Report and Recommendation of the President  
to the Board of Directors 
Project Number: 43220-014 
April 2017 
Proposed Results-Based Loans 
Republic of Indonesia: Integrated Participatory 
Development and Management of Irrigation Program 
Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been approved by the Board of Directors. 
Following such approval, ADB will disclose the document to the public in accordance with ADB’s 
Public Communications Policy 2011. 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(as of 30 March 2017) 
Currency unit 
Rp1.00 
$1.00 
– 
= 
= 
rupiah (Rp) 
$0.0000751 
Rp13,311 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB 
ASEAN 
BPKP 
DGWR 
DLI 
ha 
IAMIS 
IFAD 
IIP 
M&E 
MPWH 
NBB 
O&M 
PAP 
PSS 
RBL 
RBO 
WRA 
WUA 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Asian Development Bank 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
Badan Pengawasan Keuangan dan Pembangunan 
(Financial and Development Supervisory Board) 
Directorate General of Water Resources 
disbursement-linked indicator 
hectare 
irrigation asset management information system 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
irrigation improvement program 
monitoring and evaluation 
Ministry of Public Works and Housing 
needs-based budgeting 
operation and maintenance 
program action plan 
program safeguard system 
results-based lending 
river basin organization 
water resources agency 
water users association 
NOTE 
In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars. 
Vice-President 
Director General 
Directors 
Team leader 
Team members 
Peer reviewer 
S. Groff, Operations 2 
J. Nugent, Southeast Asia Department (SERD) 
J. Zhang, Environment, Natural Resources and Agriculture Division, 
SERD 
W. Wicklein, Country Director, Indonesia Resident Mission, SERD 
E. Quincieu, Water Resources Specialist, SERD 
S. Aman-Wooster, Principal Social Development Specialist 
(Safeguards), SERD 
K. Chua, Associate Operations Officer, SERD 
R. Hattari, Public Management Economist (Fiscal Management and 
Social Security), SERD 
L. Leung, Natural Resources and Agriculture Economist, SERD 
N. Mardiniah, Safeguards Officer (Resettlement),  SERD 
J. Pedersen, Senior Procurement Specialist, Operations Services and 
Financial Management Department 
L. Reksoatmodjo, Senior Financial Control Officer, SERD 
A. Srinivasan, Principal Climate Change Specialist, SERD 
Suharyani, Senior Procurement Officer, SERD 
O. Suyatmo, Senior Procurement Officer, SERD 
S. Zaidansyah, Principal Counsel, Office of the General Counsel 
A. Cauchois, Principal Water Resources Specialist, South Asia 
Department 
In  preparing  any  country  program  or  strategy,  financing  any  project,  or  by  making  any 
designation  of  or  reference  to  a  particular  territory  or  geographic  area  in  this  document,  the 
Asian Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status 
of any territory or area. 
CONTENTS 
RESULTS-BASED PROGRAM AT A GLANCE 
MAP 
I. 
II. 
THE PROPOSAL 
THE PROGRAM 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
Strategic Context 
Program Rationale 
Program Scope 
Program Results 
Expenditure Framework and Financing Plan 
Capacity Development and Program Action Plan 
Implementation Arrangements 
III. 
SUMMARY OF ASSESSMENTS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Program Technical Assessments 
Program Systems Assessments 
Integrated Risk Assessment and Mitigating Measures 
IV. 
V. 
ASSURANCES  
RECOMMENDATION 
APPENDIXES 
Design and Monitoring Framework 
Page 
1 
1 
1 
2 
3 
4 
6 
7 
7 
7 
7 
8 
9 
10 
10 
11 
1. 
2. 
3. 
List of Linked Documents 
14 
Disbursement-Linked Indicators, Verification Protocols, and Disbursement Schedule  15 
Project Classification Information Status: Complete
RESULTS-BASED PROGRAM AT A GLANCE
Integrated Participatory Development and
Management of Irrigation Program
Indonesia
Government of Indonesia
Department
/Division
Executing Agency
Subsector(s)
Irrigation
Project Number: 43220-014
SERD/SEER
Directorate General of Water 
Resources
     ADB Financing ($ million)
500.00
1. Basic Data
Project Name
Country
Borrower
2. Sector
Agriculture, natural
resources and rural
development
3. Strategic Agenda
Inclusive economic
growth (IEG)
Environmentally
sustainable growth (ESG)
Subcomponents
Pillar 2: Access to economic opportunities, 
including jobs, made more inclusive
Global and regional transboundary 
environmental concerns
Natural resources conservation
Total
Climate Change Information 
Adaptation ($ million)
Climate Change impact on the 
Project
500.00
30.00
Medium
4. Drivers of Change
Governance and capacity
development (GCD)
Partnerships (PAR)
Components
Institutional development
Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
Some gender elements (SGE)
International finance institutions (IFI)
Official cofinancing
5. Poverty and SDG Targeting
Geographic Targeting
Household Targeting
SDG Targeting
SDG Goals
Yes
No
Yes
SDG2, SDG6, SDG9
Location Impact
Nation-wide
High
6. Risk Categorization:
Complex
.
.
7. Safeguard Categorization
Environment: B   Involuntary Resettlement: B   Indigenous Peoples: B
8. Financing
Modality and Sources
ADB
     Sovereign Results Based Lending (Regular Loan): Ordinary capital resources
Cofinancing
     ASEAN Infrastructure Fund - Loan
     World Bank - Loan
Counterpart
Government
Total
Amount ($ million)
500.00
500.00
128.00
100.00
28.00
1,051.00
1,051.00
1,679.00
9. Effective Development Cooperation
Use of country procurement systems
Use of country public financial management systems
Yes
Yes
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.
09112016200942096871
Generated Date: 28-Feb-2017 17:12:47 PM
I. 
THE PROPOSAL 
1. 
I  submit  for  your  approval  the  following  report  and  recommendation  on  (i)  a  proposed 
loan from the ordinary capital resources of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) (A loan); and (ii) 
a proposed loan funded by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Infrastructure 
Fund  (B  loan),  both  to  the  Republic  of  Indonesia  for  the  Integrated  Participatory  Development 
and Management of Irrigation Program.1 
The  program  will  support  the  Government  of  Indonesia  in  implementing  its  irrigation 
2. 
improvement  program  (IIP),  2015–2025, 2  which  advances  the  overarching  agenda  of  food 
security and rural poverty reduction through increased and improved water delivery.3 The focus 
of  the  ADB  support  will  be  on  improving  irrigation  system  operation,  maintenance,  and  water 
delivery to farmers. The program will finance a time slice of the government’s IIP in 74 districts. 
The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is providing parallel financing to the 
Ministry of Agriculture for improved delivery of agricultural services to maximize the benefits of 
the irrigation improvements.4 
A. 
Strategic Context   
II. 
THE PROGRAM 
3. 
Boosting rural incomes and improving food security are significant concerns in Indonesia. 
Poverty  is  still  predominantly  rural,  with  poverty  rates  in  rural  areas  1.8  times  higher  than  in 
urban  areas.5 Millions  of  people  derive  their  incomes  from  food  production,  and  food  is  the 
single  largest  expenditure  item  for  the  vast  majority  of  households.6 Despite  positive  trends  in 
agricultural  production,  Indonesia  still  faces  rising  food  imports,  higher  domestic  food  prices, 
and  sporadic  food  shortages.  Key  agricultural  products  include  rice,  soybean,  corn,  fruit,  and 
vegetables.  With  most  of  the  rice  coming  from  irrigated  areas,  water  resources  and  irrigation 
management  play  an  important  role  in  the  country’s  efforts  to  increase  agricultural  output.7 
However,  water  availability  to  the  farm  community  is  erratic  in  many  areas.  The  Ministry  of 
Public Works and Housing (MPWH)—in charge of irrigation infrastructure—estimates that only 
55% of the nation’s irrigation system is functioning at full capacity, limiting yields and reducing 
cropping intensity.8 Irrigated agriculture is also sensitive to climate change. 
4. 
Since  2006,  the  Directorate  General  of  Water  Resources  (DGWR),  MPWH,  has 
introduced  reforms  to  improve  water  delivery  and  operation  and  maintenance  (O&M)  services 
1  The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1. 
2  The IIP is a subprogram of the Sector Plan for Water Resources from the Ministry of Public Works and Housing. It 
is  aligned  with  the  2015–2025  strategy  for  irrigation.  Government  of  Indonesia,  MPWH.  2011.  Kebijakan  Irigasi 
Tahun, 2015–2025. Jakarta. 
3  The  ADB  provided  project  preparatory  technical  assistance  for  the  Integrated  Participatory  Development  and 
Management of Irrigation Project for Western and Eastern Indonesia Phase 1 (TA 8460-INO).  
4  IFAD  financing  of  €94.56  million  was  approved  in  December  2015  and  will  be  recorded  as  collaborative 
cofinancing. 
5   In  2016,  17.28  million  people (14.0%) of  people in  rural  areas  fell  below  the  rural  poverty  line  of  Rp350,420  per 
Indonesia. 
capita 
https://bps.go.id/website/pdf_publikasi/Penghitungan-dan-Analisis-Kemiskinan-Makro-Indonesia-Tahun-2016--.pdf 
(accessed 7 April 2017). 
per  month.  Central  Bureau 
of  Statistics. 
2016  Profile 
of  Poverty 
in 
6  In 2015, agriculture contributed to 14% of the gross domestic product, with an estimated 39 million people working 
in the sector. ADB. 2016. Key Indicators for Asia and the Pacific 2016. Manila. 
7  Surface irrigation is spread across about 48,000 irrigation systems covering 7.2 million hectares. 
8  Government of Indonesia, MPWH. 2014. Irrigation Systems Rapid Assessment. Jakarta. 
2 
and farmer’s involvement by applying participatory irrigation management.9 In 2010, the DGWR 
established a directorate dedicated to O&M for water resources. Asset management and needs-
based budgeting (NBB) processes have been introduced to address the long-term sustainability 
of  the  infrastructure.  In  2015,  the  DGWR  institutionalized  reforms  introduced  under  the  ADB-
financed Participatory Irrigation Sector Project to improve sector performance.10 This provides a 
robust regulatory framework for irrigation infrastructure, management, and O&M. 
5. 
Since 2015, the implementation of the IIP has progressed with 834,000 hectares (ha) of 
irrigation  systems  rehabilitated,  460,000  ha  of  irrigation  infrastructure  inventoried  and  161 
irrigation  commissions  established  nationwide.  However,  there  are  remaining  gaps  that 
constrain  effective  implementation  of  the  IIP.  Institutions  and  processes  need  strengthening, 
especially  at  the  subnational  level,  to  ensure  sufficient  budget  allocation  for  routine  O&M.  To 
this end, a sound irrigation asset management registry and better planning at the scheme level 
are required, as a basis for NBB and performance benchmarking. Water delivery services also 
need improvements to provide the intended level of service and to cope with climate variability. 
Irrigation schemes need to be rehabilitated or upgraded to improve water efficiency and climate 
resilience.  Improving  irrigation  services  is  necessary  to  increase  rice  yields  and  cropping 
intensity, provide farmers with an incentive to diversify from low- to high-value crops, increase 
rural incomes, and enhance food security. Better integration between irrigation and agriculture is 
needed to adapt to climate risks. 
B. 
Program Rationale 
6. 
The  program  is  aligned  with  the  government’s  long-term  National  Development  Plan, 
2005–202511 and  National  Medium-Term  Development  Plan,  2015–2019,12 in  which  water  and 
food security are priorities. To meet these national goals, the IIP calls for participatory irrigation 
management,  better  asset  management  systems,  NBB,  strengthening  of  water  users 
associations (WUAs) and water resources agencies (WRAs), and the rehabilitation of 3.2 million 
ha  of  irrigation  systems.  The  program  is  also  aligned  with  the  priorities  of  ADB’s  country 
partnership  strategy,  2016–2019  for  Indonesia.13 The  program  is  included  in  ADB’s  country 
operations business plan, 2017–2019 for Indonesia. It is aligned with ADB’s Water Operational 
Plan, 2011–2020 and Operational Plan for Agriculture and Natural Resources, 2015–2020.14 
7. 
This operation will be delivered using the results-based lending (RBL) modality because 
of  (i)  the  strong  government  ownership  of  and  commitment  for  the  IIP;  (ii)  the  nature  of  the 
program,  which  requires  a  results  and  system  approach;  (iii)  the  opportunity  to  leverage  ADB 
financing  by  influencing  key  results  under  a  large  program;  and  (iv)  the  potential  for 
harmonization  among  development  partners  through  a  mutual  focus  on  results.  RBL  is  also  a 
suitable modality because it can (i) provide the most effective support by leveraging institutional 
9   Participatory  irrigation  management  is  a  process  that  involves  farmers  and  beneficiaries  in  the  planning,  design, 
construction, and operation and maintenance of irrigation systems.  
10 ADB.  2003.  Report  and  Recommendation  of  the  President  to  the  Board  of  Directors:  Proposed  Loans  to  the 
Republic of Indonesia for the Participatory Irrigation Sector Project. Manila. 
11 Government  of  Indonesia.  2005.  Rencana  Pembangunan  Jangka  Panjang  Nasional  Tahun,  2005–2025.  Jakarta 
(National Long-term Development Plan). 
12 Government  of  Indonesia.  2015.  Rencana  Pembangunan  Jangka  Menengah  Nasional,  2015–2019.  Jakarta 
(National Medium-term Development Plan). 
13 ADB.  2016.  Country  Partnership  Strategy:  Indonesia,  2016–2019:  Towards  a  Higher,  More  Inclusive  and 
Sustainable Growth Path. Manila. 
14 ADB.  2011.  Water  Operational  Plan,  2011–2020.  Manila;  and  ADB.  2015.  Operational  Plan  for  Agriculture  and 
Natural Resources: Promoting Sustainable Food Security in Asia and the Pacific in 2015–2020. Manila.  
3 
changes  within  the  overall  government-led  program  rather  than  specific  areas  as  with  other 
modalities;15 (ii) enhance operational efficiency by shifting the focus to results rather than inputs; 
(iii) strengthen country systems on the basis of the outcome of technical, fiduciary, and program 
safeguard-system  assessments;  (iv)  develop  institutional  capacity  through  the  effective  use  of 
disbursement  linked  indicators  (DLIs);  and  (v) enable  ADB  to  disburse  for  results  related  to 
institutional strengthening, and capacity development to improve O&M and management.  
8. 
The  program  incorporates  the  key  recommendations  on  sustainability  from  the 
Participatory  Irrigation  Sector  Project:  (i)  strengthening  institutional  frameworks  and  improving 
implementation  processes;  (ii)  facilitating  convergence  between  irrigation,  livelihood,  and 
agriculture  interventions;  (iii)  incorporating  irrigation  development  and  management  plans  into 
regional  plans;  and  (iv)  enhancing  the  roles  of  communities  and  women  in  governance  and 
service delivery. 16 The program will also introduce innovations: (i) upgrading the irrigation asset 
management  information  system  (IAMIS)  to  a  web-based  and  geospatial  interface  to  facilitate 
data management; (ii) introducing aerial surveys to reduce costs and improve the quality of the 
asset  registry;  (iii)  preparing  water  accounting  using  satellite  data  to  predict  water  availability 
and  adjust  engineering  design;  (iv)  pilot  testing  water  productivity  measurement  as  a  future 
vehicle  for  policy  making  and  improving  water  security;  and  (v)  improving  standards  for 
engineering design to integrate infrastructure, agriculture, and climate resilience. 
C. 
Program Scope 
9. 
The  RBL  program  will  strengthen  capacity  to  address  institutional  weaknesses, 
organizational  fragmentation,  and  weak  governance  to  improve  O&M  and  management  of 
irrigation  systems. It  will  also  improve  water  delivery  to farmers  by rehabilitating  infrastructure. 
This combination of measures will improve rural resilience and boost water resource productivity. 
IFAD’s  support  will  complement  RBL  program  by  addressing  underperforming  extension 
services,  poor  access  to  financial  services,  and  inefficiencies  in  the  value-chain  and  cropping 
patterns that contribute to low farm incomes. The program scope is summarized in Table 1. 
Item 
Outcome 
Key outputs 
Activity types 
Table 1: Program Scope 
Broader Government Program 
Sustainable and more productive 
irrigated agriculture in Indonesia 
Rehabilitated or upgraded irrigation 
infrastructure; appropriate operation 
and maintenance; improved farmers’ 
participation; and strengthened 
institutions.  
Rehabilitation or upgrading of 
irrigation infrastructure; improved 
asset management and needs-based 
budgeting; establishment of water 
users associations; and institutional 
strengthening of water resources 
agencies and irrigation commissions. 
Results-Based Lending Program 
Sustainable and more productive irrigated 
agriculture in 74 districts 
Same elements as the broader government 
program, organized into three outputs: (i) systems 
and institutional capacity for sustainable irrigated 
agriculture strengthened; (ii) irrigation operation, 
maintenance, and management improved; and (iii) 
irrigation infrastructure improved. 
Upgrading of engineering guidelines; 
operationalization of irrigation commissions; 
improved asset management and needs-based 
budgeting through use of information system; 
operationalization of water users associations; 
institutional strengthening of water resources 
agencies; water accounting; and rehabilitation or 
upgrading of irrigation infrastructure. 
15 Under  a  project  loan, it is estimated  that  the  reach  would  be  limited  to  around  330,000  ha,  while  under  the  RBL 
modality, improvement of performance will cover around 1.5 million ha, benefiting around 3 million farmers. 
16 ADB.  2014.  Completion  Report:  Participatory  Irrigation  Sector  Project  in  Indonesia.  Manila;  and  Independent 
Evaluation Department. 2016. Performance Evaluation Report: Participatory Irrigation Sector Project in Indonesia. 
Manila: ADB. 
4 
Broader Government Program 
Results-Based Lending Program 
$9.94 billion 
Government of Indonesia: $7.24 
billion 
Development institutions: $2.70 billion 
National 
2015–2025 
Item 
Program expenditure 
Main financiers and the 
respective financing 
amounts 
Geographic coverage 
Implementation period 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ASEAN = Association of Southeast Asian Nations. 
a  Including $100 million from the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund. 
b  Parallel financing provided under the ongoing Water Resources and Irrigation Sector Management Program II. 
c  The program is proposed to cover 74 districts across 16 provinces (Banten, Central Java, Central Sulawesi, East 
Java,  East  Nusa  Tenggara,  Lampung,  Nanggroe  Aceh  Darussalam,  North  Sulawesi,  North  Sumatra, West  Nusa 
Tenggara, South Kalimantan, South Sulawesi, South Sumatra, West Java, West Kalimantan, and West Sumatra).  
$1,679 million 
$1,051 million: Government of Indonesia (62.60%) 
$600 million: ADB (35.73%)a 
$28 million: World Bank (1.67%)b 
74 districtsc 
2017–2021 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
D. 
Program Results   
10. 
The  RBL  program’s  impacts  will  be  improved  rural  incomes  and  livelihoods,  and 
enhanced  food  security.  The  outcome  will  be  sustainable  and  more  productive  irrigated 
agriculture in 74 districts, as evidenced by the enhanced performance of irrigation systems (DLI 
1).17 An additional indicator on increased crop yield will reflect the convergence with agricultural 
interventions  by  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  IFAD. 18  The  program  will  emphasize 
strengthening  of  institutions  and  systems,  including  better  tracking  of  irrigation  system 
performance.  Increased  farmer  participation  will  help  improve  water  delivery.  Improved  asset 
management,  NBB,  and  planning  will  improve  O&M  to  ensure  sustainability  of  the  irrigation 
infrastructure. The outcome will be achieved through three outputs. 
11. 
Output  1:  Systems  and  institutional  capacity  for  sustainable  irrigated  agriculture 
strengthened.  Output  1  will  support  institutional  measures  that  strengthen  the  planning, 
management,  and  delivery  of  irrigation  systems;  and  improve  the  linkage  between  irrigation 
service  delivery  and  agricultural  development  support.  It  will  support  the  upgrading  of 
(i) engineering  guidelines  for  irrigation  infrastructure  to  improve  water  efficiency  and  climate 
resilience, and (ii) planning guidelines to ensure that irrigation and agriculture development are 
integrated (DLI 2).19 DLI 3 measures the operationalization of irrigation commissions, which will 
improve  subnational  institutional  capacities  for  integrating  agriculture  and  infrastructure 
development and O&M. Capitalizing on these strengthened institutions, this output will support 
the process to incorporate irrigation development and management plans into regional plans as 
captured  by  DLI  4.20 A  capacity  development  framework  will  be  implemented  and  monitored 
(program  action  plan  [PAP])21 to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  river  basin  organizations  (RBOs), 
WRAs, and subnational planning agencies to address weaknesses in implementing government 
safeguards,  procurement,  financial  management,  gender  mainstreaming,  engineering,  and 
irrigation O&M and management processes.  
12. 
Output  2: Irrigation  operation,  maintenance, and  management improved. Output 2 
17 The government’s irrigation performance index measures improvements in infrastructure, water efficiency, cropping 
intensity, WUA participation, and other supporting factors required for sustainable and more productive agriculture.  
18 Cropping intensity is the number of times a crop is planted per year in a given agricultural area, while crop yield for 
rice refers to the weight of rice, at agreed standard moisture content, per unit of land area harvested for rice. Crop 
yield will depend more on Ministry of Agriculture interventions than on the program, so it has not been made a DLI. 
19 Improved guidelines will benefit the IIP nationwide with an investment estimated at $6.4 billion for infrastructure. 
20 The irrigation development and management plan is approved with appropriate budget allocations by the district or 
province parliament. It then becomes part of the development policy and plan for that district and/or province. 
21 Program Action Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
5 
focuses on measures aimed at enhancing irrigation sustainability and resilience at the scheme 
level.  Having  a  better  understanding  of  the  condition  of  the  irrigation  network  is  critical  to  this 
effort. Toward that end, the program will upgrade and update the IAMIS to cover 2.5 million ha 
of  irrigated  area  using  aerial  surveys  of  assets  and  remote  sensing  technologies  (DLI  5). This 
will  enable  better  linkages  between  asset  management,  sector  budgeting,  and  planning.  The 
participation  of  beneficiaries  is  central  in  improving  asset  management  and  water  service 
delivery. Output 2 will enhance the role and participation of WUAs, including women and poor 
farmers,  in  the  planning,  design  and  construction,  and  operation  of  irrigation  infrastructure  to 
improve  maintenance  and  management  (DLI  6).  Output  2  will  also  promote  climate-resilient 
practices and provide training to farmers in water management.22 It will ensure the convergence 
of  irrigation,  livelihood,  and  agriculture  interventions  in  the  technical,  socioeconomic,  and 
institutional profiling of irrigation schemes as a basis for investments (DLI 7).  
13. 
Output  3:  Irrigation  infrastructure  improved. The  program  will  support  infrastructure 
rehabilitation  and/or  upgrading.  Rehabilitation  will  address  design  shortcomings,  restore 
effective water service delivery, and improve water efficiency and climate resilience (DLI 8). To 
ensure the technical soundness of investments, the program will confirm the reliability of water 
sources through water accounting. The combination of participatory approaches and technology 
will lead to irrigation systems with improved efficiency that better serve the farm community. 
Table 2: Disbursement-Linked Indicators 
Disburseme
nt Allocated 
($ million) 
Share of Total 
ADB and AIF 
Financing (%) 
7.0 
36.0 
42.0 
irrigated 
institutional  capacity  for  sustainable 
Indicator 
Outcome: Sustainable and more productive irrigated agriculture in 74 districts 
DLI 1: By 2021, performance of irrigation systems in the program area improved by 
at least 15% from 2017 level 
Output  1:  Systems  and 
agriculture strengthened 
DLI  2:  Planning  and  engineering  guidelines  for  irrigation  delivery  systems  are 
improved by 2019 
DLI  3:  Irrigation  commissions  operationalized  to  enhance  institutional  capacity  for 
integration  and  coordination  of  agriculture  and  infrastructure  development  in  74 
districts and 14 provinces by 2021  
DLI 4: At least 74 district irrigation development and management plans endorsed by 
district heads by 2021 
Output 2: Irrigation operation, maintenance, and management improved 
DLI 5: Irrigation asset management improved for 2.5 million hectares of irrigation  
systems by 2021 
DLI 6: Effective management of tertiary irrigation systems through operationalizing at 
least 4,500 water users associations by 2021 
DLI 7: Improved assessments integrating agriculture and infrastructure development 
conducted for at least 719 priority schemes by 2021 
Output 3: Irrigation infrastructure improved 
DLI  8:  Rehabilitated  irrigation  infrastructure  in  program  areas  increased  by 
500,000 hectares by 2021 
Total 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  AIF  =  ASEAN  Infrastructure  Fund,  ASEAN  =  Association  of  Southeast  Asian 
Nations, DLI = disbursement-linked indicator. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
138.0 
24.0 
23.0 
4.0 
600.0 
100.0 
252.0 
42.0 
36.0 
54.0 
18.0 
3.0 
6.0 
9.0 
6.0 
14. 
The  RBL  program  has  a  robust  and  comprehensive  results  framework. 23  The  DLIs 
22 IFAD  will  also  promote  climate-resilient  practices  and  provide  training  to  farmers  in  production,  soil  and  crop 
management, improved planting methods, and improved pest and harvest management. 
23 Program Results Framework (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
6 
comprise critical institutional output and outcome indicators to improve institutional and systemic 
capacity and irrigation infrastructure. The disbursement allocation is in Table 2. 
15. 
Results  monitoring  and  the  measurement  of  outcome  and  output  indicators  (including 
DLIs)  will  rely  on  the  reporting  system  of  the  DGWR.  The  Financial  and  Development 
Supervisory Board (BPKP) will be the independent verification agency. The BPKP is an internal 
auditor  of  the  government  and  a  separate  agency  from  the  executing  and  implementing 
agencies. It has a decentralized organizational structure and is mandated to verify government 
financial  and  development  activities.  The  BPKP  has  significant  experience  working  with 
externally  funded  programs,  and  is  the  independent  verification  agent  for  the  World  Bank’s 
results-based  Local  Government  and  Decentralization  Project. 24  The  verification  process  is 
designed  to  strengthen government  capacity  in  supporting  the  implementation  of the  IIP.  ADB 
will conduct review missions to confirm the achievement of DLIs. 
E. 
Expenditure Framework and Financing Plan 
Program expenditures. The program will support IIP expenditures in 74 districts, which 
16. 
are estimated to be $1,679 million from 2017 to 2021 (Table 3). 
Table 3: Summary of Program Expenditure Framework, 2017–2021 
(in 2016 prices) 
Item 
Capital expenditures 
1. Infrastructure rehabilitation and upgrading 
2. Operation and maintenance and management services 
3. Planning and detailed engineering design 
Recurrent costs 
4. Operation and maintenance expenditures 
5. Staffing and operations 
Total 
Amount ($ million) 
Share of Total (%) 
1,019 
62 
123 
408 
67 
1,679 
60.7  
3.7 
7.3 
24.3 
4.0 
100.0 
Source:  Asian  Development Bank estimates  based on  the  government’s planning  documents, including the national 
and sector medium-term plans, and other supporting sources.   
Table 4: Program Financing Plan, 2017–2021 
Amount ($ million) 
Share of Total (%) 
Source 
Asian Development Bank 
Ordinary capital resources (loan) 
Government of Indonesia 
ASEAN Infrastructure Fund (loan) 
World Bank (loan) a 
                    Total 
ASEAN = Association of Southeast Asian Nations. 
Note: Percentages may not total 100% because of rounding. 
a  Parallel financing provided through the Water Resources and Irrigation Sector Management Program (Phase II). 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates based on government planning documents. 
29.78 
62.60 
5.96 
1.67 
100.00 
500 
1,051 
100 
28 
1,679 
Program  financing.  The  government  is  expected  to  finance  $1,051  million.  The 
17. 
government  has  requested  (i)  a  regular  loan  of  $500  million  from  ADB’s  ordinary  capital 
resources (A loan) and (ii) a loan of $100 million funded from the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund (B 
24 Through  the  Local  Government  and  Decentralization  Project  approved  in  September  2014,  the  World  Bank  is 
supporting  improvement  of subnational  governments’  accountability  and  reporting of  the specific  allocation  funds 
for the basic infrastructure, including irrigation. By 2018, the project will have national coverage. 
7 
loan) to help finance the IIP.25 The A loan will have a 17.5-year term, including a grace period of 
8 years; an annual interest rate determined in accordance with ADB’s London interbank offered 
rate  (LIBOR)-based  lending  facility;  a  commitment  charge  of  0.15%  per  year;  and  such  other 
terms  and conditions  set forth  in the  draft  loan  agreement.  Based  on the  straight-line  method, 
the average maturity is 13 years, and there is no maturity premium payable to ADB. The B loan 
will  have  a  17.5-year  term,  including  a  grace  period  of  8  years;  an  annual  interest  rate 
determined  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  London  interbank  offered  rate  (LIBOR)-based  lending 
facility; and such other terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan agreement. Based on the 
straight-line method, the average maturity is 13 years, and there is no maturity premium payable 
to  ADB.  The  World  Bank,  through  its  Water  Resources  and  Irrigation  Sector  Management 
Program, will provide $28 million. The financing plan is summarized in Table 4. 
F. 
Capacity Development and Program Action Plan 
18. 
The  program  will  strengthen  the  capacity  of  agencies  involved  in  the  IIP,  especially  at 
the  subnational  level.  A  capacity  development  framework  will  be  prepared,  implemented,  and 
monitored. The PAP includes key actions in specific technical areas, governance and fiduciary 
management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), environment and social safeguards, and social 
inclusion  and  gender  mainstreaming.  The  PAP  will  also  strengthen  government  systems  and 
institutions  to  manage  performance  and  deliver  results,  notably  in  performance  measurement, 
planning, supervisory and monitoring mechanisms, and addressing gaps in relevant knowledge. 
The government will procure consulting services to support the implementation of the PAP. 
G. 
Implementation Arrangements 
19. 
The  executing  agency  will  be  the  DGWR,  MPWH.  National  RBOs  and  provincial  and 
district  WRAs—as  implementing  agencies—will  deliver  infrastructure  investment  and  irrigation 
services,  each  according  to  its  level  of  responsibility. 26  Under  the  overall  guidance  of  the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, provincial and district planning agencies—as implementing agencies— 
will  ensure  institutional  strengthening,  planning,  and  internalization  of  O&M  into  five-year  and 
annual plans.27 The program completion date is on 31 December 2022.28 
III. 
SUMMARY OF ASSESSMENTS 
A. 
Program Technical Assessments 
The  program’s  soundness  was  assessed  according  to  its  relevance,  justification,  and 
20. 
adequacy.29 The  program is  highly  relevant to  Indonesia’s  efforts to  improve  food  security  and 
foster rural income growth. The program is designed to improve irrigation service reliability and 
sustainability. Program interventions are well-justified, focusing on key results to implement the 
IIP. The program addresses inefficiencies in the delivery of irrigation services by strengthening 
WRAs  and  increasing  beneficiary  participation. To  maximize  the  benefits  brought  by  improved 
water  delivery,  the  program  will  align  irrigation  efforts  with  agriculture  development.  The 
25 The assessment of the government budgets (including projected provisions for the program) confirmed the ability 
of the government to meet financing requirements and, in time, to ensure no program implementation delays. 
26 Irrigation schemes of less than 1,000 ha are the responsibility of districts; irrigation schemes above 1,000 ha and 
below 3,000 ha are managed by provinces, while schemes above 3,000 ha are managed by national RBOs. 
27 The National Development Planning Agency will provide strategic and policy guidance. 
28 To enable verification and reimbursement of 2021 achievements and financial closing of the loans.  
29 Program Soundness Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
8 
program was screened for climate change risks and found to be at medium risk.30 The climate 
risk  and  vulnerability  assessment  also  identifies  adaptation  measures.  Economic  benefits 
include  (i)  improved  farm  income  resulting  from  improved  yield,  cropping  intensity,  and 
agricultural  development;  and  (ii)  O&M  cost  savings  owing  to  the  improved  IAMIS. 31 At  the 
program level, the economic internal rate of return is 14%. Sensitivity analysis indicates that the 
program  is  robust  against  downside  risks.  Since  2011,  the  O&M  expenditure  for  national 
irrigation schemes has consistently increased. For subnational irrigation schemes, the provision 
for  O&M  expenditure  has  been  less  predictable,  the  program  will  help  the  government  to 
allocate  the  required  funds  for  O&M.  The  IAMIS  will  bring  substantial  O&M  cost  savings  and 
budget  allocation  efficiency  for  the  government.  Consequently,  the  government  will  be  able  to 
deliver  more  extensive  irrigation  maintenance  services,  with  the  same  budget  provision  as  set 
out under the IIP. To ensure long-term sustainability of the program, the government has agreed 
to allocate adequate funds for O&M of the irrigation schemes rehabilitated under the program.  
21. 
The  program  is  categorized  some  gender  elements.  The  primary  beneficiaries  of  the 
program  will  be  local  farming  communities,  including  poor  women  farmers,  and  agricultural 
workers.  The  program  will  enhance  participation  and  decision-making  by  women  by                          
(i) accelerating the capacity development of stakeholders, (ii) increasing the share of women in 
strategic  positions,  (iii) ensuring  better  social  organization  of  WUAs,  and  (iv)  strengthening 
institutions for pro-poor monitoring and gender mainstreaming in the irrigation sector. 
B. 
Program Systems Assessments 
22.  Monitoring and evaluation system. The M&E system assessment found that the M&E 
the  Directorate  of  Operation  and  Maintenance,  DGWR—which  covers 
system  under 
infrastructure, O&M, WUA participation, institutional, and other aspects—is the most appropriate 
to  monitor  program  implementation.  However,  reports  from  some  districts  with  weaker 
capacities  are  delayed  or  incomplete.  The  program  provides  a  unique  opportunity  to  enhance 
and  strengthen  the  M&E  system  by  (i) upgrading  the  forms  to  ensure  that  all  indicators 
presented  in  the  result  frameworks  are  captured,  (ii)  improving  the  capacity  of  agencies  to 
comply with reporting requirements, (iii) preparing annual performance reports, and (iv) adopting 
the IAMIS as the M&E system in the long term. The DGWR will consolidate and submit periodic 
progress reports on the achievement of DLIs, PAP actions, and other performance indicators.  
23. 
Fiduciary  systems.  The  fiduciary  assessment  confirms  that  the  government  financial 
management,  procurement,  and  anticorruption  systems  are  adequate  with  some  mitigation 
measures.32 The financial management system assessment indicates a moderate fiduciary risk. 
While  some  financial  management  weaknesses  and  shortcomings  have  been  identified,  these 
can  be  effectively  addressed  through  the  proposed  mitigation  measures.  The  assessments 
found that (i) improvements were needed in planning and budgeting, (ii) further computerization 
was  required  for  accounting  and  financial  reporting,  and  (iii)  the  capacity  of  implementing 
agencies should be strengthened. The PAP includes the following risk mitigation measures: (i) 
provision  of  capacity  building  in  financial  management,  supported  by  consultants;  and  (ii) 
preparation of consolidated unaudited financial statements at the program level. 
24. 
The  program  will  entail  the  procurement  of  civil  works,  goods,  consulting  services, 
30 Climate Risk Vulnerability Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
31 Economic and Financial Analysis (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).  
32 Program Fiduciary Systems Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
9 
surveys,  and  individual  facilitators.  Except  for  large  consulting  services  to  support  the 
implementation  of  the  program,  it  is  unlikely  that  packages  will  attract  international  bidders. 
Overall,  the  legislative  framework  for  goods,  works,  and  smaller  consulting  packages—where 
the national market can meet the demand—is largely adequate and incorporates internationally 
recognized  principles  of  public  procurement.  The  procurement  assessment  has  identified  the 
following  risks:  (i)  low  procurement  capacity  in  some  districts  and  provinces;  (ii)  procurement 
delays owing to insufficient planning and late release of government budgets; (iii) large numbers 
of bids being disqualified for not meeting technical, administrative and commercial terms, which 
leads  to  suboptimal  competition;  (iv)  inconsistent  procurement  monitoring  across  all  procuring 
entities;  and  (v)  barriers  for  the  participation  of  international  contractors  and  consultants.  The 
risks  will  be  mitigated  by  (i)  improving  procurement  reporting,  (ii) ensuring  that  procurement 
actions  are  completed  early  each  year,  (iii)  conducting  procurement  and  probity  audits 
throughout  the  program,  (iv)  procuring  the  large  consulting  services  needed  for  the  program 
under the ADB-funded Accelerating Infrastructure Delivery through Better Engineering Services 
Project,33 outside the RBL program, and (v) conducting a value-for-money audit. The Guidelines 
to  Prevent  or  Mitigate  Fraud,  Corruption,  and  Other  Prohibited  Activities  in  Results-Based 
Lending for Programs were explained to, and discussed with, the government.34 
25. 
Safeguard  systems. The program is classified category B for environment, involuntary 
resettlement,  and  indigenous  peoples. 35  The  program  safeguard  system  (PSS)  will  apply. 
Potential  environment  impacts  include  those  from  rehabilitation  of  irrigation  infrastructure, 
changes in river morphology, and reduced water quality. Those impacts are reversible and site-
specific, and mitigation measures can be readily designed within the PSS. Rehabilitation works 
will occur on existing irrigation canals that already have right-of-way. The works will not require 
any  significant  relocation  of  households  or  acquisition  of  productive  assets.  They  might  only 
affect  crops  and  land  temporally  and  cause  temporary  loss  of  income.  Severe  impacts  on 
indigenous peoples are not envisaged. The PSS assessment revealed that the PSS is broadly 
aligned with ADB’s Safeguards Policy Statement (2009).36 The main gaps identified are (i) weak 
screening and reporting; (ii) limited awareness of government’s regulations on safeguards at the 
regional level because of rapid issuance of new regulations and guidance; and (iii) limited staff 
and budget for safeguards implementation. These gaps will be addressed through (i) upgrading 
of the screening procedures, and guidelines on environment assessment and management; (ii) 
improving  reporting  and  monitoring  processes  and  capacity;  (iii)  institutional  strengthening  of 
environment and social safeguards units in RBOs and WRAs; and (iv) improving compensation 
and  assistance to meet ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  principles.  Environment  and  social 
safeguard specialists and consultants will assist the government in implementing the PAP. 
C. 
Integrated Risk Assessment and Mitigating Measures 
26. 
An  integrated  risk  assessment  considered  potential  risks  associated  with  (i)  program 
results,  (ii)  fiduciary  and  safeguards  systems,  and  (iii)  the  operating  environment. Major  risks 
and mitigating measures  are  summarized  in Table  5. The  assessment  concludes  that  benefits 
33 ADB.  2016.  Report  and  Recommendation  of  the  President  to  the  Board  of  Directors:  Proposed  Technical 
Assistance  Loan  to  the  Republic  of  Indonesia  for  the  Accelerating  Infrastructure  Delivery  through  Better 
Engineering Services Project. Manila. 
34 ADB. 2013. Piloting Results-Based Lending for Programs. Manila (Appendix 7). 
35 The  program  will  exclude  activities  with  (i)  category  A  impact  for  environment,  involuntary  resettlement,  and 
indigenous peoples; (ii) significant impacts on informal settlers residing on the DGWR’s and WRAs’ land; and (iii) 
significant physical relocation of affected persons. 
36 Program Safeguard Systems Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).  
10 
and impacts are expected to outweigh the costs, with overall substantial program risk.  
Table 5: Summary of Integrated Risk Assessment and Mitigating Measures 
Moderate 
Substantial 
Ratings 
High 
Key Mitigating Measures 
Raise awareness of key members of regional 
parliaments. Institutionalization of the irrigation 
development management plan to be mandatory. 
Conduct financial management training to prepare 
financial reports on the program and improve financial 
management in general. 
Risks 
Results. Incorporation of the irrigation 
development management plan into five-
year development plans may be delayed. 
Fiduciary. Some procedures for 
accounting and financial reporting have 
weaknesses. Unfamiliarity with standards 
for accrual accounting. 
Procurement. Limited competition, weak 
documentation, and cost-driven selection 
for consultants affect quality. 
Safeguards. Limited capacities lead to 
limited assessment and screening, and 
nonadherence to environmental and 
social safeguard regulations. 
Operating environment. Complex and 
prolonged government approval 
procedures delay implementation. 
Overall RBL program risk 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, RBL = results-based lending. 
Note: Risk factors are assessed against two dimensions: (i) the likelihood that the risk will occur, and (ii) the impact of 
the risk on the outcome. Rating scale: low = low likelihood and low impact; moderate = substantial to high likelihood 
but  low  to  moderate  impact;  substantial  =  low  to  moderate  likelihood  but  substantial  to  high  impact;  high  =  high 
likelihood and high impact. 
Source:  Asian Development Bank. 
Implement measures to increase competition and 
improve quality, through better planning, capacity 
development, technical support, and audits. 
Update the screening and reporting procedures to 
ensure that excluded activities are not accounted for, 
update the Ministry of Public Works and Housing 
guidance, and provide capacity development. 
The National Steering Committee for Water 
Resources will coordinate the program. ADB will work 
with the government to streamline its procedures. 
Substantial 
Substantial 
Substantial 
IV. 
ASSURANCES 
The government has agreed with ADB on certain covenants for the RBL program, which 
27. 
are set forth in the loan agreements. 
V. 
RECOMMENDATION 
I  am  satisfied  that  the  proposed  results-based  loans  would  comply  with  the  Articles  of 
28. 
Agreement of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend that the Board approve  
(i) 
(ii) 
the  A  loan  of  $500,000,000  to  the  Republic  of  Indonesia  for  the  Integrated 
Participatory  Development  and  Management  of  Irrigation  Program,  from  ADB’s 
ordinary  capital  resources,  in  regular  terms,  with  interest  to  be  determined  in 
accordance  with  ADB's  London  interbank  offered  rate  (LIBOR)-based  lending 
facility;  for  a  term  of  17.5  years,  including  a  grace  period  of  8  years;  a 
commitment charge of 0.15% per year; and such other terms and conditions as 
are  substantially  in  accordance  with  those  set  forth  in  the  draft  loan  agreement 
presented to the Board; and 
the  B  loan  of  $100,000,000  to  the  Republic  of  Indonesia  for  the  Integrated 
Participatory  Development  and  Management  of  Irrigation  Program  to  be  funded 
by the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund, on terms and conditions as are substantially 
in  accordance  with  those  set  forth  in  the  draft  loan  agreement  presented  to  the 
Board. 
17 April 2017 
Takehiko Nakao 
           President 
DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK 
Impacts the RBL Program is Aligned With 
Improved rural incomes and livelihoods, and enhanced food security (National Medium-Term Development 
Plan, 2015–2019 and National Long-Term Development Plan, 2005–2025)a 
Appendix 1 
11 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
Sustainable 
and more 
productive 
irrigated 
agriculture in 
74 districts 
Outputs 
1. Systems and 
institutional 
capacity for 
sustainable 
irrigated 
agriculture 
strengthened 
Performance Indicators with Targets 
and Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting  
Risks 
Incorporation of the 
irrigation 
development 
management plan 
into five-year 
development plans 
may be delayed. 
Gaps in coordination 
and delay in 
implementation 
between irrigation 
and agricultural 
interventions could 
put outcome 
achievement at risk. 
Complex and 
prolonged 
government 
approval procedures 
delay 
implementation. 
Political or other 
reasons delay 
endorsement of 
RP2Is. 
By 2021 
a. Performance of irrigation systems in the 
program area improved by at least 15% 
from baseline level (2016 baseline: 
performance index 60%) [DLI 1] 
a. DOM–MIS 
reports, DGWR 
b. At least 50% of the district RP2I 
incorporated into five-year district, 
province, and national plans and budgets 
(2016 baseline: less than 5% of plans) 
b. District and 
province reports, 
MOHA-SIPD and 
DGWR 
c. Crop Statistics 
Division reports, 
Ministry of 
Agriculture–Center 
for Agricultural 
Data and 
Information 
Systems 
1a–f. Program 
reports, DGWR, 
MOHA 
c. Yields for rice increase by 18% for 
irrigation schemes supported by IFAD 
(2016 baseline: 4.03 tons/ha) 
1a. Planning and engineering guidelines 
for irrigation delivery systems are improved 
by 2019 (2016 baseline: government 
guidelines on delivery systems need 
adjustment and refinement) [DLI 2] 
1b. National competency certification 
system for irrigation planning, financing, 
and participatory management established 
and fully operational by 2019 (2016 
baseline: no system) 
1c. Irrigation commissions operationalized 
to enhance institutional capacity for 
integration and coordination of agriculture 
and infrastructure development in 
74 districts and 14 provinces by 2021 
(2016 baseline: 31 operationalized 
irrigation commissions) [DLI 3] b 
1d. At least 74 RP2Is endorsed by district 
head by 2021 (2016 baseline: six plans 
endorsed) [DLI 4] 
1e. Gender audits of planning and 
engineering guidelines conducted by 2018 
(2016 baseline: planning and engineering 
guidelines not fully incorporating gender 
mainstreaming aspects) [PAP 15] 
12 
Appendix 1 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with Targets 
and Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting  
Risks 
2. Irrigation 
operation, 
maintenance, 
and 
management 
improved 
3. Irrigation 
infrastructure 
improved 
1f. Capacity development framework 
implemented and monitored to improve 
capacity of RBOs, WRAs, and planning 
agency staff by 2019 (2016 baseline: 
RBOs, WRAs, and planning agency staff 
need strengthening) [PAP 5] 
2a. Irrigation assets registered for 100% of 
the 2.5 million ha of irrigation systems by 
2021 (2016 baseline: only 20% of national 
schemes assets are registered) [DLI 5]  
2b. Effective participation of beneficiaries 
through operationalizing at least 
4,500 WUAs by 2021(2016 baseline: no 
WUAs operationalized yet) [DLI 6] 
2c. Number of women in the governing 
boards of WUAs increased to at least 20% 
by 2021 (2016 baseline: <10%) 
2d. Improved assessments integrating 
agriculture and infrastructure development 
conducted for at least 719 priority schemes 
by 2021 (2016 baseline: no assessments 
in line with expanded guidelines) [DLI 7] 
3a. Water resources accounting using 
satellite technology to enable climate 
change adaptation planning for schemes of 
more than 200 ha in program area 
completed and validated by 2019 
(2016 baseline: no additional schemes) 
3b. Detailed engineering designs prepared 
in line with DGWR technical standards 
completed for at least 800,000 ha in the 
program area by 2019 (2016 baseline: 
45,000 ha) 
2a. Irrigation asset 
management 
information system 
progress reports, 
DGWR 
2b. Program 
reports, DGWR, 
MOHA 
2c. Program 
reports, MOHA 
2d. Program 
reports, DGWR, 
MOHA 
3a–b. Program 
reports, DGWR 
Variable capacities, 
especially at 
subnational level, 
(institutional and 
community) (i) pose 
risks to effective 
uptake, 
institutionalization, 
and implementation 
of regulatory 
frameworks and 
processes; (ii) may 
impede 
management and 
O&M activities; and 
(iii) may delay 
operationalization of 
WUAs and set back 
the assessment of 
priority schemes.   
Weak subnational 
capacities in some 
districts could lead 
to delays in 
infrastructure 
improvements and 
nonadherence to 
environmental and 
social safeguard 
regulations.  
3c. Rehabilitated irrigation infrastructure in 
program areas increased by 500,000 ha by 
2021 (2016 baseline: 0 ha) [DLI 8] 
3c. DOM–MIS and 
program reports, 
DGWR, MOHA 
3d. Modernization process initiated for at 
least five irrigation schemes according to 
government technical standards by 2019 
(2016 baseline: 0 schemes) 
3d. Program 
reports, DGWR 
3e. At least 30% of participants for 
planning and design of infrastructure 
consultations are women by 2021 
3e. Program 
reports, DGWR, 
MOHA 
Key Program Actions 
1. Systems and institutional capacity for sustainable irrigated agriculture strengthened 
1.1. Conduct district level intervention mapping and convergent planning with IFAD and other development  
Appendix 1 
13 
partners (Q2 2017) [GEM] 
1.2. Develop and implement a capacity development framework for WRA staff on social and environmental 
safeguards management, financial management, procurement, engineering and planning, and gender 
mainstreaming (Q4 2018) [GCD] 
1.3. Update, issue, and disseminate key technical guidelines (Q2 2019) [KNS] 
1.4. Establish staff and facilitator competency certification system (Q4 2017) [GCD] 
1.5. Establish and strengthen irrigation commissions (Q4 2020) [GCD/GEM] 
1.6. Develop, monitor, and evaluate (RP2I) at district, province, and RBO levels (Q4 2021) [GCD] 
1.7. Ensure coordination among project stakeholders and ensure efficient project delivery (Q4 2021) [GCD] 
2. Irrigation operation, maintenance, and management improved 
2.1. Upgrade the irrigation asset management information system software (Q2 2017) [KNS] 
2.2. Prepare assessments covering technical (infrastructure and agriculture), social, economic, climate 
change, and institutional aspects at the scheme level (Q4 2018) [GEM] 
2.3. Collect and process aerial and field irrigation asset information for 2.5 million ha (Q4 2021) [KNS] 
2.4. Develop irrigated agriculture management plans at the scheme level and district RP2I (Q4 2021) 
[GCD/GEM] 
2.5. Conduct performance assessments of irrigation systems and address gaps in service plans (Q2 2017) 
[GCD/KNS] 
2.6. Establish and strengthen WUAs (Q4 2021) [GCD/GEM] 
3. Irrigation infrastructure improved 
3.1. Prepare water accounting for large irrigation schemes using satellite technology (Q3 2019) [KNS] 
3.2. Conduct diagnostic for modernization of irrigation system under water stress (Q4 2017) [KNS] 
3.3. Select, evaluate, and design rehabilitation and upgrading of irrigation systems using the participatory 
approach according to government guidelines (Q3 2020) [KNS] 
3.4. Rehabilitate, upgrade, and modernize irrigation systems (Q4 2021) [KNS] 
3.5. Improve water measurement and promote water efficiency technology (Q4 2018) [KNS] 
Financing Plan  
Total program financing from 2017 to 2021: $1,679.0 million 
Government of Indonesia: $1,051.0 million 
Asian Development Bank: $500.0 million loan (ordinary capital resources) 
ASEAN Infrastructure Fund: $100.0 million loan 
World Bank: $28.0 million loan 
Assumptions for Partner Financing 
Outputs necessary to reach the outcome, but not administered by the Asian Development Bank, include 
those largely financed by the Government of Indonesia and IFAD: 
1. Improved farm productivity and services, improved financial services and use of services, and improved 
market access and services (IFAD: €94.56 million in parallel financing) 
2. Rehabilitation of tertiary canals (government) 
3.  Rehabilitation  of  irrigation  systems;  formation  and  strengthening  of  WUAs  and  irrigation  commissions; 
and  preparation  of    Social,  Economic, Technical,  and  Institutional  Profile;  and  RP2I  (government  and  the 
World Bank) 
The  assumption  is  that  these  partners  have  sufficient  resources,  as  planned,  for  their  outputs  to  help 
achieve goals for irrigated agriculture and food security in Indonesia. 
ASEAN  =  Association  of  Southeast  Asian  Nations,  DGWR  =  Directorate  General  of  Water  Resources,  DLI  = 
disbursement-linked indicator,  DOM  =  Directorate  of  Operation  and  Maintenance,  GCD  =  governance and  capacity 
development,  GEM = gender  equity  mainstreaming,  ha  =  hectare,  IFAD  =  International  Fund  for  Agricultural 
Development, KNS = knowledge solutions, MIS = management information system, MOHA = Ministry of Home Affairs, 
PAP = program action plan, Q = quarter, RBL = results-based loan, RBO = river basin organization, RP2I = rencana 
pengembangan  dan  pengelolaan  irigasi  (irrigation  development  and  management  plan),  SIPD  =  sistem  informasi 
pembangunan  daerah  (regional  development  information  system),  WRA  =  water  resources  agency,  WUA  =  water 
users association. 
a  Government  of  Indonesia.  2015.  Rencana  Pembangunan  Jangka  Menengah  Nasional,  2015–2019.  Jakarta 
(National Medium-Term Development Plan); and Government of Indonesia. 2005. Rencana Pembangunan Jangka 
Panjang Nasional Tahun, 2005–2025. Jakarta (Long-Term National Development Plan). 
b  Two provincial governments are not participating in the program. 
Sources: Asian Development Bank; Government of Indonesia, Directorate General of Water Resources, Ministry of 
Public Works and Housing; and Ministry of Home Affairs.   
14 
Appendix 2 
LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS 
http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=43220-014-3 
Loan Agreement: Ordinary Capital Resources 
Loan Agreement: ASEAN Infrastructure Fund 
Country Economic Indicators 
Summary Sector Assessment: Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development 
(Irrigation)  
Program Soundness Assessment 
Program Results Assessment  
Program Results Framework 
Program Expenditure and Financing Assessment 
Program Monitoring and Evaluation System Assessment 
Program Fiduciary Systems Assessment 
Program Safeguard Systems Assessment 
Integrated Risk Assessment and Mitigating Measures 
Program Action Plan 
Contribution to the ADB Results Framework 
Development Coordination 
Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy 
Program Implementation Document 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
Supplementary Documents 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
Program Social and Gender Assessment 
Climate Risk Vulnerability Assessment 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Detailed Safeguards Assessment 
Sector Assessment: Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development (Irrigation)  
DISBURSEMENT-LINKED INDICATORS, VERIFICATION PROTOCOLS, AND DISBURSEMENT SCHEDULE 
Table A3.1: Disbursement-Linked Indicators 
Appendix 3 
15 
Results Indicators 
Baseline Value 
Baseline 
Year 
2017 
Outcome: Sustainable and more productive irrigated agriculture in 74 Districts 
DLI 1: By 2021, 
performance of irrigation 
systems in the program 
area improved by at least 
15% from baseline levela  
The performance  
index for national 
schemes in the 
program area was 
60% 
2016 
No baseline for 
subnational schemes  
Reporting system non-
functional in some 
districts 
Target Values of Results Indicators 
2019 
2020 
2018 
Baseline data 
updated and 
reported for  all 
schemes in 74 
districts 
Annual report on 
performance by 
scheme 
submitted from 
all participating 
agencies at 
national, 
provincial and 
district levels  
Performance 
for 826 
irrigation 
schemes in 
program area 
improved by at 
least 10% from 
2017 baseline 
value 
2021 
Performance for 
826 irrigation 
schemes in 
program area 
improved by at 
least 15% from 
2017 baseline 
value 
Results area 1: Systems and institutional capacity for sustainable irrigated agriculture strengthened 
DLI 2: Planning and 
engineering guidelines 
for irrigation  
delivery systems 
improved by 2019 
Government guidelines 
or regulations on 
delivery systems need 
adjustment and 
refinement 
2016 
1 guideline 
officially issued 
and 
disseminatedd 
1 guideline 
updatedc and 2 
guidelines 
officially issued 
and 
disseminated   
DLI 3: Irrigation 
commission 
operationalized to 
enhance  
institutional capacity for 
integration and 
coordination of 
agriculture and 
infrastructure 
development in 74 
districts and 14 provinces 
by 2021e 
DLI 4: At least 74 District 
irrigation development 
and management plans 
(RP2I) endorsed by 
district headg 
2016 
No updated 
performance criteria 
for assessing 
institutional capacity 
31 operationalized 
irrigation commissions  
2016 
6 RP2Is endorsed in 
2015 by district head 
for incorporation into 
five-year district plans 
and budgets 
At least 45 
district or 
province 
irrigation 
commissions 
are assessed 
as 
operationalized 
based on the 
updated 
performance 
indicators 
At least 55 
district or 
province 
irrigation 
commissions are 
assessed as 
operationalized 
based on the 
updated 
performance 
indicators 
12 RP2Is 
endorsed by 
district heads 
At least 65 
district or 
province 
irrigation 
commissions 
are assessed 
as 
operationalized 
based on the 
updated 
performance 
indicators 
50 RP2Is 
endorsed by 
district heads  
At least 88 
district or 
province 
irrigation 
commissions 
are assessed as 
operationalized 
based on the 
updated 
performance 
indicators 
74 RP2Is 
endorsed by 
district heads 
5 guidelines 
updated,b of 
which 3 
guidelines 
officially issued 
and 
disseminated   
Irrigation 
commission 
performance 
indicators 
updated f 
16 
Appendix 3 
Results Indicators 
Baseline Value 
Baseline 
Year 
2017 
Target Values of Results Indicators 
2019 
2020 
2018 
Results area 2: Irrigation operation and maintenance, and management improved 
DLI 5: Irrigation asset 
management improved 
for 2.5 million hectares of 
irrigation systems by 
2021h 
The IAMIS software is 
outdated and cannot 
be used for planning 
and managing 
irrigation systems 
IAMIS software 
has been 
upgraded to a 
web-based 
geospatial 
system 
2016 
Only 20% of national 
schemes assets are 
registered 
No  WUAs 
operationalized yet   
2016 
No SETIP/PSETK in 
line with expanded 
guidelinesl   
2016 
DLI 6: Effective 
management of tertiary 
irrigation systems 
through operationalizing 
at least 4,500 WUAs by 
2021i 
DLI 7: Improved 
assessments integrating 
agriculture and 
infrastructure 
development conducted 
for at least 719 priority 
schemes by 2021k 
Guidelines for 
field verification 
developed and 
approved 
Existing dataset 
on nationwide 
irrigation 
systems 
migrated to 
upgraded 
IAMIS 
WUA 
performance 
indicators 
updated j 
Baseline survey 
conducted 
SETIP/PSETK 
guidelines 
updated to 
integrate 
planning and 
development of 
agriculture and 
infrastructure  
At least 50 
SETIPs/PSETK 
completed in 
line with the 
expanded 
requirements 
IAMIS has 
updated data 
and maps on at 
least 0.6 million 
hectares of 
irrigation 
systems, based 
on validated 
surveys and 
other existing 
data 
IAMIS has 
updated data and 
maps on at least 
1.2 million 
hectares of 
irrigation systems 
based on 
validated surveys 
and other 
existing data 
IAMIS has 
updated data 
and maps on 
at least 1.8 
million 
hectares of 
irrigation 
systems based 
on validated 
surveys and 
other existing 
data 
2021 
IAMIS has 
updated data 
and maps on at 
least 2.5 million 
hectares of 
irrigation 
systems based 
on validated 
surveys and 
other existing 
data 
The number of 
WUAs 
operationalized 
by the program 
is at least 3,000  
The number of 
WUAs 
operationalized 
by the program is 
at least 4,000  
The number of 
WUAs 
operationalized 
by the program 
is at least 
4,500  
At least 500 
SETIPs/PSETK 
completed in 
line with the 
expanded 
requirements 
for integrated 
planning and 
development of 
agriculture and 
infrastructure 
At least 719 
SETIPs/PSETK 
completed in line 
with the 
expanded 
requirements for 
integrated 
planning and 
development of 
agriculture and 
infrastructure 
Results Indicators 
Baseline Value 
Baseline 
Year 
Results area 3: Irrigation infrastructure improved 
DLI 8: Rehabilitated 
irrigation infrastructure in 
program areas increased 
by 500,000 ha by 2021m 
Zero hectare of 
rehabilitated or 
upgraded irrigation 
infrastructure as per 
MPWH technical 
standards 
2016 
2017 
for integrated 
planning and 
development of 
agriculture and 
infrastructure 
At least 45,000 
hectares of  
irrigation 
infrastructure 
rehabilitated or 
upgraded as 
per MPWH 
technical 
standards  
Target Values of Results Indicators 
2019 
2020 
2018 
Appendix 3 
17 
2021 
At least 
145,000 
hectares of  
irrigation 
infrastructure 
rehabilitated or 
upgraded as 
per MPWH 
technical 
standards  
At least 300,000 
hectares of  
irrigation 
infrastructure 
rehabilitated or 
upgraded as per 
MPWH technical 
standards  
At least 
400,000 
hectares of  
irrigation 
infrastructure 
rehabilitated or 
upgraded as 
per MPWH 
technical 
standards  
At least 500,000 
hectares of  
irrigation 
infrastructure 
rehabilitated or 
upgraded as per 
MPWH 
technical 
standards 
DLI = disbursement-linked indicator; IAMIS =  irrigation asset management information system; MPWH = Ministry of Public Works and Housing;  RP2I = rencana 
pengembangan dan pengelolaan irigasi (irrigation development and management plan); SETIP = social, economic, technical and institutional profile; WUA = water 
user association. 
a   The irrigation performance index or Indek Kinerja Sistem Irigasi (IKSI) is calculated based on 6 criteria, with a possible total score of 100 as stipulated in the 
Ministry  of  Public  Works  and  Housing  (MPWH)  regulation  12/2015.  The  6  criteria  are  measured  and  weighted  for  every  irrigation  scheme  as  follows:                            
(i)  functioning  infrastructure  (45%);  (ii)  agriculture  productivity  (15%);  (iii)  supporting  facilities  for  operations  and  maintenance  (O&M)  (10%);  (iv)  adequacy  of 
human resources for O&M (15%); (v) adequacy of data and information (5%); and (vi) water user association participation (10%). Achievement of DLI 1 requires 
achieving  outputs  as  well  as  strengthening  the  IKSI  system  so  that  baselines  can  be  set.  DLI  1  will  cover  irrigation  schemes  of  more  than  400  ha  and  10 
irrigation schemes with an area of less than 200 ha included in the selected 74 districts.  
b   Updated guidelines: (i) detailed engineering guidelines to incorporate adaptation for irrigation system management to increasing climate variability and change, 
climate  proofing,  water  efficiency,  mapping, and  remote  sensing; master  planning  and  feasibility  study methodology,  construction management  and technical 
specification and cost estimate standards; right of way management; hydro-mechanical works; (ii) participatory irrigation management or Pengembangan dan 
Pengelolaan Sistem Irigasi Partisipatip (PPISP) guidelines for water user associations (WUAs) and farmers empowerment; (iii) guidelines for  preparation for 
operation an maintenance (PROM); (iv) social, economic, technical and institutional profile (SETIP) guidelines; (v) irrigated agriculture management plan (IAMP) 
guidelines. Officially issued: (i) SETIP guidelines; (ii) IAMP guidelines; (iii) guidelines for PROM. 
c  Updated guidelines: (i) decree for key performance indicators for RBOs and WRAs.Officially issued: (i) detailed engineering guidelines to incorporate adaptation 
for irrigation system management to increasing climate variability and change, climate proofing, water efficiency, mapping, and remote sensing; master planning 
and  feasibility  study  methodology,  construction  management  and  technical  specification  and  cost  estimate  standards;  right  of  way  management;  hydro-
mechanical  works;  (ii)  participatory  irrigation  management  or  Pengembangan  dan  Pengelolaan  Sistem  Irigasi  Partisipatip  (PPISP)  guidelines  for  WUAs  and 
farmers empowerment. 
d   Officially issued: (i) decree for key performance indicators for river basin organizations (RBOs) and water resources agencies (WRAs). 
e   Strengthening institutional capacity for integration and coordination of agriculture and infrastructure development requires three steps: (i) irrigation commission 
performance indicators are updated; (ii) irrigation commissions meet the minimum score to be considered as operational; and (iii) the irrigation commission’s 
performance is assessed against updated indicators in all target provinces and districts. 
f   The  irrigation  commission  performance  composite  index  includes:  (i)  establishment  and  legal  status;  (ii)  staffing,  job  description,  coordination  and 
implementation of the work plan, documentations/reports and facilities; and (iii) annual operational budget. 
18 
Appendix 3 
g   The RP2I, prepared with a needs-based budget, is endorsed by the head of district, a necessary step for the regional parliament’s approval for incorporation into 
five-year sector plans and budgets. 
h   Improved irrigation asset management means: (i) irrigation asset management information system (IAMIS) software upgraded; (ii) existing dataset on irrigation 
systems migrated  to  upgraded  IAMIS;  (iii)  surveys and  remote sensing  conducted  on  irrigation  assets;  (iv)  survey  data  validated and entered  into geospatial 
information systems; and (v) staff trained and appointed to use the IAMIS effectively. 
i   A given WUA is considered operationalized as per performance evaluation in line with updated guidelines. 
j   The  WUA  performance  composite  index  includes:  (i)  establishment  and  legal  status;  (ii)  operation  of  irrigation  infrastructure  and  water  allocation,  (iii) 
management of tertiary canals and associated infrastructure. 
k   Improved assessments  integrating agriculture and infrastructure development mean (i) SETIP is prepared for the irrigation scheme, and (ii) the assessment is 
conducted in line with the expanded requirements for integrated planning and development of agriculture and infrastructure. 
l    763 irrigation schemes have completed SETIPs prepared in line with the current guidelines.  
m Rehabilitated  and  upgraded  infrastructure  as  per  MPWH  guidelines.  The  target  excludes  category  A  (involuntary  resettlement,  environment  and  indigenous 
people)  interventions.  For  irrigation  schemes  that  are  crossing  2  districts  –  with  one  of  them  not  a  participating  district  –  the  downstream  area  hydraulically 
connected to the rehabilitated infrastructure will be accounted as functioning.  
Sources:  Asian Development Bank; Directorate General of Water Resources, Ministry of Public Works and Housing; and Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Disbursement-Linked 
Indicator 
Outcome 
DLI 1: By 2021, 
performance of 
irrigation systems in 
the program area 
improved by at least 
15% from baseline 
level 
Table A3.2:  Verification Protocols 
Definition and Description of Achievement  
Information Source and 
Frequency 
Verification Agency 
and Procedure 
Appendix 3 
19 
Definition: The irrigation performance index or Indek Kinerja Sistem Irigasi 
(IKSI) is calculated based on 6 criteria, with a possible total score of 100 as 
stipulated in the MPWH regulation 12/2015 or its update. The 6 criteria are 
measured and weighted for every irrigation scheme as follows: (i) functioning 
infrastructure (45%); (ii) agriculture productivity (15%); (iii) supporting facilities for 
O&M (10%); (iv) adequacy of human resources for O&M (15%); (v) adequacy of 
data and information (5%); (vi) water user association participation (10%).  
DGWR has a system for measuring this index that involves collection of field 
data in a series of forms. 
Baseline: The IKSI is measured for irrigation schemes under national authority 
in the program area. In 2015, the average IKSI for national schemes in the 
program area was 60%. There is no baseline for subnational schemes. 
“Program area” means irrigation schemes of more than 400 ha and 10 irrigation 
schemes with an area of less than 200 ha included in the selected 74 districts 
across 16 provinces.  
The definition of targets each year is geared towards strengthening the IKSI 
monitoring to be able to (a) set baseline data for 2017, (b) ensure the channels 
for regular data collection and annual report are well established and produce 
annual reports by 2018, and (c) start tracking performance index improvement in 
2019, 2020, and 2021. This system will be combined with the IAMIS described in 
DLI 5, when complete.   
Conditions for disbursement are met if the target specified each year is 
achieved.  
Partial disbursement: The DLI is scalable and partial disbursement is allowed. 
If the target for each year is not met, then disbursement can be proportional to 
the increase made (e.g., if an improvement in IKSI for the program area is 
increased by only half the target set, then 50% of the planned disbursement for 
that year can be made).  
Disbursements are allowed for early or late achievement of the DLI. This means 
that the planned disbursement amount for a given year can be released when 
the set target is fully achieved even if the achievement is a year or more late, as 
long as the achievement is during the program’s duration. 
DOM reporting supported 
by DILL, RBOs, WRAs 
and MOHA  
Frequency for reporting 
will be annual or semi-
annual when necessary. 
However, monitoring 
may be as frequent as 
necessary. 
Each year, the focal unit 
in DOM prepares an 
attestation that the DLI is 
met and attaches the 
relevant report.  
The IVA will verify the 
results each year in DOM 
where the database is 
housed. The IVA will 
verify the results by spot 
checks of the system at 
central level (where the 
data are housed), and at 
district, province and 
scheme level, where 
sampling and spot 
checks of the IKSI 
calculation and criteria 
will be undertaken.  
The IVA will refer to the 
verification guidelines 
prepared for the 
program. 
The IVA might require 
independent technical 
expertise, which could be 
drawn from a body 
outside the Government 
such as an Indonesian 
university or independent 
expert.  
20 
Appendix 3 
Disbursement-Linked 
Indicator 
Output 
DLI 2. Planning and 
engineering guidelines 
for irrigation delivery 
systems are improved 
by 2019 
DLI 3: Irrigation 
commissions 
operationalized  to 
enhance institutional 
capacity for integration 
and coordination of 
agriculture and 
infrastructure 
development in 74 
districts and 14 
provinces by 2021 
Definition and Description of Achievement  
Information Source and 
Frequency 
Verification Agency 
and Procedure 
Definitions: 
“Updated” means that guidelines are acceptable for the technical agencies. 
DOM and DILL reporting 
supported by MOHA 
“Officially issued” means that the updated guidelines have been legalized by the 
technical agencies. 
“Disseminated” means that the updated guidelines have been distributed 
electronically and explained to national and subnational water resources 
agencies by the central government through 1 regional roadshow on year 2018. 
Frequency for reporting 
will be annual or semi-
annual when necessary.  
However, monitoring 
may be as frequent as 
necessary. 
The focal unit in DOM 
prepares an attestation 
that the DLI is met and 
attaches the relevant 
report. 
The IVA will refer to the 
verification guidelines 
prepared for the 
program. 
The purpose of this indicator is to ensure that program innovations and 
approaches become part of the institutional framework for irrigation systems 
O&M and management. 
Conditions for disbursement are met if the government issues the regulations 
or guidelines.  
Partial disbursement: The DLI is scalable and partial disbursement is  allowed. 
If the target for each year is not met, then disbursement can be  proportional to 
the increase made. The updated detailed engineering design guidelines weight 
for 50%, others are pro rata. 
Disbursements are allowed for early or late achievement of the DLI. This means 
that the planned disbursement amount for a given year can be released when 
the set target is fully achieved even if the achievement is a year or more late, as 
long as the achievement is during the program’s duration. 
Definition: Irrigation commissions can be at both district and province level.  
An irrigation commission is considered to be “operationalized” based on the 
updated performance indicators.  
Conditions for disbursement are met if the number of commissions each year 
meeting the definition above is equal to or more than the target number of 
“operationalized” commissions for that year.  
Partial disbursement: The DLI is scalable and partial disbursement is allowed. 
If the target for each year is not met, then disbursement can be proportional to 
the increase made (e.g., if the number of commissions meeting the definition and 
conditions set above is equivalent to half of the target number for that year, then 
50% of the planned disbursement for that year can be made).  
Disbursements are allowed for early or late achievement of the DLI. This means  
DOM reporting based 
MOHA reporting 
Frequency for reporting 
will be annual. However, 
monitoring may be as 
frequent as necessary. 
Each year, the focal unit 
in DOM prepares an 
attestation that the DLI is 
met and attaches the 
relevant report. 
The IVA will refer to the 
verification guidelines 
prepared for the 
program. 
The IVA will verify the 
results at district and 
province level through 
spot checks. 
Disbursement-Linked 
Indicator 
Definition and Description of Achievement  
that the planned disbursement amount for a given year can be released when 
the set target is fully achieved even if the achievement is a year or more late, as 
long as the achievement is during the program’s duration. 
Appendix 3 
21 
Information Source and 
Frequency 
Verification Agency 
and Procedure 
DLI 4: At least 74 
district irrigation 
development and 
management plan  
(RP2I) endorsed by 
district heads 
Definitions:  
District Irrigation Development and Management Plans or Rencana 
Pengembangan dan Pengelolaan Irigasi (RP2I) are the aggregation of available 
irrigation scheme level IAMPs covering national, province, and district levels in 
line with requirements set in MPWH regulation 12/2015 and its update. RP2Is 
cover irrigated agriculture development on a 5-year horizon and are updated 
every year. 
DOM reporting supported 
by MOHA 
Frequency for reporting 
will be annual. However, 
monitoring may be as 
frequent as necessary. 
“Endorsed” means that the head of district government (Bupati) endorses the 
RP2I through a legal letter as a step for inclusion into the sector plan and budget 
of the district/province agencies. The budget should incorporate operations and 
maintenance needs. This process is called “internalization.” 
Conditions for disbursement are met if the number of RP2I that have been 
endorsed by the district head.  
Partial disbursement: The DLI is scalable and partial disbursement is allowed. 
If the target for each year is not met, then disbursement can be proportional to 
the increase made (e.g., if the number of aggregated IAMPs meeting the 
definition set above is equivalent to 50% of the target number for that year, then 
50% of the planned disbursement for that year can be made).  
Disbursements are allowed for early or late achievement of the DLI. This means 
that the planned disbursement amount for a given year can be released when 
the set target is fully achieved, even if the achievement is a year or more late, as 
long as the achievement is during the program’s duration. 
Each year, the focal unit 
in DOM prepares an 
attestation that the DLI is 
met and attaches the 
relevant report. 
The IVA will refer to the 
verification guidelines 
prepared for the 
program. 
The IVA will verify the 
results at district level 
through spot checks. 
DLI 5: Irrigation asset 
management improved 
for 2.5 million hectares 
of irrigation systems by 
2021 
Definitions: 
An “upgraded” IAMIS software means that the IAMIS software is web-based with 
geographic information system interface combining the functionalities of the 
previous Pengelolaan Aset Irigasi (PAI) and the Rencana Pengembangan dan 
Pengelolaan Irrigasi (RP2I) information systems in line with the requirements of 
the Ministry of Public Works and Housing regulation 23/2015.  
“Migration of existing data into the upgraded IAMIS” means that data collected 
for national schemes using the PAI format are converted into the new format and 
imported into the upgraded IAMIS. 
DOM reporting supported 
by the DGWR data 
center, RBOs, WRAs 
and MOHA 
Each year, the focal unit 
in DOM prepares an 
attestation that the DLI is 
met and attaches the 
relevant report.  
Frequency for reporting 
will be annual or semi-
annual when necessary. 
However, monitoring 
may be as frequent as 
necessary. 
The IVA will verify the 
results at scheme 
through sampling and 
spot checks. 
22 
Appendix 3 
Disbursement-Linked 
Indicator 
Information Source and 
Frequency 
Verification Agency 
and Procedure 
The IVA will refer to the 
verification guidelines 
prepared for the 
program. 
The IVA might require 
independent technical 
expertise, which could be 
drawn from a body 
outside the Government 
such as an Indonesian 
university or independent 
expert. 
Definition and Description of Achievement  
“Updated data and maps for IAMIS” means that: (i) location of irrigation 
infrastructure (canal, headworks, diversion, turn out, drop, gate, aqueduct, drain) 
are digitalized and imported into the IAMIS: and (ii) dimensions and conditions of 
irrigation infrastructure have been validated through field check and are inputted 
in the IAMIS.  
The indicator relates first, to strengthening and upgrading the current IAMIS, and 
second, to the number of hectares of irrigation systems for which IAMIS data set 
has been thus updated.  
Conditions for disbursement are met if conditions specified in the DLI table 
each year are met. In the last four years, conditions for disbursement are met 
when digital geo-referenced information on irrigation infrastructure is inputted 
into the IAMIS and validated through field check that meets the definition above 
is equal to or more than the target number of hectares for that year.  
Partial disbursement: The DLI is scalable and partial disbursement is allowed. 
If the target for each year is not met, then disbursement can be proportional to 
the increase made (e.g., if the number of hectares meeting the definition and 
conditions set above is equivalent to 50% of the target number for that year, then 
50% of the planned disbursement for that year can be made).  
Disbursements are allowed for early or late achievement of the DLI. This means 
that the planned disbursement amount for a given year can be released when 
the set target is fully achieved even if the achievement is a year or more late, as 
long as the achievement is during the program’s duration. 
DLI 6: Effective 
management of tertiary 
irrigation systems 
through 
operationalizing at 
least 4,500 WUAs by 
2021 
Definitions:  
The DLI will be met when WUAs are considered operationalized as per 
performance evaluation in line with updated guidelines in line with the MPWH 
regulation 30/2015 and its update.  
“Program area” means irrigation schemes included in the selected 74 districts 
across 16 provinces. 
DOM reporting supported 
by RBOs, WRAs and 
MOHA  
Frequency for reporting 
will be annual. However, 
monitoring may be as 
frequent as necessary. 
Conditions for disbursement are met if the number of WUAs each year 
meeting the definition above is equal to or more than the target number of WUAs 
for that year.  
Partial disbursement: The DLI is scalable and partial disbursement is allowed. 
If the target for each year is not met, then disbursement can be proportional to 
the increase made (e.g., if the number of WUAs meeting the definition and 
conditions set above is equivalent to 50% of the target number for that year, then 
Each year, the focal unit 
in DOM prepares an 
attestation that the DLI is 
met and attaches the 
relevant report.  
The IVA will verify the 
results at scheme and 
community level through 
sampling and spot 
checks. 
The IVA will refer to the 
verification guidelines 
prepared for the 
program. 
Disbursement-Linked 
Indicator 
Definition and Description of Achievement  
50% of the planned disbursement for that year can be made).  
Disbursements are allowed for early or late achievement of the DLI. This means 
that the planned disbursement amount for a given year can be released when 
the set target is fully achieved even if the achievement is a year or more late, as 
long as the achievement is during the program’s duration. 
Appendix 3 
23 
Information Source and 
Frequency 
Verification Agency 
and Procedure 
DLI 7: Improved 
assessments 
integrating agriculture 
and infrastructure 
development 
conducted for at least 
719 priority schemes 
by 2021 
Definitions:  
The SETIP/PSETK will go beyond the usual assessments and be in line with the 
updated requirements to include environmental, livelihoods, agricultural, and 
institutional assessments.   
“Program area” means irrigation schemes included in the selected 74 districts 
across 16 provinces 
Conditions for disbursement are met if the number of SETIPs/PSETK as 
specified above for each year is equal to or more than the target number of 
assessments for that year.  
Partial disbursement: The DLI is scalable and partial disbursement is allowed. 
If the target for each year is not met, then disbursement can be proportional to 
the increase made (e.g., if the number of SETIPs/PSETK meeting the definition 
and conditions set above is equivalent to half the target number for that year, 
then 50% of the planned disbursement for that year can be made).  
Disbursements are allowed for early or late achievement of the DLI. This means 
that the planned disbursement amount for a given year can be released when 
the set target is fully achieved even if the achievement is a year or more late, as 
long as the achievement is during the program’s duration. 
DOM reporting based on 
by RBOs, WRAs and 
MOHA reporting 
Frequency for reporting 
will be annual. However, 
monitoring may be as 
frequent as necessary. 
DLI 8: Rehabilitated 
irrigation infrastructure 
in program areas 
increased by 500,000 
ha by 2021 
Definitions: 
The irrigation infrastructure in program areas that have been rehabilitated and 
upgraded as per MPWH technical standards includes all or parts of irrigation 
schemes, including headworks; primary, secondary and tertiary canals; 
associated structures (such as diversion, turn out, drop, gate, aqueduct, culvert, 
drains) and which function well, meaning that the irrigation infrastructure as a 
system delivers irrigation water to the target tertiary blocks. 
DOM reporting based on 
DILL, RBOs, WRAs and 
MOHA reporting 
Frequency for reporting 
will be annual. However, 
monitoring may be as 
frequent as necessary. 
The IVA might require 
independent technical 
expertise, which could be 
drawn from a body 
outside the Government 
such as an Indonesian 
university or independent 
expert. 
Each year, the focal unit 
in MOHA prepares an 
attestation that the DLI is 
met and attaches the 
relevant report.  
The IVA will verify the 
results at scheme level 
through sampling and 
spot checks. 
The IVA will refer to the 
verification guidelines 
prepared for the 
program. 
The IVA might require 
independent technical 
expertise, which could be 
drawn from a body 
outside the Government 
such as an Indonesian 
university or independent 
expert. 
Each year, the focal unit 
in DILL prepares an 
attestation that the DLI is 
met and attaches the 
relevant report.  
The IVA will verify the 
results at scheme level, 
where sampling and spot 
24 
Appendix 3 
Disbursement-Linked 
Indicator 
Definition and Description of Achievement  
“Program area” means irrigation schemes included in the selected 74 districts 
across 16 provinces.  
For irrigation schemes that are crossing 2 districts – with one of them not a 
participating district – the downstream area hydraulically connected to the 
rehabilitated infrastructure will be accounted as functioning. 
Conditions for disbursement are met if the number of hectares served by 
rehabilitated/ upgraded irrigation infrastructure each year is equal to or more 
than the target number of hectares set for that year.  
Partial disbursement: The DLI is scalable and partial disbursement is allowed. 
If the target for each year is not met, then disbursement can be proportional to 
the increase made (e.g., if an increase in hectares meeting the definition and 
conditions set above is equivalent to 50% of the target hectares for that year, 
50% of the planned disbursement for that year can be made).  
Disbursements are allowed for early or late achievement of the DLI. This means 
that the planned disbursement amount for a given year can be released when 
the set target is fully achieved even if the achievement is a year or more late, as 
long as the achievement is during the program’s duration. 
Information Source and 
Frequency 
Verification Agency 
and Procedure 
checks of the 
rehabilitation undertaken. 
The IVA will be provided 
with completion reports 
of rehabilitation works 
prepared by the RBOs 
and WRAs. 
The IVA will refer to the 
verification guidelines 
prepared for the program 
The IVA might require 
independent technical 
expertise, which could be 
drawn from a body 
outside the government 
such as an Indonesian 
university or independent 
expert  
DGWR  =  Directorate  General  of Water  Resources;  DILL  =  Directorate  of  Irrigation  and  Low  Land;  DLI  =  disbursement-linked  indicators;  DOM  =  Directorate  of 
Operation and Maintenance; IAMIS = irrigation asset management information system;  IKSI = Indek Kinerja Sistem Irigasi (irrigation performance index); IVA = 
independent verification agency; MOHA = Ministry of Home Affairs; MPWH = Ministry of Public Works and Housing; O&M = operation and maintenance;  RBO = 
river  basin  organization;  RP2I  =  rencana  pengembangan  dan  pengelolaan  irigasi  (irrigation  development  and  management  plan);  SETIP  =  social,  economic, 
technical and institutional profile; WRA = water resources agency. 
Appendix 3 
25 
Table A3.3: Disbursement Schedulea 
($ million) 
Indicator 
DLI 1: By 2021, performance of irrigation systems in 
the program area improved by at least 15% from 
baseline level 
DLI 2. Planning and engineering guidelines for 
irrigation delivery systems are improved by 2019 
DLI 3: Irrigation Commissions operationalized  to 
enhance institutional capacity for integration and 
coordination of agriculture and infrastructure 
development in 74 districts and 14 provinces by 2021 
DLI 4: At least 74 district irrigation management and 
development plans (RP2I) endorsed by district heads  
DLI 5: Irrigation asset management improved for 2.5 
million hectares of irrigation systems by 2021 
DLI 6: Effective management of tertiary irrigation 
systems through operationalizing at least 4,500 
WUAs by 2021 
DLI 7: Improved assessments integrating agriculture 
and infrastructure development conducted for at least 
719 priority schemes by 2021 
DLI 8: Rehabilitated irrigation infrastructure in 
program areas increased by 500,000 ha by 2021 
TOTAL 
Total ADB 
financing 
allocation 
Share of total 
ADB financing 
(%) 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
Total 
42.0 
7.0% 
0.0 
6.0 
6.0 
15.0 
15.0 
42.0 
36.0 
6.0% 
18.0 
15.0 
3.0 
0.0 
0.0 
36.0 
54.0 
9.0% 
6.0 
24.0 
12.0 
6.0 
6.0 
54.0 
18.0 
3.0% 
0.0 
0.0 
6.0 
6.0 
6.0 
18.0 
138.0 
23.0% 
18.0 
30.0 
30.0 
30.0 
30.0 
138.0 
24.0 
4.0% 
6.0 
6.0 
6.0 
6.0 
0.0 
24.0 
36.0 
6.0% 
12.0 
12.0 
12.0 
0.0 
0.0 
36.0 
252.0 
42.0% 
78.0 
57.0 
63.0 
39.0 
15.0 
$600.0 
100.0% 
138 
150 
138 
102 
72 
252.0 
600.0 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  DLI  =  disbursement-linked  indicators,  ha  =  hectare,  RP2I  =  rencana  pengembangan  dan  pengelolaan  irigasi  (irrigation 
development and management plan,  WUA = water user associations. 
  a Amounts will be disbursed on a pro-rata basis (83.3% OCR and 16.7% AIF).  
  Source: Asian Development Bank. 
