Report and Recommendation of the President  
to the Board of Directors 
Project Number: 45371-007 
May 2018 
Proposed Loan  
India: Madhya Pradesh Irrigation Efficiency 
Improvement Project 
Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been approved by the Board of Directors. 
Following such approval, ADB will disclose the document to the public in accordance with ADB’s 
Public Communications Policy 2011. 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(as of 20 April 2018) 
Currency Unit 
₹1.00 
$1.00 
– 
= 
= 
Indian rupee (₹) 
$0.0151 
₹66.105 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB 
DBO 
EIRR 
EMP 
ha 
KIP 
KMMP 
MMI 
MOM 
MPWRD 
SSIP 
Asian Development Bank 
– 
design–build–operate 
– 
economic internal rate of return 
– 
environmental management plan 
– 
hectare 
– 
Kundalia Irrigation Project 
– 
Kundalia Major Multipurpose Project 
– 
major- and medium-sized irrigation 
– 
– 
management, operation and maintenance 
–  Water Resources Department Madhya Pradesh 
– 
Sanjay Sarovar Irrigation Project 
(i) 
The fiscal year (FY) of the Government of India and its agencies ends on 31 March. 
“FY” before a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends, e.g., 
FY2018 ends on 31 March 2018. 
NOTES 
(ii) 
In this report, "$" refers to United States dollars. 
Vice-President 
Director General 
Director 
Team leader 
Team members 
Peer reviewer 
Wencai Zhang, Operations 1 
Hun Kim, South Asia Department (SARD) 
Mio Oka, Environment, Natural Resources and Agriculture Division, 
SARD 
Arnaud Cauchois, Principal Water Resources Specialist, SARD 
Cynthia Pancracia Ceniza, Operations Assistant, SARD 
Debra Ann Cruz, Senior Portfolio Management Officer, Southeast 
Asia Department (SERD) 
Randall Jones, Senior Economist, SARD  
Soo-Wan Kim, Senior Audit Specialist, Office of the Auditor General 
Takako Morita, Senior Counsel, Office of the General Counsel 
Dewi Utami, Principal Safeguards Specialist, SARD  
Eric Quincieu, Senior Water Resources Specialist, SERD 
In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation 
of  or  reference  to  a  particular  territory  or  geographic  area  in  this  document,  the  Asian 
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any 
territory or area. 
CONTENTS 
PROJECT AT A GLANCE 
MAP 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
THE PROPOSAL 
THE PROJECT 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Rationale 
Impact and Outcome 
Outputs 
Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan 
Implementation Arrangements 
DUE DILIGENCE 
A. 
Technical 
B. 
Economic and Financial 
C. 
Governance 
D. 
Poverty, Social and Gender 
E. 
Safeguards 
F. 
Summary of Risks Assessment and Risk Management Plan 
ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS 
RECOMMENDATION 
APPENDIXES 
1. 
2. 
Design and Monitoring Framework 
List of Linked Documents 
Page 
1 
1 
1 
3 
3 
4 
5 
6 
6 
7 
7 
8 
8 
9 
10 
10 
11 
14 
PROJECT AT A GLANCE
Madhya Pradesh Irrigation Efficiency 
Improvement Project 
India
India
Department
/Division
Executing Agency
Subsector(s)
Agricultural production
Irrigation
Subcomponents
Pillar 2: Access to economic 
opportunities, including jobs, made 
more inclusive
Global and regional transboundary 
environmental concerns
Project Classification Information Status: Complete
Project Number: 45371-007
SARD/SAER
Water Resources Department 
Madhya Pradesh
     ADB Financing ($ million)
11.25
363.75
Total
Climate Change Information 
Adaptation ($ million)
Climate Change impact on the 
Project
375.00
42.50
High
Components
Institutional development
Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
Some gender elements (SGE)
Pilot-testing innovation and learning
Promotion of private sector investment
No
No
Yes
SDG2, SDG6, SDG13
Complex
Location Impact
Rural
High
1. Basic Data
Project Name
Country
Borrower
2. Sector
Agriculture, natural 
resources and rural 
development
3. Strategic Agenda
Inclusive economic growth 
(IEG)
Environmentally sustainable 
growth (ESG)
4. Drivers of Change
Governance and capacity 
development (GCD)
Knowledge solutions (KNS)
Private sector development 
(PSD)
5. Poverty and SDG Targeting
Geographic Targeting
Household Targeting
SDG Targeting
SDG Goals        
6. Risk Categorization:
.
.
7. Safeguard Categorization
Environment: B   Involuntary Resettlement: B   Indigenous Peoples: C
8. Financing
Modality and Sources
ADB
     Sovereign Project (Regular Loan): Ordinary capital resources
Amount ($ million)
Cofinancing
     None
Counterpart 
     Government 
Total
375.00
375.00
0.00
0.00
160.71
160.71
535.71
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.
13032017113628904883
Generated Date: 20-Apr-2018 17:16:33 PM
I. 
THE PROPOSAL 
I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan to 
1. 
India for the Madhya Pradesh Irrigation Efficiency Improvement Project. 
2. 
The project is designed to support higher irrigation efficiency and expansion of irrigation 
in Madhya Pradesh. It will focus on developing 125,000 hectares (ha) of new, highly efficient and 
climate-resilient irrigation networks and productive command area under the Kundalia Irrigation 
Project  (KIP).  It  will  also  finance  a  feasibility  study  and  detailed  designs  for  modernizing  the 
existing Sanjay Sarovar Irrigation Project (SSIP).1   
A. 
Rationale 
II. 
THE PROJECT 
India requires irrigation water use efficiency and productivity improvement. Water 
3. 
plays  a  critical  role  in  India’s  food  security  and  welfare  of  the  rural  poor  as  84%  of  all  water 
withdrawals are dedicated to agriculture and 42% of all agricultural land is irrigated. India benefits 
from only 4% of the world’s renewable fresh water but has 16% of the world’s population.2 With 
intense urbanization and industrialization, the need for water from the nonagriculture sector is fast 
increasing  and  water  shortage  is  becoming  a  major  concern  for  industries.  At  the  same  time, 
population growth and change in dietary habits require continued growth in agricultural production. 
By 2050, annual water availability per capita in India is expected to drop from 1,530 cubic meters 
to 1,140 cubic meters, indicating severe water stress.3 The current average irrigation water use 
efficiency of 38% points towards the need for serious performance improvement in this sector.4 
The productivity of irrigation water is further hampered by low crop yields and cultivation of low- 
value  crops.  Therefore,  most  of  India’s  utilized  water  not  only  supports  activities  with  low 
economic value but is also inefficiently used. In the meantime, water shortages are constraining 
water-dependent power production and the development of high-value industries that are required 
to fuel the country’s economic growth. These problems will worsen in the future with the projected 
impacts of population and economic growth, and with climate change, which will increase both 
irrigation water demand and uncertainty around the reliability of water resources.  
4. 
Irrigation  modernization  is  a  key  strategy  to  reducing  water  wastage.  The 
Government of India recognizes the situation. Both the Three Year Action Agenda (2017–2018 to 
2019–2020)5 and the 2015 Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana program have acknowledged 
the necessity to improve water use efficiency in irrigation.6 In 2014, the Asian Development Bank 
(ADB)  funded  the  Scoping  Study  for  a  National  Water  Use  Efficiency  Improvement  Support 
Program.7 The  study  identified  the  following  three  main  causes  for  low  water  use  efficiency: 
(i) inadequate  irrigation  and  drainage  infrastructure  because  of  faulty  designs  and  lack  of 
maintenance; (ii) inadequate management,  operation and maintenance  (MOM)  of  the  irrigation 
systems;  and  (iii) inadequate  capacity  building  and  training  services.  The  study  highlights  the 
need  to  modernize  the  design  and  management  of  major-  and  medium-sized  irrigation  (MMI) 
1   The  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  provided  project  preparatory  technical  assistance  for  the  Madhya  Pradesh 
Irrigation Efficiency Improvement Project (TA 9051-IND).  
2  T. A. Bhat. 2014. An Analysis of Demand and Supply of Water in India. Journal of Environment and Earth Science.  
4 (11). p. 67. 
3   Government of India, Central Water Commission. 2010. Water and Related Statistics. New Delhi; Government of 
India. 2001. Census of India. New Delhi. 
4   Water use efficiency is the ratio between the fraction of irrigation water used for productive crop evapotranspiration 
within the boundaries of the scheme and the total volume of water diverted at the intake to the irrigation system.   
5   Government of India, NITI Aayog. 2017. Three Year Action Agenda (2017–2018 to 2019–2020). New Delhi. 
6   Government of  India,  Ministry  of  Agriculture and  Farmers Welfare.  2015–2016.  Pradhan  Mantri  Krishi  Sinchayee 
Yojana. New Delhi. 
7   ADB. 2014. Support for the Implementation of the National Water Mission by State Governments in India: Scoping 
Study for a National Water Use Efficiency Improvement Support Program. Manila. 
2 
schemes  to  reduce  system  inefficiencies  and  substantially  improve  water  delivery  services  to 
farmers.  It  proposed  a  framework  for  assessing  and  improving  water  use  efficiency  on  MMI 
schemes.  Under  a  subsequent  regional  technical  assistance,  the  framework  was  successfully 
pilot  tested  on  such  schemes  within  South  Asia.  The  study  also  developed  comprehensive 
modernization strategies for existing irrigation systems and recommended a tailored investment 
plan for the SSIP.8   
5. 
Madhya  Pradesh  plan  to  expand  and  modernize  irrigation.  Since  2010,  the 
Government  of  Madhya  Pradesh  has  embarked  on  an  ambitious  irrigation  expansion  and 
infrastructure  modernization  and  substantial 
modernization  plan.  New  developments, 
management and operation improvement led to an increase in net irrigation area from 0.85 million 
ha in 2006 to 3.6 million ha in 2017–2018. These efforts have been rewarded by record annual 
agricultural growth of 20%  in 2013–2016. The state plans to further increase the total irrigated 
area to 7.2 million ha by 2025. This will be achieved by maximizing irrigation efficiency and water 
productivity in both new and existing irrigation systems. It includes development of pressurized 
irrigation, adoption of micro-irrigation and production of high-value crops. The state has set the 
ambitious target of developing pressurized irrigation in 80% of all irrigated areas by 2025. The 
plan is estimated to cost $20 billion. 
6. 
The  Water  Resources  Department  Madhya  Pradesh  (MPWRD)  has  requested  ADB 
assistance to help finance this plan and, more importantly, to provide advice on developing highly 
efficient  and  sustainable  model  for  MMI  schemes  that  will  serve  as  reference  for  future 
modernization investments. The KIP will include the design and construction of a highly efficient 
and productive new pressurized irrigation system with automated volumetric control for efficient, 
reliable and flexible water delivery services. The KIP will be supplied by the reservoir being built 
under the Kundalia Major Multipurpose Project (KMMP). Modernization being conducted under 
the  SSIP  will  include  (i) upgrading  infrastructure  to  improve  conveyance  efficiency  and  flow 
regulation, and (ii) extending the command area and partially converting to pressurized irrigation 
and micro-irrigation.9  
Innovation and ADB value addition. The project supports both technical and institutional 
7. 
innovations.  The  technical  innovation  involves  designing  and  constructing  a  very  large  scale 
pressurized  and  automated  irrigation  system  that  will  allow  considerable  gains  in  water  use 
efficiency.  On  the  institutional  side,  the  project  introduces  the  design–build–operate  (DBO) 
contracting modality. There are very few examples of irrigation DBO contracts in India and none 
on such large systems and with such a long MOM period. The DBO approach addresses critical 
lessons from past projects. It aims to address recurrent public sector inefficiencies in irrigation 
MOM. The DBO modality will also substantially enhance irrigation service delivery to farmers and 
encourage contractors to build quality and efficient irrigation systems to reduce MOM costs. Value 
added by ADB assistance consists of providing state of the art technical support for designing the 
KIP  and  SSIP,  supervising  KIP  construction,  MOM  and agriculture  support  services,  preparing 
DBO bidding documents and providing support for efficient management of the DBO contracts. 
The current limited expertise of MPWRD with pressurized irrigation, irrigation modernization and 
performance-based irrigation management will be substantially enhanced through the project. 
8. 
The project is consistent with the objectives of ADB’s country partnership strategy, 2018–
2022  for  India.10 It  will  support  the  country’s  Three  Year  Action  Agenda  (2017–2018  to  2019–
8   ADB. 2011. Technical Assistance for Innovations for More Food with Less Water into Regional Cooperation. Manila.  
(TA 7967-REG, completed in 2015).  
9   Micro-irrigation is an irrigation method that is localized to the crop root zone and uses low volume of water and low 
pressure. Micro-irrigation systems used under the project are drippers and micro-sprinklers. 
10  ADB.  2017.  Country  Partnership  Strategy:  India,  2018–2022—Accelerating  Inclusive  Economic  Transformation. 
Manila. 
3 
2020) (footnote 5) and the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana program objectives (footnote 
6) to increase irrigation water productivity.  
B. 
Impact and Outcome 
9. 
The project is aligned with the following impacts: (i) Indian farmers’ income doubled by 
2022  (footnote  5);  (ii) India’s  “more  crop  per  drop”  achieved  (footnote  6);  and  (iii)  resilience  of 
farmers  in  the  project  area  to  ongoing  and  uncertain  future  climate  change  increased.11 The 
project will have the following outcome: higher irrigation efficiency, agricultural water productivity 
and climate resilience in Madhya Pradesh achieved.12   
C. 
Outputs  
10. 
Output 1: Kundalia Irrigation Project infrastructure constructed. The KIP will consist 
of two large pumping stations pumping water to distribution chambers from where water will be 
distributed by gravity pressure through a network of buried pipelines that gradually reduce in size 
up to end user and/or farm outlets (hydrants every 1–2 ha). The system is designed to provide 
pressure of 200 kilopascal at the outlet for field micro-irrigation systems. 
Output  2:  Kundalia 
11. 
Irrigation  Project  performance-based  operation  and 
maintenance established. This output will be delivered by contracting a private sector operator 
under a DBO contract. The contractor will be tasked to operate and maintain the system for a 
period of 5 years after completion of the construction. During this period the contractor will need 
to meet several performance indicators related to system leakage, electricity consumption, and 
noninterruption of operation. The contractor will  provide on-the-job training to MPWRD staff.  A 
supervisory control and data acquisition system and a decision support system will be installed to 
facilitate the MOM of the system.  
12. 
Output  3:  Farmers  capacity  for rapid  uptake of micro-irrigation  technology  in  the 
Kundalia  Irrigation  Project  command  area  enhanced.  This  output  will  be  achieved  by 
(i) establishing and building the capacity of the water users’ associations, (ii) establishing micro-
irrigation farm demonstration sites, and (iii) establishing farmers’ service centers and conducting 
farmers’ field schools to support adoption of micro-irrigation and productive irrigated agriculture 
including  high-value  crops.  These  activities  will  be  carried  out  by  the  DBO  contractor(s)  in  a 
collaborative  relationship  with  government  agencies  and  stakeholders.  The  DBO  contracts 
include performance guarantees for the area equipped with micro-irrigation systems at year 1, 3 
and 5 after commissioning.  
13. 
Output 4: Modernization of the Sanjay Sarovar Irrigation Project well-designed with 
project readiness criteria met. This output will be achieved by (i) preparing a comprehensive 
SSIP modernization plan, (ii) undertaking a feasibility study and detailed design of the proposed 
plan,  (iii)  developing  an  institutional  strategy  to  enhance  the  performance  and  sustainability  of 
SSIP MOM, (iv) preparing bidding documents for the modernization works and consultant request 
for  proposal  for  the  ensuing  project  implementation  and  construction  quality  supervision,  and 
(v) supporting MPWRD and ADB to meet the project processing requirements. 
11  Defined by the project. 
12 The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1. 
4 
D. 
Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan  
14. 
The project is estimated to cost $535.71 million (Table 1). 
15. 
Detailed  cost  estimates  by  expenditure  category  and  by  financier  are  included  in  the 
project  administration  manual. 13  Major  expenditure  items  include  (i)  civil  works  and  electro-
mechanical equipment for the construction of the KIP, (ii)  a project management unit including 
staff  and  recurrent  expenditures,  (iii)  agriculture  support  services,  (iv)  environment  and  social 
mitigation for temporary and permanent land acquisition and implementation of the environment 
management plan (EMP) under the KIP, (v) KIP MOM, and (vi) consulting services for MPWRD 
capacity  building  and  preparation  of  the  feasibility  study  and  detailed  design  for  the  SSIP 
Modernization.  
Table 1: Summary Cost Estimates 
($ million) 
Item 
A.  
Base Costb 
Kundalia Irrigation Project infrastructure constructed 
1. 
2.          Kundalia Irrigation Project performance-based operation and 
maintenance established 
3.          Farmers capacity for rapid uptake of micro-irrigation technology in the 
Kundalia Irrigation Project command area enhanced 
4.          Modernization of the Sanjay Sarovar Irrigation Project well-designed with 
project readiness criteria met 
Subtotal (A) 
B.  
C.  
Contingenciesc 
Financing Charges During Implementationd 
Total (A+B+C) 
Amount a 
396.74 
19.10 
15.47 
3.57 
434.88 
60.48 
40.36 
535.71 
a  Includes taxes and duties of $19.69 million to be financed in cash contribution from government resources.  
b  In October 2017 prices. 
c  Physical  contingencies computed  at 10%  for  civil  works  and  goods.  Price  contingencies computed  at  average of 
1.5% on foreign exchange costs and  4.6% on local currency costs; includes provision for potential exchange rate 
fluctuation under the assumption of a purchasing power parity exchange rate. 
d  Includes interest and commitment charges. Interest during construction for ordinary capital resources loan has been 
computed at the 5-year forward London Interbank Offered Rate plus a spread of  0.7% (including a maturity-based 
premium of 0.1%). Commitment charges for an ordinary capital resources loan are 0.15% per year to be charged on 
the undisbursed loan amount.  
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
The government has requested a regular loan of $375 million from ADB’s ordinary capital 
16. 
resources to help finance the project. The loan will have a 26-year term, including a grace period 
of 5 years; an annual interest rate determined in accordance with ADB’s London interbank offered 
rate  (LIBOR)-based  lending  facility;  a  commitment  charge  of  0.15%  per  year;  and  such  other 
terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan and project agreements. Based on the straight-line 
method, the average maturity is 15.75 years, and the maturity premium payable to ADB is 0.10% 
per year.  
The summary financing plan is in Table 2. ADB will finance the expenditures in relation to 
17. 
civil works, consulting services and trainings. 
13  Project Administration Manual (accessible from the list of linked documents in RRP Appendix 2). 
5 
Table 2: Summary Financing Plan 
Source 
Asian Development Bank  
Ordinary capital resources (regular loan) 
Government of Madhya Pradesh 
Total 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
Amount ($ million) 
Share of Total (%) 
375.00 
160.71 
535.71 
70.0 
30.0 
100.0 
18. 
Climate adaptation is estimated to cost $50 million exclusive of taxes and duties. ADB will 
finance 85% of this cost. This includes financing part of the structural components of the project 
aimed  at  increasing  water  supply  during  rabi  (the  dry  [winter]  cropping  season,  which  lasts 
between November and March) and addressing the increase in uncertainty associated with water 
availability under a changing climate, as well as the additional adaptation measure of agricultural 
training  and field  pilot  demonstrations to  advance  planting  time  of  rabi  crops  and  benefit  from 
residual soil moisture from the monsoon. Details are in the project climate risk assessment and 
management report.14 
E. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 3 and described in detail in 
19. 
the project administration manual (footnote 13). 
Aspects  
Implementation period 
Estimated completion date 
Estimated loan closing date 
Management 
(i) Oversight body 
(ii) Executing agency 
(iii) Implementation unit 
Procurement 
Consulting services 
Retroactive financing and/or 
advance contracting 
Disbursement  
Table 3: Implementation Arrangements 
Arrangements 
May 2018–September 2025 
30 September 2025 
31 March 2026 
State Project Steering Committee 
Principal Secretary of the Water Resources Department (Chair)  
Representatives  of  Department  of  Agriculture,  Department  of  Horticulture, 
Department  of  Finance,  and  Department  of  Energy,  Department  of  Animal 
Husbandry,  Department  of  Rural  Development,  Madhya  Pradesh  State 
Cooperative  Bank,  and  Madhya  Pradesh  Water  and  Land  Management 
Institute (members) 
Water Resources Department Madhya Pradesh 
Bhopal, 371 staff 
International competitive 
bidding 
ICS  
Consulting Firm QCBS 80:20  170 person-months  $3.85 million 
Advance contracting and retroactive financing will be used for civil works and 
consulting  services.  Retroactive  financing  will  be  considered  for  eligible 
expenditures  not  exceeding  20%  of  the  loan  amount  incurred  prior  to  loan 
effectiveness,  but  not  earlier than  12  months  before the loan  agreement  is 
signed. 
The loan proceeds will be disbursed in accordance with ADB's Loan 
Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time) and detailed 
arrangements agreed between the government and ADB. 
112 person-months  $2.019 million 
$420.245 million 
2 contracts 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ICS = individual consultant selection, QCBS = quality- and cost-based selection.  
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
14  Project Climate Risk Assessment and Management Report (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 
2). 
6 
A. 
Technical 
III. 
DUE DILIGENCE 
20. 
The KMMP includes three main components: (i) the 44.5-meter high Kundalia dam across 
the Kalisindh River, construction of which will be completed in October 2018 and is being funded 
by the state; (ii) the KIP; and (iii) the supply of water for potable and industrial use. The KIP was 
initially envisaged to cover 58,000 ha, of which 45,000 ha would have been gravity irrigation with 
canals  and  13,000  ha  lift  irrigation.  In  2015,  MPWRD  decided  to  convert  the  KIP  to  a  100% 
pumped pressurized pipeline system for spray and micro-irrigation.  
21. 
The feasibility design for the pressurized distribution system, including pumping stations, 
electrical  substations  and  power  supply  systems,  transmission  pipelines,  valves,  controls  and 
associated structures, was planned under the project preparatory technical assistance. Design 
criteria were selected to allow delivery of reliable and flexible irrigation service with a pressurized 
water  outlet  at  every  1–2  ha.  The  system  was  conceived  to  achieve  80%  overall  irrigation 
efficiency.  With  such  gain  in  efficiency,  the  water  balance  assessment  confirmed  the  KIP 
command area can be extended to 125,000 ha to provide full irrigation services in the rabi season 
and  protective  irrigation  in  the  wet  season.  Several  design  options  were  studied.  The  best 
compromise in terms of energy consumption, construction cost and robustness to local conditions 
was retained as the base design. The power requirement is estimated at 63 megawatts. MPWRD 
initially  envisaged  building  a  solar  power  plant  as  part  of  the  project  to  offset  the  power 
requirement  of  the  KIP  scheme.  However,  construction  of  the  plant  was  deferred  as  Madhya 
Pradesh has a large excess in generation capacity that remains unutilized and for which the state 
pays  compensation  charges  to  private  companies.  In  addition,  the  state  is  finalizing  a  750-
megawatt public–private partnership project for solar power generation. The KIP design provides 
a  smart  water  management  system  to  increase  management  efficiency  and  reduce  energy 
consumption. This includes (i) a supervisory control and data acquisition system to monitor and 
control flow remotely throughout the command area, and (ii) a decision support system with an 
irrigation planning and scheduling database to help organize efficient water distribution.  
increase),  and  changes 
22. 
The  overall  climate-related  risk  associated  with  the  project  was  rated  as  high  by  the 
AWARE rapid climate screening tool, mainly because of high risks associated with temperature 
increase  (and  related  evapotranspiration 
in  rainfall  patterns. 
Consequently, a climate risk and vulnerability assessment  was undertaken to analyze this risk 
more  rigorously  and  assess  the  need  for  and  economic  feasibility  of  potential  adaptation 
measures.  The  assessment  confirmed  likely  increase  in  irrigation  demand  in  the  dry  season 
because  of  an  increase  in  temperature.  This  increase  in  irrigation  water  demand  can  be  met 
through  additional  groundwater  pumping.  The  aquifer  sustainable  yield  will  only  be  exceeded 
under the most pessimistic climate change scenario. In such a case, a 1.5% reduction in area 
planted with high water-use crops like oranges will be required towards the end of the economic 
lifetime  of  the  project.  The  climate  risk  and  vulnerability  assessment  studied  the  economic 
feasibility  of  alternative measures to  actively  increase  the  availability  of  irrigation  water. These 
included infrastructure investments aiming to increase the supply of irrigation water, and initiatives 
to  reduce  irrigation  water  demand  from  farmers.  The  only  measure  considered  economically 
feasible  is  the  provision  of  agricultural  training  and  field  pilot  demonstrations  to  advance  the 
planting  time  of  rabi  crops  and  benefit  from  residual  soil  moisture  from  the  monsoon.  This 
additional adaptation measure is included under the project design.  
7 
B. 
Economic and Financial 
Economic  analysis.  An  economic  analysis  was  prepared  for  the  entire  KMMP.15 The 
23. 
economic net present value (discounted at the assumed economic opportunity cost of capital of 
9%) of the project is estimated at ₹38.5 billion indicating that the KMMP is economically feasible. 
The same conclusion can be derived from the project’s economic internal rate of return (EIRR), 
which is estimated at 15.7%, well above the minimum required rate of 9.0%. Increased agricultural 
production  is the  most  important  source  of quantifiable economic  benefits,  accounting for  over 
95% of total benefits. The development of irrigation will support change in cropping patterns from 
low-value  crops  towards  high-value  crops  such  as  vegetables  and  oranges.  It  will  support  an 
increase  in  cropping  intensity  from  132%  to  180%,  thereby  extending  the  harvested  area  by 
59,500  ha.  More  importantly,  sufficient  and  reliable  irrigation  supply  will  boost  yields  by  10%– 
50%  depending  on  crop  type.  Benefits  from  increased  raw  water  provision  accounts  for  the 
remainder.   
24. 
Sensitivity tests were conducted by varying the project’s investment cost, MOM cost, and 
benefits. The results of the analysis indicate that the economic feasibility of the KMMP is more 
sensitive to unfavorable changes to economic benefits than to the investment cost. If the benefits 
are 43.8% lower or the investment cost is 127.5% higher than in the base case, the EIRR will fall 
below 9.0%. The project’s EIRR is relatively insensitive to changes to the  MOM cost. A Monte 
Carlo  simulation  indicates  that  the  EIRR  has  a  negligible  likelihood  of  dropping  below  the 
economic opportunity cost of capital, even if benefits would be 50% lower and costs 50% higher 
than in the base case.16 
25. 
Financial  analysis.  MPWRD  is  considering  a  gradual  increase  in  the  current  tariff  for 
pressurized irrigation from ₹1,000 to ₹10,900 (in constant October 2017 prices, per ha per year). 
At this much higher tariff, the financial internal rate of return of the KMMP is estimated at –5.7%, 
which  is  lower  than  the  weighted  average  cost  of  capital  (2.2%).  This  is  mainly  because  the 
proposed  incremental  tariff  does  not  include  repayment  of  the  capital  costs.  For  projects 
implemented by government sector units such as MPWRD, the financial analysis focuses on the 
capacity to finance the incremental recurrent costs which are required for the sustainability of the 
investment. Despite the low financial internal rate of return the project is worth supporting based 
on the large economic development benefits as indicated by the high estimated EIRR, the positive 
impact on the state economy, and the substantial positive effect on reducing rural poverty in the 
KIP command area.  
26. 
The proposed tariff was set to cover the full cost of routine MOM by 2026.  MPWRD would 
only need to subsidize the MOM expenditure during 2021–2025 (about ₹1.2 billion in total for the 
5-year period) and in 2050, the year in which hydraulic steel structures and mechanical equipment 
will be replaced (about ₹3.9 billion). A review of MPWRD MOM annual budgets has indicated that 
MPWRD would be able to cover these costs.  The state government has committed to adopt the 
appropriate tariff scheme and to cover for any MOM budget shortfalls. This has been included as 
a loan covenant. 
C. 
Governance 
Financial  management.  A financial  management  assessment  of  MPWRD  was carried 
27. 
out  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Guidelines  for  the  Financial  Management  and  Analysis  of 
Projects.17 The overall risk assessment for the project is moderate. MPWRD has experience in 
15 Because  the  construction  of  the  dam  is  needed  to  realize  the  economic  benefits  of  the  pipeline  network  and 
pressurized distribution system, the economic analysis covered the entire KMMP, and not only the component that 
will be cofinanced by ADB. 
16  A  Monte  Carlo  simulation  is  a  mathematical  technique  that  generates  random  variables  for  modelling  risk  or 
uncertainty of a certain system. 
17 ADB. 2005. Financial Management and Analysis of Projects. Manila. 
8 
implementing  World  Bank  projects,  but  none  on  ADB  accounting  requirements  and  loan 
disbursement  procedures.  Hence,  MPWRD  will  appoint  experienced  accounting  staff  to  the 
project.  A  financial  management  consultant  will  be  provided  under  the  project  to  prepare  a 
detailed procedure manual and undertake trainings on ADB’s policies and guidelines. MPWRD 
will recruit independent audit firms to undertake periodical internal audits of the project accounts. 
The project accounts will be audited annually by the state Controller and General Auditor.  
28. 
Procurement.  MPWRD  organized  consultation  workshops  and  a  roadshow  during  the 
project  design  to  appraise  private  sector  interest  and  capacity  to  undertake  DBO  contracts 
including  agriculture  support  services.  The  procurement  of  goods  and  works  will  follow  ADB’s 
Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time). All recruitment of consultants will 
follow  ADB’s  Guidelines  on  the  Use  of  Consultants  (2013,  as  amended  from  time  to  time).  A 
procurement capacity assessment concluded that the overall procurement risk for the project is 
moderate. International and national procurement specialists were provided as part of the project 
preparatory  technical  assistance  to  prepare  the  two  DBO  bidding  documents,  support  the 
evaluation  process  and  assist  with  the  consultants’  recruitment.  Funds  were  allocated  in  the 
project to provide procurement training to the implementing agency. In addition, India Resident 
Mission trained MPWRD staff on ADB’s procurement and consultant recruitment guidelines. 
29. 
ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and discussed 
with  the  government  and  MPWRD.  The  specific  policy  requirements  and  supplementary 
measures are described in the project administration manual (footnote 13). 
D. 
Poverty, Social, and Gender 
30. 
Over  40%  of  the  population  in  the  KIP’s  future  cultivable  command  area  depends  on 
agriculture  for  their  livelihoods.  Wheat  and  soybeans  are  the  two  main  crops  followed  by 
chickpeas (pulses), spices, oranges, and vegetables. While agricultural growth has substantially 
increased in the state over the last 5 years, it has stagnated in the project area because of a lack 
of  irrigation  development.  The  KIP  is  expected  to  improve  farmers’  net  incomes  and  directly 
benefit  about  838,262  people  in  419  villages  in  Rajgarh  and  Agar  Malwa  districts  of  Madhya 
Pradesh. In general, it will also provide economic opportunities to improve nonfarm rural incomes, 
and this will indirectly contribute to development and poverty reduction. The project poverty impact 
ratio  was  estimated  at  30.1%.  This  represents  the  proportion  of  the  net  economic  benefits 
designed  to  go  to  the  poor  compared  to  total  project  net  economic  benefits.  The  project  is 
classified  as  having  some  gender  elements,  where  women  will  benefit  from  skills  training  for 
farmers in improved agricultural practices using the new irrigation systems. 
The contractors will be required to strictly implement government requirements regarding 
31. 
health and safety of men and women who work at the construction sites. The contractors, in close 
coordination with the project management unit, will conduct awareness programs on prevention 
of sexually transmitted diseases and drug use. The contractor will be required to strictly implement 
equal pay for female and male workers.  
E. 
Safeguards 
32. 
safeguard categories are as follows.18 
In  compliance  with  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009)  (SPS),  the  project’s 
33. 
Environment (category B). The initial environmental examination including its EMP has 
been prepared. The project’s initial environmental examination identified that most impacts—such 
as noise, dust, impacts on vegetation because of land clearing and excavation—occur during the 
construction periods. Mitigation measures were included accordingly in the EMP. Stakeholders 
have  been  consulted  and  will  continue  to  be  consulted  during  implementation.  A  grievance 
18  ADB. Safeguard Categories. https://www.adb.org/site/safeguards/safeguard-categories. 
9 
redress mechanism to address both social and environmental issues will be established prior to 
project implementation.  
34. 
Involuntary  Resettlement  (category  B).  Permanent  land  acquisition  is  limited  for  the 
pumping stations and distribution chambers. Most land acquisition will be temporary for laying the 
irrigation pipelines underground and this will affect land owners during construction. Two sample 
resettlement plans (land acquisition plans) were prepared. One resettlement plan was prepared 
for distribution pipes covering 500 ha of cultivable command area that will affect 96 households 
and  requires  4.81  ha  of  land  (4.78  ha  of  temporary  acquisition,  and  0.03  ha  of  permanent 
acquisition). The second resettlement plan was prepared for installing a pumping station, which 
will affect 25 households and require 31.14 ha of land, 2.21 ha of which is private land. For the 
rest of the project areas, the DBO contractors will prepare the resettlement plan(s) in accordance 
with  the  project’s  resettlement  framework.  The  resettlement  framework  for  this  project  was 
prepared to guide the preparation of the resettlement plan(s) during project implementation. The 
sample  resettlement  plans  and  resettlement  framework  were  prepared  in  accordance  with  the 
ADB SPS, Madhya Pradesh Pipeline Act (2013), the Madhya Pradesh Consent Land Purchase 
Policy  (2014),  and  the  Indian  land  legislation  on  The  Right  to  Fair  Compensation  and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act (2013).   
35. 
Resettlement plans prepared by the DBO contractor will be reviewed and cleared by ADB. 
MPWRD  has  adequate  capacity  to  implement  the  resettlement  plan  and  environmental 
safeguards,  since  it  is  currently  implementing  projects  with  significant  resettlement  and 
environmental  concerns.  The  grievance  redress  mechanism  that  has  been  established  for 
MPWRD’s current project will also be established for this ADB-funded project. 
Indigenous Peoples (category C). There are no indigenous peoples, as defined by the 
36. 
ADB SPS in the project-affected areas.  
37. 
 Associated facility. The water required for the irrigation network constructed under the 
proposed  project  will  be  supplied  from  the  KMMP  reservoir.  Therefore,  the  KMMP  reservoir  is 
considered as an associated facility. Due diligence was undertaken to assess the suitability of 
measures  undertaken  under  the  KMMP  in  addressing  the  environmental  impacts.  The  due 
diligence found that the KMMP planning and construction followed the guidance provided in the 
environmental  impact  assessment  and  EMP  that  was  approved  by  Ministry  of  Environment, 
Forest, and Climate Change in January 2015. The environmental impact assessment and EMP 
for the KMMP has comprehensively addressed its environmental impacts and is in line with ADB 
SPS requirements. MPWRD has allocated adequate resources to implement the EMP and other 
associated plans. Therefore, no corrective action or additional actions need to be adopted under 
the KMMP. 
F. 
Summary of Risks Assessment and Risk Management Plan  
Significant  risks  and  mitigating  measures  are  summarized  in  Table  4  and  described  in 
38. 
detail in the risk assessment and risk management plan.19  
Risks 
Benefits of the project will be reduced if water 
management 
if  a 
significant majority of the farmers do not adopt 
micro-irrigation. 
improved  and 
is  not 
Table 4: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures  
Mitigating Measures 
The  DBO  contractor  will  be  tasked  to  provide  farmers  support 
services including WUA strengthening and extensive agricultural 
support  program  component,  with  field  demonstrations  and 
experiential  training.  Payment  to  the  contractor  will  depend  on 
achievement of performance targets. 
The DBO contractor will be responsible for MOM during a 5-year 
operation service period, including meeting specific performance 
guarantees. 
MOM  of  the  pumping  stations  and  pipeline 
distribution system is technically complex and 
unfamiliar to MPWRD. 
19 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
10 
Risks 
KIP  power  consumption  increases  operation 
and  maintenance  budget  requirement  of 
MPWRD  and  recurrent  expenditures  of  the 
Government of Madhya Pradesh. 
External interferences affect the performance 
of the DBO contractors 
Mitigating Measures 
The  Government  of  Madhya  Pradesh  is  committed  to  increase 
budget  to  MPWRD  as  per  requirement  and  to  implement  cost 
recovery  from  farmer  beneficiaries  through  gradual  increase  of 
water tariff. A loan covenant is prepared for this purpose. 
A project participation and communication strategy was prepared 
to  enhance  communication  with  farmers  and  politicians  on  the 
project design, benefits and progress. 
MPWRD  and  the  DBO  contractors  will  organize  farmers  to 
improve bargaining power for purchase of farm inputs. 
Input prices  (fertilizers, pesticides, electricity) 
increase sharply and affect farmers’ capacity 
to invest in pressurized irrigation and intensive 
agriculture. 
If the climate change impacts exceed the projections used for the 
Future  climate  change 
impact  exceeds 
CRVA, the Government of Madhya Pradesh will need to consider 
projections which may reduce the benefits of 
the project. 
building the Lakundar diversion and groundwater recharge ponds. 
CRVA  =  climate  risk  and  vulnerability  assessment,  DBO  =  design–build–operate,  KIP  =  Kundalia  Irrigation  Project,  MOM  = 
management,  operation  and  maintenance,  MPWRD  =  Water  Resources  Department  Madhya  Pradesh,  WUA  =  water  users’ 
association.  
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
IV. 
ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS 
39. 
The Government of India, Government of Madhya Pradesh and MPWRD have assured 
ADB that implementation of the project shall conform to all applicable ADB policies including those 
concerning anticorruption measures, safeguards, gender, procurement, consulting services, and 
disbursement as described in detail in the project administration manual and loan documents. 
40. 
The  Government  of  India,  Government  of  Madhya  Pradesh  and  MPWRD  have  agreed 
with ADB on certain covenants for the project, which are set forth in the draft loan and project 
agreements.  
V. 
 RECOMMENDATION 
41. 
I am satisfied that the proposed loan would comply with the Articles of Agreement of the 
Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  and  recommend  that  the  Board  approve  the  loan  of 
$375,000,000 to India for  the  Madhya Pradesh  Irrigation  Efficiency  Improvement  Project, from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources, in regular terms, with interest to be determined in accordance 
with ADB’s London interbank offered rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility; for a term of 26 years, 
including a grace period of 5 years; and such other terms and conditions as are substantially in 
accordance with those set forth in the draft loan and project agreements presented to the Board. 
10 May 2018
Takehiko Nakao 
President 
Appendix 1 
11 
DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK 
Impacts the Project is Aligned with 
a. Indian farmers’ income doubled by 2022 (The Three Year Action Agenda, 2017–2018 to 2019–2020)a 
b. India’s “more crop per drop” achieved (Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana)b 
c. Resilience of farmers in the project area to ongoing and uncertain future climate change increasedc 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
Higher irrigation 
efficiency, agricultural 
water productivity and 
climate resilience in 
Madhya Pradesh 
achieved  
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources 
and Reporting 
Risks 
By 2026 
a. 125,000 ha new irrigated 
area made climate resilientd 
under KIP with an irrigation 
efficiency of at least 80%             
(2017 baseline: 37,300 ha 
irrigated from groundwater with 
average efficiency of 50%) 
a. KIP DBO 
contract third 
party audit 
performance 
reports 
b. Wheat water productivity 
increased by 25% in KIP 
command area. 
(2012–2017 average baseline: 
0.84 kg/m3) 
b. MPWRD 
remote sensing 
water 
productivity 
report 
c. Area cultivated with citrus 
orchard in KIP command area 
increased to 15,000 ha (2017 
baseline: 8,000 ha) 
c. Department of 
Horticulture 
annual statistical 
report 
Input prices (fertilizers, 
pesticides, electricity) 
increase sharply and 
affect farmers’ capacity 
to invest in pressurized 
irrigation and intensive 
agriculture. 
Future climate change 
impact exceeds 
projections which may 
reduce the benefits of 
the project. 
Outputs 
1. Kundalia Irrigation 
Project infrastructure 
constructed  
By 2022 
1a. Two large pumping stations 
installed and commissioned 
(2017 baseline: 0) 
1a–c. Project 
quarterly 
progress reports 
External interferences 
affect the performance 
of the DBO contractors 
2. Kundalia Irrigation 
Project performance- 
based operation and 
maintenance 
established 
1b. 350 km pressurized main 
pipeline distribution system 
built (2017 baseline: 0) 
1c. 4,000 outlets with 
volumetric controls installed  
(2017 baseline: 0) 
By 2018 
2a. DBO contract signed with 5 
years operation and 
maintenance period  
(2017 baseline: none) 
By 2025 
2b. Plant operation interruption 
limited to no more than 30 
minutes in a day during 
irrigation season   
(2017 baseline: not applicable) 
2a. DBO 
contract 
agreements 
2b–e. DBO 
contract third 
party audit 
report 
12 
Appendix 1 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources 
and Reporting 
Risks 
2c. Electricity consumption of 
maximum 30 kWh/m3 not 
exceeded 
(2017 baseline: not applicable) 
2d. Continuous discharge and 
pressure monitoring at both 
every 300 ha and 30 ha with 
1% flow measurement 
accuracy established 
(2017 baseline: not applicable) 
2e. 112 MPWRD staff capacity 
to undertake MOM of the KIP 
increased 
(2017 baseline: 0) 
By 2025 
3a.  250 WUAs (with at least 
20% women members) 
registered with MPWRD  
(2017 baseline: 0) 
3a. MPWRD 
registers 
3b.  Micro-irrigation system 
demonstration established on 
1,250 ha 
(2017 baseline: 0) 
3b–d. DBO 
contract third 
party audit 
report 
3c. Eight farmers’ service 
centers established  
(2017 baseline: 0) 
3d. At least 50,000 farmers 
(with at least 20% women) with 
increased knowledge and skills 
of micro-irrigation technology 
(2017 baseline: 0) 
By 2020 
4a. SSIP Modernization 
feasibility study and detailed 
designs approved by MPWRD 
and ADB (2017 baseline: not 
approved) 
4b. 30% SSIP Modernization 
civil works contract awarded.  
(2017 baseline: not awarded) 
4a. MPWRD and 
ADB approved 
report 
4b. Signed 
contract 
agreements  
3. Farmers’ capacity for 
rapid uptake of micro-
irrigation technology in 
KIP command area 
enhanced 
4. Modernization of the 
Sanjay Sarovar 
Irrigation Project well-
designed with project 
readiness criteria met 
Key Activities with Milestones 
1. Output 1: Kundalia Irrigation Project infrastructure constructed 
1.1. Finalize DBO bidding documents and award contracts for design and construction (Q2 2017–Q4 
2018) 
1.2. Supervise detailed design preparation (Q2 2018–Q2 2019) 
Appendix 1 
13 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources 
and Reporting 
Risks 
1.3. Supervise construction (Q4 2018–Q3 2021) 
1.4. Commission scheme and monitor technical performance (Q1 2021–Q3 2022) 
2. Output 2: Kundalia Irrigation Project performance-based operation and maintenance 
established 
2.1. Design and install SCADA (Q3 2018–Q3 2021) 
2.2. Develop irrigation planning decision support system and prepare irrigation plan (Q3–Q4 2020) 
2.3. Develop an MOM manual (Q4 2020) 
2.4. Train MPWRD staff on MOM (Q1 2021–Q4 2025) 
2.5. Supervise contractors’ MOM performance (Q1 2021–Q4 2025) 
3. Output 3: Farmers capacity for rapid uptake of micro-irrigation technology in the Kundalia 
Irrigation Project command area enhanced 
3.1. Promote formation and capacity building of water users’ associations (Q2 2018–Q1 2021) 
3.2. Establish farmers service centers and conduct farmers field schools (Q2 2019–Q1 2024) 
3.3. Establish micro-irrigation demonstrations sites over 1% of the command area (Q1 2019–Q4 2025) 
3.4. Monitor and evaluate the performance (Q1 2019–Q1 2026) 
4. Output 4: Modernization of the Sanjay Sarovar Irrigation Project well-designed with project 
readiness criteria met 
4.1. Recruitment of PDPC SSIP Modernization preparation consulting services (Q2–Q4 2018) 
4.2. Develop SSIP Modernization plan (Q1 2019) 
4.3. Prepare feasibility study and detailed design (Q2 2019–Q2 2020) 
4.4. Prepare bidding documents and award 30% civil works contract (Q1–Q3 2020) 
Project Management Activities 
Recruit the implementation support and capacity building consultants (Q1–Q2 2018) 
Set up financial management system (Q1 2018) 
Set up project performance monitoring system (Q2 2018) 
Undertake midterm review (Q2 2021) 
Prepare project completion report (Q1 2026) 
Inputs  
ADB: $375.00 million (OCR regular loan) 
State Government of Madhya Pradesh: $160.71 million 
Assumptions for Partner Financing 
Not Applicable 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DBO = design–build–operate, ha = hectare, kg/m3 = kilogram per cubic meter, KIP = 
Kundalia Irrigation Project, km = kilometer, kWh/m3 = kilowatt-hour per cubic meter, MOM = management, operation 
and maintenance, MPIEIP = Madhya Pradesh Irrigation Efficiency Improvement Project, MPWRD = Water Resource 
Department  Madhya  Pradesh,  MT=  metric  ton,  PDPC  =  project  design  and  procurement  consultant,  SCADA  = 
supervisory control and data acquisition, SSIP = Sanjay Sarovar Irrigation Project, WUA= water users’ association. 
a   Government of India, NITI Aayog. 2017. Three Year Action Agenda (2017–2018 to 2019–2020). New Delhi. 
b  Government of  India,  Ministry  of  Agriculture and  Farmers Welfare.  2015–2016.  Pradhan  Mantri  Krishi  Sinchayee 
Yojana. New Delhi. 
c  Defined by the project. 
d  Climate  change  is  expected  to  increase  (i)  crop  water  requirements  as  rising  temperature  increases 
evapotranspiration; (ii) variability of rainfall within and between seasons; and (iii) frequency and intensity of dry spells 
and droughts. The KIP design will improve the reliability of irrigation supply under a changing and uncertain climate 
by providing highly efficient water conveyance, distribution and field application supported by reservoir storage. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
14 
Appendix 2 
LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS  
http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=45371-007-3 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
Loan Agreement 
Project Agreement 
Sector Assessment (Summary): Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 
Project Administration Manual  
Contribution to the ADB Results Framework 
Development Coordination 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Country Economic Indicators 
Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy 
Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan 
Initial Environmental Examination 
Land Acquisition Plan (Pipelines) 
Land Acquisition Plan (Pumping Stations) 
Land Acquisition Framework 
Supplementary Documents 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
Financial Management Assessment 
Procurement Capacity Assessment 
Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment Report 
Project Climate Risk Assessment and Management Report 
Poverty and Social Analysis 
Economic Assessment 
