Report and Recommendation of the President  
to the Board of Directors 
Project Number: 46528-002 
November 2017 
Proposed Loan 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan: Jalalpur Irrigation 
Project 
Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been approved by the Board of Directors. 
Following such approval, ADB will disclose the document to the public in accordance with ADB’s 
Public Communications Policy 2011. 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
as of 18 October 2017 
Currency unit 
PRe1.00 
$1.00 
– 
= 
= 
Pakistan rupee (PRe/PRs) 
$0.0094 
PRs105.30 
ADB 
EIA 
EMP 
FAO 
ha 
HEIS 
IBIS 
km 
LARP 
m3 
O&M 
PAD 
PAM 
PDA 
PID 
PIO 
PMO 
TA 
WUA 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Asian Development Bank 
environmental impact assessment 
environmental management plan 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
hectare 
high-efficiency irrigation system 
Indus Basin Irrigation System 
kilometer 
land acquisition and resettlement plan 
cubic meter 
operation and maintenance 
Punjab Agriculture Department 
project administration manual 
project design advance 
Punjab Irrigation Department 
project implementation office 
project management office 
technical assistance 
water user association 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
NOTES 
(i) 
(ii) 
The fiscal year (FY) of the Government of Pakistan ends on 30 June. “FY” before 
a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends, e.g., FY2017 ends 
on 30 June 2017. 
In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars. 
Vice-President 
Director General 
Director 
Team leader 
Team members 
Peer reviewer 
W. Zhang, Operations 1 
S. O’Sullivan, Central and West Asia Department (CWRD) 
A. Siddiq, Environment, Natural Resources and Agriculture Division, 
CWRD 
R. Takaku, Principal Water Resources Specialist, CWRD 
G. M. Bui, Senior Natural Resources and Agriculture Economist, 
CWRD 
C. S. Cabrales-Chiong, Senior Operations Assistant, CWRD 
N. Djenchuraev, Senior Environment Specialist, CWRD 
L. Nazarbekova, Principal Counsel, Office of the General Counsel 
J. T. Nicolas, Senior Social Development Specialist (Safeguards), 
CWRD 
N. Rive, Climate Change Specialist, CWRD 
M. A. Rosero, Social Development Specialist (Gender and 
Development), CWRD 
A. Zafar, Senior Project Officer (Water Resources), CWRD 
F. Radstake, Principal Environment Specialist, East Asia Department 
In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation 
of  or  reference  to  a  particular  territory  or  geographic  area  in  this  document,  the  Asian 
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any 
territory or area. 
PROJECT AT A GLANCE 
CONTENTS 
Page 
MAP 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
THE PROPOSAL 
THE PROJECT 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Rationale 
Impact and Outcome 
Outputs 
Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan 
Implementation Arrangements 
DUE DILIGENCE 
A. 
Technical 
B. 
Economic and Financial 
C. 
Governance 
D. 
Poverty, Social, and Gender 
E. 
Safeguards 
F. 
Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan 
ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS 
RECOMMENDATION 
APPENDIXES 
1. 
2. 
Design and Monitoring Framework 
List of Linked Documents 
1 
1 
1 
4 
4 
5 
6 
7 
7 
8 
8 
9 
9 
10 
11 
11 
12 
15 
Project Classification Information Status: Complete
PROJECT AT A GLANCE
1. Basic Data
Project Name
Country
Borrower
2. Sector
Agriculture, natural 
resources and rural 
development
Jalalpur Irrigation Project 
Pakistan
Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Subsector(s)
Agricultural production
Irrigation
3. Strategic Agenda
Inclusive economic growth 
(IEG)
Environmentally sustainable 
growth (ESG)
4. Drivers of Change
Governance and capacity 
development (GCD)
5. Poverty and SDG Targeting
Subcomponents
Pillar 2: Access to economic 
opportunities, including jobs, made 
more inclusive
Natural resources conservation
Components
Institutional development
Geographic Targeting
Household Targeting
SDG Targeting
SDG Goals        
No
No
Yes
SDG2, SDG6, SDG8
Department
/Division
Executing Agency
Project Number: 46528-002
CWRD/CWER
Punjab Irrigation Department
     ADB Financing ($ million)
41.19
233.44
Total
Climate Change Information 
Adaptation ($ million)
Climate Change impact on the 
Project
Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
Effective gender mainstreaming 
(EGM)
Location Impact
Rural
274.63
1.70
High
High
6. Risk Categorization:
Complex
.
.
7. Safeguard Categorization
Environment: A   Involuntary Resettlement: A   Indigenous Peoples: C
8. Financing
Modality and Sources
ADB
     Sovereign Project (Regular Loan): Ordinary capital resources
Cofinancing
     None
Counterpart 
     Beneficiaries 
     Government 
Total
Amount ($ million)
274.63
274.63
0.00
0.00
85.96
5.16
80.80
360.59
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.
06092017160900401288
Generated Date: 19-Oct-2017 14:50:20 PM
I. 
THE PROPOSAL 
I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan to 
1. 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Jalalpur Irrigation Project. 
2. 
The  project  will  build  a  new  kharif  season  (April  to  October)  surface  irrigation  system 
covering about 68,263 hectares (ha) of less productive, predominantly rain-fed land in the Jhelum 
and Khushab districts in Punjab province.1 The irrigation system will become part of the Indus 
Basin Irrigation System (IBIS) by diverting the flows of the Jhelum River at the Rasul Barrage. It 
will comprise a diversion structure, a 117-kilometer (km) main canal, 23 distributaries, 10 minor 
canals,  485  watercourses,  and  associated  structures.  The  primary  beneficiaries  are  384,000 
people in 80 villages in the project area.2 
A. 
Rationale 
II. 
THE PROJECT 
3. 
Sector  overview.  Agriculture  contributed  20%  of  gross  domestic  product  and  was 
Pakistan’s largest employer, absorbing 42% of the country’s total labor force in fiscal year (FY) 
2015.3 About 30% of the population lived below the poverty line during FY2014, or about 55 million 
out of Pakistan’s estimated population of 186 million (footnote 3). At 36%, the poverty incidence 
in rural areas in FY2014 was almost double the 19% rate in urban areas (footnote 3). Pakistan’s 
major crops are wheat, rice, sugarcane, maize, and cotton, which account for 24% of the value 
added  in  overall  agriculture  and  5%  of  gross  domestic  product.  Punjab’s  contribution  to  the 
agriculture sector is estimated at more than 80%. The province produced 76% of the nation’s total 
output of wheat, 51% of rice, 65% of sugarcane, 81% of maize, and 72% of cotton. 
4. 
The  Ministry  of  Planning,  Development  and  Reform  has  estimated  that  the  agriculture 
sector has to grow 5% per year to reduce the poverty incidence and ensure food security, and for 
the national economy to reach its 7%–8% annual growth target.4 But agriculture’s annual growth 
rate only averaged 2.8% during 2010–2014, a significant drop from 4.4% average annual growth 
rates  experienced  during  1990s  and  from  3.2%  during  2000s.5  The  sector  is  increasingly 
dominated by small farmers who produce mostly for their own food needs. Only 17% of farms are 
large, produce cash crops, and engage in value-added activities.6 
In  the  Punjab  Growth  Strategy  2018,7  the  government  of  Punjab  sees  growth  in  the 
5. 
agriculture sector as a key element in achieving inclusive growth, and highlights the following: (i) 
increased crop productivity through improved agriculture research and extension, on-farm water 
management,  and farm  inputs; (ii)  better  value  chains; (iii)  better  use  of energy; (iv)  increased 
high-value agriculture; (v) improved land resources and environment and adaptability to climate 
1  Kharif refers to the sowing season for summer crops. 
2  The  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  provided  project  preparatory  technical  assistance  for  the  Jalalpur  Irrigation 
Project (TA 8404-PAK). 
3  Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Finance. 2016. Pakistan Economic Survey, 2015–16. Islamabad. 
4  Government  of  Pakistan,  Ministry  of  National  Food  Security  and  Research.  2013.  Agriculture  and  Food  Security 
Policy (Draft). Islamabad. 
5  International  Food  Policy  Research  Institute.  2016.  How  to  Revitalize  Pakistan’s  Agriculture  Sector  and  Rural 
Economy. 12 December. http://www.ifpri.org/blog/how-revitalize-pakistans-agricultural-sector-and-rural-economy 
6  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Investment Centre Division. 2012. Pakistan: Priority 
Areas for Investment in the Agricultural Sector. Rome. 
7  Government of Punjab, Planning and Development Department. 2015. Punjab Growth Strategy 2018: Accelerating 
Economic Growth and Improving Social Outcomes. Lahore. 
2 
change  impacts;  (vi)  increased  cultivated  area;  (vii)  improved  productivity  of  water  use  by 
improving  irrigation  infrastructures;  and  (viii)  improved  regulatory  and  institutional  changes, 
mainly  on  agriculture  inputs.  The  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  has  been  supporting  the 
government of Punjab in strengthening on-farm water management, adapting to climate change 
impacts, and rehabilitating irrigation systems, all of which require substantial financing resources. 
6. 
Because  of  the  country’s  semi-arid  climate,  with  an  average  annual  rainfall  of  240 
millimeters  in  most  parts  of  the  country,  about  80%  of  arable  land  and  more  than  90%  of 
agriculture  output  depends  on  irrigation.  One  of  the  strengths  of  the  agriculture  sector  is  the 
availability of water from IBIS, the world’s largest contiguous irrigation system covering 15 million 
ha  of  farmland,  which  accounts  for  74%  of  the  country’s  irrigated  area.8  The  operational 
performance of irrigation systems, including IBIS, however, is less than satisfactory. Crop water 
requirements have dramatically increased as a result of the increase in cropping intensities and 
the  cultivation  of  high  water-consuming  crops.  While  demand  for  canal  irrigation  water  has 
increased, surface water availability has essentially remained unchanged as no new reservoirs 
have been constructed on the Indus River since 1976. Irrigation efficiency is also low at about 
40%.  Agriculture  productivity  per  unit  of  water,  land,  and  other  inputs  is well  below  global  and 
regional standards because of mismanagement of water resources.9 
7. 
IBIS  is  also  financially  unsustainable,  recovering  on  average  only  24%  of  the  costs 
necessary  for  the  effective  management  of  the  irrigation  infrastructure.10  As  a  result,  asset 
management remains a pervasive problem as irrigation departments routinely defer maintenance 
because they lack funds to cover operation and maintenance (O&M) costs. To establish efficient 
and sustainable irrigation and drainage institutions, the government of Pakistan launched a far-
reaching sector reform initiative in 1997 across Pakistan’s four provinces with a view to converting 
the provincial irrigation departments into autonomous and self-accounting irrigation and drainage 
authorities. The reforms, however, were not fully successful and the self-accounting irrigation and 
drainage  authorities  still  lack  the  capacity  to  carry  out  their  intended tasks.11  ADB,  through  its 
technical assistance (TA), is reviewing the reforms and their related plans and actions and will 
integrate  them,  as  appropriate,  into  the  transformation  process  of  the  Punjab  Irrigation 
Department (PID) into the Water Resources Department.12 
To  address  the  country’s  water  stress  in  the  short  to  medium  term,  Pakistan  needs  to 
8. 
invest more in (i) water conservation, (ii) high-efficiency irrigation, (iii) the capture of unclaimed 
monsoon  flows  to  irrigate  rain-fed  areas,  and  (iv)  modern  irrigation  systems  and  measures  to 
improve asset management and irrigation service delivery to ensure food security. 
9. 
About 20% of Pakistan’s cultivable area is outside IBIS. Farming in most of these areas 
(about 3.24 million ha) is rain fed, resulting in low agricultural productivity. Some of the country’s 
poorest people live in these areas and depend on agriculture for their income. Without a secure 
source of water for irrigation, farming in rain-fed areas is both a low-productivity and a high-risk 
8  FAO. 2012. Irrigation in Southern and Eastern Asia in Figures: AQUASTAT Survey 2011. FAO Water Reports. No. 
37. Rome. 
9  Friends  of  Democratic  Pakistan  Water  Sector  Task  Force.  2012.  A  Productive  and  Water-Secure  Pakistan: 
Infrastructure, Institutions, Strategy. Islamabad. 
10 Government of Pakistan, Planning Commission. 2012. Canal Water Pricing for Irrigation in Pakistan: Assessment, 
Issues and Options. Islamabad. 
11 Irrigation  subsector  reform  is  discussed  in  the  Project  Administration  Manual  (accessible  from  the  list  of  linked 
documents in Appendix 2). 
12 ADB. 2016. Technical Assistance to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Institutional Transformation of the Punjab 
Irrigation Department to a Water Resources Department. Manila. 
3 
venture. Although Punjab accounts for 57% of the nation’s cultivable area and accounts for 78% 
of the nation’s irrigated area, about 13% of cultivable land in Punjab is still rain fed.13 
10. 
Proposed investment. The project aims to increase agriculture production by bringing 
68,263 ha of less-productive, predominantly rain-fed agricultural land under new IBIS coverage. 
More than 500,000 people live in the project area, and more than 70% of these people rely on 
farming for their livelihood.14 Available water for farming is limited, as runoffs from the nearby hills 
and  the  groundwater  are  highly  saline.  The  project  will  provide  as  much  as  284  million  cubic 
meters of fresh and good quality water annually from the Jhelum River during the high-flow kharif 
season,15 in accordance with the Water Apportionment Accord that determines the agreed share 
of waters in the Indus Basin among the country’s four provinces.16 ADB first identified the project 
for possible financing in 201317 and completed a feasibility study in 2015 (footnote 2). 
11. 
The analysis of climate change impacts in the project area for 2025 and 2050 shows that 
annual  rainfall  is  likely  to increase  about  4.0% by  2025  and  6.5%  by  2050,  with the  maximum 
increase  likely  to  occur  in  the  summer  (July–September).  The  analysis  also  suggested  a 
maximum increase in extreme rainfall events of about 6% by 2025 and 10% by 2050 for a 100-
year  return  period.  The  temperatures  will  also  rise  throughout  the  year,  increasing  the  water 
requirements of crops. Such increase will be compensated for by increased precipitation.18 
The project is consistent with ADB’s country partnership strategy for Pakistan, 2015–2019, 
12. 
which  prioritizes  the  promotion  of  better  water  resource  management  and  irrigation,19  and  is 
included  in  ADB’s  country  operations  business  plan  for  Pakistan,  2017–2019.20  The  project  is 
included in the list of upcoming irrigation subsector investments (footnote 7). It is consistent with 
ADB’s Water Operational Plan, 2011–2020 and will contribute to some outputs expected in the 
plan.21 Under the current partnership strategy, ADB has been financing two irrigation subsector 
projects for the Punjab government. The first was the four-tranche multitranche financing facility 
for the Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Investment Program in 2006. Except for slow progress in the 
first tranche, all tranches were completed by the original program completion date of September 
2017  and  delivered  major  intended  infrastructure  outputs.22  The  second  is  the  Trimmu  and 
Panjnad Barrages Improvement Project approved in 2014, which is being implemented without 
serious implementation problems.23 
13 Government of Pakistan, Ministry of National Food Security and Research. 2013. Agricultural Statistics of Pakistan 
2011–2012. Islamabad. 
14 The Jalalpur Sharif, one of the beneficiary towns in the Jhelum district, is known as the camp site of Alexander the 
Great and his troops in May 326 BC, prior to his last great Battle of Hydaspes River (now Jhelum River) against Raja 
Porus. The Khewra Salt Mines is the world’s second-largest salt mine and is located near Khewra town, another 
beneficiary town. 
15 The volume of 284 million cubic meters (m3) considering the estimated conveyance efficiency of 68%. 
16 Punjab’s water withdrawal entitlement from the Indus system during the high-flow season is 45.7 billion m3, while the 
province’s average actual water withdrawal in the same period during 1991–2012 was 41.3 billion m3. Thus, Punjab 
is entitled to an additional 4.4 billion m3 (the balance between the two). The total average water withdrawal of the 
Jalalpur irrigation system would be about 6.4% of this unclaimed water entitlement. 
17 ADB. 2013. Country Operations Business Plan: Pakistan, 2013–2014. Manila. 
18 Climate  Change  Risk  Vulnerability  Assessment  and  Adaptation  Measures  (accessible  from  the  list  of  linked 
documents in Appendix 2). 
19 ADB. 2015. Country Partnership Strategy: Pakistan, 2015–2019. Manila. 
20 ADB. 2016. Country Operations Business Plan: Pakistan, 2017–2019. Manila. 
21 ADB. 2011. Water Operational Plan, 2011–2020. Manila. 
22 ADB.  2006.  Report  and  Recommendation  of  the  President  to  the  Board  of  Directors:  Proposed  Multitranche 
Financing Facility to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Investment Program. Manila. 
23 ADB. 2014. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loans to the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan for the Trimmu and Panjnad Barrages Improvement Project. Manila. 
4 
The community participatory approach for constructing 485 watercourses under output 2 
13. 
reflects the lessons identified in the country assistance program evaluation, 2002–2012: (i) past 
projects  were  often  successfully  facilitated  by  community-based  organizations;  and  (ii)  ADB’s 
desired shift to infrastructure operations, relying on only a few large contracts, should take into 
account that certain types of projects may lead to more complete development outcomes when 
nongovernment organizations and community-based organizations are involved.24 
14. 
The project is design and procurement ready. The PID completed the detailed engineering 
design, successfully and in a timely manner, in August 2017 under the project design advance 
(PDA)  approved  in January  2016  with $5  million financing.25  The  PID  has  already  been  in the 
process of shortlisting the major project implementation consultants for this project. By the end of 
May 2018, the PID is expected to complete international competitive bidding for the construction 
of  the  main  irrigation  system,  and  engage  the  major  project  implementation  consultants.  Land 
acquisition  for  the  main  irrigation  system  is  in  the  advanced  stage,  with  50%  completed  as  of 
September 2017. The improved project readiness reflected the lesson identified in administering 
the first-tranche of the Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Investment Program, which took 10 years to 
complete because of the absence of its detailed design and draft bid document at the approval.   
B. 
Impact and Outcome 
The project is aligned with the following impact: growth of agriculture sector enhanced and 
15. 
food  security  ensured  (footnote  7).  The  project  will  have  the  following  outcome:  agricultural 
production in the project area increased.26 
C. 
Outputs 
16. 
Output  1:  Jalalpur  irrigation  distribution  system  established.  The  structures  to  be 
constructed include an intake structure at the right bank of the Jhelum River at the Rasul Barrage, 
with a design discharge capacity of 38.2 cubic meters per second. The flow will be conveyed to 
the project area through a 117-km main canal and further distributed throughout the project area 
via 23  distributaries  and  10  minor  canals. The  good  quality  water  that  will  be  delivered by  the 
irrigation system will reduce the use of saline groundwater. Because the main canal will traverse 
natural drainage channels that carry seasonal and saline flood water from the Salt Range,  the 
project will construct 72 cross-drainage structures for the safe passage of flood water across the 
main canal. The project will also construct 18 flood-carrier channels to drain saline flood water to 
the Jhelum River, protect the project area from floods, and restore soil productivity. In addition, 
the project will construct 253 associated structures, including 42 flow regulators and drops, 16 
railway  and  road  bridges,  15  footbridges,  and  2  escapes.  The  project  will  also  construct  485 
watercourses and 17 drinking water supply outlets and, for easy access to water by livestock, 30 
cattle baths. 
17. 
The project will develop a monitoring and evaluation system using satellite remote sensing 
technology to assess irrigation efficiency, crop growing, water productivity, and the abiana;27 and 
will train staff from the PID and the Punjab Agriculture Department (PAD) to use the system. To 
ensure sustainable O&M of the Jalalpur irrigation system, the project will develop a guideline and 
a sustainable plan for the system’s O&M with improved asset management and irrigation service 
24 Independent  Evaluation  Department.  2013.  Country  Assistance  Program  Evaluation:  Pakistan:  2002–2012—
Responding to the Changing Development Conditions. Manila: ADB. 
25 ADB. 2016. Project Design Advance: Jalalpur Irrigation Project in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. Manila. 
26 The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1. 
27 The abiana is the irrigation service fee assessed based on expected crop production. 
5 
delivery using the government of Punjab’s committed budget allocation. To address potential risks 
against extreme torrents from the hilly terrain and floods from the Jhelum River,  the project will 
also develop a flood disaster risk management plan. 
Output 2: Water-use capacity improved in project areas. The project will construct 485 
18. 
farm-level field channels (watercourses) to distribute irrigation water over 68,263 ha of farmland 
during  April–October.  The  project  will  organize  the  beneficiary  farmers  into  water  user 
associations  (WUAs)  that  will  be  responsible  for  the  O&M  of  the  watercourses  and  their 
associated structures, and provide training to strengthen their capacity. The project will involve 
the WUAs  in  planning,  designing,  and  constructing  the  watercourses;  and  will  provide  precast 
parabolic concrete segments to cover 50% of the length of each watercourse.28 To increase crop 
yields and irrigation application efficiency with minimum water wastage,29 the project will provide 
the project area with precision land leveling covering about 12,140 ha, high-efficiency irrigation 
systems (HEISs)  covering  more than  800 ha,  and 20  water  storage  ponds with solar  pumping 
stations, under a cost-sharing arrangement with the beneficiary farmers. The project will train the 
WUAs and the farmers on climate-smart irrigation practices covering (i) the use of solar pumping 
stations,  (ii)  precise  land  leveling  and  HEISs,  (iii)  irrigation  schedules  based  on  crop  water 
requirements, and (iv) other management techniques to maximize water productivity. 
19. 
Output  3:  Farm  management  capacity  improved  in  project  areas.  The  project  will 
establish 664 agricultural demonstration farms of varying sizes covering 220 ha. The project will 
provide  6,000  farm  households  with  advisory  services  and  training  on  climate-smart  irrigated 
agriculture practices and more profitable farm management through demonstration activities and 
farmer field schools. The services and training will cover cropping patterns for high-value crops, 
selection  and  adequate  use  of  seeds  and  fertilizers,  soil  analysis  and  soil  improvement 
techniques,  and  better  marketing.  The  project  will  (i)  organize  knowledge-sharing  events  to 
promote modern water management and farming technologies, (ii) provide farmers with private 
agriculture  support  services  for  marketing  and  supply  chain  management  of  high-value 
agriculture, and (iii) help farmers develop links between growers and the market. 
D. 
Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan 
The  project  is  estimated  to  cost  $360.59  million  (Table  1).  Detailed  cost  estimates  by 
20. 
expenditure category and by financier are included in the project administration manual (PAM).30 
Table 1: Summary Cost Estimates 
($ million) 
Item 
A.  Base Costb 
1.  Jalalpur irrigation distribution system established  
2.  Water-use capacity improved in project areas 
3.  Farm management capacity improved in project areas 
Subtotal (A) 
B.  Contingenciesc 
C.  Financial Charges During Implementationd 
Total (A+B+C) 
Amounta 
263.19 
34.48 
2.34 
300.01 
43.22 
17.36 
360.59 
a  Includes  taxes  and  duties  of  $33.01  million,  which  the  government  will  finance  through  cash  contribution.  Such 
amount does not represent an excessive share of the project cost. Farmers’ contribution estimated at $5.16 million 
is included in output 2. 
28 The remaining watercourse length will remain unlined, as further water reduction losses when more than 50%–60% 
is lined are not significant when compared with the cost of lining. 
29 The field application efficiency is estimated at 75%. 
30 Project Administration Manual (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
6 
b  In mid-2017 prices as of July 2017. 
c  Physical contingencies computed at 3% for all expenditure accounts given the detailed technical due diligence. Price 
contingencies computed at an average of 2% on foreign exchange costs and 6% on local currency costs; includes 
provision for potential exchange rate fluctuation under the assumption of a purchasing power parity exchange rate. 
d  Includes interest and commitment charges. Interest during construction for the ordinary capital resources loan has 
been  computed  at  the  5-year  United  States dollar  fixed  swap  rate  plus  an  effective  contractual  spread  of  0.5%. 
Commitment charges for the ordinary capital resources loan are 0.15% per year to be charged on the undisbursed 
loan amount. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
The government of Pakistan has requested a regular loan of $274.63 million from ADB’s 
21. 
ordinary capital resources to help finance the project. The loan will have a 20-year term, including 
a grace period of 5 years with straight-line repayment method; an annual interest rate determined 
in  accordance  with  ADB’s  London  interbank  offered  rate  (LIBOR)-based  lending  facility;  a 
commitment charge of 0.15% per year (the interest rate and other charges during construction to 
be capitalized in the loan); and such other terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan and 
project agreements. Based on these loan terms and repayment method, the average loan maturity 
is 12.75 years and there is no maturity premium payable to ADB. The summary financing plan is 
in Table 2.  
Table 2: Summary Financing Plan 
Source 
Asian Development Bank 
Ordinary capital resources (regular loan) 
Governmenta 
Total 
a  Includes farmers’ contribution estimated at $5.16 million. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
E. 
Implementation Arrangements 
Amount 
($ million) 
Share of Total 
(%) 
274.63 
85.96 
360.59 
76.2 
23.8 
100.0 
22. 
The PID will be the executing agency and will oversee the entire project. It has experience 
implementing  projects financed by  ADB,  the  Japan International  Cooperation Agency,  and the 
World Bank, and has ample technical, procurement, and managerial capacity to oversee these 
investments.  The  project  management  office  (PMO)  for  canals  (PMO-Canals)  for  the  Punjab 
Irrigated Agriculture Investment Program will execute output 1 of this project.31 The PMO-Canals 
staff has experience in managing ADB projects, such as the Lower Bari Doab Canal Improvement 
Project under the Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Investment Program (footnote 22). The PAD will be 
the implementing agency. A project implementation office (PIO) to be established in the PAD will 
implement outputs 2 and 3, under the overall coordination and oversight of the PID. Except for 
direct payments, all funds will be channeled through the PID and the PAD. The implementation 
arrangements are summarized in Table 3 and described in detail in the PAM (footnote 30). 
Table 3: Implementation Arrangements 
Aspects 
Implementation period 
Estimated completion date 
Estimated loan closing date 
Management 
(i)  Oversight body 
Arrangements 
February 2018–December 2023 
31 December 2023 
30 June 2024 
Project Steering Committee 
31 In September 2017, the PMO was transformed from the project management unit that implemented two loans under 
the Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Investment Program multitranche financing facility for the Lower Bari Doab Canal 
Improvement Project. 
7 
Aspects 
(ii)  Executing agency 
(iii)  Implementing agency 
(iv)  Project management office 
(v)  Project implementation office 
Procurement 
Consulting services 
Arrangements 
Chair: Chairperson, Planning and Development Board 
Members: PID and PAD secretaries, Punjab Finance Department, Punjab 
Environment Department, Board of Revenue member 
PID 
PAD 
About 30 main staff in Lahore 
About 35 main staff in Lahore and in the field 
ICB 
Shopping 
QCBS 
(90:10) 
QCBS 
(90:10) 
QCBS 
(90:10) 
ICS 
3 contracts 
Multiple 
18 person-months, international 
524 key person-months, national 
277 key person-months, national 
$184.0 million 
$26.2 milliona 
$13.3 million 
372 key person-months, national 
$2.8 million 
$2.3 million 
$0.3 million 
12 person-months, international 
30 person-months, national 
Retroactive financing and/or 
advance contracting 
Disbursement 
The project will use advance contracting and has requested retroactive 
financing for the engagement of the project implementation consultant. 
The loan proceeds will be disbursed following ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time) and detailed arrangements 
agreed between the government and ADB. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ICB = international competitive bidding, ICS = individual consultant selection, PAD = 
Punjab Agriculture Department, PID = Punjab Irrigation Department, QCBS = quality- and cost-based selection, WUA 
= water user association. 
a  Includes $20.7 million for the construction of 485 watercourses through community participatory procurements. This 
will  enhance  community  mobilization,  involvement  and  ownership  of  the  WUAs,  and  the  employment  of  labor-
intensive techniques through a cost-sharing mechanism. The WUAs and the PAD will enter an agreement by which 
WUAs will execute the works. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
A. 
Technical 
III. 
DUE DILIGENCE 
23. 
The  initial  7  km  of  the  Jalalpur  main  canal  from  the  intake  at  the  Rasul  Barrage  runs 
through a narrow space between the right bank of the Jhelum River and the steep hilly terrain. 
The PID, under the PDA, examined several alignment options of the initial section through a model 
experiment, considering potential risks from extreme torrents from the hilly terrain and floods from 
the Jhelum River, and selected the least-cost solution for capital investment and O&M. The project 
will build 72 cross-drainages to let the flood flows pass safely across the main canal, and 18 flood-
carrier channels to let the saline flood flows pass to the Jhelum River. The design capacity of the 
cross-drainage structures and flood-carrier channels, with a 40-year return period for floods, is 
sufficient to incorporate the risk of the increase in flood events because of climate change.  
24. 
Value added by ADB assistance. The project will incorporate innovative satellite remote 
sensing  technology  into the monitoring  and  evaluation  system for  the  efficient  and  transparent 
assessment of irrigation efficiency, crop growing, water productivity, and the abiana. Precise land 
leveling  of  about  12,140  ha  and  HEISs  covering  more  than  800  ha  will  increase  irrigation 
application efficiency to reduce water wastage. The project will build a concrete flume on 50% of 
the length of each watercourse to avoid water losses. 
8 
B. 
Economic and Financial 
25. 
The  project’s  main  economic  benefits  will  be  increased  agricultural  production  made 
possible  by  the  provision  of  seasonal  irrigation  water  to  about  68,263  ha  of  land  with  low 
agricultural productivity. Good quality irrigation, to be made available by the project during April–
October every year, will help not only the summer crops but also the winter crops (October–May) 
because  of  the  increased  soil  moisture  at  the  end  of  the  irrigation  season  and  the  gradual 
improvement in groundwater quality. Over its 6-year implementation period, the project will bring 
about  diversification,  increase  crop  intensity  from  13%  to  90%,  and,  depending  on  the  crop, 
increase crop yield by between 12% and 141%. The estimated internal economic rate of return is 
15%.32 The sensitivity analysis indicates that the economic viability of the project is most sensitive 
to  a  2-year  delay  in  the  realization  of  benefits.  Therefore,  it  is  essential  that  the  project  is 
implemented as scheduled through the provision of technical and extension support to the project 
beneficiaries. 
26. 
The management and O&M of Punjab’s irrigation systems is estimated at $51.30/ha per 
year.  During  2013–2016,  the  government  of  Punjab  has  allocated  $158  million  equivalent  or 
$18.60/ha  annually  on  average  for  this  purpose.  Despite  the  financial  gap,  Punjab’s  irrigation 
systems are in reasonably good condition and deliver an acceptable level of water to end users. 
The government of Punjab will allocate adequate resources to fully implement the O&M plan to 
be developed under the project. During the development of the O&M plan, the PID and ADB will 
reassess and reconfirm the adequacy of the O&M requirement.33 ADB will provide small-scale TA 
for the continued monitoring of the financial sustainability and O&M status of the Jalalpur irrigation 
system after project completion. Ensuring the financial sustainability of irrigation systems is the 
core agenda of irrigation sector reforms. ADB, through its TA, is reviewing the reforms and their 
related plans and actions and will integrate them, as appropriate, into the transformation process 
of the PID into the Water Resources Department under ADB TA (footnote 12). 
C. 
Governance 
27. 
The  financial  management  assessment  concluded  that  the  PID  and  the  PAD  have 
satisfactory capability to record financial transactions and balances, provide regular records and 
monitor  reports,  and  safeguard  assets.  But  their  financial  management  risks  were  assessed 
substantial because the assessment identified an accounting staff shortage in the PID and a lack 
of internal audit arrangement in the PID and the PAD. To address these weaknesses, the PID 
and the PAD will need to be strengthened by appointing additional staff. 
28. 
Procurement of civil works and goods will follow ADB's Procurement Guidelines (2013, as 
amended from time to time), while  consultant engagement will follow ADB’s Guidelines on the 
Use of Consultants (2013, as amended from time to time). All civil works contracts valued at $10 
million  and above will  be  procured  using international  competitive bidding.  Consulting services 
will be recruited in two packages for the project management and construction supervision of the 
PMO-Canals,  and one package for  implementation  support  of  outputs  2 and 3 under the  PIO, 
using the quality- and cost-based selection method with a 90:10 ratio. Two individual consultants 
(one  for  social  and  another  for  environment)  will  be  required  for  the  external  monitoring  of 
safeguard  implementation under  the  PMO-Canals,  and  two  other  individual  consultants  will  be 
required to support the PID  secretary. The procurement risks of the PMO-Canals and the PIO 
32 Economic and Financial Analysis (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
33 A detailed financial sustainability assessment and a guidance note to develop a plan for the sustainable O&M of the 
Jalalpur irrigation system are in the project administration manual. 
9 
were rated low.34 ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and 
discussed with the government of Punjab, the PID, and the PAD. The specific policy requirements 
and supplementary measures are described in the PAM (footnote 30). 
D. 
Poverty, Social, and Gender 
29. 
Agricultural land is turning barren because of groundwater salinity and the use of saline 
flood  water  from  the  Salt  Range  for  agriculture,  which  ultimately  reduces  crop  production  and 
leads  to  increasing  poverty  in  the  region.  The  majority  of  farmers  in  the  project  areas  have 
smallholdings and are considered poor. The construction of a new irrigation system; provision of 
irrigation supplies and agricultural support services; and training on the efficient use of irrigation 
water,  irrigated  agriculture  practice,  and  more  profitable  farm  management  will  contribute  to 
poverty  reduction  by  increasing  agricultural  production  and  improving  the  income  of  about 
500,000  mostly  poor  rural  people.  Irrigated  agriculture  will  create  job  opportunities  for  on-farm 
and off-farm labor in both farming and nonfarming communities. The communities will also benefit 
from the reliable supply of irrigation water, as well as improved water-use skills. The project will 
construct about 17 water supply outlets, which will help reduce poverty by increasing household 
access to safe water. 
30. 
In addition to their household tasks, women perform a large proportion of agriculture- and 
livestock-related  activities,  which  often  require  the  use  of  water.  Yet  women  farmers  are  often 
excluded from training on improved agricultural practices and water-use skills. They also have 
very  little participation  in  decision making as  they  are  often  not WUA  members. The  project  is 
classified effective gender mainstreaming and will address these gender issues by (i) installing 
water supply outlets, cattle baths, fencing, and crossing points in strategic places of the irrigation 
system;  (ii)  encouraging women’s  participation  in  the WUAs;  (iii)  training  women  on  water-use 
skills; and (iv) ensuring women farmers’ participation in training on irrigated agricultural practices 
and profitable farming systems. 
E. 
Safeguards 
31. 
categories are as follows: 
In  compliance  with  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009),  the  project’s  safeguard 
32. 
Environment  (category  A).  The  PID  prepared  an  environmental  impact  assessment 
(EIA)  following  the  Safeguard  Policy  Statement.  Major  anticipated  adverse  environmental  and 
social impacts related to construction include soil erosion, noise, cutting trees, and impacts on 
public structures and infrastructure. Among the potential adverse impacts during operation are 
floods from hill torrents, disposal of solid waste in canals, and use of fertilizers and pesticides. 
Protected zones near the project area are the Jalalpur Wildlife Sanctuary, which  is a breeding 
area for the Punjab urial, and the Rasul Barrage Game Reserve. The EIA established that the 
project will not have any significant impact on the avifauna and aquatic life of the game reserve, 
nor  will  it  affect  wildlife  in  the  wildlife  sanctuary.  The  PID  incorporated  adequate  mitigation 
measures into the project design and will implement them through an environmental management 
plan (EMP). The environment experts of the project implementation consultant will supervise the 
contractor in implementing the EMP. The PID will establish an environmental and social safeguard 
unit, which will ensure that the project is implemented in an environmentally sustainable manner. 
An  external  individual  environment  expert  will  ensure  that  all  contractual  obligations  related  to 
environmental  and social  compliance are met.  The  EMP  includes provisions  on  environmental 
34 Procurement Risk Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
10 
and social management, as well as an occupational health and safety development program, and 
the  PMO-Canals  and  contractors  will  implement  them  through  training  and  workshops  at  the 
preconstruction  and  construction  stages.  The  project  complies  with  public  disclosure  and 
consultation  requirements.  The  PDA  consultants  held  two  rounds  of  community  consultations 
during the EIA process and disclosed the EIA on the ADB website on 4 July 2017. 
33. 
Involuntary resettlement (category A). The main canal, distributaries, and flood-carrier 
channels  to  be  constructed  under  output  1  will  require  3,283  ha  of  land.  Almost  99%  of  the 
required land is privately owned and will need to be acquired. Out of this, 1,370 ha is agricultural 
land.  Only  about  5.6 ha is for residential  and/or commercial  purposes.  At  the  main  canal,  216 
residential and 10 commercial structures may be affected, along with 43 tube wells and related 
structures.  Construction  of  the  distributaries  may  also  affect  about  39  miscellaneous  private 
structures. About 8,000 people may be affected. Of these, 2,920 landowners may lose 10% or 
more of their agricultural land, while 166 owners of residential and commercial structures may 
need to relocate. The PDA consultants prepared a draft land acquisition and resettlement plan 
(LARP)  following  the  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  based  on  a  socio-economic  survey  of  400 
potentially displaced persons and community consultations. The PID disclosed the draft LARP on 
the  ADB  website  on  25  August  2017.  The  PID  will  prepare  the  final  LARPs  following  the 
notification of land acquisition under Sections 4 and 6 of the Pakistan Land Acquisition Act (1894), 
marking of the project boundaries in the field, census, detailed measurement surveys, and further 
consultations with affected persons. Under output 2, land will be required for the 485 watercourses 
to be constructed, along with more than 18,910 small farm turnout structures. The required land 
will  be  provided  by  the  farmers  and  local  communities  as  counterpart  support,  including  other 
assets,  therefore  involuntary  resettlement  is  not  involved.  Safeguard  measures  to  ensure  that 
contributions are voluntary and documented are provided in the PAM. 
34. 
Indigenous peoples (category C). Punjabis comprise the majority of the population in 
the project area, and there are no communities or groups that may be considered as indigenous 
peoples as defined under the Safeguard Policy Statement. All ethnic groups are mainstreamed 
into the general Pakistan society and culture. 
F. 
Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan 
35. 
ADB has identified and assessed the risks associated in the implementation and sustained 
performance  of  the  project  in  aspects  such  as  technical;  economic  and financial;  governance; 
poverty, social, and gender; and safeguards. The project’s overall risk was assessed moderate. 
Significant risks and mitigating measures are summarized in Table 4 and described in detail in 
the risk assessment and risk management plan.35 
Risks 
Extreme weather events cause hill torrent 
floods above design discharges, damaging 
the irrigation system, farm land, and 
properties. 
Deteriorating irrigation cost recovery and 
inadequate budget support lead to poor 
asset management, reducing the financial 
and economic returns of the irrigation 
services. 
Table 4: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures 
Mitigation Measures 
The PID examined several options for the initial section using a model 
experiment and selected the least-cost solution for capital investment 
and O&M. The PMO-Canals, with help from project implementation 
consultants, will develop the flood disaster risk management plan and 
will train PID staff to implement the plan. 
The government of Punjab will provide an adequate O&M budget from 
FY2023 onward for the completed Jalalpur irrigation system and its 
associated facilities. The PID will monitor and record the actual O&M 
expenses, budget allocation, and assessment and recovery of abiana 
35 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
11 
Risks 
Mitigation Measures 
(irrigation service fee) on an annual basis, and make such information 
available to ADB on request. 
The PMO-Canals will establish an accountant and an assistant 
accountant positions, and the PIO will establish an accountant 
position. The PMO-Canals and PIO will adopt a financial management 
manual that is tailored to the needs of the project. 
The PMO-Canals and the PIO lack financial 
management staff, which may cause project 
delay. The absence of internal auditing at 
provincial departments may affect effective 
risk management and control. 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  FY  =  fiscal  year,  O&M  =  operation  and  maintenance,  PID  =  Punjab  Irrigation 
Department, PIO = project implementation office, PMO = project management office. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
IV. 
ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS 
The government and the PID have assured ADB that implementation of the project shall 
36. 
conform  to  all  applicable  ADB  policies,  including  those  concerning  anticorruption  measures, 
safeguards, gender, procurement, consulting services, and disbursement as described in detail 
in the PAM and loan documents. The government and the PID have agreed with ADB on certain 
covenants for the project, which are set forth in the draft loan agreement and project agreements. 
37. 
The government of Punjab has assured ADB that (i) by 31 November 2021, the PID will 
approve for the Jalalpur irrigation system (a) the guidelines and plan for sustainable O&M with 
improved  asset  management  and  irrigation  service  delivery,  and  (b)  a  flood  disaster  risk 
management plan; (ii) by no later than 30 June 2022, the PID will start the implementation of the 
plans;  (iii)  an  adequate  O&M  budget  for  the  completed  Jalalpur  irrigation  system  and  its 
associated  facilities  is  provided  starting  in  FY2023;  and  (iv)  actual  O&M  expenses,  budget 
allocations,  and  assessment  of  recovery  of  abiana  are  monitored  and  recorded  annually  and 
promptly provided to ADB for at least 5 years following the project completion. The government 
of Punjab has also agreed that no withdrawals shall be made from the loan account until qualified 
accounting staff are engaged at the PMO-Canals in the PID and the PIO in the PAD. 
V. 
RECOMMENDATION 
38. 
I am satisfied that the proposed loan would comply with the Articles of Agreement of the 
Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  and  recommend  that  the  Board  approve  the  loan  of 
$274,630,000 to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Jalalpur Irrigation Project, from ADB’s 
ordinary  capital  resources,  in regular  terms,  with interest  to  be  determined  in  accordance  with 
ADB’s  London  interbank  offered  rate  (LIBOR)-based  lending  facility;  for  a  term  of  20  years, 
including a grace period of 5 years; and such other terms and conditions as are substantially in 
accordance with those set forth in the draft loan and project agreements presented to the Board. 
2 November 2017 
Takehiko Nakao 
President 
12 
Appendix 1 
Impact the Project is Aligned with 
Growth of agriculture sector enhanced and food security ensured (Punjab Growth Strategy 2018)a 
DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
Agricultural 
production in the 
project area increased 
Outputs 
1. Jalalpur irrigation 
distribution system 
established 
2. Water-use capacity 
improved in project 
areas 
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanisms 
Risks 
Shortage of water for 
diversion from the 
Jhelum River because 
of competition with 
other irrigation 
schemes or erratic 
river flows reduces 
agricultural benefits. 
Extreme weather 
events cause hill 
torrent floods above 
design discharges, 
damaging the 
irrigation system, farm 
land, and properties. 
By 2024: 
a. Cropping intensity during kharifb 
season increased to 90% in the 
project area of 68,263 ha (2008–
2014 average baseline: 13%) 
a–b. PAD’s crop reporting 
services through PMO-
Canals complemented by 
M&E systems 
b. Crop yield in the project area 
during kharif season increased by 
141% for cotton, 12% for maize, 
17% for rice, 29% for tinda,c 45% for 
sorghum, and 66% for wheat (2008–
2014 baseline: cotton 0.58 t/ha; 
maize 6.95 t/ha; rice 1.66 t/ha; tinda 
7.56 t/ha; sorghum 7.95 t/ha; wheat 
1.66 t/ha during the rabid season) 
c. Coverage of topsoil with high 
salinity reduced to 10,239 ha (2015 
baseline: 20,478 ha) 
By 2022: 
1a. An intake structure with a design 
discharge capacity of 38.2 m3/s, 117 
km-long main canal, 23 
distributaries, 10 minor canals, 72 
cross-drainage structures, 18 flood-
carrier channels, and more than 250 
associated structures for kharif 
season irrigation constructed (2017 
baseline: 0) 
1b. Guideline and sustainable O&M 
plan for the Jalalpur irrigation system 
approved by the PID (2017 baseline: 
not applicable) 
1c. Flood disaster risk management 
plan approved by the PID (2017 
baseline: not applicable) 
1d. M&E system using satellite 
remote sensing technology to assess 
irrigation efficiency, crop growing, 
and the abianae certified as fully 
functional by the PID (2017 baseline: 
not applicable) 
By 2023: 
2a. 485 watercourses covering all 
project areas for kharif season 
irrigation constructed (2017 baseline: 
0) 
2b. 485 WUAs formed and their 
capacities improved for sustainable 
O&M of watercourses and efficient 
c. PMO-Canals and PID 
data 
1a–d. PMO-Canals and 
PID data 
2a–e. PAD and PIO data 
through the PMO-Canals 
Appendix 1 
13 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanisms 
Risks 
3a–c. PAD and PIO data 
through the PMO-Canals 
Results Chain 
3. Farm management 
capacity improved in 
project areas 
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
water use during kharif season (2017 
baseline: 0) 
2c. 12,140 ha of the project area 
flattened (2017 baseline: 0) 
2d. HEISs covering 809 ha of the 
project area installed (2017 baseline: 
0) 
2e. More than 6,000 households 
(about 20% of the total estimated 
number of beneficiary households) 
improved water-use skills, at least 
30% of whom are women (2017 
baseline: 0) 
By 2023: 
3a. More than 6,000 households 
(about 20% of the total estimated 
number of beneficiary households) 
improved their capacities on irrigated 
agriculture practices, at least 30% of 
whom are women (2017 baseline: 0) 
3b. More than 6,000 households 
(about 20% of the total estimated 
number of beneficiary households) 
improved their capacities on 
profitable farming systems, at least 
30% of whom are women (2017 
baseline: 0) 
3c. More than 6,000 farmers 
accessed private agriculture support 
services in the project area (2017 
baseline: 0) 
Key Activities with Milestones 
1.  Jalalpur irrigation distribution system established 
1.1  Construct Jalalpur irrigation distribution structures (Q3 2018–Q2 2022) 
1.2  Develop M&E system for Jalalpur irrigation system (Q2 2020) 
1.3  Complete training of PID and PAD staff on the use of the M&E system (Q2 2022) 
1.4  Develop guideline and sustainable O&M plan and flood disaster risk management plan (Q1 2021–Q4 2021) 
1.5  Complete training of PID staff on the use of the plans (Q2 2022) 
2.  Water-use capacity improved in project areas 
2.1  Establish 485 WUAs (Q3 2018–Q1 2023) 
2.2  Construct 485 watercourses with farmers’ participation (Q1 2019–Q2 2023) 
2.3  Undertake WUA training for efficient O&M and their organizations (Q2 2021–Q3 2023) 
2.4  Undertake precision land leveling of 12,140 ha of the project area (Q1 2019–Q4 2023) 
2.5  Install HEISs (e.g., drip irrigation) covering 809 ha and 20 water storage ponds with solar pumping stations 
(Q1 2019–Q4 2023) 
2.6  Undertake farmer training for climate-smart irrigation practices (Q2 2021–Q3 2023) 
3.  Farm management capacity improved in project areas 
3.1  Establish 664 demonstration plots covering 220 ha (Q2 2021–Q3 2023) 
3.2  Conduct farmer field schools and farmers’ training (Q2 2021–Q3 2023) 
3.3  Hold farmer fairs and other knowledge-sharing events (Q2 2021–Q3 2023) 
3.4  Provide private agriculture support services (Q2 2021–Q3 2023) 
14 
Appendix 1 
Project Management Activities 
Complete detailed engineering design (Q3 2017) 
Initiate bid process for the major civil works contract (Q3 2017) 
Mobilize project implementation consultant (Q4 2017) 
Mobilize project support consultant for outputs 2 and 3 activities (Q1 2018–Q3 2018) 
Award major civil works contract (Q3 2018) 
Inputs 
ADB: $274.63 million 
Government: $80.80 million 
Beneficiaries: $5.16 million 
Assumptions for Partner Financing 
Not applicable 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  ha  =  hectare,  HEIS  =  high-efficiency  irrigation  system,  M&E  =  monitoring  and 
evaluation, m3/s = cubic meter per second, O&M = operation and maintenance, PAD = Punjab Agriculture Department, 
PID  =  Punjab  Irrigation  Department,  PIO  =  project  implementation  office,  PMO  =  project  management  office,  Q  = 
quarter, t/ha = ton per hectare, WUA = water user association. 
a  Government of Punjab, Planning and Development Department. 2015. Punjab Growth Strategy 2018: Accelerating 
Economic Growth and Improving Social Outcomes. Lahore. 
b  Kharif refers to the sowing season for summer crops, which is generally from April to October. 
c  Tinda is a small vegetable that is also referred to as Indian squash, round melon, Indian round gourd, apple gourd, 
or Indian baby pumpkin. 
d  Rabi refers to the sowing season for winter crops, which is generally from October to April. 
e  Abiana is the irrigation service fee assessed based on expected crop production. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Appendix 2 
15 
LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS 
http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=46528-002-3 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
Loan Agreement 
Project Agreement 
Sector Assessment (Summary): Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development 
Project Administration Manual 
Contribution to the ADB Results Framework 
Development Coordination 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Country Economic Indicators 
Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy 
Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan 
Gender Action Plan 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
Resettlement Plan 
Supplementary Documents 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
Financial Management Assessment 
Procurement Risk Assessment 
Climate Change Risk Vulnerability Assessment and Adaptation Measures 
Detailed Economic and Financial Analysis 
