Report and Recommendation of the President  
to the Board of Directors 
Sri Lanka 
Project Number: 47381-001 
June 2015 
Proposed Multitranche Financing Facility  
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka: 
Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program 
Distribution  of  this  document  is  restricted  until  it  has  been  approved  by  the  Board  of 
Directors.  Following  such  approval,  ADB  will  disclose  the  document  to  the  public  in 
accordance with ADB’s Public Communications Policy 2011. 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(as of 15 May 2015) 
Currency unit 
SLRe1.00 
$1.00 
– 
= 
= 
Sri Lanka rupee/s (SLRe/SLRs) 
$0.0075  
SLRs133.60 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB 
ADF 
DOI 
km 
m 
m3 
MASL 
MDP 
MFF 
MMDE 
NCPCP 
OCR 
cubic meter 
Asian Development Bank 
Asian Development Fund 
Department of Irrigation 
kilometer 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–  meter 
– 
–  Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka 
–  Mahaweli Development Program 
–  multitranche financing facility 
–  Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment 
– 
– 
North Central Province Canal Program 
ordinary capital resources 
1. 
The fiscal year (FY) of the Government of Sri Lanka and its agencies ends on 31 
December. 
NOTE 
2. 
In this report, “$” refers to US dollars. 
Vice-President 
Director General 
Director 
Team leader 
Team members 
Peer reviewers 
W. Zhang, Operations 1 
H. Kim, South Asia Department (SARD) 
T. Matsuo, Environment, Natural Resources and Agriculture Division, 
SARD 
L. Gore, Water Resources Specialist, SARD 
M. Amerasinghe, Environment Specialist, SARD 
P. Bandara, Senior Project Officer (Environment), SARD 
C. Lapsansky, Communications Specialist, Department of External 
Relations 
E. Perera, Safeguards Officer, SARD 
Y. Seo, Counsel, Office of the General Counsel 
E. Quincieu, Water Resources Specialist, Southeast Asia Department 
(SERD) 
J. Miller, Principal Transport Specialist, SERD 
In  preparing  any  country  program  or  strategy,  financing  any  project,  or  by  making  any 
designation  of  or  reference  to  a  particular  territory  or  geographic  area  in  this  document,  the 
Asian Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status 
of any territory or area. 
CONTENTS 
INVESTMENT PROGRAM AT A GLANCE 
MAP 
I. 
II. 
III. 
THE PROPOSAL 
THE INVESTMENT PROGRAM 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Rationale 
Impact and Outcome 
Outputs 
Investment and Financing Plans 
Implementation Arrangements 
DUE DILIGENCE 
A. 
Technical 
B. 
Economic and Financial 
C. 
Governance 
D. 
Poverty and Social 
E. 
Safeguards 
F. 
Risks and Mitigating Measures 
IV. 
V. 
ASSURANCES 
RECOMMENDATION 
APPENDIXES 
1. 
2. 
Design and Monitoring Framework for the Investment Program 
List of Linked Documents 
Page 
1 
1 
1 
3 
3 
4 
5 
6 
6 
7 
7 
8 
8 
9 
10 
10 
11 
14 
INVESTMENT PROGRAMa AT A GLANCE
Project Classification Information Status: Complete
1. Basic Data
Project Name
Country
Borrower
Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program
Sri Lanka
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Department
/Division
Executing Agency
Project Number: 47381-001
SARD/SAER
Ministry of Mahaweli 
Development & 
Environment
2. Sector
Agriculture, natural
resources and rural
development
Subsector(s)
Irrigation
Water-based natural resources management
3. Strategic Agenda
Inclusive economic growth
(IEG)
Environmentally
sustainable growth (ESG)
Subcomponents
Pillar 2: Access to economic opportunities, 
including jobs, made more inclusive
Disaster risk management
Global and regional transboundary environmental
concerns
Natural resources conservation
     ADB Financing ($ million)
45.00
408.00
Total
Climate Change Information 
Adaptation ($ million)
Climate Change impact on the 
Project
453.00
227.00
High
4. Drivers of Change
Governance and capacity
development (GCD)
Knowledge solutions (KNS) Application and use of new knowledge solutions 
Components
Institutional development
Partnerships (PAR)
in key operational areas
Pilot-testing innovation and learning
International finance institutions (IFI)
Official cofinancing
5. Poverty Targeting
Project directly targets
poverty
No
6. Risk Categorization:
Complex
Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
No gender elements (NGE)
Location Impact
Rural
Urban
High
Low
.
.
7. Safeguards Categorization [Tranche 1]
Environment: A   Involuntary Resettlement: B   Indigenous Peoples: C
8. Financing
Modality and 
Sources
ADB
    Sovereign 
MFF-Tranche (Loan): 
Asian Development 
Fund  
    Sovereign 
MFF-Tranche (Loan): 
Ordinary capital 
resources 
Cofinancing
    European 
Investment Bank 
    To Be Determined 
Counterpart
    Government
Total
I
Indicative Tranches ($million)
II
III
74.00
50.00
67.00
Amount 
($million)
453.00
191.00
76.00
80.00
106.00
262.00
0.00
0.00
40.00
190.00
60.00
54.00
41.00
285.00
0.00
0.00
27.00
200.00
114.00
60.00
54.00
108.00
108.00
675.00
9. Effective Development Cooperation
Use of country procurement systems
Use of country public financial management systems
No
Yes
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.
08122014103434923980
Generated Date: 23-Jun-2015 11:10:23 AM 
INVESTMENT PROGRAMa AT A GLANCE
10. Country Operations Business Plan
CPS
COBP
http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/34140/fil
es/cobp-sri-2014-2016.pdf
11.
Investment Program Summary
The Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program will assist the government complete outstanding water conveyance 
investments under the Mahaweli Development Program (MDP). Completion of MDP is a key priority of the government  and will 
maximize the productivity of Mahaweli River Basin water resources by transferring available water to the northern dry zone 
areas of Sri Lanka for irrigation, drinking and commercial purposes. This will accelerate local and national economic growth. The
investment program follows the multitranche financing facility (MFF) modality.
Impact and Outcome: The impact (of the facility) is improved agricultural production and sustained economic growth in the 
North Central Province, Central Province, North Western Province and Eastern Province. The outcome (of the facility) is 
secured access to water resources for agricultural and drinking purposes in project areas 
Outputs: (i) New and improved water conveyance and storage infrastructure constructed, (ii) Systems for improving water 
resources management and productivity developed,  and (iii) Multidisciplinary investment program management operational
Implementation Arrangements: Ministry of Mahaweli Development & Environment will be the executing agency.
Project Readiness: A. Status of Compliance with Detailed Design - detailed designs will be completed and 25% of the loan 
amount will be contracted by loan effectiveness
B. Status of Recruitment of Consultants - Request for proposal issued in March 2015 - recruitment of PMDSC is delegated to 
ADB.
C. Status of Bidding Process for Civil Works - ICB specimen bid docs have been reviewed by ADB and comments provided. 
D. PMU established and core PMU staff designated - Yes
E. Status of Safeguard Clearances - Resettlement process is initiated for tranche 1 and environmental clearances are in 
progress.  
F. Other
1. Status of local counterpart financing stage - pending subject to loan agreement being signed
2. Fund flow arrangements agreed between the line ministry/state govt. for central sector schemes only - No
3. Local permits and other clearances obtained - No
12. Milestones
Modality
Multitranche financing facility
Tranche I
Tranche II
Tranche III
13. Project Data Sheet (PDS)
PDS c
Estimated Approval
25 June 2015
2 July 2015
15 February 2017
15 February 2018
Estimated Completionb
31 December 2024
31 December 2019
31 December 2024
31 December 2024
http://www.adb.org/projects/47381-001/main
a Multitranche Financing Facility (MFF).
b For MFF, this refers to the end of the availability period; for tranches, this refers to the tranche closing date.
c Safeguard documents can be viewed by clicking the Document's hyperlink in the Project Data Sheet (PDS) page.
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.
08122014103434923980
Generated Date: 23-Jun-2015 11:10:23 AM
MAP
I. 
THE PROPOSAL 
1. 
I  submit  for  your  approval  the  following  report  and  recommendation  on  a  proposed 
multitranche  financing  facility  (MFF)  to  the  Democratic  Socialist  Republic  of  Sri  Lanka  for  the 
Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program.1   
2. 
The  investment  program  will  accelerate the  economic  activities  of  Sri  Lanka’s  northern 
dry zone region by transferring surplus water of the Mahaweli river basin for irrigation, drinking, 
and  commercial  purposes.2 It  will  develop  bulk  water  conveyance  and  storage  infrastructure 
planned under the North Central Province Canal Program (NCPCP), a high priority development 
program of the government that will support completion of the Mahaweli Development Program 
(MDP), which started in 1970.3  
II. 
THE INVESTMENT PROGRAM 
A. 
Rationale 
3. 
Sri Lanka has abundant water resources, with annual rainfall of about 1,860 millimeters. 
However, the water distribution is skewed over time and space. Most of the rain falls during two 
distinct  monsoons:  Maha  season  from  December  to  February  and  Yala  season  from  May  to 
September.4 The  majority  falls  in  the  southwest  and  central  highlands,  called  the  wet  zone, 
during both monsoons, with annual rainfall typically exceeding 5,000 millimeters. In comparison, 
the  country’s  lowlands  are  dry—particularly  in  the  northern  dry  zone  region,  where  annual 
rainfall is less than 1,500 millimeters, and droughts occur regularly. About 6.2 million people live 
in the dry zone region, or about 30% of the total population. Their access to freshwater is only 
1,200 cubic meters (m3) per person per annum.5 This is less than half of the national average of 
2,600 m3 and below the stress threshold of 1,700 m3. Water scarcity in the region is expected to 
deteriorate  because  of  increasing  demand  from  population  growth  and  a  reduction  in  rainfall 
from anticipated climate change. 
4. 
Over  the  past  millennia,  local  communities  have  managed  this  water  stress  by 
constructing many small cascade systems of reservoirs, transfer canals, and irrigation schemes. 
These have been sufficient to provide supplementary irrigation for a single paddy crop only each 
year,  and  limited  storage  for  drinking  water  supply.  In  many  places,  communities  rely  on 
groundwater,  some  of  which  is  contaminated,  causing  high  incidences  of  chronic  kidney 
disease.  Lack  of  year-round  access  to  water  resources  constrains  the  agricultural  and 
commercial production of the region, suppressing social and economic development. Agriculture 
contributes  19% to  the  local  economy  and  provides  livelihoods  to 70% of the rural  population. 
However, in 2012, average household incomes  in the northern dry zone were 10% lower than 
other regions.6 
1   The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1. 
2   The northern dry zone region comprises mainly the North Central Province, North Western Province, and Eastern 
Province.  
3   The  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  provided  project  preparatory  technical  assistance  for  the Water  Resources 
Development Program (TA 8633-SRI). 
4   These monsoon seasons are synonymous with the two cultivation seasons of Sri Lanka. 
5   This figure represents the annual per capita water endowment—the notional volume of water available each year—
based on the accessible and reliable freshwater. 
6  Government of Sri Lanka, Department of Census and Statistics. 2014. Household Income and Expenditure Survey 
– 2012/13. Colombo. This excludes urban areas in the Western Province. 
2 
In the 1970s, under the MDP, the government initiated developments to  increase water 
5. 
within these cascade systems using large transfer canals and reservoirs. These initiatives used 
available  water  resources  from  the  Mahaweli  River,  the  country’s  largest  river,  which  starts  in 
the wet zone and has abundant river flows exceeding the projected future water demand in its 
river  basin.  Key  components  of  the  MDP  were  finished  by  the  mid-1980s,  but  program 
completion was halted as a result of resource constraints and prolonged conflict. Since then, the 
government  has  updated  the  MDP,  taking  into  account  socioeconomic  changes  and  national 
development  priorities.  The  government’s  latest  priorities  and  investment  road  map  for  the 
irrigation  and  water-based  natural  resources  management  subsectors  are  described  in  the 
Public Investment Strategy, 2014–2016.7 These focus on nonphysical and physical investments 
to  ensure  availability  of  adequate  water  quantities.  Agricultural  production  from  irrigation 
systems  will  be  increased  by  (i)  improving  water  management,  productivity,  and  system 
efficiencies  to  meet  rising  demands;  (ii)  minimizing  spatial  variations  in  water  availability  by 
developing  trans-basin  diversions  to  transfer  available  water  to  dry  zone  areas;  and 
(iii) increasing  resilience  to  climate  change.  Providing  additional  and  clean  drinking  water 
supplies to dry zone communities is also a key priority.  
6. 
These  priorities  will  be  addressed  by  completing  the  NCPCP,  which  comprises 
outstanding  MDP  components,  and  is  estimated  to  cost  $1.64  billion.  The  NCPCP  will  be 
implemented  in  two  phases.  The  investment  program  will  finance  NCPCP  Phase  1,  which 
includes (i) key upstream investments of the NCPCP that will transfer water from the Mahaweli 
River to existing reservoirs in the Central Province, North Central Province, and North Western 
Province;  (ii) rehabilitation  of  an  existing  irrigation  system  located  in  the  lower  reach  of  the 
Mahaweli River; and (iii) improved water management practices. The investment program also 
supports  preparation  of  NCPCP  Phase  2,  which  will  develop  additional  transfer  canals  and 
reservoirs  to  allow  more  water  to  be  diverted  from  the  Mahaweli  River,  and  will  extend  the 
system  to  additional  existing  reservoirs  in  the  North  Central  Province.  The  NCPCP  and  other 
programs  supported  by  the  government  and  development  partner  that  improve  associated 
command areas and drinking water systems will complement each other.  
7. 
The investment program will implement physical investments to address water scarcity, 
food  security,  and  poverty  issues  in  beneficiary  areas  by  increasing  and  securing  perennial 
access  to  water  for  irrigation  and  nonagricultural  users.  Irrigation  water  conveyed  by  the  new 
infrastructure  will  service  existing  cultivated  lands  under  existing  major  and  minor  irrigation 
schemes,  to  increase  annual  cropping  intensities  and  minimize  drought  risk.  The  investment 
program also supports the government in addressing key nonphysical priorities, with a focus on 
improving water management, system efficiencies, policy, and institutional arrangements.  
8. 
The  investment  program  is  in  line  with  the  government’s  development  objectives  of 
improving connectivity and service delivery to lagging regions. It also supports the government’s 
sector  objectives  of  attaining  food  self-sufficiency  and  increasing  water  productivity,  and  is 
aligned with the strategic and sector goals of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) as articulated 
in ADB’s Strategy 2020 and its Midterm Review;8 and the Water Operational Plan, 2011–2020 
to  reduce  the  water  demand–supply  gap  in  water-scarce  areas,  foster  integrated  water 
resources  management,  improve  water  governance  and  delivery  of  services,  and  improve 
resilience  to  climate  change.  The  sector  deviates  from  the  key  strategic  focus  of  the  current 
7   Government  of  Sri  Lanka,  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Planning.  2013.  Public  Investment  Strategy,  2014–2016. 
Colombo. 
8   ADB.  2008.  Strategy  2020:  The  Long-Term  Strategic  Framework  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank,  2008–2020. 
Manila; ADB. 2014. Midterm Review of Strategy 2020: Meeting the Challenges of a Transforming Asia and Pacific. 
Manila. 
3 
country partnership strategy.9 An interim country partnership strategy for 2015-2016 that covers 
the agriculture and natural resource sector is being prepared. 
9. 
The  government  requested  ADB  support  for  developing  key  components  of  its  sector 
investment  road  map  using  the  MFF  modality,  as  it  is  suitable  for  time-sliced  financing  and 
implementation  of  large-scale  investment  projects.  It  also  provides  for  a long-term  partnership 
between ADB and the government for policy dialogue and capacity development, and ensures 
continuity  in  combining  investments  in  physical  infrastructure  and  nonphysical  components  for 
integrated  water  resources  management. 10  This  helps  the  investment  program  to  observe 
recommendations  from  the  earlier  ADB-financed  Water  Resources  Management  Project  that 
was  rated  unsuccessful  because  of  incomplete  implementation  of  sector  reforms. 11  The 
preconditions for use of the MFF—a road map and strategy, policy framework, investment and 
financing plans, and reliable safeguard arrangements—are all in place.12  
B. 
Impact and Outcome 
The investment program’s impact will be improved agricultural production and sustained 
10. 
economic growth in the North Central Province, Central Province, North Western Province, and 
Eastern  Province.  Its  outcome  will  be  secured  access  to  water  resources  for  agricultural  and 
drinking purposes in project areas.  
C. 
Outputs 
11. 
The outputs of the investment program will be (i) new and improved water conveyance 
and storage infrastructure constructed; (ii) systems for improving water resources management 
and  productivity  developed;  and  (iii) multidisciplinary 
investment  program  management 
operational.  Each tranche of  the  MFF finances  slices of  each output.  Output  1  will  include the 
following three projects: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(b) the  Upper  Elahera  Canal 
The Upper Elahera Canal Project comprises two components: (a) the 9 kilometer 
(km) Kalu Ganga–Moragahakanda Transfer Canal, including an 8 km tunnel that 
transfers water between the Kalu Ganga and Moragahakanda reservoirs that are 
under  construction;  and 
that  connects 
Moragahakanda  Reservoir  to  existing  reservoirs  (Huruluwewa,  Manankattiya, 
Eruwewa, and Mahakanadarawa) via 82 km of canals (including a total of 28 km 
of tunnels), which supply existing irrigation and water supply schemes. 
The  North  Western  Province  Canal  Project  will  construct  96  km  of  new  and 
upgraded canals, including a 940 meter (m) tunnel, and two new 25 m tall earth 
gravity dams, impounding the new Mahakithula and Mahakirula reservoirs. It will 
transfer  water  from  the  Dambulu  Oya  River  and  the  existing  Nalanda  and 
Wemedilla reservoirs to command existing irrigation and water supply reservoirs. 
The  Minipe  Left  Bank  Canal  Rehabilitation  Project,  located  in  the  downstream 
reaches of the Mahaweli River, will (a) add upstream storage by heightening the 
headwork’s  weir  by  3.5 m; (b)  construct  new  intake gates  to the  left  bank  canal 
and emergency spill weirs to both left and right bank canals; and (c) rehabilitate 
the  74  km  Minipe  Left  Bank  Canal  to  improve  conveyance  and  reliability  of 
service to existing farmers.  
9  ADB. 2011. Country Partnership Strategy: Sri Lanka, 2012-2016. Manila. 
10  Comparison of Financing Modality (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
11 ADB. 2007. Project Completion Report:  Water Resources Management Project (Sri Lanka). Manila. 
12  The  sector  investment  road  map  and  policy  framework  are  discussed  in  the  Framework  Financing  Agreement 
(accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
4 
12. 
The  first  tranche  of  the  investment  program  will  implement  (i)  stage  1  of  the  Upper 
Elahera Canal Project,  comprising the first 6.2 km of  open canals and associated structures of 
the Upper Elahera Canal; (ii) stage 1 of the North Western Province Canal Project,  comprising 
two  new  Mahakithula  and  Mahakirula  reservoirs  and  27  km  of  open  canals  linking  these 
reservoirs with the existing Wemedilla reservoir, and a 940 m tunnel;  and (iii) all of the  Minipe 
Left Bank Canal Rehabilitation Project.  
Output  2  will  support  the  key  nonphysical  sector  priorities  through  two  consulting 
13. 
packages.  Under  the  first  tranche,  the  study  on  improving  system  efficiencies  and  water 
productivity  will  investigate inefficiencies  within the existing conveyance and irrigation  systems 
and  constraints  to  improving  water  productivity,  and  recommend  on-farm  and  system-wide 
improvements.  Physical  recommendations  will  be  incorporated  into  civil  works  packages  for 
implementation under subsequent tranches and potentially under NCPCP Phase 2. The second 
consulting package, strengthening institutions with integrated water resources management, will 
recommend  programs  for  modernizing  policy  and  governance  frameworks,  and  institutional 
strengthening to improve national water resources planning and management, and operational 
and  maintenance  procedures.  Output  3  will  support  program  management  for  successful 
completion of the investment program. 
D. 
Investment and Financing Plans 
14. 
The  cost  of  the  investment  program  is  estimated  at  $675  million  (Table  1).  The 
government  has  requested  an  MFF  in  an  amount  up  to  $453  million  equivalent  from  ADB’s 
ordinary  capital  resources  (OCR)  and  Special  Funds  resources  (Asian  Development  Fund 
[ADF])  to  help  finance  part  of  the  investment  program.  The  MFF  will  consist  of  3  tranches, 
subject to the government’s submission of related periodic financing requests, execution of the 
related  loan  and  project  agreements  for  each  tranche,  and  fulfillment  of  terms  and  conditions 
and  undertakings  set  forth  in  the  framework  financing  agreement.13 Approval  for  the  second 
tranche is scheduled in 2017 and approval for the third tranche is scheduled in 2018. 
15. 
The  MFF  combines  OCR  and  Asian  Development  Fund  (ADF)  financing  up  to  the 
aggregate  MFF  amount.  The  provision  of  any  ADF  resources  will  be  balanced  by  a 
corresponding  reduction  in  available  OCR  financing  (and  vice  versa),  with  total  financing 
provided under the MFF not to exceed the aggregate MFF total of $453 million equivalent. Any 
ADF allocation will be subject to (i) the availability of ADF resources; (ii) Sri Lanka’s access to 
such  resources  pursuant  to  ADB’s  Graduation  Policy14 and  the  requirements  of  ADF  donors; 
and (iii) the availability of such resources to Sri Lanka given ADB’s policy on performance-based 
allocation of ADF resources.15 
The first tranche will be financed, in part, from a loan from ADB’s OCR ($76 million) and 
16. 
a loan from ADB’s Special Funds resources ($74 million).16 The OCR loan will have a 26-year 
term, including a grace period of 5 years, an annual interest rate determined in accordance with 
13 Framework Financing Agreement (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
14 ADB. 2008. Review of the 1998 Graduation Policy of the Asian Development Bank. Manila. 
15 ADB.  2004.  Review  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank’s  Policy  on  the  Performance-Based  Allocation  of  Asian 
Development  Fund  Resources.  Manila;  ADB.  2008.  Refining  the  Performance-Based  Allocation  of  Asian 
Development Fund Resources. Manila. 
16 Periodic Financing Request for Tranche 1 (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
5 
ADB’s London interbank (LIBOR) offered rate-based lending facility,17 a commitment charge of 
0.15% per year, and such other terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan agreement. The 
loan from ADB’s Special Funds resources will have a 25-year term, including a grace period of 5 
years,  an  interest  rate  of  2.0%  per  year,  and  such  other  terms  and  conditions  set  forth  in  the 
draft loan agreement. The financing plan for the investment program and tranche 1 is in Table 2. 
Item 
A.  Base Costb 
Table 1: Investment Program 
Amounta ($ million) 
Investment 
Program 
Tranche 1  Tranche 2  Tranche 3 
1.  New and improved water conveyance and storage 
465.0 
116.0 
228.0 
121.0 
infrastructure constructed 
2.  Systems for improving water resources management 
4.0 
and productivity developed 
3.  Multidisciplinary investment program management 
46.0 
2.0 
31.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.0 
15.0 
operational 
B.  Contingenciesc 
C.  Financing Charges during Implementationd 
Subtotal (A) 
Total (A+B+C)
e
515.0 
134.0 
26.0 
675.0 
149.0 
32.0 
9.0 
190.0 
228.0 
48.0 
9.0 
285.0 
138.0 
54.0 
8.0 
200.0 
a   Includes  taxes  and  duties  to  be  financed  from  government  resources  ($15  million  for  the  first  tranche  and 
$54 million  for  the  investment  program)  as  cash  contributions.  Amounts  for  the  second  and  third  tranches  are 
indicative. 
b    In mid-2014 prices. Costs comprise about 84% civil works, 3% equipment and 7% consulting services.  
c  Physical  contingencies  computed  at  10%  for civil  works  and  equipment.  Price contingencies  computed  at  0.3%–
1.4% on foreign exchange costs and 6.0% on local currency costs; includes provision for potential exchange rate 
fluctuation under the assumption of a purchasing power parity exchange rate. 
d    Includes interest and commitment charges. Interest during construction for the  ordinary capital resources loan has 
been computed at the 5-year forward London interbank offered rate plus a spread of 0.50%, plus maturity premium 
of 0.10%. Commitment charges for the  ordinary capital resources  loan are 0.15% per year to be charged on the 
undisbursed loan amount. Interest during implementation for the Special Funds resources loan has been computed 
at an interest rate of 2% per year. 
e   Any  incidental  expenditure  relating  to  bank  charges,  local  transport,  freight,  and  insurance  are  eligible  for  ADB 
financing.  
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
Source 
Asian Development Bank 
  Ordinary capital resources (loan) 
  Special Funds resources (loan) 
Cofinanciersa 
Government of Sri Lanka 
Total 
Table 2: Financing Plan 
Investment Program 
Tranche 1 
Amount 
($ million) 
Share of Total 
(%) 
Amount 
($ million) 
Share of Total 
(%) 
262.0 
191.0 
114.0 
108.0 
675.0 
39.0 
28.0 
17.0 
16.0 
100.0 
76.0 
74.0 
0.0 
40.0 
190.0 
40.0 
39.0 
0.0 
21.0 
100.0 
a  To be confirmed. Initial discussions are taking place with potential cofinancier(s). 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
E. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 3 and described in detail in 
17. 
the facility administration manual.18 
17  The  interest  includes  a  maturity  premium  of  10  basis  points.  This  is  based  on  the  above  loan  terms  and  the 
government’s choice of repayment option and dates. 
18  Facility Administration Manual (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
6 
Aspects  
Implementation period 
Estimated completion date 
Management 
(i)   Oversight body 
(ii)   Executing agency 
(iii)   Implementation unit 
Procurement 
Consulting services, 
indicative for the investment 
program 
PMDSC 
Retroactive financing 
and/or advance contracting 
Disbursement 
Table 3: Implementation Arrangements 
Arrangements 
July 2015–December 2024 
31 December 2024 
A program steering committee will provide policy direction on matters relating to the 
investment program. The committee, chaired by the secretary, MMDE, will comprise 
representatives of key collaborating agencies. It will review implementation and provide 
guidance. 
MMDE 
A central program management unit responsible for coordination, management, 
monitoring, and supervision of the investment program has been established by MMDE 
with a minimum of 33 staff. Individual project implementation units for each of the three 
investment projects will assist project implementation and monitor day-to-day 
construction works. Each unit will have a minimum of 31 staff. 
ICB 
NCB 
Force Account 
Shopping 
QCBS (90:10)–PMDSC  
$493,340,000 
$69,410,000 
$600,000 
$1,875,000 
$40,000,000 
9 contracts 
14 contracts 
Various 
Various 
International: 350 person-
months; National: 
4,100 person-months 
To be identified 
To be identified 
Various 
$2,500,000 
$2,500,000 
$1,000,000 
QCBS (90:10)–ISEWP 
QCBS (90:10)–SIWRM 
ICS 
The PMDSC will be engaged for the first tranche and may be extended for subsequent 
tranches, at the request of the executing agency or the government, subject to 
satisfactory performance of the team. This is to ensure continuity of project 
implementation. 
For each tranche, ADB may, subject to its policies and procedures, allow upon request 
advance contracting of civil works, equipment and materials, and consulting services. 
For each tranche, retroactive financing may be considered for eligible expenditures 
incurred for consulting services and procurement of goods, services and civil works, 
project management, and project administration up to 12 months before the relevant 
loan signing date, and not exceeding 20% of the relevant loan amount. 
The loan proceeds will be disbursed in accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time) and detailed arrangements agreed 
upon between the government and ADB. 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank;  ICB  =  international  competitive  bidding;  ICS  =  individual  consultant  selection; 
ISEWP  =  improving  system  efficiencies  and  water  productivity;  MMDE  =  Ministry  of  Mahaweli  Development  and 
Environment;  NCB  =  national  competitive  bidding;  PMDSC  =  program  management,  design,  and  supervision 
consultants;  QCBS  =  quality-  and  cost-based  selection;  SIWRM  =  strengthening  integrated  water  resources 
management. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
A. 
Technical 
III. 
DUE DILIGENCE  
18. 
Technical due diligence included a comprehensive  review and updating of the projects’ 
feasibility  studies,  and  preparation  of  detailed  designs  and  cost  estimates,  based  on  site 
investigations.  All  aspects  of  the  detailed  feasibility  studies  were  examined  during  the  design 
process, including (i) confirming that the NCPCP water balance is sufficient in the long term and 
that  the  projects  avoid  adverse  downstream  impacts  to  existing  users  and  the  environment; 
(ii) considering  a  range  of  technical  alternatives  and  their  technical  and  economic  viability; 
(iii) assessing  the  capital  and  operating  costs,  and  achievable  cost  savings;  (iv) reviewing  the 
rationale for the proposed design, specific components, and operational modes; (v) maximizing 
the  beneficiary  areas  and  communities;  (vi) minimizing  adverse  environmental  and  social 
7 
impacts;  and  (vii) optimizing  timescales  for  project  implementation.  The  results  from  the 
technical  evaluations  are  detailed  in  (i) a  sector  analysis  and  assessment;  (ii) a  water  balance 
assessment;  (iii) a  climate  risk  and  vulnerability  assessment;  (iv) individual  technical  review 
summaries for the three  projects  and a  specific  geotechnical  design  assessment  of  the  tunnel 
and  dam  components;  (v) an  institutional  and  policy  assessment;  and  (vi) detailed  project 
construction cost estimates.  
19. 
The  investment  program  is  inherently  a  climate  change  adaptation  measure  because  it 
will increase water storage and transfer water from wet to dry areas. However, the infrastructure 
designs include additional adaptation measures, such as provision for increased flows in canals 
and  cross-drainage  structures.  The  investment  program  also  includes  soft  components  for 
climate resilience that will assist (i) irrigation managers to improve system water management; 
(ii)  farmers  to  increase  agriculture  water  productivity;  and  (iii)  the  government  to  improve  its 
policies and institutions based on integrated water resources management principles. 
B. 
Economic and Financial 
20. 
Economic  and  financial  analyses  undertaken  for  the  investment  program  indicate  that 
the NCPCP is economically viable and financially sustainable. Increased agricultural production 
is the most important quantifiable economic benefit, accounting for about 90% of total benefits. 
Other quantifiable benefits include increased provision of raw water for domestic, municipal, and 
industrial  uses;  and  increased  hydropower  generation.  The  indirect  benefits  of  induced 
economic  activities  and  investments  by  the  NCPCP’s  upstream  water  infrastructure  were  not 
quantified, although expected to be significant. These include broader regional economic growth 
and  improved  food  and  political  security.  The  economic  internal  rate  of  return  is  estimated  at 
13.1%. The economic internal rate of return is sensitive to changes to the investment cost and 
level  of  project  benefits.  An  11%  increase  in  total  cost  or  decrease  in  benefits  reduces  the 
economic internal rate of return to 12%, implying the need to monitor factors that may affect the 
cost and benefits.19 The government has committed to financing the operation and maintenance 
costs  and  periodical  replacement  cost  of  the  investment  program  infrastructures  from  its  own 
resources;  these  will  not  exceed  2.3%  of  the  total  annual  budget  of  the  Ministry  of  Mahaweli 
Development and Environment (MMDE) and the Department of Irrigation (DOI).20 
C. 
Governance 
21. 
Financial  management  and  procurement  capacity  assessments  have  been  undertaken 
for MMDE; the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka (MASL), an agency under MMDE; and the DOI 
under the Ministry of Irrigation. MASL and DOI will be responsible for managing, operating, and 
maintaining  the  infrastructure  after  its  commissioning.  The  total  annual  budget  allocation  for 
MMDE,  MASL,  and  DOI  is  over  $400  million  for  capital  works.  MMDE,  MASL,  and  DOI  are 
experienced  in  implementing  large  hydropower  and  water  resources  development  initiatives. 
The  financial  management  assessment  concludes  that  MMDE  has  sufficient  experience  and 
capacity to manage the project funds as well as adequate fund flow, accounting, and budgeting 
arrangements.  The  overall  pre-mitigation  financial  management  risk  and  procurement  risk  are 
both  rated  substantial.  The  financial  management  and  procurement  arrangements  are 
19 Although  farmers’  incomes  are  expected  to  increase,  no  revenue  will  flow  directly  to  MMDE  or  the  Mahaweli 
Authority of Sri Lanka (MASL) from the project. Accordingly, an assessment of the financial internal rate of return of 
the  project  and  its  comparison  against  the  weighted  average  cost  of  capital  is  not  meaningful.  An  incremental 
recurrent cost analysis was performed instead to ensure that adequate budget provisions can be made to operate 
and maintain project assets.  
20 Financial Management Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
8 
considered adequate. Improvements required are (i) commitment for adequate counterpart fund 
allocation;  (ii) preparing  a  detailed  procedural  manual,  and  training  in  ADB’s  rules  and 
regulations  in  disbursement  and  procurement;  and  (iii) developing  5-year  corporate  plans.  A 
detailed financial management action plan is in the facility administration manual (footnote 20). 
22. 
ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and discussed 
with the government and the MMDE. The result of the financial management and procurement 
capacity  assessment,  and  the  specific  policy  requirements  and  supplementary  measures  are 
described in the facility administration manual. 
D. 
Poverty and Social 
The investment program will improve socioeconomic conditions in the northern dry zone. 
23. 
By  providing  secured  and  increased  irrigation  water  supplies,  it  will  improve  the  livelihoods  of 
more than 70% of investment program-affected beneficiaries who cultivate land with irregular and 
uncertain irrigation water supplies. Since most paddy lands are cultivated in both Maha and Yala 
cultivation  seasons,  the  rural  poor  who  depend  largely  on  occasional  agricultural  labor  for  their 
livelihood, will benefit from more opportunities to improve their household incomes. By employing 
the rural poor in construction activities, the investment program will help to reduce rural poverty in 
the short term. The investment program will supply domestic water to about 358,000 people and 
thereby improve health conditions of people in beneficiary areas, where acute kidney diseases are 
prevalent.  It  will  benefit  men  and  women  alike.  The  investment  program  will  ensure  women’s 
participation  in  consultation  processes  that  determine  compensation  entitlements,  and  income 
generation and improvement programs. During consultations held in investment program-affected 
areas,  most  respondents  stated  the  investment  program  will  improve  their  living  standards  and 
employment opportunities.  
24. 
Contractors will be required to implement appropriate measures regarding the health and 
safety of men and women who work at the construction sites. Contractors, in close coordination 
with  the  program  management  unit,  will  conduct  awareness  programs  on  the  prevention  of 
sexually  transmitted  infections,  drug  use,  gender  issues,  and  core  labor  standards.  The 
investment  program  is  classified  as  general  intervention,  since  it  supports  poverty  reduction 
indirectly. Although tranches 1 and 2 will provide the same opportunities for women to work in the 
construction  activities  as  men,  they  are  classified  as  no  gender  elements  because  the  activities 
will  be  limited  to  construction  of major  infrastructure for  conveying and  storing water. Tranche  3 
could  be  classified  as  some  gender  benefits,  since  investments  may  improve  secondary  and 
tertiary distribution systems with farmers’ organizations.  
E. 
Safeguards 
Involuntary resettlement. The first tranche is categorized B for involuntary resettlement 
25. 
impacts. Land acquisition is required for only the North Western Province Canal Project, and a 
resettlement plan has been prepared. It will require 11.8 hectares of land from 128 households, 
with 448 project-affected people. Of those, nine households with 27 project-affected people will 
be  physically  displaced.  The  remaining  119 households  will  lose  2%–9%  of  their  lands.  All 
physically  displaced  households  have  opted  for  self-relocation.  No  land  acquisition  is  required 
for the Upper Elahera Canal Project or Minipe Left Bank Canal Rehabilitation Project under the 
first tranche. A resettlement framework for the investment program has been prepared to guide 
the  formulation  of  resettlement  plans  for  all  tranches.  Subsequent  tranches  are  likely  to  be 
categorized A for involuntary resettlement. Each tranche will implement comprehensive income 
restoration and improvement programs for the project-affected people. The investment program 
9 
will  also  establish  a  project-level  grievance  redress  mechanism  to  resolve  problems  with 
compensation  calculation  and  payment,  resettlement  assistance,  and  income  generation  and 
improvement.  MMDE  has  adequate  capacity  to  implement  the  resettlement  plans,  as  it  has 
implemented several resettlement programs under the MDP.  
26. 
Indigenous  people. Research and field surveys undertaken during project preparation 
found  that  no  indigenous  people communities  or  individuals  will  be  affected  by  the  investment 
program. Hence, all tranches are category C for indigenous peoples impacts.  
Environment. All tranches of the investment program are categorized A for environment 
27. 
in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009).  Individual  environmental 
assessments have been undertaken for the three projects. Environmental impact assessments 
for  the  North  Western  Province  Canal  Project  and  the  Upper  Elahera  Canal  Project,  each 
categorized  A,  and  an  initial  environmental  examination  for  the  Minipe  Left  Bank  Canal 
Rehabilitation  Project  were  prepared.  Since  the  investment  program  is  time-sliced  and 
implementation  of  all  three  projects  will  begin  under  the  first  tranche,  the  environmental 
assessments  cover  the  entire  investment  program.  An  environmental  assessment  and  review 
framework  has  also  been  developed  for  the  investment  program.  Stakeholders  have  been 
consulted  and  will  continue  to  be  consulted  during  implementation  as  described  in  the 
stakeholder  communications  strategy.  A  grievance  redress  mechanism  to  address  both  social 
and environmental issues will be established prior to project implementation. 
28. 
Based  on  the  findings  of  a  strategic  environment  assessment  undertaken  by  the 
government for the updated MDP, the cumulative impacts on two key areas of biodiversity and 
hydrology were assessed for the investment program and the Kalu Ganga and Moragahakanda 
reservoirs  (associated  facilities  under  construction).21 For  these  combined  investments,  about 
11,600  hectares  of  natural  habitat  (moist  semi-evergreen,  dry  mixed  evergreen,  and  riverine 
forests and scrublands) will be impacted, but the projects under the investment program affect 
only  about  1,100  hectares,  or  about  0.0005%  of  the  natural  habitat  available  in  Sri  Lanka. 
Several alternative options were considered in designing the canal routes to minimize adverse 
impacts  to  communities,  biodiversity,  and  natural  resources.  The  final  routes  include  about 
36 km of tunnels, primarily to minimize impacts to forest and wildlife reserves.  Appropriate off-
set  measures  have  also  been  included  in  the  investment  program,  such  as  compensatory 
planting of degraded forest areas. The water balance study also demonstrates that downstream 
water uses and environmental flows will not be impacted by the planned water diversions.   
F. 
Risks and Mitigating Measures 
29.  Major risks and mitigating measures are summarized in Table 4 and described in detail 
in the risk assessment and risk management plan.22 The integrated benefits and impacts of the 
investment program are expected to outweigh the costs. 
Table 4: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures 
Risks 
Inherent risks associated 
with construction of dams 
and tunnels 
Mitigating Measures 
Comprehensive  ground  investigations  have  been  undertaken  during  the  design 
process. A tunnel boring machine will be used to construct the 26 km tunnel, which 
will  help  expedite  implementation  and  minimize  construction  risks.  The  contracts 
for tunnel construction may also include performance and penalty clauses.  During 
21 Government  of  Sri  Lanka,  Ministry  of  Agriculture  Development  and  Agrarian  Services.  2012.  Dam  Safety  and 
Water Resources Planning Project: Strategic Environmental Assessment–Mahaweli Systems. Colombo. 
22 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
10 
Risks 
Benefits of the investment 
program will be reduced if 
water management is not 
improved and if the 
government does not 
implement NCPCP Phase 2 
Insufficient counterpart 
funding  
Mitigating Measures 
implementation,  a  systematic  risk  management  program  will  be  used  to  identify 
risks and advise on mitigation actions. MMDE will engage a panel of independent 
technical experts to advise MMDE and ADB during implementation. 
The investment program will support MMDE in improving water management, with 
pilot testing of initiatives. MMDE assures that recommendations from the pilots are 
scaled up for the entire Mahaweli system. The government has also committed to 
complete  the  NCPCP,  and  include  it  in  the  Public  Investment  Strategy  as  a  high 
priority  project.  The  PMDSC  will  support  preparation  of  the  remaining  NCPCP 
components, and will prepare due diligence reports (technical, economic, financial, 
safeguards) and documentation for possible ADB financing of NCPCP Phase 2. 
Commitment for adequate annual budgetary allocation will be obtained in the legal 
agreements for both implementation and sustainable operation and maintenance of 
the investments. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank; km = kilometer; MMDE = Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment; 
NCPCP  =  North  Central  Province  Canal  Project;  PMDSC  =  program  management,  design,  and  supervision 
consultants. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
IV. 
ASSURANCES 
30. 
The  government  and  MMDE  have  assured  ADB  that  implementation  of  the  investment 
program  shall  conform  to all  applicable ADB  policies including those  concerning  anticorruption 
measures,  safeguards,  gender,  procurement,  consulting  services,  and  disbursement  as 
described in detail in the facility administration manual and loan documents. 
31. 
The  government  and  MMDE  have  given  ADB  certain  undertakings  for  the  MFF,  which 
are  set  forth  in  the  framework  financing  agreement.  Specific  covenants  agreed  by  the 
government  and  MMDE  with respect  to  individual  tranches  under the  MFF  are  set forth  in the 
loan and project agreements for the respective tranches.  
V. 
RECOMMENDATION 
32. 
I  am  satisfied  that  the  proposed  multitranche  financing  facility  would  comply  with  the 
Articles  of  Agreement  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  and  recommend  that  the  Board 
approve the multitranche financing facility to the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for 
the  Mahaweli  Water  Security  Investment  Program  in  an  aggregate  principal  amount  not 
exceeding the equivalent of $453,000,000, which comprises: 
(i)  
(ii) 
the  provision  of  loans  from  ADB’s  Special  Funds  resources,  with  interest  and 
other  terms  to  be  determined  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  applicable  policies 
relating to Special Funds resources; and 
the  provision  of  loans  from  ADB’s  ordinary  capital  resources,  with  interest  and 
other terms to be determined in accordance with ADB’s London interbank offered 
rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility 
and is subject to such other terms and conditions as are substantially in accordance with those 
set forth in the framework financing agreement presented to the Board. 
3 June 2015 
Takehiko Nakao 
President 
DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK FOR THE INVESTMENT PROGRAM 
Appendix 1 
11 
Performance Targets and 
Indicators with Baselines 
By 2030: 
Annual growth of at least 
8% in provincial GDP 
(baseline: 9.7% weighted 
average in 2010–2012) 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanisms 
Central Bank of 
Sri Lanka Annual Report 
Agricultural production 
increases from 
SLRs270 billion in 2012 to 
SLRs575 billion (in 2012 
prices) 
Department of 
Agriculture and MASL 
annual reports 
For all indicators: 
MASL and DOI annual 
reports 
Assumptions and 
Risks 
Assumptions 
Government completes 
NCPCP Phase 2 and 
associated command 
area improvement, and 
implements programs 
to improve productivity 
of water. 
Government continues 
to maintain irrigation 
infrastructure in the 
investment program’s 
beneficiary command 
areas. 
Risk 
Climate change impacts 
water availability and 
water demand by crops 
exceed projections. 
Design Summary 
Impact 
Improved agricultural 
production and 
sustained economic 
growth in the North 
Central Province, 
Central Province, North 
Western Province, and 
Eastern Province 
Outcome 
Secured access to 
water resources for 
agricultural and 
drinking purposes in 
project areas 
Outputs 
1.  New and improved 
water conveyance 
and storage 
infrastructure  
constructed 
By 2024: 
974 mcm/year of water 
available from the 
Mahaweli system in North 
Central Province, inclusive 
of 70 mcm/year of raw 
water for 358,000 people 
(baseline = 60 mcm/year 
with 0 mcm/year for 
drinking in 2014)   
130 mcm/year water 
available from Mahaweli 
System in North Western 
Province (baseline = 
0 mcm) 
Storage capacity of Minipe 
Anicut is increased to 
1.25 mcm (baseline = 
0.18 mcm in 2014) 
Irrigated area serviced by 
Mahaweli System 
increases to 162,000 ha 
with cropping intensity of 
191% (baseline = 
146,000 ha and 188% in 
2014) 
By 2024: Kalu Ganga–
Moragahakanda Transfer 
Canal (9 km) and Upper 
Elahera Canal 
commissioned (82 km) 
For all indicators: 
MASL and DOI progress 
reports 
Assumption 
Cofinancing will be 
secured on time. 
Risk 
Unexpected ground 
12 
Appendix 1 
Design Summary 
Performance Targets and 
Indicators with Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanisms 
Assumptions and 
Risks 
conditions cause 
implementation delays. 
By 2024: North Western 
Province canal (96 km), 
two new reservoirs, and 
associated infrastructure 
commissioned 
By 2019: Minipe Anicut 
heightened by 3.5 m, and 
Left Bank Canal and 
associated infrastructure 
rehabilitated (74 km) 
Recommendations from 
ISEWP plan implemented 
during 2019–2024 
Recommendations from 
SIWRM plan approved by 
the government by 2024 
Timely submission of 
periodic financing requests 
for subsequent tranches 
Program outputs delivered 
on time and within budget 
2.  Systems for 
improving water 
resources 
management and 
productivity 
developed 
3.  Multidisciplinary 
investment program 
management 
operational 
MASL and DOI project 
and investment program 
progress and completion 
reports 
MMDE annual reports 
For all indicators: 
MMDE financial records 
and progress reports 
Activities with Milestones 
1.  New and improved water conveyance and storage 
Inputs 
Asian Development Bank: $453 million 
infrastructure constructed 
1.1  For tranche 1, finalize detailed designs and procurement 
Government: $108 million 
Cofinancing: $114 million to be 
confirmed 
documents, and award first contract of tranche 1 works 
package in Q4 2015 and last works package by Q1 2017 
1.2  Commence works for tranche 1 in Q4 2015 
1.3  Tender and award tranche 2 works package in Q4 2016 
1.4  Complete construction of tranche 1 works by Q4 2019 
1.5  Tender and award the first works packages for tranche 3 
by Q4 2017 and last works package by Q4 2021 
1.6  Complete construction of tranche 2 works by Q4 2021 
1.7  Complete construction of tranche 3 works by Q4 2024 
2.  Systems for improving water resources management 
and productivity developed 
2.1  Award ISEWP consulting package and mobilize 
consultants by Q3 2016 
2.2  Complete ISEWP consulting package by Q2 2018 
2.3  Award SIWRM consulting package and mobilize 
consultants by Q4 2020 
2.4  Complete SIWRM consulting package by Q4 2022 
Appendix 1 
13 
Activities with Milestones 
3.  Multidisciplinary investment program management 
Inputs 
operational 
3.1  Mobilize PMDSC by Q3 2015 
3.2  Prepare the detailed designs, cost estimates, and contract 
documents for tranche 2 and 3 packages by December 
2016 
3.3  Finalize the feasibility study for NCPCP Phase 2 and 
prepare necessary documents for possible funding by 
Q2 2017 
3.4  Finalize documents for consulting services package for 
SIWRM by Q4 2019 
3.5  Prepare necessary reporting documents for the 
government and ADB (continuous) 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank;  DOI  =  Department  of  Irrigation;  GDP  =  gross  domestic  product;  ha  =  hectare; 
ISEWP  =  improving  system  efficiencies  and  water  productivity;  km  =  kilometer;  m  =  meter;  MASL  =  Mahaweli 
Authority  of  Sri Lanka; mcm =  million  cubic meters;  MMDE  =  Ministry  of  Mahaweli  Development  and  Environment; 
NCPCP  =  North  Central  Province  Canal  Program;  PMDSC  =  program  management,  design,  and  supervision 
consultants; Q = quarter; SIWRM = strengthening integrated water resources management.  
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
14 
Appendix 2 
LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS 
http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=47381-001-3 
Framework Financing Agreement 
Periodic Financing Request for Project 1 
Sector Assessment (Summary): Irrigation and Water-Based Natural Resources 
Management 
Facility Administration Manual 
Contribution to the ADB Results Framework 
Development Coordination 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Country Economic Indicators 
Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy 
Environmental Impact Assessment: Upper Elahera Canal Project 
Environmental Impact Assessment: North Western Province Canal Project 
Initial Environmental Examination: Minipe Left Bank Canal Rehabilitation Project 
Environmental Assessment and Review Framework 
Resettlement Plan: North Western Province Canal Project 
Resettlement Framework 
Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
Supplementary Documents 
17. 
18. 
19. 
Investment Program Climate Risk Assessment and Management 
Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment 
Comparison of Financing Modality 
20.  Water Balance Assessment 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
Economic Assessment 
Financial Management Assessment 
Procurement Capacity Assessment 
Poverty and Social Assessment 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
