Report and Recommendation of the President  
to the Board of Directors 
Project Number: 50165-002 
May 2018 
Proposed Loan and Grant 
Kingdom of Bhutan: Phuentsholing Township 
Development Project 
Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been approved by the Board of Directors. 
Following such approval, ADB will disclose the document to the public in accordance with ADB’s 
Public Communications Policy 2011. 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(as of 11 April 2018) 
Currency unit  –  ngultrum (Nu) 
Nu1.00 
$1.00 
=  $0.0154 
=  Nu64.86       
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB 
CDCL 
DHI 
EIA 
EIRR 
EMP 
ha 
O&M 
PAM 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Asian Development Bank 
Construction Development Corporation Limited 
Druk Holding and Investments Limited 
environmental impact assessment 
economic internal rate of return 
environmental management plan 
hectare 
operation and maintenance 
project administration manual 
NOTE 
In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars. 
Vice-President 
Director General 
Director 
Team leader 
Team members 
Peer reviewer 
Wencai Zhang, Operations 1 
Hun Kim, South Asia Department (SARD) 
Mio Oka, Environment, Natural Resources and Agriculture Division, 
SARD 
Lance Gore, Senior Water Resources Specialist, SARD 
Vivian Castro-Wooldridge, Urban Development Specialist, SARD 
Christopher Damandl, Senior Counsel, Office of the General 
Counsel 
Suzanne Marsh, Water Resources Specialist, SARD 
Shinjini Mehta, Urban Development Specialist, SARD 
Jaemin Nam, Financial Management Specialist, SARD 
Catherine Santiago, Senior Procurement Specialist, Procurement, 
Portfolio and Financial Management Department 
Sherazade Shafiq, Financial Management Specialist, SARD 
Gina Sinang, Operations Assistant, SARD 
Dewi Utami, Principal Safeguards Specialist, SARD 
Andrew McIntyre, Project Administration Unit Head, East Asia 
Department 
In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation 
of  or  reference  to  a  particular  territory  or  geographic  area  in  this  document,  the  Asian 
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any 
territory or area. 
CONTENTS 
PROJECT AT A GLANCE 
I. 
II. 
THE PROPOSAL 
THE PROJECT 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Rationale 
Impact and Outcome 
Outputs 
Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan 
Implementation Arrangements 
III. 
DUE DILIGENCE 
A. 
Technical 
B. 
Economic and Financial 
C. 
Governance 
D. 
Poverty, Social, and Gender 
E. 
Safeguards 
F. 
Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan 
IV. 
V. 
ASSURANCES 
RECOMMENDATION 
APPENDIXES 
1. 
2. 
Design and Monitoring Framework 
List of Linked Documents 
Page 
1 
1 
1 
3 
4 
4 
5 
6 
6 
7 
7 
8 
8 
9 
10 
10 
11 
14 
Project Classification Information Status: Complete
Project Number: 50165-002
SARD/SAER
Druk Holding and Investments
Limited
     ADB Financing ($ million)
35.64
1. Basic Data
Project Name
Country
Borrower
2. Sector
Agriculture, natural 
resources and rural 
development
Water and other urban 
infrastructure and services
PROJECT AT A GLANCE
Phuentsholing Township Development 
Project 
Bhutan
Kingdom of Bhutan
Department
/Division
Executing Agency
Subsector(s)
Rural flood protection
Other urban services
Urban sanitation
Urban sewerage
Urban solid waste management
Urban water supply
3. Strategic Agenda
Inclusive economic growth 
(IEG)
Environmentally sustainable 
growth (ESG)
Subcomponents
Pillar 2: Access to economic 
opportunities, including jobs, made 
more inclusive
Disaster risk management
Global and regional transboundary 
environmental concerns
Urban environmental improvement
Total
Climate Change Information 
Adaptation ($ million)
Climate Change impact on the 
Project
4. Drivers of Change
Private sector development 
(PSD)
Components
Promotion of private sector investment
Public sector goods and services 
essential for private sector development
Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
Some gender elements (SGE)
5. Poverty and SDG Targeting
Geographic Targeting
Household Targeting
SDG Targeting
SDG Goals        
6. Risk Categorization:
No
No
Yes
SDG6, SDG9, SDG11
Complex
Location Impact
Rural
Urban
.
.
7. Safeguard Categorization
Environment: A   Involuntary Resettlement: C   Indigenous Peoples: C
8. Financing
Modality and Sources
ADB
     Sovereign Project grant: Asian Development Fund
     Sovereign Project (Concessional Loan): Ordinary capital resources
Amount ($ million)
Cofinancing
     None
Counterpart 
     Government 
Total
4.36
4.00
4.00
1.00
4.00
53.00
2.00
High
Medium
Medium
53.00
24.26
28.74
0.00
0.00
10.00
10.00
63.00
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.
15112016153056007620
Generated Date: 08-May-2018 11:24:33 AM
I. 
THE PROPOSAL 
1. 
I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on (i) a proposed loan, 
and  (ii)  a  proposed  grant,  both  to  the  Kingdom  of  Bhutan  for  the  Phuentsholing  Township 
Development Project (the project). 
2. 
The project will construct river walls and raise ground levels to protect Phuentsholing city 
and new township from floods and riverbank erosion. It will also develop common infrastructure 
on about 66 hectares (ha) of new urban land to enable the safe and sustainable expansion of 
human  settlements  and  commercial  activities.  Finally,  it  will  support  capacity  development  to 
improve flood risk management and the delivery of urban services.1 
A. 
Rationale 
II. 
THE PROJECT 
Bhutan,  which  is  located  entirely  within  the  Himalayan  mountain  range,  is  increasingly 
3. 
experiencing  water-induced  disasters  such  as  landslides,  floods,  and  flash  floods.  Major  cities 
such  as  Thimphu,  Phuentsholing,  and  Paro  are  encroaching  on  scarce  agricultural  land  and 
unsafe  terrain,  including  steep  hillsides  and  floodplains.  This  situation,  coupled  with  rapid 
urbanization,  is  making  it  extremely  difficult  for  Bhutan  to  achieve  its  vision  of  balanced  and 
environmentally sustainable development. 
4. 
An important focus of Bhutan’s development strategy is the potential of growth centers in 
the south near the Indian border to boost export-oriented industrial development. The advantages 
of these centers compared to others elsewhere in the country include better access to transport, 
cheaper  wage  labor  from  India,  access  to  cheaper  raw  materials,  and  an  abundant  and 
inexpensive power supply.2 Under its Economic Development Policy, 2010, Bhutan is prioritizing 
infrastructure  investments  and  improved  connectivity  to  stimulate  the  development  of  these 
centers as economic hubs for trade, transport, storage, and manufacturing.3 However, the centers 
are constrained by a dearth of adequate and suitable land for development. 
Bhutan’s  Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan,  2014–2018  identified  Phuentsholing  as  a  regional 
5. 
growth center that can be safely expanded through the construction of flood protection works and 
planned  urbanization.4 Located  on  two  major  trade  corridors  developed  under  the  South  Asia 
Subregional  Economic  Cooperation  framework,  Phuentsholing  handles  over  80%  of  Bhutan’s 
trade, and is the country’s largest commercial and industrial hub and main trading gateway with 
India. Phuentsholing is also Bhutan’s second most populous city, with 25,000 residents, and is 
anticipated  to  grow  by  5%  per  year  subject  to  land  availability.  Due  to  housing  constraints  in 
Phuentsholing, many Bhutanese people reside on the Indian side of the border in Jaigaon.5  
1   Asian Development Bank (ADB) provided project preparatory technical assistance for preparing the Amochhu Land 
Development and Township Project (TA 9140-BHU), of which the Phuentsholing Township Development Project will 
develop  the  first  66  ha  of  460  ha  that  are  ultimately  planned.  The  government  requested  the  project’s  name  be 
changed to Phuentsholing Township Development Project following loan negotiations.  
2   ADB. 2013. Bhutan Transport 2040: Integrated Strategic Vision. Manila. 
3   Government of Bhutan. 2010. Economic Development Policy of the Kingdom of Bhutan. Thimphu.  
4  Government of Bhutan. 2013. Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2014–2018. Thimphu. 
5  Government of Bhutan, Ministry of Works and Human Settlements. 2013. Phuentsholing Structure Plan 2013–2028 
(Vol. 01). Thimphu. Phuentsholing receives more inward migration from rural areas than any other city in Bhutan.  
2 
6. 
Land scarcity is a key growth constraint for Phuentsholing, which is physically confined by 
steep and unstable Himalayan foothills, the Amochhu River, and international borders. The city is 
significantly  exposed  to  precipitation-  and  earthquake-triggered  landslides,  which  have  a  high 
mortality rate, and has also been significantly impacted by flood damage and riverbank erosion 
over  the  past  25  years.  Flash  floods  triggered  by  monsoon  rains  are  also  occurring  more 
frequently  due  to  dense  development,  the  loss  of  natural  ground  cover,  and  climate  change.6 
Since  2002,  the  Government  of  Bhutan  has  been  working  to  mitigate  Phuentsholing’s  land 
constraints  and  exposure  to  geophysical  and  flood  hazards  by  constructing  flood  and  erosion 
defenses along the left and right banks of the Amochhu River, and expanding the city away from 
the mountain slopes to areas of flat riparian land suitable for residential, commercial, institutional, 
and recreational uses.7  
7. 
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has supported Phuentsholing’s development through 
(i)  the  South  Asia  Subregional  Economic  Cooperation  Road  Connectivity  Project;8 (ii)  various 
urban  infrastructure  initiatives  under  three  separate  investment  projects;9 and  (iii)  a  transport, 
trade facilitation,  and  logistics  project.10 These  investments  aim to  enhance  trade,  productivity, 
and connectivity in the region, but do not address land and housing constraints or quality of life. 
The project will complement and leverage these investments to provide an incubator for economic 
growth. Specifically, it will develop about 66 ha of vacant riparian land immediately adjacent to 
the existing city along the left bank of the Amochhu River, based on the Amochhu Development 
Master  Plan.11 The  project  will  also  (i)  construct  river  walls  and  common  urban  infrastructure, 
(ii) raise land, (iii) install a flood early warning system, (iv) implement a flood management plan, 
and (v) help the government prepare subsequent phases of development. 
8. 
Beyond  infrastructure  investments,  the  project  will  help  Bhutan  improve  its  urban  land 
management  and  municipal  service  delivery.  Like  many  other  local  governments,  which  are 
similarly  under-resourced,  the  Phuentsholing  municipality  currently  lacks  the  capacity  to 
implement and operate the project. Therefore, the project will help the municipal government build 
this capacity. Meanwhile, the government has entrusted the project’s development and operation 
to Druk Holding and Investments Limited (DHI), a fully government-owned enterprise responsible 
for  Bhutan’s  strategic 
the  Construction 
Development Corporation Limited (CDCL).12 Under this project, DHI and the CDCL are applying 
income-generating  entities,  and 
its  subsidiary 
6   The most devastating event in recent history was Cyclone Alia, which caused loss of land and infrastructure when it 
occurred in 2009. 
7   Government of Bhutan. 2004. Urban Development Plan, 2002–2017: Phuentsholing, Bhutan. Thimphu. 
8   ADB. 2014. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and Grant to 
the Kingdom of Bhutan for the South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation Road Connectivity Project. Manila. 
The  project  promotes  regional  connectivity  through  investments  in  road  construction,  a  land  port,  and  a  custom 
station. 
9   ADB. 1998. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to the Kingdom 
of Bhutan for the Urban Infrastructure Improvement Project. Manila; ADB. 2006. Report and Recommendation of the 
President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and Technical Assistance Grant to the Kingdom of Bhutan for 
the Urban Infrastructure Development Project. Manila; ADB. 2011. Report and Recommendation of the President to 
the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to the Kingdom of Bhutan for the Urban Infrastructure Project. Manila. These 
projects included investments in flood protection, drainage, roads, pedestrian facilities, and social infrastructure.  
10  ADB. 2016. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and Grant to 
the  Kingdom  of  Bhutan  for the  South  Asia  Subregional  Economic  Cooperation Transport,  Trade  Facilitation,  and 
Logistics Project. Manila. The project promotes regional connectivity through investments in road construction, trade 
facilitation, and logistics equipment. 
11  Government of Bhutan, DHI. 2017. Amochhu Development Master Plan. Thimphu. The master plan is aligned with 
the Phuentsholing Structure Plan 2013–2028. 
12  This includes the Bhutan Power Corporation Limited, Bhutan Telecom Limited, the Druk Green Power Corporation 
Limited, and the CDCL, among others. 
3 
a new greenfield development and management modality by integrating the construction of river 
defenses, building plots, and common urban infrastructure, as well as establishing a ring-fenced 
corporate entity to deliver sustainable operation and maintenance (O&M). The project will also 
build the capacity of both the new township office and Phuentsholing municipality to ensure that 
coordination and high service standards are achieved.  
9. 
The project is expected to provide opportunities for investment, create jobs, and relieve 
existing  housing  pressures.  Integrated  planning  and  infrastructure,  and  strengthening  DHI 
institutionally  will  ensure  the  sustainability  of  investments  in  a  climate-  and  disaster-resilient 
township. The project’s commercial approach, support for investor outreach, and strong focus on 
O&M will ensure the new township’s financial and operational sustainability. Moreover, expanding 
the municipality’s tax base will help it finance its own investments and operations.  
10. 
Lessons. The project design incorporates lessons from disaster risk reduction initiatives 
and  recent  greenfield  urban  development  projects  within  Bhutan  and  the  South  Asian  region. 
Lessons  are  incorporated  primarily  from  (i)  ADB’s  recently  completed  urban  infrastructure 
development  project,  which  supported  the  planned  southern  expansion  of  Thimphu  through  a 
participatory  process;  and  (ii)  riverfront  development  projects  in  India,  such  as  Naya  Raipur 
(Chhattisgarh),  Sabarmati  (Ahmedabad),  and  Lavasa  (Maharashtra).  Most  notably,  the  project 
will incorporate the following lessons: (i) construct strong flood and erosion defenses that account 
for  climate  change  projections,  install    flood  early  warning  systems,  and  establish  community-
based flood management procedures; (ii) phase capital expenditure in line with planned growth 
instead of completing all components upfront, and develop land incrementally; and (iii) ensure a 
robust  institutional  arrangement  for  O&M,  including  the  application  of  build–operate  works 
packages. Positive lessons from other projects in Bhutan (footnote 9) have been applied to the 
project’s urban components, such as the successful expansion of Thimphu to accommodate an 
additional  19,000  people  (about  16%  of  the  city’s  population)  in  livable  urban  environments 
without encroaching into hazardous areas. 
11. 
Value added by ADB’s assistance. During preparation, ADB has helped the government 
incorporate  in  the  township  master  plan  integrated  urban  planning  principles  that  address  the 
social,  economic,  environmental,  and  physical  aspects  of 
township.  During 
township  and 
implementation,  ADB  will  (i)  streamline  coordination  between 
Phuentsholing  municipality  to  enhance  service  delivery,  connectivity,  and  linkages  with  the 
existing  city  and  ongoing  and  future  multisector  ADB  projects;  (ii)  develop  a  sustainable  and 
effective  model  for  township  management;  (iii)  ensure  sustainability  by  embedding  the  project 
within  longer  term  strategic  plans  for  the  wider  economic  area;  and  (iv)  ensure  that  strong 
marketing  machinery  is  in  place  to  attract  investors.  The  project  will  improve  the  capacity  and 
competitiveness  of  the  Phuentsholing  urban  area  and  complement  the  efforts  of  the  ADB-
supported South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation program, which has enabled greater 
connectivity and facilitated trade between Bhutan and other countries in the region. 
the  new 
the  new 
B. 
Impact and Outcome 
The  project  is  aligned  with  the  following  impacts:  (i)  balanced  and  sustainable 
12. 
development of human settlements ensured (footnote 4); and (ii) smart growth principles applied 
in planning and development to promote Phuentsholing’s cultural and social vibrancy (footnote 5). 
The project will have the following outcome: Phuentsholing’s urban area protected from floods 
and expanded with improved amenities and services.13 
13 The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1. 
4 
C. 
Outputs 
13. 
Output 1: Flood and erosion protection measures installed. The riverbank protection 
works  will  protect  Phuentsholing  from  flooding  and  erosion.  Specifically,  the  project  will 
(i) construct  4  kilometers  of  erosion-resilient  river  walls  to  protect  against  a  100-year  probable 
flood, (ii) raise ground levels behind the new walls to reclaim at least 66 ha of flood-protected land 
for urban development, and (iii) establish and operationalize a flood early warning system and 
flood management plan in consultation with the community. 
14. 
Output 2: Municipal infrastructure constructed. The project will provide serviced plots 
of land by constructing common urban infrastructure comprising (i) about 10 kilometers of roads 
with  footpaths,  landscaping,  and  streetlights,  which  are  planned  in  consultation  with  women; 
(ii) modern  drinking  water  supply  and  distribution  systems,  and  wastewater  collection  and 
treatment systems that service the new township and adjoining areas; (iii) a resource recovery 
system for managing solid waste in both the new and old townships; and (iv) power distribution 
and  telecommunication  systems  throughout  the  new  township.  The  plots  will  be  leased  to 
residential and commercial investors as prescribed by the Amochhu Development Master Plan, 
which emphasizes principles of sustainable urban design such as maximum walkability, greenery, 
and open spaces. 
15. 
Output 3: Township management systems installed. The project will (i) establish asset 
management systems, (ii) build the capacity of township staff to ensure sustainable and effective 
urban management, and (iii) initiate investor promotion activities. 
D. 
Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan 
16. 
The  project  is  estimated  to  cost  $63  million  (Table  1).  Detailed  cost  estimates  by 
expenditure category and by financier are included in the project administration manual (PAM).14 
Table 1: Summary Cost Estimates 
($ million) 
Item 
A.  
Base Costb 
1.  
2.  
3.  
Output 1: Flood and erosion protection measures installed 
Output 2: Municipal infrastructure constructed 
Output 3: Township management systems installed 
Subtotal (A) 
B.  
C.  
Contingenciesc 
Financial Charges During Implementationd 
Total (A+B+C) 
Amounta 
33.24 
11.90 
2.74 
47.88 
14.07 
1.05 
63.00 
a   Includes taxes and duties of $0.13 million. Such amount does not represent an excessive share of the project 
cost. The Government of Bhutan will finance taxes and duties of $0.13 million in the form of cash contribution. 
The government will also exempt import duties on civil works contracts to be financed by the project; the value of 
this exemption is estimated to be $2.43 million. 
b  In March 2017 prices. 
c   Physical  contingencies  computed  at  10%  for  civil  works  and  equipment.  Price  contingencies  computed,  on 
average, at 0.3%–1.5% on foreign exchange costs and 4.0%–5.0% on local currency costs; includes provision for 
potential exchange rate fluctuation under the assumption of a purchasing power parity exchange rate. 
d   Includes interest and commitment charges. Interest during construction for the concessional OCR loan has been 
computed at the applicable interest rate during the grace period (1.0% per year). 
Source: Asian Development Bank.  
14  Project Administration Manual (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
5 
The  government  has  requested  (i)  a  concessional  loan  of  $28.74  million  from  ADB’s 
17. 
ordinary capital resources, and (ii) a grant not exceeding $24.26 million from ADB’s Special Funds 
resources (the Asian Development Fund) to help finance the project. The loan will have a 32-year 
term, including a grace period of 8 years; an interest rate of 1.0% per year during the grace period 
and 1.5% per year thereafter; and such other terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan and 
project agreements. The government will provide the loan proceeds to DHI as a subsidiary loan. 
The subsidiary loan will have a 32-year term, including a grace period of 8 years, and an interest 
rate of 1.00% per year during the grace period and 2.55% thereafter. The grant will be provided 
as a grant to DHI. 
The summary financing plan is in Table 2. ADB will finance the expenditures in relation to 
18. 
civil works and consulting services.  
Table 2: Summary Financing Plan 
Source 
Asian Development Banka 
Ordinary capital resources (concessional loan) 
Special Funds resources (ADF grant) 
Government of Bhutan 
Total 
Amount 
($ million) 
53.00 
28.74 
24.26 
10.00 
63.00 
Share of Total 
(%) 
84.1 
45.6 
38.5 
15.9 
100.0 
a The Disaster Risk Reduction Fund will finance $6.07 million equivalent of the concessional loan and $6.07 million 
of the ADF grant. 
ADF = Asian Development Fund. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Climate adaptation is estimated to cost $2.0 million. ADB will finance 92% of adaptation 
19. 
costs.  
E. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 3 and described in detail in 
20. 
the PAM. 
Table 3: Implementation Arrangements 
Arrangements 
July 2018–June 2025 
Aspects  
Implementation period 
Estimated completion date  30 June 2025  
Loan closing date 
Management 
(i) Oversight body 
31 December 2025 
Project advisory committee 
DHI chief executive officer (chair) 
DHI, the CDCL, the Ministry of Works and Human Settlements, the Department of 
Roads, the National Environment Commission, Phuentsholing municipality (members) 
DHI, a wholly-owned holding company of the Government of Bhutan. It was established 
in 2007 to hold and manage the government’s existing and future investments for the 
long-term benefit of Bhutan. 
The CDCL, a wholly-owned subsidiary of DHI. It is responsible for preparing and 
implementing construction projects throughout Bhutan, including this project. 
Project management unit, Thimphu, 9 staff members 
Project implementation unit, Phuentsholing, 23 staff members 
International competitive bidding 
3 works contracts 
$47.20 million 
(ii) Executing agency 
(iii) Implementing agency 
(iv) Implementation units 
Procurement 
6 
Aspects  
Consulting services 
Retroactive financing and 
advance contracting 
Disbursement 
357 person-months 
14 person-months 
Arrangements 
Quality- and cost-based selection 
Individual consultant selection 
Advance contracting and retroactive financing of civil works and consulting services. 
Retroactive financing will be considered for eligible expenditures not exceeding 20% of 
the loan and grant amounts incurred prior to effectiveness, but not earlier than 12 
months before the loan and grant agreements are signed. 
The loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed in accordance with ADB's Loan 
Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time) and detailed 
arrangements agreed upon between the government and ADB. 
$8.11 million 
$0.45 million 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CDCL = Construction Development Corporation Limited, DHI = Druk Holding and 
Investments Limited.  
Source: ADB. 
A. 
Technical 
III. 
DUE DILIGENCE 
21. 
Riverbank protection and embankment works. The river walls were designed following 
a  thorough  evaluation  of  hydrologic,  hydraulic,  and  sediment  transport  conditions  to  assess 
probable  flood  levels,  the  projected  impact  of  climate  change,  sedimentation,  and  scour.  Two 
widely  accepted  methods—flood  frequency  analysis  and  synthetic  unit  hydrograph  analysis—
were  used  to  derive  the  design flood  estimate for  the  Amochhu  River  at  Phuentsholing.  Flood 
events were simulated using one- and two-dimensional computer models, with sensitivity testing 
of  various  parameters  to  confirm  the  designs.  Physical  modelling  of  the  ultimate  development 
scenario  will  be  undertaken  during  project  implementation.  The  walls  have  a  100-year  flood 
design  standard  and  1-meter  freeboard  between  the  design  flood  levels  and  building  platform 
levels. This is a normal standard of protection for urban areas adjacent to major rivers. The impact 
of climate change on future flood magnitudes may reduce the freeboard by up to 33%, which is 
acceptable. Cross-drainage structures have been designed to convey 50-year floods from local 
catchments,  including  an  allowance  for  climate  change.  The  foundation  design  of  the  walls 
accounts  for  scour,  and  any  accumulation  of  sedimentation  will  be  managed  during  O&M. 
Additional erosion control measures, such as installation of spurs, will be considered using the 
physical model. A flood early warning system and management plan will be established under the 
project to ensure residents’ safety during all flood events. 
22. 
Urban planning and municipal infrastructure. An urban master plan and development 
control regulations was prepared for the new urban area and is consistent with the project’s vision 
and  appropriate  for  the  country’s  context.  The  plan  and  regulations  will  ensure  that  the  new 
township is livable, vibrant, inclusive, affordable, sustainable, and safe. The plan and regulations 
also guided the design of common urban infrastructure to be installed under the project, including 
local roads, drainage, footpaths, parks, treated water supply and distribution systems, sewerage 
collection  and  treatment  systems,  telecommunication  facilities,  and  electricity  distribution 
systems. The works contract for constructing the common urban infrastructure will include 5 years 
of O&M to augment the CDCL’s capacity to operate the new township while transferring skills. 
The  designs  incorporate  hard  and  soft  linkages  with  the  existing  city.  For  example,  the  water 
supply and sewerage treatment systems will service existing built up areas adjacent to the new 
township, solid waste management facilities will be shared, and traffic management studies are 
planned to mitigate or avoid traffic congestion. 
23. 
Sustainable  township  management  systems.  The  project  will  establish  a  township 
management  office  within  the  project  area  and  will  strengthen  the  CDCL’s  ability  to  manage, 
7 
operate,  and  maintain  the  new  township  effectively  and  sustainably.  This  includes  installing 
supervisory control and data acquisition technology to operate the water supply and sanitation 
facilities,  and  introducing  modern  asset  management,  customer  service,  and  financial 
management  systems.  The  project  will  also  help  market  the  new  township  to  potential 
international  and  national  commercial  investors,  and  provide  transaction  advisory  services. 
Capacity-building activities will benefit both new township and Phuentsholing municipality staff. 
B. 
Economic and Financial 
24. 
Economic  analysis.  Increased  land  value  accounts  for  about  76%  of  total  project 
benefits,  with  reduced  flood  damage  to  infrastructure  and  increased  benefits  from  water  and 
power supply accounting for the remaining 24%. Given several uncertainties related to the project, 
a risk modeling framework was used to estimate the value of the project benefits. The economic 
analysis indicates that the project is economically viable, with a mean economic internal rate of 
return (EIRR) of 11.3%. The project’s economic feasibility is not sensitive to unfavorable changes 
in investment costs and economic benefits; the EIRR only drops below the economic opportunity 
cost  of  capital  of  9%  if  investment  costs  increase  by  30%  or  benefits  decrease  by  22%.  The 
project’s EIRR is far less sensitive to changes in management and O&M costs. The poverty impact 
ratio was estimated at 5.2%. It is assumed that occupants of residential housing—including social 
housing reserved for the poor—will value the new land they occupy at higher lease rates than 
would be payable to the government, primarily because the quality of urban infrastructure and 
services will be much better than can be found elsewhere in Bhutan. 
25. 
Financial analysis. The project’s financial sustainability was assessed in accordance with 
ADB’s Guidelines for the Financial Management and Analysis of Projects (2005). The project’s 
cash inflows mainly comprise revenues generated from the lease of newly developed land, which 
the government will promote to investors with new financial and regulatory incentives. Revenue 
will  also  include  water  supply,  wastewater  treatment,  and  solid  waste  management  service 
charges.  Although  the  project  will  not  fully  recover  its  capital  costs,  it  will  generate  enough 
cashflow to pay for O&M and its debt service obligations, since a portion of the capital costs is 
grant-financed. Expected financial internal rate of return of 4.3% is slightly lower than the weighted 
average cost of capital of 4.5%, mainly due to the opportunity cost of ADB grants. 
C. 
Governance 
26. 
Financial management. A financial management assessment of DHI and the CDCL was 
carried out in accordance with ADB’s Guidelines for the Financial Management and Analysis of 
Projects.15 The project’s overall risk assessment is low. The CDCL will assign a suitably qualified 
full-time project accountant to be trained in ADB’s disbursement procedures. Further, the Royal 
Audit  Authority  of  Bhutan,  an  independent  and  nonpartisan  institution  authorized  to  audit 
government  agencies,  will  audit  the  CDCL’s  financial  statements  annually  in  accordance  with 
international  auditing  standards.  An  integrity  due  diligence  of  DHI  and  the  CDCL  yielded 
satisfactory results. 
Procurement.  The  procurement  of  goods  and  works  will  follow  ADB’s  Procurement 
27. 
Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time), and all consultants will be recruited following 
ADB’s  Guidelines  on  the  Use  of  Consultants  (2013,  as  amended  from  time  to  time). 
A procurement  capacity  assessment  concluded  that  the  project’s  overall  procurement  risk  is 
15  Financial Management Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
8 
moderate.16 Procurement specialists will help the CDCL prepare and evaluate bids. Funds will be 
allocated under the project to provide procurement training to the implementing agency and local 
contractors. 
Anticorruption. ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained 
28. 
to and discussed with the government, DHI, and the CDCL. The specific policy requirements and 
supplementary  measures  are  described  in  the  PAM  (footnote  14).  The  Anti-Corruption 
Commission of Bhutan, the constitutional anticorruption agency, is empowered to investigate any 
project irregularities. The CDCL will follow government rules and procedures for all expenses and 
revenue items, and will establish both a project website to ensure transparency and a system for 
handling complaints related to contracts and procurement. 
D. 
Poverty, Social, and Gender 
flooding  experienced  by 
The  erosion  and  annual 
29. 
the  existing  municipality 
disproportionately  affects  the  poor,  who  lack  the  resources  to  cope  and  recover  quickly.  By 
addressing this problem, the project is expected to boost the economy, create more and better 
employment  opportunities  in  the  longer  term,  and  help  alleviate  poverty.  Moreover,  adding 
housing  stock  to  the  new  township  will  relieve  pressure  in  the  existing  municipality  by  making 
housing more affordable. Therefore, the project will directly benefit vulnerable local inhabitants in 
several ways. The second project output includes the development of recreation areas, pedestrian 
safety features such as streetlights, public toilets, road markings, ramps, and footpaths. Women 
and  women’s  organizations  will  be  encouraged  to  participate  in  public  planning  meetings 
associated with the project, especially those related to the development of municipal infrastructure 
and  the  flood  early  warning  system.  The  civil  works  contracts  will  include  labor  provisions  to 
ensure  that  women  and  men  receive  equal  pay  for  equal  work,  and  that  HIV  awareness 
campaigns are conducted for laborers and local communities. A summary poverty reduction and 
social strategy has been prepared.17 
E. 
Safeguards 
In  compliance  with  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009),  the  project’s  safeguard 
30. 
categories are as follows.18 
31. 
Environment  (category  A).  The  project  is  not  expected  to  have  any  significant 
environmental impact. However, due to its location on Bhutan’s border with India and upstream 
of  India’s  Jadalpara  National  Park,  the  project  has  been  classified  as  category  A  for  the 
environment, and an environmental impact assessment (EIA) study was prepared.19 The EIA’s 
scope covers the full extent of the government’s ultimate plan to develop 460 ha of new urban 
land  along  both  banks  of  the  Amochhu  River  under  their  Amochhu  Land  Development  and 
Township Project, although the current project area is limited to 66 ha on the left bank. The EIA 
found that most impacts occur during construction due to river bed levelling, the transportation of 
construction materials and equipment, and the construction of urban facilities. These impacts are 
temporary, local, and reversible. Mitigation measures have been proposed, and an environmental 
management  plan  (EMP)  has  been  prepared  and  will  be  strictly  implemented  throughout  the 
construction  period.  Nonetheless,  the  project  may  impact  aquatic  ecology  due  to  river  bed 
16  Procurement Capacity Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
17 Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
18  ADB. Safeguard Categories. https://www.adb.org/site/safeguards/safeguard-categories. 
19 The EIA has also been prepared in accordance with Bhutan’s Environmental Assessment Act 2000. 
9 
levelling  during  construction  and  operation.  The  EMP  includes  a  mitigation  measure  to  avoid 
species disruption by maintaining some natural river flows during the river bed levelling activities; 
if environmental monitoring finds a decline in any important fish species, replenishment will be 
undertaken. The EIA also confirmed that elephants occasionally roam along the right bank. The 
project will finance a more detailed study of elephant behavior and movement patterns to develop 
appropriate mitigation measures to reduce impacts on their habitat if the right bank is eventually 
developed. During the EIA’s preparation, two public consultations were carried out and the study 
findings were disclosed. The EIA report was disclosed through ADB’s website on 29 May 2017.20 
32. 
The implementing agency has adequate capacity to manage the potential impacts. The 
environmental officer will be responsible for addressing overall environmental concerns related to 
the project. The project implementation unit will oversee the overall implementation of the EIA’s 
recommendations  and  the  EMP,  and  will  be  assisted  by  the  environment  specialist  under  the 
project  implementation  consultants.  The  contractors  will  have  an  environment  and  safeguard 
specialist who will manage environmental impacts related to construction. The project will also 
engage  an  external  monitoring  expert  to  monitor  compliance  with  environmental  safeguards 
independently. The project grievance redress mechanism will be used to resolve complaints in a 
timely and systematic manner. 
33. 
Involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples (category C). As the entire 66 ha 
area to be developed for flood defenses and the new township is under government control, no 
households  face  resettlement,  and  no  private  structures  will  be  affected.  A  poverty  and  social 
assessment  found  no  indigenous  people,  as  described  in  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement, 
living near or affected by the project. 
F. 
Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan 
Significant  risks  and  mitigating  measures  are  summarized  in  Table  4  and  described  in 
34. 
detail in the risk assessment and risk management plan.21 
Risks 
Lower than expected demand for 
leasable land 
Table 4: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures 
Mitigation Measures 
The grant financing will be on-granted to DHI, and favorable 
on-lending terms will apply to the loan financing amount. 
These measures will enable DHI to offer competitive lease 
rates. The project also will appoint a reputable firm to help 
DHI attract investors and provide transaction advisory 
services. 
There are no plausible mitigation measures to manage 
disasters triggered by natural hazards that may prevent or 
delay implementation. Otherwise, delays in the project are not 
expected, and at least 30% of packages are expected to be 
under contracting before the ADB Board consideration date. 
Disasters triggered by natural hazards 
and extreme weather conditions lead 
to implementation delays. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DHI = Druk Holding and Investments Limited. 
Source: ADB. 
20 Amochhu Land Development and Township Project: Environmental Impact Assessment (accessible from the list of 
linked documents in Appendix 2). 
21 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
10 
IV. 
ASSURANCES 
The government, DHI, and the CDCL have assured ADB that implementation of the project 
35. 
shall conform to all applicable ADB policies, including those concerning anticorruption measures, 
safeguards, gender, procurement, consulting services, and disbursement as described in detail 
in the PAM, loan, and grant documents. 
The government, DHI, and the CDCL have agreed with ADB on certain covenants for the 
36. 
project, which are set forth in the draft loan, grant, and project agreements.  
V. 
RECOMMENDATION 
I  am  satisfied  that  the  proposed  loan  and  grant  would  comply  with  the  Articles  of 
37. 
Agreement of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend that the Board approve 
(i) 
(ii) 
the loan of $28,740,000 to the Kingdom of Bhutan for the Phuentsholing Township 
Development  Project,  from  ADB’s  ordinary  capital  resources,  in  concessional 
terms, with an interest charge at the rate of 1.0% per year during the grace period 
and 1.5% per year thereafter; for a term of 32 years, including a grace period of 8 
years; and such other terms and conditions as are substantially in accordance with 
those set forth in the draft loan and project agreements presented to the Board; 
and 
the grant not exceeding $24,260,000 to the Kingdom of Bhutan from ADB’s Special 
Funds  resources  (Asian  Development  Fund),  for  the  Phuentsholing  Township 
Development Project, on terms and conditions that are substantially in accordance 
with  those  set  forth  in  the  draft  grant  and  project  agreements  presented  to  the 
Board. 
14 May 2018 
Takehiko Nakao  
President 
 Appendix 1 
11 
Impacts the Project is Aligned with 
DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK 
a. Balanced and sustainable development of human settlements ensured (Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2014–
2018)a  
b. Smart growth principles applied in planning and development (Phuentsholing Structure Plan 2013–2028)b 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
Phuentsholing’s urban 
area protected from 
floods and expanded 
with improved 
amenities and 
services 
Outputs 
1. Flood and erosion 
protection measures 
installed 
2. Municipal 
infrastructure 
constructed 
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting 
Risks  
a. Hydrology report 
at project completion  
Lower than expected 
demand for leasable 
land 
b.  Annual  reports  of 
DHI and the CDCL 
1a–c. Annual project 
progress reports 
Disasters triggered by 
natural hazards and 
extreme weather 
conditions lead to 
implementation delays. 
2a–i. Annual project 
progress reports 
By 2026: 
a. Phuentsholing and 
reclaimed land protected from 
100-year flood events in the 
Amochhu River (2018 
baseline: Phuentsholing is 
protected from mean annual 
floods) 
b. At least 10% of fully 
serviced plots tendered for 
development (2018 baseline: 
NA) 
By 2025: 
1a. 4 km of climate- and 
erosion-resilient river walls 
constructed to protect against 
100-year probable flood (2018 
baseline: 0) 
1b. At least 66 ha of land 
reclaimed (2018 baseline: 0) 
1c. A flood early warning 
system and community-based 
flood management plan 
established and operational 
(2018 baseline: NA) 
2a. 10 km of roads with 
footpaths, landscaping, and 
streetlights planned with at 
least 30% female participation 
(2018 baseline: 0) 
2b. Water treatment plant with 
a capacity of 4 MLD 
constructed (2018 baseline: 
none) 
2c. 12 km of new primary and 
secondary water mains 
constructed (2018 baseline: 0) 
2d. 9 km of new sewer mains 
and 9 km of new storm drains 
constructed (2018 baseline: 0) 
12 
Appendix 1 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting 
Risks  
2e. A sewerage treatment 
plant with a capacity of 3 MLD 
constructed (2018 baseline: 0) 
2f. A resource recovery system 
for solid waste management 
installed (2018 baseline: 0) 
2g. A 630 KVA grid substation 
constructed (2018 baseline: 0) 
2h. 16 circuit-km of 415-volt 
power distribution lines 
installed (2018 baseline: 0) 
2i. 11 circuit-km of 
telecommunication 
transmission cables installed 
(2018 baseline: 0) 
3a. At least 80% of township 
management staff reported 
improved knowledge of 
modern urban management 
(2018 baseline: NA) 
3b. An asset management 
system established with 100% 
of project infrastructure and 
facilities geocoded in a 
database (2018 baseline: NA) 
3c. At least 10 potential 
investors attended investor 
outreach campaigns (2018 
baseline: NA) 
3a–c. Annual project 
progress reports 
3. Township 
management systems 
installed 
 Appendix 1 
13 
Results Chain 
Key Activities with Milestones 
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting 
Risks  
1.  Flood and erosion protection measures installed 
1.1  Award works contract for constructing river walls and land reclamation (June 2018) 
1.2  Award contract for flood early warning system (March 2020) 
1.3 Operationalize flood management plan (December 2021) 
1.4  Complete and commission all facilities (June 2022) 
2.  Municipal infrastructure constructed 
2.1  Award works contract for constructing roads, water supply, and sanitation systems (June 2021) 
2.2  Complete and commission all facilities (June 2024) 
2.3  Procure O&M equipment (March 2025) 
2.4 Complete first year of 5-year operation contract (June 2025) 
3.  Township management systems installed 
3.1 Recruit urban management advisor (March 2022) 
3.2 Recruit investment promotion advisor (September 2022) 
3.3 Recruit sustainable township management capacity development consultant (December 2022) 
3.4 Initiate activities to build the capacity of township management staff (January 2023) 
3.5 Recruit investor promotion and transaction advisory services consultant (June 2023)  
3.6 Initiate investor promotion activities (July 2023) 
3.7 Establish GIS database for built infrastructure (September 2024) 
Project Management Activities 
Mobilize project implementation consultant (June 2018) 
ADB undertakes biannual review missions 
Inputs 
ADB: $28.74 million (concessional OCR loan) and $24.26 million (ADF grant) 
Government: $10 million 
Assumptions for Partner Financing 
NA 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADF = Asian Development Fund, CDCL = Construction Development Corporation 
Limited,  DHI  =  Druk  Holding  and  Investments  Limited,  GIS  =  geographic  information  system,  ha  =  hectare,  km  = 
kilometer, KVA = kilovolt-ampere, MLD = million liters per day, NA = not applicable, OCR = ordinary capital resources, 
O&M = operation and maintenance.  
a  Government of Bhutan. 2013. Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2014–2018. Thimphu. 
b  Government of Bhutan, Ministry of Works and Human Settlements. 2013. Phuentsholing Structure Plan 2013–2028 
(Vol. 01). Thimphu. 
Source: ADB. 
14 
Appendix 2 
LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS 
http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=50165-002-3 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
Loan Agreement 
Grant Agreement 
Project Agreement: Druk Holding and Investments Limited 
Project Agreement: Construction Development Corporation Limited 
Sector Assessment (Summary): Multisector (Agriculture, Natural Resources, Rural 
Development; and Water and Other Urban Infrastructure and Services)  
Project Administration Manual 
Contribution to the ADB Results Framework 
Development Coordination 
Financial Analysis 
Economic Analysis 
Country Economic Indicators 
Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan 
Supplementary Documents 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
Financial Management Assessment 
Procurement Capacity Assessment 
Project Climate Risk Assessment and Management 
Disaster and Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment 
Economic Assessment 
Detailed Financial Analysis and Evaluation 
Poverty and Social Assessment 
Technical Due Diligence (River Engineering, Urban Planning, and Urban Infrastructure) 
