Report and Recommendation of the President  
to the Board of Directors 
Project Number: 53353-001 
July 2020 
Proposed Programmatic Approach and 
Policy-Based Loan for Subprogram 1 
Republic of the Philippines: Competitive and 
Inclusive Agriculture Development Program 
Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been approved by the Board of Directors. 
Following such approval, ADB will disclose the document to the public in accordance with ADB's 
Access to Information Policy after excluding information that is subject to exceptions to disclosure 
set forth in the policy. 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(as of 15 July 2020) 
Currency unit 
₱1.00 
$1.00 
– 
= 
= 
peso (₱) 
$0.02023  
₱49.43  
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB 
ANR 
COVID-19 
DOF 
DWR 
FRMMP 
GDP 
ha 
NFA 
NIMP 
PBL 
PDP 
PFM 
RCEF 
RSBSA 
RTL 
SURE 
TA 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Asian Development Bank 
agriculture, natural resources, and rural development 
coronavirus disease  
Department of Finance 
Department of Water Resources 
flood risk management master plan 
gross domestic product 
hectare 
National Food Authority 
National Irrigation Master Plan 
policy-based loan 
Philippine Development Plan 
public financial management 
Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund 
Registry System for Basic Sectors in Agriculture 
Rice Tariffication Law 
survival and recovery 
technical assistance 
NOTE 
In this report, "$" refers to United States dollars. 
Vice-President 
Director General 
Directors 
Team leaders 
Team members 
Peer reviewer 
Ahmed M. Saeed, Operations 2 
Ramesh Subramaniam, Southeast Asia Department (SERD) 
Jiangfeng Zhang, Environment, Natural Resources and Agriculture 
Division (SEER), SERD 
Kelly Bird, Philippines Country Office (PHCO), SERD 
Jose Antonio R. Tan III, Public Management, Financial Sector, and 
Trade Division (SEPF), SERD 
Takeshi Ueda, Principal Natural Resources and Agriculture Economist, 
SEER, SERD 
Cristina Lozano, Principal Country Specialist, PHCO, SERD 
Meenakshi Ajmera, Principal Social Safeguards Specialist, Office of the 
Director General (SEOD), SERD 
Robert A. Boothe, Senior Public Management Specialist, SEPF, SERD 
Elizabeth Burges-Sims, Senior Social Development Specialist (Gender 
and Development), Human and Social Development Division (SEHS), 
SERD 
Shamit Chakravarti, Principal Social Sector Specialist, SEHS, SERD 
Tatiana Golubko, Counsel, Office of the General Counsel 
Matthias Leitner, Young Professional, SEER, SERD 
Teresa Mendoza, Senior Economics Officer, PHCO, SERD 
Antoine Morel, Principal Environment Specialist, SEOD, SERD 
Cecile Ramiro, Senior Operations Assistant, SEER, SERD 
Junko Sagara, Water Resources Specialist, SEER, SERD 
Karen May B. Sanchez, Senior Project Assistant, SEPF, SERD 
Indah Setyawati, Senior Safeguards Specialist (Resettlement), SEER, 
SERD 
Takashi Yamano, Senior Economist, Economic Analysis and Operation 
Support Division, Economic Research and Regional Cooperation 
Department 
Akmal Siddiq, Chief of Rural Development and Food Security 
(Agriculture) Thematic Group, Sustainable Development and Climate 
Change Department 
In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation 
of  or  reference  to  a  particular  territory  or  geographic  area  in  this  document,  the  Asian 
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any 
territory or area. 
CONTENTS 
PROGRAM AT A GLANCE 
I. 
II. 
THE PROPOSAL 
PROGRAM AND RATIONALE 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Background and Development Constraints 
Policy Reform and ADB’s Value Addition 
Impacts of the Reform 
Development Financing Needs and Budget Support 
Implementation Arrangements 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
DUE DILIGENCE 
ASSURANCES 
RECOMMENDATION 
APPENDIXES 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Design and Monitoring Framework 
List of Linked Documents 
Development Policy Letter 
Policy Matrix 
Page 
1 
1 
1 
4 
10 
10 
11 
11 
13 
13 
15 
18 
19 
22 
Project Classification Information Status: Complete
PROGRAM AT A GLANCE
1. Basic Data
Project Name
Country
Borrower
Country Economic Indicators https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedD
Competitive and Inclusive Agriculture 
Development Program (Subprogram 1)
Philippines
Philippines
Department/Division
SERD/SEER
Project Number: 53353-001
Executing Agency
Department of Finance
ocs/?id=53353-001-CEI
https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedD
ocs/?id=53353-001-PortAtaGlance
Subsector(s)
Agricultural policy, institutional and capacity development
     ADB Financing ($ million)
400.00
Portfolio at a Glance
2. Sector
Agriculture, natural 
resources and rural 
development
3. Operational Priorities
Addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequalities
Accelerating progress in gender equality
Tackling climate change, building climate and disaster resilience, and 
enhancing environmental sustainability
Promoting rural development and food security
Strengthening governance and institutional capacity
Fostering regional cooperation and integration
Sustainable Development Goals
SDG 1.3
SDG 2.1, 2.4, 2.c
SDG 5.a
SDG 10.1
SDG 13.a
4. Risk Categorization:
Complex 
Total
Climate Change Information
GHG reductions (tons per annum)
Climate Change impact on the 
Project
ADB Financing
Adaptation ($ million)
Mitigation ($ million)
Cofinancing
Adaptation ($ million)
Mitigation ($ million)
Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
Some gender elements (SGE)
Poverty Targeting
General Intervention on Poverty
400.00
0
Low
40.00
12.31
0.00
0.00
.
.
5. Safeguard Categorization
Environment: C   Involuntary Resettlement: C   Indigenous Peoples: C
6. Financing
Modality and Sources
ADB
     Sovereign Programmatic Approach Policy-Based Lending (Regular Loan):  
Ordinary capital resources
Cofinancing
     None
Counterpart 
     None
Total
Currency of ADB Financing: US Dollar 
Amount ($ million)
400.00
400.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
400.00
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.
26062020173422747600
Generated Date: 26-Jun-2020 17:34:40 PM
I. 
THE PROPOSAL 
1. 
I  submit  for  your  approval  the  following  report  and  recommendation  on  (i)  a  proposed 
programmatic approach for the Competitive and Inclusive Agriculture Development Program, and 
(ii) a proposed policy-based loan (PBL) to the Republic of the Philippines for subprogram 1 of the 
Competitive and Inclusive Agriculture Development Program. 
2. 
In  line  with  the  Philippine  Development  Plan  (PDP),  2017−2022,  the  program  aims  to 
reduce income inequality by expanding economic opportunities in agriculture.1 The program will 
support the government’s effort to increase competitiveness and inclusiveness of the agriculture 
sector by (i) implementing agricultural trade policy and regulatory reforms, (ii) enhancing public 
services and finance for the sector, and (iii) increasing social protection to rural families who may 
be affected by the reforms. The program is included in the country operations business plan for 
the Philippines, 2020–2022 of the Asian Development Bank (ADB).2 The program is consistent 
with ADB’s Strategy 2030 and country partnership strategy for the Philippines, 2018–2023.3 
II. 
PROGRAM AND RATIONALE 
A. 
Background and Development Constraints 
Prior  to  the  coronavirus  disease  (COVID-19)  pandemic,  the  Philippines  presented  very 
3. 
strong economic performance with an average annual economic growth rate of 6.4% from 2010 
to 2019.4 This sustained high economic growth contributed to a reduction in the national poverty 
rate  from  23.3%  in  2015  to  16.6%  in  2018. 5  However,  during  2010–2018,  the  Philippines’ 
agriculture sector growth was stagnant with annual growth averaging  1.3%, which was lower than 
that of Indonesia (3.9%), Viet Nam (2.7%), and Cambodia (2.0%).6 The poor sector performance 
has been the result of decades of underinvestment, policy distortions, uncertainties linked to the 
implementation  of  agrarian  reform,  and  periodic  extreme  weather  events.  It  has  significantly 
impacted people’s livelihoods and rural poverty. First, it has resulted in low incomes for farmers 
and  the  majority  of  the  rural  population,  which  has  impeded  the  government’s  efforts  to 
significantly  reduce  rural  poverty.  The  rural  poverty  rate  remains  high  at  24.5%  while  national 
poverty incidence has declined (paras. 4, 12). Second, it has pushed up rice prices about 30% 
higher than global prices. As rice accounts for 50% of total household calorie intake in the country, 
the high domestic rice prices (i) hurt poor households with high food expenses in proportion to 
their total expenses, and (ii) threaten food security. 
Impact  of  COVID-19.  These  development  challenges  have  been  compounded  by  the 
4. 
COVID-19  pandemic,  which  has  serious  economic  and  social  consequences.  Measures  to 
contain the spread of the virus have resulted in job losses and reduction in household incomes.  
According to ADB estimates, the unemployment rate in Luzon, which represents about 50.0% of 
the  country’s  population  and  70.0%  of  economic  activity,  could  peak  at  22.0%  in  the  second 
1  Government of the Philippines, National Economic and Development Authority. 2017. Philippine Development Plan, 
2017–2022. Manila. 
2  ADB. 2019. Country Operations Business Plan: Philippines, 2020−2022. Manila. The program was formerly known 
as the Support for Agrifood System Competitiveness Program (for $300 million). The government later requested to 
increase the amount to $400 million given the substantive reforms to be supported by the program. 
3  ADB.  2018.  Strategy  2030:  Achieving  a  Prosperous,  Inclusive,  Resilient,  and  Sustainable  Asia  and  the  Pacific. 
Manila; and ADB. 2018. Country Partnership Strategy: Philippines, 2018–2023—High and Inclusive Growth. Manila. 
4  Government of the Philippines. Philippine Statistics Authority. National Accounts (accessed 25 June 2020). 
5  Government  of 
the  Philippines.  Philippine  Statistics  Authority.  http://www.psa.gov.ph/poverty-press-
releases/nid/144752. 
6  ADB. 2019. Key Indicators for Asia and the Pacific 2019. Manila. 
2 
quarter of 2020 and gradually decline to 9.6% by the first quarter of 2021, well above the pre-
COVID-19  rate  of  5.4%  at  the  end  of  2019. 7 The  recent  Labor  Force  Survey  reports  Luzon 
unemployment at 18.2% in April 2020. Poverty incidence is estimated to rise to 20.7% in 2020 
from  16.6%  in  2018,  threatening  to  reverse  the gains  made on this  front  with  5.5 million  more 
Filipinos  falling  into  poverty.  Disruptions  in  the  food  supply  chain  because  of  the  community 
quarantine have severely affected the poorest citizens, including farmers and fisherfolk. Playing 
a  pivotal role  in  poverty reduction  and  ensuring food  security,  agriculture  is  among the  priority 
areas for reforms in the government’s COVID-19 economic recovery program. 
5. 
Development constraints. The Government of the Philippines recognizes the need for 
competitive and inclusive agricultural development. However, this has been hampered largely by 
(i) decades of protective policies and regulations for agricultural trade, (ii) inadequate provision of 
public services and finance for agricultural development, and (iii) insufficient social protection of 
rural families. 
6. 
Policy  and  regulatory  barriers  to  international  and  domestic  trade  of  agricultural 
products. Agricultural policy over the past few decades has prioritized food (particularly rice) self-
sufficiency  by  protecting  domestic  producers  through  import  restrictions  (including  quantitative 
restrictions on rice imports).8 These protective policies make domestic rice prices artificially higher 
than world prices, giving incentives for farmers to continue with basic rice production. This has 
limited their potential to move up the value chain, and precludes them from diversifying into higher-
value crops and earning higher income.9 The protective rice trade is one of the root causes of the 
slow  progress  in  agriculture  diversification  and  commercialization,  resulting  in  low  sector 
productivity and low farm incomes.10 
7. 
Under the protective trade regime, the National Food Authority (NFA) controls rice imports 
through the issuance of licenses for importers, wholesalers, retailers, and rice mills operating in 
the domestic market.11 To protect farmers, the NFA also buys domestic paddy at higher prices; 
mills, distributes, and sells most of the rice at lower-than-market prices; and keeps the rest for 
emergency stock. However, this procurement operation is poorly targeted and benefits only few 
farmers,  as  the  NFA’s  operation  covers  only  1%  of  domestic  production.12 Further,  the  NFA’s 
financially  inviable  operation  translates  into  substantial  liabilities  (₱169.7 billion  in  2017)  which 
has considerable national budgetary implications.13 
7  ADB.  2020.  Report  and  Recommendation  of  the  President  to  the  Board  of  Directors:  Proposed  Countercyclical 
Support Facility Loans to the Republic of the Philippines for the COVID-19 Active Response and Expenditure Support 
Program. Manila. 
8  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2017. Agricultural Policies in the Philippines. Paris. 
9  Estimates of the effective rates of protection measure the net protection received by domestic producers from the 
protection of their outputs and the penalty from protection of their inputs. In 2004 (the latest estimates available), the 
average  effective  rates of  protection in  the  Philippines  were  14.2%  for  agriculture,  10.0%  for manufacturing,  and 
18.1% for importable agricultural products (indicating protection afforded to agriculture, with a relatively high effective 
rate  of  protection  for  rice).  R.M.  Aldaba.  2010.  Micro  Study:  Philippines  Does  Trade  Protection  Improve  Firm 
Productivity? Evidence from Philippine Micro Data. In C.H. Hahn and D. Narjoko, eds. Causes and Consequences 
of  Globalization  in  East  Asia:  What  Do  the  Micro  Data  Analyses  Show?  ERIA  Research  Project  Report  2009-2. 
Jakarta: Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia. 
10 Government of the Philippines, Department of Agriculture. 2018. The Philippine Rice Industry Roadmap 2030 (first 
edition). Manila. 
11 Sector Assessment (Summary): Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development (accessible from the list of 
linked documents in Appendix 2). 
12 Government of the Philippines, NFA. 2019. Beginning Rice Stock Inventory, by Month, by Sector, Philippines, 2013–
2019. Manila. In 2018, the NFA held about 100,000 metric tons of rice (equivalent to about 150,000 metric tons of 
paddy) as a retainer, while the total paddy production was about 19.07 million metric tons. 
13 Government of the Philippines, Development Budget Coordination Committee. 2019. Fiscal Risks Statement 2020.  
Manila. 
3 
High import tariffs and quantitative restrictions on rice imports, alongside the NFA’s near-
8. 
monopoly on rice trade, have resulted in inadequate rice supply and a serious distortion in the 
domestic rice market. Additionally, administrative trade barriers, such as the issuance of sanitary 
and phytosanitary certificates for import, and inadequate interagency coordination among trade 
regulatory agencies also result in a high level of protection in agriculture. 
9. 
Uncertain  agricultural  land  ownership.  Piecemeal  and  incomplete  agrarian  reforms 
have led to uncertainties in agricultural land ownership and titles.14 The uncertainties have been 
partly caused by restrictions imposed by the Public Land Act enacted in 1936.15 The restrictions 
comprise (i) prohibition on the sale and mortgaging of land within the first 5 years of the patent 
grants; (ii) possible buy back of the land titles by original landowners within a 5-year period; and 
(iii) prohibition on corporations, associations, or partnerships acquiring or owning land. Uncertain 
land  ownership  prevents  farmers  from  using  their  land  as  collateral  to  access  credit.  It  also 
impedes agricultural land transfer among farmers and agriculture-based corporations. Uncertain 
land ownership results in creating disincentives for landowners to invest in their own land, which 
leads to low agriculture productivity and poor sector performance. These restrictions inadvertently 
encourage underpriced informal land transactions, leading to losses in tax revenue. Women also 
remain  at  the  margins  of  agricultural  land  ownership,  comprising  about  30%  of  total  agrarian 
reform beneficiaries with individual land titles during 2000–2016.16 
Ineffective  water  resources  management.  A  complex  institutional  setup  and  poor 
10. 
coordination and planning for water resources management cause inadequate irrigation services 
and uncontrolled flood risks, eroding agricultural productivity. There are more than 30 government 
agencies  managing  water  resources  and  utilization  in  the  Philippines,  operating  without  an 
effective  coordination  mechanism.  This  results  in  substantial  inefficiencies  in  the  development 
and operation of irrigation systems and low irrigation coverage.17 To tackle increasingly intense 
and  frequent  floods,  the  government  needs  to  prepare  flood  risk  management  master  plans 
(FRMMPs) for major river basins. 
11. 
Limited  public  financing  and  provision  of  agriculture  extension  services. 
Uncoordinated arrangements for public financing and fragmented institutional setup for extension 
services  undermine  support  to  agriculture.  There  are  various  government  programs  and  credit 
schemes to support agriculture, with a focus on rice production. However, there is a lack of overall 
planning  and  coordination  of  those  programs.  Farm  extension  services  are  not  effectively 
delivered because of the structural disconnect between the Department of Agriculture and local 
14 Presidential Decree No. 2 issued on 26 September 1972 proclaimed the entire country as a land reform area, and 
simultaneously the Agrarian Reform Program was decreed. On 15 June 1988, the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform 
Law was enacted, and the government aims at distributing the targeted 5.43 million hectares (ha) of agricultural lands 
to  landless  farmers  and  farm workers  under  the  Comprehensive  Agrarian  Reform  Program  (1988–2008)  and  the 
Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program Extension with Reforms (2009−ongoing). During 1972–2019, cumulative 
land distribution and registration totaled 4.82 million hectares (88.8% of the targeted area) and the total number of 
agrarian reform beneficiaries reached 2,887,914. Government of the Philippines, Philippine Statistics Authority. 2019. 
Redistribution of Land. Agricultural Indicators System. No. 2019-7. Manila. 
15 Government of the Philippines. 1936. Commonwealth Act (No. 141). Manila. The Commonwealth Act is also known 
as the Public Land Act. 
16 The 30% figure includes land ownership and emancipation patent holders. Government of the Philippines, Philippine 
Statistics Authority. 2016. 2016 Statistical Handbook on Women and Men in the Philippines. Manila. 
17 Irrigated  farmlands  in  2018  totaled  1.92  million  ha,  comprising  61.39%  of  the  estimated  total  irrigable  area. 
Government of the Philippines, Philippine Statistics Authority. 2019. Selected Statistics on Agriculture 2019. Manila. 
However, 0.36 million ha of irrigated farmlands have dysfunctional and aging canals in 2015 (there is no current data 
available).  Government  of  the  Philippines,  National  Economic  and  Development  Authority.  2017.  Philippine 
Development Plan, 2017–2022. Manila. 
4 
government  units.  This hinders  farmers  from  adopting  modern seed  varieties, modern farming 
technologies and practices, and farm mechanization. This is particularly aggravated for female 
farmers,  as they  are  not  recognized  as  farmers because  of  social  and  cultural  norms.  Despite 
their  primary  role  in  the  family’s  food  security,  only  23%  of  female  farmers  have  access  to 
extension services and only 14% of them receive financial assistance.18 
12. 
Persistent rural poverty and food insecurity. Despite recent strong economic growth, 
annual incomes of households engaged in agriculture, forestry, and fishery are still low, leading 
to high rural poverty. While the rural poverty rate has declined to 24.5% in 2018 from 34.0% in 
2015, it remains substantially high.19 Poverty is also directly linked to malnutrition and stunting in 
children.  The  2018  Expanded  National  Nutrition  Survey  showed  that  undernutrition  rates 
remained  very  high  and  stunting  stood  at  30%  among  children  under  5,  affecting  3.5  million 
children of the 11.7 million aged 0–5 years.20 Chronic malnutrition or stunting is strongly linked 
with high rates of disease and premature death. It also has adverse effects on crucial stages of 
child development, leading to cognitive and behavioral deficits, learning disabilities, and ultimately 
an uncompetitive and suboptimal labor force. The Philippines is lagging behind other Southeast 
Asian  countries  such  as  Thailand  and  Viet  Nam  in  terms  of  making  the  shift  from  low-value 
agricultural commodities to products that can attract higher returns and improve farmer incomes. 
This  is  largely  because  of  distortive  policies  favoring  low-value  commodities,  particularly  rice. 
Moreover, rice is the largest expenditure item in the food basket for poor Filipinos. Among the 
poorest 20% of households, including households headed by women, rice constitutes over 19% 
of their total expenditure.21 Low farm incomes together with high rice prices reduce disposable 
income of poor households for other necessities, including human capital investments such as 
education and health care, that are critical for future employment prospects. 
B. 
Policy Reform and ADB’s Value Addition 
13. 
Government reform agenda. The PDP promotes inclusive growth and sets a strategic 
target for the Philippines to reach upper middle-income status by 2022. To maximize the inclusive 
growth  potential  of  agriculture,  the  PDP  lays  out  strategies  to  raise  sector  productivity  and 
competitiveness. Prior to the onset of COVID-19, the government had set the following targets to 
be achieved during 2016–2022: annual real gross domestic product (GDP) growth of 7%–8%, per 
capita GDP increase from $3,550 to $5,000, and poverty rate reduction from 21.6% to 14.0%. To 
accomplish  inclusive  growth,  the  government  has  emphasized  agriculture  sector  development, 
because the sector is pivotal in generating employment for one-fourth of the country’s labor force 
that is dependent on agriculture, including women, thereby reducing poverty and inequality for 
three-fourths  of  the  poor  who  are  in  rural  areas.  Female  workers  account  for  22%  of  the 
agricultural  labor  force. 22  The  sector  also  provides  raw  materials  to  the  manufacturing  and 
services  sectors,  generating  higher-paying  and  more  stable  job  opportunities  through  forward 
linkages. 
18 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, International Fund for Agricultural Development, United 
Nations  Children’s  Fund  (UNICEF),  World Food  Programme,  and World  Health  Organization.  2018.  The  State of 
Food Security and Nutrition in the World, 2018: Building Climate Resilience for Food Security and Nutrition. Rome. 
19 Government  of the  Philippines,  Philippine  Statistics  Authority.  2020.  Farmers,  Fisherfolks,  Individuals  Residing  in 
Rural Areas and Children Posted the Highest Poverty Incidences Among the Basic Sectors in 2018. News release. 
3 June. 
20 Government of the Philippines, Department of Science and Technology, Food and Nutrition Research Institute. 2018. 
The Expanded National Nutrition Survey Overview. Manila.  
21 Government of the Philippines, Philippine Institute for Development Studies. 2018. Pass Rice Tariffication before 
TRAIN2. News release. 18 May. 
22 Government  of  the  Philippines,  Philippine  Statistics  Authority.  2019.  Population  and  Labor  Force.  Agricultural 
Indicators System. No. 2019-8. Manila. 
5 
Proposed  policy  reforms.  The  reform  areas  are  (i)  agricultural  trade  policy  and 
14. 
regulatory  framework  improved,  (ii)  public  services  and  finance  for  the  agriculture  sector 
enhanced, and (iii) social protection to rural families increased. The program will comprise two 
subprograms. Subprogram 1 largely addresses constraints in the enabling environment and has 
provided much-needed government-led direction and planning to support sustainable agriculture 
productivity growth in the long term. Subprogram 2 will continue effective implementation of these 
reforms to further boost competitiveness and expand economic opportunities for farmers, crucial 
to accomplishing inclusive growth. A programmatic approach gives a flexible and effective way of 
tackling complex policy and institutional reforms to increase agricultural competitiveness. Under 
subprogram  1, the  government  has  accomplished  13  policy  actions,  including  5  policy  triggers 
and 8 policy milestones. Subprogram 2 comprises 15 policy actions, of which 6 are policy triggers 
and 9 are policy milestones. 
15. 
Reform Area 1: Agricultural trade policy and regulatory framework. Under this policy 
reform  area,  the  government  has  liberalized  and  facilitated  rice  trade  to  make  sufficient  rice 
available at affordable prices in the domestic market and to be a catalyst for resources to diversify 
production and shift to higher-value agricultural products. This reform area will make agricultural 
products and input markets more flexible and responsive to price signals. Under subprogram 1, 
the  government  enacted  the  Rice  Tariffication  Law  (RTL),  2019  and  adopted  its  implementing 
rules and regulations. The RTL removed (i) quantitative restrictions on rice imports and replaced 
them  with  a  pure tariff system,  and (ii) the  NFA’s  regulatory  powers  and  commercial  functions 
over  the  domestic  and  international  trade  of  rice  and  other  grains. 23  The  government  also 
facilitated  trade  of  non-rice  agricultural  products  by  removing  administrative  barriers  for  their 
import,  and  it  rolled  out  an  online  trade  facilitation  portal  (TradeNet)  with  the  Department  of 
Agriculture  as  a  key  regulatory  agency.  Under  subprogram  2,  the  government  will  issue 
implementing  rules  of  the  NFA’s  buffer  stock management to  better  cope  with  any  emergency 
situations, including infectious disease outbreaks. 
Reform  Area  2:  Public  services  and  finance  for  the  agriculture  sector.  Under  this 
16. 
policy reform area, the government has improved (i) land and water resources use planning and 
management, which are key production factors for agriculture; (ii) financing to make the Philippine 
rice  industry  competitive  under  the  liberalized  trade  regime;  and  (iii)  access  and  quality  of 
extension services. 
17. 
Under subprogram 1, the government enacted the Agricultural Free Patent Reform Act, 
2019  to  retroactively  remove  the  restrictions  on  the  sale  and  transfer  of  agricultural  land  to 
facilitate efficient and effective utilization of land as an asset. The government (i) took steps to 
create the Department of Water Resources (DWR) as a significant institutional reform aiming to 
centralize  management  of  water  resources;  (ii)  formulated  and  adopted  the  National  Irrigation 
Master Plan (NIMP)  24 for efficient and sustainable planning, and management of irrigation; and 
(iii) developed FRMMPs for major river basins. 
18. 
The  government  set  up  the  Rice  Competitiveness  Enhancement  Fund  (RCEF)  to 
strengthen the rice industry in 57 rice-competitive provinces during 2019–2024 in accordance with 
the Philippine Rice Industry Roadmap (footnote 10). The RCEF provides an annual budget of ₱10 
billion  from  increased  tariff  revenue  from  rice  imports  for  four  primary  programs:  (i)  rice  farm 
machineries and equipment (₱5 billion); (ii) rice seed development, propagation, and promotion 
23 The import tariff rates are set for ASEAN countries at 35% and for non-ASEAN countries at 40% within the minimum 
access volume of 350,000 metric tons and 180% for over the minimum access volume. 
24 Government of the Philippines, National Irrigation Administration. National Irrigation Master Plan 2020−2030. Manila. 
Unpublished. 
6 
(₱3 billion); (iii) expanded rice credit assistance (₱1 billion); and (iv) rice extension services (₱1 
billion). If the rice tariff revenue goes beyond the ₱10 billion, the RCEF will further support the 
following: (i) rice farmer financial assistance, (ii) titling of agricultural rice lands, (iii) an expanded 
crop insurance program on rice, and (iv) a crop diversification program. To improve the targeting 
of RCEF programs, the government started updating the Registry System for Basic Sectors in 
Agriculture (RSBSA) to identify the beneficiary farmers, farmworkers, and their dependents.  
19. 
Subprogram  2  will  help  consolidate  and  solidify  these  reforms  by  (i)  transforming  the 
National  Water  Resources  Board  into  the  National  Water  Management  Council  to  streamline 
water resources management as a provisional measure towards the establishment of the DWR, 
and (ii) allocating national budget to implement priority investment projects under the NIMP and 
the FRMMPs. The government will (i) develop a rice fund impact monitoring system to assess the 
impact  of  the  RCEF  programs  on  farm  productivity  and  income;  (ii)  complete  updating  of  the 
RSBSA; (iii) develop a national agriculture and fisheries modernization and industrialization plan 
to  map  out  a  detailed  sector  strategy;  and  (iv)  develop  a  pilot  project  to  establish  provincial 
agricultural and fishery extension centers to strengthen local government units’ extension services 
for farmers, with measures to promote women’s meaningful participation and benefits. 
20. 
Reform Area 3: Social protection to rural families affected by the reforms. There are 
two development objectives under this policy reform area: (i) mitigate the adverse impacts of the 
RTL  on  potential  losers  from  the  reforms,  such  as  smallholder  rice  farmers,  as  well  as  the 
unforeseen impact of COVID-19 on rural communities, and (ii) expand targeted social assistance 
programs to rural communities including national feeding program to tackle persistent malnutrition 
and  stunting  among  children  and  rural  poverty.  Under  subprogram  1,  the  government 
(i) established unconditional cash transfer programs for smallholder rice farmers who were most 
affected by low farmgate rice prices as a result of the RTL, and (ii) allocated ₱3 billion under the 
Rice  Farmer  Financial  Assistance  Program  and  an  additional  ₱3  billion  under  the  Financial 
Subsidy to Rice Farmers Program. 
21. 
The  government  also  established  (i)  the  Expanded  Survival  and  Recovery  (SURE) 
Assistance Program for Rice Farmers (SURE Aid, which is one of the SURE assistance programs) 
to  issue  no-collateral,  interest-free  loans  totaling  ₱2.5  billion  to  164,274  small  rice  farmers              
(1 hectare [ha] or less), of which about 45% are female; and (ii) the SURE COVID-19 Program 
with  an  additional  ₱2.5  billion  to  provide  no-collateral,  interest-free  loans  to  small  farmers  and 
fisherfolk (3 ha or less) and agri- and fishery-based micro and small enterprises affected by the 
COVID-19  pandemic.  The  government  institutionalized  through  legislation  a  national  feeding 
program for undernourished children in public day care, kindergartens, and elementary schools 
to  address  high  rates  of  child  malnutrition  and  stunting  rates,  improving  nutritional  status  of 
children. 
Under subprogram 2, the government will (i) provide an additional ₱2.5 billion for SURE 
22. 
assistance programs as part of emergency support for vulnerable groups, (ii) implement a national 
feeding program, and (iii) commence planning for a nutritional food program for poor pregnant 
women  as  part  of  its  zero-hunger  agenda  to  address  malnutrition  and  stunting  in  newly  born 
babies. The Box summarizes the key achievements of the program thus far, and Table 1 shows 
the alignment with Strategy 2030. 
7 
Box: Key Achievements under Subprogram 1 
•  Enactment of Rice Tariffication Law and adoption of implementing rules and regulations, which has 
considerably streamlined agricultural trade  
•  Enactment of Agricultural Free Patent Reform Act, which has liberalized land markets 
•  Land and water resources use planning improved, supported by adoption of National Irrigation 
Master Plan and steps to establish an integrated Department of Water Resources 
•  Access and quality of agricultural extension services improved 
•  Establishment of Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund 
•  Rolling out comprehensive social protection programs to compensate farmers affected by the reforms 
Strategy 2030 Operational 
Priorities 
Promoting rural development 
and food security 
Accelerating progress in 
gender equality 
Addressing remaining 
poverty and reducing 
inequalities 
Strengthening governance 
and institutional capacity 
Tackling climate change, 
building climate and disaster 
resilience, and enhancing 
environmental sustainability 
Fostering regional 
cooperation and integration 
Table 1: Alignment with Strategy 2030 
Program Actions 
The program will enhance food security by making sufficient rice available 
at affordable prices for all Filipinos as a result of the rice trade liberalization. 
The RCEF strengthens the rice industry and promotes crop diversification, 
which will increase supply of other food products and boost farmers’ 
incomes to increase their economic access to food. 
The program will support gender mainstreaming in (i) water resources 
management, (ii) master planning of irrigation development and flood risk 
management, and (iii) RCEF programs and interest-free loans for small 
farmers and fisherfolk under SURE assistance programs. 
The program will comprise mostly pro-poor policy actions, including 
strengthening social protection systems for rural families and making rice 
available at affordable prices, which has the most significant impact on the 
poor as rice is a key household expenditure. 
The program will improve (i) governance in the food grain sector by 
removing the NFA’s regulatory powers on rice trade and improving their rice 
buffer stock management, and (ii) national water resources management by 
taking a step to create the Department of Water Resources. 
The program will strengthen climate resilience by (i) improving water 
resources management, (ii) strengthening flood risk management, and 
(iii) promoting climate-resilient seed development and distribution. Climate 
mitigation will be realized by reducing (i) energy use as a result of improved 
water resources planning and utilization, (ii) greenhouse gas emissions via 
crop diversification, and (iii) food loss and water use. 
The program will foster international trade of agricultural products by 
replacing quantitative restrictions with tariffication and streamlining 
administrative procedures. 
NFA = National Food Authority, RCEF = Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund, SURE = survival and recovery. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
23. 
ADB experience in the agriculture, natural resources, and rural development sector. 
ADB  has  had  a  long  engagement  in  the  Philippines  agriculture,  natural  resources,  and  rural 
development  (ANR)  sector through  policy  advice  and  investment  projects.  Through the Grains 
2004), ADB developed an integrated package of policy and 
Sector Development Program (2000
institutional reforms linked to agriculture sector investment loans and technical assistance (TA).25 
These  included  trade  policy  reforms  to  the  rice  sector  and  reforms  to  the  NFA.  However,  the 
program was canceled in 2003 because of several reasons. First, the short period of the second 
tranche (9 months  after effectiveness) required  strong  ongoing political  support  to meet timing 
−
25 ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loans and Technical 
Assistance Grant to the Republic of the Philippines for the Grains Sector Development Program. Manila. 
8 
objectives while there was opposition from some stakeholders. Second, the counterpart funding 
requirements  were substantial  in  the  context  of  the  Philippines  budgetary  constraints  following 
the  Asia  financial  crisis.  Third,  disbursements  under  the  investment  loan  were  linked  to  the 
program  loan  conditions.  When  the  program  loan  failed  to  meet  its  policy  objectives,  the 
investment loan also failed. ADB supported agricultural land reform through the Agrarian Reform 
2019) and irrigation investments through the Second 
Communities Project, phases 1 and 2 (1999
Irrigation  Systems  Improvement  Project  (1995
2006)  and  the  Southern  Philippines  Irrigation 
2011). 26 Most  recently,  ADB  supported  the  preparation  of  FRMMPs  for 
Sector  Project  (1998
−
major  river  basins  through  the  ongoing  Infrastructure  Preparation  and  Innovation  Facility 
2021).27 The proposed program lays out the policy foundations for ADB’s future investment 
(2017
projects and programs in the ANR sector (Figure). 
−
−
−
24. 
ADB’s value addition to the program. The program provides an overarching framework 
for ADB’s investment projects and TA in the ANR sector under the current country partnership 
strategy.  ADB  provided  the  government  with  critical  policy  advisory  support  to  draft  the 
implementing  rules  and  regulations  of  the  RTL.  These  include  the  necessary  institutional 
arrangements  that  will  enhance  competitiveness,  ensure  the  country’s  smooth  and  timely 
transition  to  a  new  rice  production  and  trading  regime,  and  institute  safety  nets  to  assist  local 
farmers. ADB is also providing TA on the preparation of the National Agriculture and Fisheries 
Modernization and Industrialization Plan, 2020−2025 and the strengthening of the Philippine Rice 
26 ADB. 1998. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to the Republic 
of the Philippines for the Agrarian Reform Communities Project. Manila; ADB. 2008. Report and Recommendation 
of  the  President  to  the  Board  of  Directors:  Proposed  Loan  and  Administration  of  Loan  to  the  Republic  of  the 
Philippines for the Agrarian Reform Communities Project II. Manila; ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the 
President  to  the  Board  of  Directors:  Proposed  Loans  and  Technical  Assistance  Grant  to  the  Republic  of  the 
Philippines  for  the  Second  Irrigation  Systems  Improvement  Project.  Manila;  and  ADB.  1998.  Report  and 
Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the 
Southern Philippines Irrigation Sector Project. Manila. 
27 ADB. 2017. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Technical Assistance 
Loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the Infrastructure Preparation and Innovation Facility. Manila. 
9 
Industry Roadmap (footnote 10). ADB is preparing a TA to pilot farming cluster development with 
measures  to  ensure  women’s  meaningful  participation  and  benefit.  ADB  will  support  (i)  the 
implementation of the NIMP through the Mindanao Irrigation Development Project (for approval 
in  2021);  and  (ii)  preparation  of  FRMMPs  for  the  major  river  basins  through  the  ongoing 
Infrastructure  Preparation  and  Innovation  Facility,  and  implementation  of  these  master  plans 
through the Integrated Flood Risk Management Sector Project (for approval in 2021). ADB will 
also  help  promote  value  addition  and  diversification  through  the  Mindanao  Agro-Enterprise 
Development Project (for approval in 2022). To further reduce hunger, the government created 
the  Inter-Agency  Task  Force  on  Zero  Hunger  on  10  January  2020,  and  ADB  is  advising  the 
government on the design of a nutritional food program for poor pregnant women as part of its 
zero-hunger agenda. 
Lessons. The program was designed based on relevant lessons from ADB’s experience, 
25. 
particularly the Grains Sector Development Program whose objectives are similar to those of the 
PBL, 28 as  well  as  evaluation  findings  on  the  special  study  on  PBLs. 29 These  lessons  are  as 
follows: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Agriculture reforms are complex, have a medium- to long-term gestation period, 
and  require  proper  sequencing.  Programs  should  exhibit  sufficient  flexibility  to 
accommodate  a  medium-  to  long-term  development  horizon  and  the  inevitable 
changes that occur when dealing with complex reform areas. 
Strong  high-level  government  resolve  and  ownership  are  key  to  successful 
implementation of reforms. 
Policy  reforms  create  winners  and  losers,  and  adverse  impacts  on  the  losers 
should  be  mitigated  and  supplemented  with  expansion  of  social  assistance 
programs to vulnerable rural families and communities. 
A programmatic approach and PBL will help to promote structural policy reforms 
in the sector and support downstream investment projects in irrigation, flood risk 
management,  and  agribusiness  in  the  pipeline.  The  “One  ADB  approach”, 
involving  extensive  coordination  within  ADB’s  Southeast  Asia  Department  and 
across ADB’s departments, ensures an appropriate program design, the scope of 
which goes beyond the agriculture sector. 
26. 
Development  coordination.  Major  development  partners  in  the  ANR  sector  in  the 
Philippines  include  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development,  Japan  International 
Cooperation  Agency,  Korea  International  Cooperation  Agency,  and  World  Bank.  Strong 
development coordination and effective and efficient use of resources provided by development 
partners are imperative for the program. ADB will continue communicating with key development 
partners to gather lessons from partner programs and projects and further improve the program’s 
impact. 
27. 
ADB  has  coordinated  closely  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  on  macroeconomic 
conditions  and  prospects  in  the  Philippines.  The  International  Monetary Fund  has  provided  an 
assessment  letter  for  the  program.  The  government  had  demonstrated  a  sound  record  of 
macroeconomic management before the COVID-19 crisis. The economy expanded by 6.4% on 
average during 2010–2019. Inflation had been carefully managed and was only 2.5% in 2019. 
28 ADB. 2007. Completion Report: Grains Sector Development Program in the Philippines. Manila. The list of previous 
programs  and  projects  are  in  Sector  Assessment  (Summary):  Agriculture,  Natural  Resources,  and  Rural 
Development (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
29 ADB. 2018. Policy Based Lending 2008–2017: Performance, Results and Issues of Design. Manila. 
10 
Slowing food price inflation served as the main inflationary brake following the enactment of the 
RTL. ADB estimates that the GDP will contract by 3.8% in 2020 because of a significant fall in 
household  spending  and  investment  as  a result of  COVID-19  impact,  down  from the  originally 
projected 6.2% growth for 2020. With economic policies mitigating the impact of COVID-19 and 
an acceleration in public investment, growth is projected to rebound to 6.5% in 2021.30 
C. 
Impacts of the Reform 
Economic impact  of  the  program.  The  program  reforms  the  agriculture  sector  with  a 
28. 
specific focus on dismantling trade protection in the rice sector. Overall, through reforms to move 
toward  market-based  rice  prices  the  program  is  expected  to  facilitate  a  transition  from  rice 
production to higher value-added crops supported by enabling reforms to the management and 
utilization  of  key  production  factors,  such  as  land  and  water  resources,  and  better  extension 
services and targeted funding to the sector. The key effect of the program is increased agricultural 
competitiveness  and  inclusiveness.  Reform  area  1  will  expose  the  rice  sector  to  international 
competition; reform area 2 will enhance its competitiveness; and reform area 3 will enhance its 
inclusiveness. The program will increase income opportunities in the agriculture sector as well as 
in the industry and services sectors through backward and forward linkages. The assessment of 
the economic impact of the program focused on the impact of rice trade liberalization (reform area 
1) since the economic impact of the program is expected to result substantially from the enactment 
of the RTL in 2019. 
29. 
The  welfare  impact  of  the  rice  trade  liberalization  is  estimated  at  $21  billion  during 
2020−2040.31 This trade policy reform will benefit all rice consumers in the Philippines (i.e., nearly 
the entire population) through reduced retail rice prices, making them as the winners of the reform. 
On the other hand, it will hurt most of the about 2 million rice farmers who sell rice to markets 
through reduced farmgate prices, making them as the losers of the reform. The consumer surplus 
is estimated at $50.7 billion. Per capita rice consumption is expected to increase by 6.3% to 120 
kilograms  per  year  by  2025  and  to  fall  to  117  kilograms  per  year  by  2040,  and the  number  of 
malnourished children is expected to decline from 3.0 million in 2015 to 2.4 million by 2040. On 
the other hand, the loss in producer surplus is estimated at $29.7 billion, which is expected to be 
partly mitigated by the RCEF programs under reform area 2. Some farmers are expected to shift 
to high-value crops, such as vegetables and fruits. The RCEF will be financed by the rice tariff 
revenue, which is expected to increase from $487 million in 2020 to $640 million in 2040. The 
RCEF  programs,  irrigation  expansion,  and  agricultural  extension  programs  are  expected  to 
generate a producer surplus of $7.3 billion. Further, under reform area 3, the program will include 
income distributive benefits, such as income transfers to marginal rice farmers affected by the 
reforms and transfers to rural families to tackle long-term rural poverty, including dimensions such 
as malnutrition and stunting of children residing in rural communities. 
D. 
Development Financing Needs and Budget Support 
30. 
The government has requested a regular loan of $400 million from ADB’s ordinary capital 
resources to help finance subprogram 1.32 The loan will have a 15-year term, including a grace 
period of 3 years; an annual interest rate determined in accordance with ADB’s London interbank 
30 ADB.  2020.  Asian  Development  Outlook  Supplement  (June  2020):  Lockdown,  Loosening,  and  Asia’s  Growth 
Prospects. Manila. The government projects that the GDP will contract by 2.0%–3.4% in 2020. 
31 N. D. Perez and A. Pradesha. 2019. Philippine Rice Trade Liberalization: Impacts on Agriculture and the Economy, 
and  Alternative  Policy  Actions.  NEDA-IFPRI  Policy  Studies.  June.  Washington,  DC:  International  Food  Policy 
Research Institute. 
32 The loan may be disbursed in one or more installments. 
11 
offered rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility; a commitment charge of 0.15% per year; and such 
other terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan agreement. Based on the annuity repayment 
method, the average maturity is 12.1 years, and there is no maturity premium payable to ADB. 
The indicative loan amount for subprogram 2 is $400 million, which will be funded from ADB’s 
ordinary capital resources. The annual budget deficit was originally programmed at 3.2% of GDP 
in 2020 compared to 3.4% of GDP deficit in 2019. With significantly lower revenues because of 
the economic contraction and higher spending to respond to the impacts of COVID-19, the deficit 
is  expected  to  widen  to  8.4%  of  GDP  in  2020.  As  such,  the  financing  requirement  of  the 
government is expected to reach record levels at  ₱2.9 trillion with a financing mix of 74% from 
domestic borrowing and 26% from foreign borrowing.33 The loan size of subprogram 1 reflects 
the government’s total financing needs, the strength of the program, and its economic benefits. 
E. 
Implementation Arrangements 
31. 
The Department of Finance (DOF) is the executing agency. The implementing agencies 
are  the  National  Economic  and  Development  Authority,  the  Department  of  Agriculture,  the 
Department  of  Environment  and  Natural  Resources,  the  Department  of  Public  Works  and 
Highways,  the  Department  of  Social  Welfare  and  Development,  and  the  National  Irrigation 
Administration.  A  steering  committee  chaired  by  the  DOF  with  the  implementing  agencies  as 
members will oversee the program’s implementation. The implementation period is May 2018–
April 2020 for subprogram 1 and May 2020–April 2022 for subprogram 2. The loan proceeds will 
be withdrawn in accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from 
time to time). 
III. 
DUE DILIGENCE 
32. 
Safeguards.  The  program  is  classified  category  C  for  environment,  involuntary 
resettlement,  and  indigenous  peoples  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement 
(2009). The potential environmental and social impacts of the proposed policy reforms have been 
assessed.34 No policy action will entail any involuntary resettlement or adversely affect indigenous 
peoples  or  the  environment.  Indigenous  peoples  will  benefit  from the  program  (e.g.,  access to 
finance,  food  security,  and  flood  risk  mitigation).  There  will  be  no  differential  impacts  on 
indigenous peoples. 
33. 
Climate  change.  The  Philippines  is  highly  vulnerable  to  climate  change.  The  weak 
performance of the crop subsector, the largest subsector in agriculture, is partly attributed to its 
vulnerability to extreme weather events (e.g., droughts and typhoons). The program will contribute 
to strengthening climate resilience of the agriculture and fishery sectors and reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions. Climate resilience will be realized by (i) improving water resources management 
through the legislation related to establishing the DWR, (ii) ensuring effective implementation of 
the climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction and management measures laid out by 
the  FRMMP  and  NIMP,  (iii)  strengthening  flood  risk  management,  and  (iv)  promoting  climate-
resilient seed development and distribution under the RCEF. Climate mitigation will be realized 
by  reducing  (i)  energy  use  as  a  result  of  improved  water  resources  planning  and  utilization, 
(ii) greenhouse gas emission from crop diversification, and (iii) food loss and water use as a result 
of farmers’ investment in on-farm water management and post-harvest processing equipment and 
facilities from credit assistance under the RCEF.35 The total estimated climate financing is $52.31 
33 Government of the Philippines, Department of Finance. 2020. Medium-Term Fiscal Program. Manila. 
34 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
35 Rice production generally requires more water than non-rice crops. 
12 
million, including $12.31 million contributing to climate mitigation and $40.00 million contributing 
to climate adaptation.36 
34. 
Poverty and social. The country’s overall poverty rate decreased from 23.3% in 2015 to 
16.6% in 2018. The short-term impact of the program is twofold. First, smallholder farmers will 
have increased access to extension services, credit, and other support programs (including farm 
mechanization), which will help lift productivity and incomes over the medium to long term. Further, 
the  RTL  has  already  pushed  down  domestic rice  prices  by  as much  as 22%,  which has  put  a 
downward pressure to the national inflation rate, benefiting poor consumers.37 Second, with falling 
rice prices, smallholder rice farmers, especially in marginal lands, will be adversely affected. The 
program’s  extension  of  social  assistance  to  vulnerable  communities  will  help  mitigate  these 
effects. In the longer term, part of labor and capital engaged in basic rice farming will be relocated 
to more profitable and diversified agricultural activities including farming with improved and high-
quality rice varieties as the basic rice farming becomes less profitable. The COVID-19 pandemic 
has started having an adverse impact on poverty in the short term because of (i) loss of incomes 
and livelihood, especially for informal sector workers; (ii) disruption of trade and markets affecting 
small-scale  entrepreneurs  and  food  producers,  including  farmers;  (iii)  immense  increase  in 
personal debt; and (iv) illnesses or deaths of primary income earners in families. The financial 
relief and extension of social assistance programs will help alleviate these effects. 
Gender. Subprogram 1 is categorized some gender elements at entry. The government 
35. 
has  accomplished  five  policy  actions  with  gender  considerations  under  subprogram  1.  The 
program will promote (i) the incorporation of gender equality in water resources planning, policy 
formulation, and management by the DWR (which is being proposed by the government) through 
consultations  with  all  stakeholders,  including  women,  the  elderly,  and  people  with  disabilities; 
(ii) the  inclusion  of  gender  analyses  in  the  NIMP  and  FRMMPs;  (iii)  the  collection  of  sex-
disaggregated data for the RSBSA; and (iv) the provision of interest-free loans to smallholder rice 
farmers, of which about 45% are female, under SURE Aid. 
36. 
Subprogram  2  is  expected  to  achieve  effective  gender  mainstreaming  through  (i)  the 
compliance  of  the  DWR’s  operation  with  the  gender  and  development  framework,  (ii)  the 
integration  of  gender  considerations  in  the  preparation  and  implementation  of  forthcoming 
investment  projects  under  the  NIMP  and  FRMMPs,  (iii)  the  inclusion  of  gender  analyses  in 
FRMMPs  for  other  priority  river  basins,  (iv)  the  inclusion  of  gender  impact  assessment  in  the 
evaluation of the RCEF programs, (v) the targeting of female farmer beneficiaries of the SURE 
assistance  programs,  (vi)  at  least  30%  participation  by  female  family  members  in  the  pilot 
provincial agricultural and fisheries extension system, and (vii) the commencement of planning 
for  a  nutritional  program  for  poor  pregnant  women  as  part  of  the  government’s  zero-hunger 
agenda. 
Governance.  Public  financial  management  (PFM)  reforms  implemented  during  2011–
37. 
2016  strengthened  fiscal  discipline  and  allocative  and  technical  efficiency,  while  improving 
transparency and citizen empowerment. A 2016 public expenditure and financial accountability 
assessment found that three of the seven core PFM areas had improved: policy-based budgeting, 
transparency, and asset–liability management.38 The government has set an aggressive reform 
agenda to promote effective and honest governance and to create an enabling environment for 
36 Climate Change Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
37 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Food Price Monitoring and Analysis (accessed 30 May 
2020). 
38 World  Bank.  2016.  Republic  of  the  Philippines:  PFM  Strategy  Implementation  Support—Public  Financial 
Management and Accountability Assessment. Report No. 105753-PH. Washington, DC. 
13 
citizens and the private sector. The framework of the PFM Reform Roadmap, 2017–2022 aims to 
strengthen  the  foundation  of  the  PFM  system  by  focusing  on  three  components:  (i)  a  shift  to 
annual  cash  appropriations;  (ii)  automation  reform,  initially  through  the  Budget  and  Treasury 
Management  System;  and  (iii)  the  creation  of  an  Office  of  the  Comptroller  General.  ADB’s 
Anticorruption  Policy  (1998,  as  amended  to  date)  was  explained  to  and  discussed  with  the 
government and the DOF. 
Risks and mitigating measures. Major risks and mitigating measures are summarized 
38. 
in Table 2 and described in detail in the risk assessment and risk management plan.39 
Table 2: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures 
Risks 
Prolonged COVID-19 pandemic 
causes unprecedented economic 
crisis, which may affect the benefits of 
the policy and institutional reforms 
Rice exports to the Philippines may be 
restricted because of emergency 
situations in major rice-exporting 
countries 
Reforms stall as they did in the Grains 
Sector Development Program (footnote 
25) 
Mitigation Measures 
The government is mounting a $12.9 billion pro-poor 
countercyclical expenditure program with a focus on 
providing social protection for the vulnerable, scaling up 
resources for the health sector, protecting critical public 
spending, and providing economic stimulus. The government 
is also preparing a medium-term economic recovery strategy 
to recommend programs and policies to support the 
economy. 
The government has diversified and increased the number of 
countries from which to import rice. The government is also 
strengthening the domestic rice sector. 
Based on lessons learned from the Grains Sector 
Development Program that had a similar reform objective, 
the proposed program includes measures to mitigate impacts 
on rice farmers of reduced farmgate rice prices resulting from 
the rice trade liberalization, such as various competitiveness 
enhancement programs under reform area 2 and financial 
assistance programs under reform area 3. 
COVID-19 = coronavirus disease. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
IV. 
ASSURANCES 
39. 
The government has assured ADB that implementation of the program shall conform to 
all  applicable  ADB  policies  including  those  concerning  anticorruption  measures,  safeguards, 
gender,  procurement,  consulting  services,  and  disbursement as  described  in  detail  in  the  loan 
documents. 
V. 
RECOMMENDATION 
40. 
I  am  satisfied  that  the  proposed  programmatic  approach  and  policy-based  loan  would 
comply with the Articles of Agreement of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend 
that the Board approve 
(i) 
the  programmatic  approach  for  the  Competitive  and  Inclusive  Agriculture 
Development Program; and 
39 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
14 
(ii) 
21 July 2020 
the loan of $400,000,000 to the Republic of the Philippines for subprogram 1 of the 
Competitive and Inclusive Agriculture Development Program, from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources, in regular terms, with interest to be determined in accordance 
with ADB’s London interbank offered rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility; for a term 
of  15  years,  including  a  grace  period  of  3  years;  and  such  other  terms  and 
conditions as are substantially in accordance with those set forth in the draft loan 
agreement presented to the Board. 
Masatsugu Asakawa 
President 
DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK 
Country’s Overarching Development Objective 
Economic opportunities in agriculture expanded (Philippine Development Plan, 2017−2022)a 
Appendix 1 
15 
Risks 
Prolonged 
economic crisis 
induced by the 
COVID-19 
pandemic 
undermines the 
reform efforts. 
Rice exports to 
the Philippines 
may be 
restricted 
because of 
emergency 
situations in 
major rice-
exporting 
countries. 
Performance Indicators with Targets and 
Baselines 
By 2023: 
a. Labor productivity of farmers increased by 
at least 5.0% annually (2016 baseline: 4.6%) 
b. Poverty incidence reduced to 18.0% (2020 
baseline: 20.7% as of 4 April 2020) 
Data Sources 
and Reporting 
Mechanisms 
a–b. Philippine 
Statistics 
Authority 
website 
Key Policy Actions 
By 2020: 
1.1 The government enacted the Rice 
Tariffication Lawb (2018 baseline: Not 
applicable) 
1.1–1.2 
Legislative 
reports in 
Official Gazette 
Results Chain 
Effect of the 
Reform 
Agricultural 
competitiveness 
and 
inclusiveness 
increased 
Reform Areas 
under 
Subprogram 1 
1. Agricultural 
trade policy and 
regulatory 
framework 
2. Public 
services and 
finance for the 
agriculture 
sector 
1.2 The government removed the regulatory 
powers and commercial functions of the 
National Food Authority (2018 baseline: Not 
applicable) 
1.3 The government facilitated agricultural 
trade by removing nontariff barriers and 
streamlining administrative procedures on 
the importation of agricultural products (2018 
baseline: Not applicable) 
1.3 Legislative 
report in Official 
Gazette; 
Department of 
Finance reports 
2.1 The government enacted the Agricultural 
Free Patent Reform Act, 2019 (2018 
baseline: Not applicable) 
2.1 Legislative 
report in Official 
Gazette 
2.2 The government submitted a legislation 
to Congress to create the Department of 
Water Resources, an apex body for the 
water resources sector, taking into 
consideration gender equality, climate 
resiliency, and disaster risk reductionc (2018 
baseline: Not applicable) 
2.2 Philippine 
House of 
Representatives 
website 
2.3 The National Irrigation Administration 
Board adopted the National Irrigation Master 
Plan, which promotes the integration of 
climate change and gender aspects into 
irrigation projectsd (2018 baseline: Not 
applicable) 
2.3 National 
Irrigation 
Administration 
website 
2.4  The  government  prepared  and  adopted 
flood  risk  management  master  plans  for  six 
major river basins, which include gender  
2.4 Legislative 
report in Official 
Gazette; 
Risks 
Data Sources 
and Reporting 
Mechanisms 
Department of 
Public Works 
and Highways 
website 
2.5–2.7 
Department of 
Agriculture 
website 
16 
Appendix 1 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with Targets and 
Baselines 
analysis and safeguard impact assessmente 
(2018 baseline: Not applicable) 
2.5 The government (i) approved the Rice 
Competitiveness Enhancement Fund to 
support 57 potential rice-competitive 
provinces during 2019–2024 and 
(ii) allocated ₱10 billion annually in the GAA 
2019 and 2020 (2018 baseline: Not 
applicable) 
2.6 The government issued implementing 
guidelines for four Rice Competitiveness 
Enhancement Fund programs (2018 
baseline: Not applicable) 
2.7 The government started updating the 
Registry System for Basic Sectors in 
Agriculture covering about 1.956 million rice 
farmers, where data collected is 
disaggregated by sex (2018 baseline: Not 
applicable) 
3. Social 
protection to 
rural families 
3.1 The government approved unconditional 
cash transfer programs (i) in total of ₱3 
billion in the 2019 GAA, and (ii) in total of ₱3 
billion in the 2020 GAA to assist small 
farmers affected by low rice farmgate prices 
(2018 baseline: Not applicable)  
3.1–3.2 
Department of 
Agriculture 
website 
3.2 The government approved (i) the 
Expanded SURE Assistance Program for 
Rice Farmersf to provide no-collateral, 
interest-free loans to 164,274 small rice 
farmers, of which about 45% are female; and 
(ii) the SURE COVID-19 Programg to provide 
no-collateral, interest-free loans in total of 
₱2.5 billion to small farmers and fisherfolk 
and agri- and fishery-based micro and small 
enterprises affected by COVID-19 pandemic 
(2018 baseline: Not applicable) 
3.3 The government enacted the National 
Feeding Program for Undernourished 
Children Acth and allocated ₱3.7 billion in the 
2020 GAA (2018 baseline: Not applicable) 
3.3 Legislative 
report in Official 
Gazette; 
Department of 
Social Welfare 
and 
Development 
reports 
Appendix 1 
17 
Budget Support 
Asian Development Bank 
Subprogram 1: $400 million (policy-based loan) 
Subprogram 2: $400 million (policy-based loan, indicative) 
COVID-19 = coronavirus disease, GAA = General Appropriations Act, SURE = survival and recovery. 
a  Government of the Philippines, National Economic and Development Authority. 2017. Philippine Development Plan, 
2017−2022. Manila. 
b  Government of the Philippines, House of Representatives. 2018. Republic Act No. 11203: An Act Liberalizing the 
Importation, Exportation and Trading of Rice, Lifting for the Purpose the Quantitative Import Restriction on Rice, and 
for Other Purposes. Manila. 
c  The language “gender equality, social inclusion, climate resiliency, and disaster risk reduction” is from House Draft 
Substitute Bill 9 (consolidation of 35 bills) creating the Department of Water Resources, specifically Section 8, para. 
I (j), which states the following: “Ensure that gender equality, social inclusion, climate resiliency and disaster risk 
reduction  are  integrated  into  any  water  resource  management  planning,  policy  making,  and  the  design  and 
construction of water infrastructure.” In addition, Section 3 of the bill contains a definition of “gender equality” as the 
principle asserting the equality of men and women and their right to enjoy equal conditions realizing their full human 
potential to contribute to and benefit from the results of development, and with the state recognizing that all human 
beings are free and equal in dignity and rights. 
d  The National Irrigation Master Plan, 2020−2030 includes sex-disaggregated data on employment in the agriculture 
sector from 2015 to 2017 (p. 26), a social profile of rice-based farm households indicating that "rice-based farms are 
heavily  dominated  by  males with  females  comprising  10%–12%  of  total”  (p.  29).  It  also recommends including a 
gender action plan as part of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, as well as hiring a gender specialist 
in the project team to formulate, ensure, and monitor gender action plan implementation (p. 388). 
e  The flood risk management master plans include gender analysis of the current context. They also ascertain the 
potential impact and benefits of solutions proposed in the various master plans, which include possible impacts on 
involuntary resettlement, generation of employment, and occupational safety and health risks, among other impacts 
and  benefits  indicators.  Gender  analysis  of  the  current  context  included  employment  and  means  of  generating 
income for women and families, as well as issues they face related to flood risk management, as gleaned from focus 
group discussions held at the (village) level. 
f  The Expanded SURE Assistance Program for Rice Farmers (SURE Aid) is one of the SURE assistance programs. 
g  The SURE COVID-19 Program, another of the SURE assistance programs, is an emergency loan program for small 
farmers and fisherfolk and micro and small enterprises engaged in agriculture and fisheries affected by COVID-19. 
h  Government of the Philippines, House of Representatives. 2017. Republic Act No. 11037: An Act Institutionalizing a 
National Feeding Program for Undernourished Children in Public Day Care, Kindergarten and Elementary Schools 
to Combat Hunger and Undernutrition among Filipino Children and Appropriating Funds Therefor. Manila. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
18 
Appendix 2 
LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS 
http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=53353-001-3 
Loan Agreement 
Sector Assessment (Summary): Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural 
Development 
Contribution to the ADB Results Framework 
Development Coordination 
Country Economic Indicators 
International Monetary Fund Assessment Letter 
Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy 
Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan 
List of Ineligible Items 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
Supplementary Documents 
11. 
12. 
13. 
Program Impact Assessment 
Public Financial Management Assessment 
Climate Change Assessment 
Appendix 3 
19 
20 
Appendix 3 
Appendix 3 
21 
22 
Appendix 4 
POLICY MATRIX 
Policy Actions 
Subprogram 1 Accomplishments 
(May 2018–April 2020) 
Policy Triggers in bold 
Subprogram 2 
 (May 2020–April 2022) 
Policy Triggers in bold 
Medium-term Framework 
and expected results 
(2018–2025) 
Reform Area 1. Agriculture trade policy and regulatory framework 
ADB’s policy 
advisory on 
drafting of the 
Rice 
Tariffication 
Law (RTL) 
Implementing 
Rules and 
Regulations 
The government eliminated market distortions in 
the agriculture sector by enacting the RTL. Its 
implementing rules and regulations laid 
foundations for a transition to a diversified and 
competitive agriculture sector. 
1. The government removed quantitative 
restrictions on rice imports converting these 
into a simple tariff system to improve food 
security by increasing rice availability for all 
Filipinos and reduce poverty by increasing 
disposable income through affordable rice 
prices. 
2. The government dismantled state monopoly 
for rice and improved governance in the food 
grains sector by removing the distortionary 
regulatory powers and commercial functions 
of the National Food Authority (NFA) and 
transforming it into an emergency buffer stock 
management agency. 
3. The government facilitated agricultural trade by 
streamlining administrative procedures on the 
importation of agricultural products and rolling out 
the government’s online trade facilitation portal 
(TradeNet) with the Department of Agriculture 
(DA) as a key regulatory agency. 
The government consolidates reforms to 
increase agriculture sector’s 
competitiveness. 
1. The NFA Council issues 
implementing rules, regulations and 
procedures to maintain sufficient rice 
buffer stock to be sourced from local 
farmers covering: (i) an optimal level 
of rice inventory; (ii) composition, 
storage, processing, replenishment 
and release of rice stocks; 
(iii) location and amounts of stocks in 
anticipation of emergencies; and 
(iv) transaction flows for release of 
rice stocks to government agencies 
as emergency response. 
1. Stable supply of rice and 
other key agriculture 
commodities at affordable 
prices in the domestic 
market is ensured. 
2. By 2022, the NFA 
functions as a buffer stock 
agency operating in an 
efficient and fiscally 
sustainable manner. 
3. TradeNet has simplified 
the import and export 
documentary process of 
over 900 regulated 
agricultural products. 
Appendix 4 
23 
Policy Actions 
Subprogram 1 Accomplishments 
(May 2018–April 2020) 
Policy Triggers in bold 
Subprogram 2 
 (May 2020–April 2022) 
Policy Triggers in bold 
Medium-term Framework 
and expected results 
(2018–2025) 
Reform Area 2. Public services and finance for the agriculture sector   
2.1 Land and 
water 
management 
reforms 
implemented.  
The government introduced regulatory and 
institutional reforms for efficient management of 
land and water resources that are critical to 
agriculture sector. 
The government implements key reforms 
to land and water resource management. 
ADB Loan 3589 
“Infrastructure 
Preparation  and 
Innovation 
Facility” 
4. To remove restrictions on agricultural land 
ownership, the government enacted the 
Agricultural Free Patent (AFP) Reform Act (2019), 
making the land titles held by AFP recipient 
farmers immediately tradeable and bankable, 
providing them access to capital and credit. 
2. The government (through the 
Department of Environment and Natural 
Resources) issues implementing 
guidelines for the AFP Reform Act 
including use of the land titles as bank 
collateral. 
4. The AFP for the 
remaining public agricultural 
land of approximately 
500,000 hectares (ha) are 
granted to farmers without 
the restrictions. 
ADB Loan 3886 
“Infrastructure 
Preparation  and 
Innovation 
Facility 
(additional 
financing)” 
5. The government submitted to Congress a 
proposed legislation on the creation of an 
apex body for the water resources sector, i.e., 
the Department of Water Resources, in order 
to: (i) address the fragmentation in important 
activities such as water-related plans, policies 
and program and/or project implementation; 
(ii) separate water resource regulation from 
economic regulation; and (iii) rationalize all 
water related functions in the government, 
taking into consideration, among others, 
gender equality, social inclusion, climate 
resiliency and disaster risk reduction. 
6. To improve the country’s irrigation systems and 
expand service areas including by addressing 
climate change impacts and impacts on gender, 
the National Irrigation Administration endorsed the 
National Irrigation Master Plan. 
3. As part of water sector reforms, the 
government issues Executive Order, 
reconstituting and transforming the 
National Water Resources Board into 
the National Water Management 
Council, which shall be responsible 
for the planning and policy 
formulation, management and 
protection of the country’s water 
resources. 
4. The government implements the 
flood risk management master plans 
and the National Irrigation Master Plan 
by: (i) selecting priority investment 
projects in 2021−2022, (ii) allocating 
sufficient budget from the 2021−2022 
General Appropriations Act (GAA) for 
priority projects, and (iii) integrating 
5. By 2022, substantial 
progress made in reforming 
the institutional set up in the 
water resource planning, 
policy, investment 
framework, compliant with 
the gender and 
development framework of 
the government and PCW 
MC 2018–04 on the 
preparation of the Gender 
and Development Agenda. 
6. Irrigated farmland are 
expanded by at least 
300,000 ha.  
24 
Appendix 4 
Policy Actions 
2.2. Public 
financing 
enhanced. 
Subprogram 1 Accomplishments 
(May 2018–April 2020) 
Policy Triggers in bold 
Subprogram 2 
 (May 2020–April 2022) 
Policy Triggers in bold 
Medium-term Framework 
and expected results 
(2018–2025) 
7. To reduce flood risk, the government (through 
the Department of Public Works and Highways) 
prepared and adopted flood risk management 
master plans for six major river basins, integrating 
flood protection infrastructure with enhanced flood 
resilience and response measures in consultation 
with basin stakeholders, including due 
consideration given for safeguard impact 
assessment, the rights of indigenous people and 
gender aspects. 
8. To improve rice sector competitiveness 
under the liberalized trade regime, the 
government (i) established the Rice 
Competitiveness Enhancement Fund (RCEF) 
to support 57 potential rice competitive 
provinces during 2019−2024, and (ii) allocated 
₱10 billion in the GAA 2019 and 2020. 
9. The government issued implementing 
guidelines for four RCEF programs: farm 
mechanization, seeds development and 
distribution, extension and training services, and 
credit assistance. 
in each priority investment project 
climate change impact assessments 
and gender analysis, considerations 
and actions. 
5. The government (through the 
Department of Public Works and 
Highways) develops flood risk 
management master plans for additional 
seven priority principal river basins, 
including climate change impact 
assessment and gender analysis.  
6. The government allocates through the 
GAA ₱10 billion annually to RCEF for 
2021−2022. 
7. The government (through the DA) 
develops the Rice Fund Impact 
Monitoring System to assess the 
impact of RCEF on farm productivity 
and income, including gender impact 
assessment based on sex-
disaggregated data. 
8. The government (through the DA) 
completes validating and updating the 
7. Flood risk on agriculture 
in the six river basins are 
reduced. 
8. RCEF benefits about 
1.956 million rice farmers 
listed in the Registry 
System for Basic Sectors in 
Agriculture (RSBSA) in 57 
priority provinces to improve 
productivity and farm 
household income. 
9. By 2022, RCEF 
implementation is 
evaluated. 
Policy Actions 
Subprogram 1 Accomplishments 
(May 2018–April 2020) 
Policy Triggers in bold 
Subprogram 2 
 (May 2020–April 2022) 
Policy Triggers in bold 
Medium-term Framework 
and expected results 
(2018–2025) 
Appendix 4 
25 
10. For accurate targeting of RCEF beneficiaries, 
the government started updating the RSBSA 
covering around 1.956 million rice farmers, where 
data collected is disaggregated by sex. 
RSBSA with sex-disaggregated data and 
includes this data in regular reporting. 
9. The government develops National 
Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization 
and Industrialization Plan to enhance its 
financing to agriculture sector for 
modernization and industrialization. 
10. The government implements the 
Agriculture Dialogue and Information 
Network Groups Program as DA’s 
integrity management implementation 
and advocacy program to ensure 
accountability of DA’s programs and 
activities. 
11. The government (through the DA) 
approves the budget and implements 
the pilot Provincial Agricultural and 
Fishery Extension System to 
strengthen local government units’ 
extension services to farmers with at 
least 30% active participation by 
female family members. 
10. By 2022, Provincial 
Agricultural and Fishery 
Extension Centers are 
established in 15 provinces. 
2.3. Extension 
services 
strengthened. 
Reform Area 3. Social protection to rural families 
3.1 Impact of 
RTL on 
smallholder 
farmers and 
fisherfolks 
mitigated. 
11. The government established the Rice Farmer 
Financial Assistance Program and allocated (i) ₱3 
billion in 2019 GAA to provide unconditional cash 
transfers to smallholder rice farmers that were 
affected by low rice farmgate prices, and (ii) ₱3 
billion in 2020 GAA under the Financial Subsidy to 
Rice Farmers Program to provide unconditional 
cash transfers to smallholder rice farmers also 
affected by low farmgate prices in areas not 
12. The government completes the 
disbursements of unconditional cash 
transfers in total of ₱6 billion to 
smallholder rice farmers with active 
participation of both male and female 
family members. 
11. By 2022, about 900,000 
smallholder rice farmers 
benefit from the 
unconditional cash 
transfers. 
26 
Appendix 4 
Policy Actions 
Subprogram 1 Accomplishments 
(May 2018–April 2020) 
Policy Triggers in bold 
Subprogram 2 
 (May 2020–April 2022) 
Policy Triggers in bold 
Medium-term Framework 
and expected results 
(2018–2025) 
covered by the Rice Farmer Financial Assistance 
Program. 
12. The government, through the DA-
Agricultural Credit Policy Council (ACPC), 
established (i) the Expanded Survival and 
Recovery Assistance Program for Rice 
Farmers (SURE Aid, which is one of the SURE 
Assistance Programs) that provided 164,274 
smallholder rice farmers (holding 1 ha or 
below), of which about 45% are female, with 
interest-free loans from ₱2.5 billion credit 
funds sourced from the 2019 GAA and ACPC 
loan collections; and (ii) SURE COVID-19 
Program and allocated an additional ₱2.5 
billion credit funds sourced from the 2020 
GAA and ACPC loan collections to provide 
interest-free loans for smallholder farmers and 
fisherfolks (holding 3 ha or below) and agri- 
and fishery-based micro- and small-sized 
enterprises affected by the coronavirus 
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. 
12. By 2022, various SURE 
assistance programs benefit 
443,827 smallholder 
farmers and fisherfolks 
adversely affected by 
environmental and 
economic shocks. 
13. The government through DA-
ACPC (i) provides interest-free loans 
to about 40,000 smallholder farmers 
and fisherfolks, of which 50% are 
female,  and about 150 agri- and 
fishery-based micro- and small-sized 
enterprises under the SURE COVID-19 
Program; and (ii) allocates an 
additional ₱2.5 billion in 2021 GAA for 
SURE COVID-19 Program and/or other 
SURE assistance program(s) to help 
smallholder farmers and fisherfolks 
mitigate impacts of specific 
environmental and economic shocks. 
3.2 Delivery of 
basic services 
for the poor 
institutionalized. 
13. To improve child nutrition in poor households, 
the government enacted the Act Institutionalizing 
a National Feeding Program (NFP) for 
Undernourished Children in Public Day Care, 
Kindergarten, and Elementary Schools and 
allocated ₱3.7 billion in 2020 GAA. 
14. The government ensures that 
adequate budget through the GAA is 
provided to the NFP to improve 
nutritional status of children.  
13. By 2022, the NFP 
benefits about 2 million 
children annually. 
15. The government commences 
planning of a nutritional food program for 
poor pregnant women as part of its zero- 
hunger agenda. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
