Report and Recommendation of the President  
to the Board of Directors 
Project Number: 54255-001 
August 2020 
Proposed Countercyclical Support Facility Loan 
Republic of the Union of Myanmar: COVID-19 Active 
Response and Expenditure Support Program 
Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been approved by the Board of Directors. 
Following such approval, ADB will disclose the document to the public in accordance with ADB's 
Access to Information Policy.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(as of 3 August 2020) 
Currency unit 
MK1.00 
$1.00 
– 
= 
= 
kyat/s (MK) 
$0.00073 
MK1,363.69 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB 
CARES 
CBM 
CERP 
COVID-19 
CPRO 
GDP 
HSCP 
IMF 
MOHS 
MOPFI 
MSMEs 
OP 
PFM 
PRC 
TWG 
WHO 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Asian Development Bank 
COVID-19 Active Response and Expenditure Support 
Central Bank of Myanmar 
COVID-19 Economic Relief Plan 
coronavirus disease 
COVID-19 pandemic response option 
gross domestic product 
Health Sector Contingency Plan 
International Monetary Fund 
Ministry of Health and Sports 
Ministry of Planning, Finance and Industry 
micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises 
operational priority 
public financial management 
People’s Republic of China 
technical working group 
World Health Organization 
NOTES 
(i) 
The  fiscal  year  (FY)  of  the  Government  of  Myanmar  ends  on  30  September.  “FY” 
before a calendar year denotes the year in  which the fiscal year ends, e.g., FY2020 
ends on 30 September 2020. 
(ii) 
In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars. 
Vice-President 
Director General  Ramesh Subramaniam, Southeast Asia Department (SERD) 
Directors 
Ahmed M. Saeed, Operations 2 
Jose Antonio Tan III, Public Management, Financial Sector and Trade 
Division (SEPF), SERD 
Ayako Inagaki, Human and Social Development Division (SEHS), SERD 
Newin Sinsiri, Myanmar Resident Mission (MYRM), SERD 
Team leaders 
Aekapol Chongvilaivan, Economist (Public Finance), SEPF, SERD 
Kyaw Thu, Infrastructure Specialist, MYRM, SERD 
Ye Xu, Health Specialist, SEHS, SERD 
Team members 
Zehra Abbas, Principal Environment Specialist, Safeguards Division 
(SDSS), Sustainable Development and Climate Change Department 
(SDCC) 
Lara Arjan, Urban Development Specialist, Urban Sector Group, Sector 
Advisory Service Cluster, SDCC 
Thwet Thwet Aye, Project Officer, MYRM, SERD 
Eduardo Banzon, Principal Health Specialist, Health Sector Group, 
Sector Advisory Service Cluster, SDCC 
Gambhir Bhatta, Chief of Knowledge Advisory Services Center, SDCC 
Elizabeth Burges-Sims, Senior Social Development Specialist (Gender 
Development), SEHS, SERD 
Arup Kumar Chatterjee, Principal Financial Sector Specialist, Finance 
Sector Group, Sector Advisory Service Cluster (SDSC-FIN), SDCC 
Lisette Cipriano, Senior Digital Technology Specialist (Financial 
Technology Services), SDSC-FIN, SDCC 
Haidy Ear-Dupuy, Senior Social Development Specialist (Core Labor 
Standards), SDSS, SDCC 
Madhumita Gupta, Principal Social Development Specialist (Safeguards), 
SDSS, SDCC 
Wunna Htay, Project Officer (Social Sector), MYRM, SERD 
Zaw Myo Htet, Programs Officer, MYRM, SERD 
Yukiko Ito, Senior Social Development Specialist, Social Development 
Thematic Group, Thematic Advisory Service Cluster, SDCC 
Chitoshi Izumi, Senior Procurement Specialist, Procurement Division 2, 
Procurement, Portfolio and Financial Management Department 
Michiko Katagami, Principal Natural Resources and Agriculture 
Specialist, Rural Development and Food Security (Agriculture) Thematic 
Group, SDCC 
Eve Cherry Lynn, Economics Officer, MYRM, SERD 
Jenelyn A. Mendez-Santos, Project Analyst, SEPF, SERD 
Go Nagata, Public Management Specialist (Taxation), Governance 
Thematic Group, Thematic Advisory Service Cluster (SDTC-GOV), SDCC 
Kaukab Naqvi, Senior Economist, Economic Analysis and Operational 
Support Division, Economic Research and Regional Cooperation 
Department  
Ashish Narain, Principal Economist (Regional Cooperation), Regional 
Cooperation and Integration Thematic Group, Thematic Advisory Service 
Cluster, SDCC 
Team members 
Peer reviewer 
Anne Michelle Mendoza, Senior Financial Management Officer, SEPF, 
SERD 
Sann Oo, External Relations Officer, MYRM, SERD 
Hyun Chol Park, Senior Financial Control Specialist, Loan and Grant 
Disbursement Section, Controller’s Department 
Daniele Quaggiotto, Counsel, Office of the General Counsel 
Lindsay Marie Renaud, Results Management Specialist, Results 
Management and Aid Effectiveness Division, Strategy, Policy and 
Partnerships Department 
Joehanne Kristal M. Santos, Operations Assistant, SEPF, SERD 
Stephen Schuster, Principal Financial Sector Specialist, SEPF, SERD 
Malika Shagazatova, Social Development Specialist (Gender and 
Development), Gender Equity Thematic Group, Thematic Advisory 
Service Cluster, SDCC 
Christopher A. Spohr, Principal Portfolio Management Specialist, MYRM, 
SERD 
Yasushi Suzuki, Public Management Specialist (Taxation), SDTC-GOV, 
SDCC 
Nan K. Syne, Safeguards Officer, MYRM, SERD 
Elaine Thomas, Senior Social Development Specialist (Civil Society and 
Participation), NGO and Civil Society Center, SDCC 
Samuel Tumiwa, Advisor, Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations, Office 
of the Cluster Head, Thematic Advisory Service Cluster, SDCC 
Ananya Basu, Principal Economist, Social Sectors and Public Sector 
Management Division, Pacific Department 
In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation 
of  or  reference  to  a  particular  territory  or  geographic  area  in  this  document,  the  Asian 
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any 
territory or area. 
CONTENTS 
PROGRAM AT A GLANCE 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
THE PROPOSAL 
PROGRAM AND RATIONALE 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Background and Development Constraints 
Proposed Program, Impacts, and ADB’s Value Addition 
Development Financing Needs, Budget Support, and Debt Sustainability 
Development Partner Coordination 
Implementation Arrangements 
DUE DILIGENCE 
ASSURANCES 
RECOMMENDATION 
APPENDIXES 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Design and Monitoring Framework 
List of Linked Documents 
Development Policy Letter 
Assessment of Compliance with Access Criteria for the  Countercyclical Support  
Facility and COVID-19 Pandemic Response Option 
Page 
1 
3 
3 
8 
10 
11 
11 
11 
13 
13 
14 
16 
17 
22 
Project Classification Information Status: Complete
PROGRAM AT A GLANCE
1. Basic Data
Project Name
Country
Borrower
Country Economic Indicators https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedD
COVID-19 Active Response and 
Expenditure Support Program
Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Department/Division
SERD/SEPF
Project Number: 54255-001
Executing Agency
Ministry of Planning, 
Finance and Industry 
(formerly Ministry of 
Planning and Finance)
ocs/?id=54255-001-CEI
https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedD
ocs/?id=54255-001-PortAtaGlance
Subsector(s)
Public expenditure and fiscal management
Social protection initiatives
Agricultural policy, institutional and capacity development
     ADB Financing ($ million)
100.00
50.00
25.00
Portfolio at a Glance
2. Sector
Public sector management
Agriculture, natural 
resources and rural 
development
Health
Disease control  of communicable disease
Health system development
3. Operational Priorities
Addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequalities
Accelerating progress in gender equality
Promoting rural development and food security
Fostering regional cooperation and integration
Sustainable Development Goals
SDG 1.5, 1.a
SDG 2.1
SDG 3.8, 3.d
SDG 5.c
SDG 8.1
SDG 10.4
4. Risk Categorization:
Complex 
50.00
25.00
250.00
0
Low
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Total
Climate Change Information
GHG reductions (tons per annum)
Climate Change impact on the 
Project
ADB Financing
Adaptation ($ million)
Mitigation ($ million)
Cofinancing
Adaptation ($ million)
Mitigation ($ million)
Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
Effective gender mainstreaming (EGM)
Poverty Targeting
General Intervention on Poverty
.
.
5. Safeguard Categorization
Environment: C   Involuntary Resettlement: C   Indigenous Peoples: C
6. Financing
Modality and Sources
ADB
     Sovereign COVID19 Pandemic Response Option (Concessional Loan):  
Ordinary capital resources
Cofinancing
     None
Counterpart 
     None
Total
Currency of ADB Financing: US Dollar 
Amount ($ million)
250.00
250.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
250.00
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.
16062020065641829425
Generated Date: 04-Aug-2020 21:33:36 PM
I. 
THE PROPOSAL 
1. 
I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan to 
the  Republic  of  the  Union  of  Myanmar  for  the  COVID-19  Active  Response  and  Expenditure 
Support  (CARES)  Program  under  the  Countercyclical  Support  Facility–COVID-19  pandemic 
response option (CPRO).1  
2. 
The CARES Program, under the CPRO of the Asian Development Bank (ADB), will help 
the Government of Myanmar fund critical public expenditures to mitigate the adverse impacts of 
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. It will also build the foundations for the country’s 
economic  recovery  using  a  coordinated  response  led  by  the  country,  with  support  from  its 
development partners. The proposed loan will provide general budgetary support for: (i) social 
assistance to the poor and vulnerable groups and populations at risk; (ii) a strengthened health 
system to prevent and control  COVID-19; and (iii) micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises 
(MSMEs) and workers to insulate them from the economic downturn. 
Myanmar sustained strong growth averaging 6.4% in 2015ꟷ2019 and maintained sound 
3. 
macroeconomic conditions. It has also reported only a moderate number of confirmed COVID-19 
cases  to  date.  However,  the  country  is  highly  vulnerable  to  economic  shocks  because  of  its 
dependence on trade and tourism, and to future surges of the pandemic because of its limited 
public health capacity. Disruptions to key economic sectors and  to trade and investment flows 
stand  to  derail  the  strong  growth  trajectory.  ADB  revised  its  projection  of  Myanmar’s  gross 
domestic product (GDP) growth in 2020  from 6.8% to 1.8%—equivalent to economic losses of 
$3.3 billion. COVID-19 may slow Myanmar’s significant progress in poverty reduction because 
large poor and vulnerable populations are least able to cope. It will result in an estimated loss of 
1.2  millionꟷ2.1  million  jobs  and  is  likely  to  increase  the  number  of  the  poor  by  1.3  million.2 
Moreover, the poor living conditions in urban areas, the porous borders with a large migrant labor 
pool  of more  than 4  million  people, and  limited water  and  sanitation  infrastructure  expose  the 
country to future outbreaks. 
4. 
The government is implementing a $2.5 billion COVID-19 Economic Relief Plan (CERP) 
during  fiscal  years  (FYs) 2020 and 2021.3 The  CERP  was designed  to  raise  preparedness  for 
COVID-19 surges, mitigate the current economic impact through social assistance and support 
to MSMEs and workers, and help the economy bounce back. The government’s total financing 
requirement is expected to increase from $3.7 billion to $4.2 billion in FY2020, and to $4.5 billion 
in  FY2021;  of  which  $1.7  billion  in  FY2020  and  $1.5  billion  in  FY2021  will  be  financed  by 
concessional borrowing from development partners. The risk of public debt distress will remain 
low  despite the  COVID-19 pandemic,  i.e., below the  public  debt  sustainability  threshold  of  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). The CARES Program is aligned with the operational priorities 
(OPs) of ADB’s Strategy 2030 by addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequalities (OP1), 
accelerating progress in gender equality (OP2), promoting rural development and food security 
(OP5),  and  fostering  regional  cooperation and  integration  (OP7).4 It  builds upon ADB’s trusted 
relationship  with  the  government  through  continued  engagement,  and  will  supplement  the 
ongoing health, social, and finance sector responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. Myanmar meets 
all the access criteria of ADB’s CPRO (Table 1).5  
1  ADB. 2020. Policy Paper: ADB’s Comprehensive Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic. Manila. 
2   ADB. 2020. Updated Assessment of the Potential Economic Impact of COVID-19. Manila. 
3   Government of Myanmar. 2020. Overcoming as One: COVID-19 Economic Relief Plan. Nay Pyi Taw. 
4  ADB.  2018.  Strategy  2030:  Achieving  a  Prosperous,  Inclusive,  Resilient,  and  Sustainable  Asia  and  the  Pacific. 
Manila. 
5  Details on compliance with the access criteria are in Appendix 4.  
Table 1: Compliance with Access Criteria for COVID-19 Pandemic Response Option 
CPRO Access Criteria 
2 
1. Adverse impact of 
exogenous shocks  
2. Countercyclical 
development 
expenditure 
3. Pre-shock record of 
sound macroeconomic 
management 
4. Structural reforms 
5. Debt sustainability 
6. Coordination with IMF 
including  ADB  and  various  stakeholders 
ADB Assessment 
ADB revised Myanmar’s GDP growth in 2020 from 6.8% to 1.8%, equivalent 
to economic losses of $3.3 billion. Construction, manufacturing, and tourism 
have  been  hit  hard.  As  a  result,  2.1  million  people  may  lose  their  jobs, 
pushing  1.3  million  people  into  poverty.  The  fiscal  deficit  is  expected  to 
widen to 5.8% of GDP in FY2020, from the pre-shock estimate of 2.6%. In 
a more adverse scenario with wider community spread of COVID-19, GDP 
could  contract  further  in  2020. The  already  weak  health  care  system  was 
considerably  stretched  by  the  pandemic,  raising  concerns  about  possible 
subsequent waves of the disease.  
The  government  announced 
the  CERP,  a  pro-poor  countercyclical 
expenditure  program  of  $2.5  billion.  It  will  support  public  health,  social 
assistance  through  cash  and  in-kind  support,  and  economic  measures  to 
contain  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  support  the  poor  and  vulnerable 
groups. About 44% of the package will be in the form of health-related and 
social  assistance  expenditures.  The  government  consulted  with 
in 
development  partners 
formulating  the  CERP.  Staff  applied  ADB’s  conflict–sensitive  approach  to 
ensure  that  the  CERP  has  adequate  provisions  for  supporting  all  ethnic 
groups living in different parts of the country without any differentiation.  
Myanmar  sustained  strong  growth,  averaging  6.4%  in  2015–2019,  with 
stable  inflation  averaging  7.1%.  It  maintained  sound  macroeconomic 
conditions  and  desirable  policies  within  a  sound  budgetary  framework. 
Fiscal  and  monetary  policies  were  moderately  accommodative.  Improved 
budget  execution  and  debt 
the 
government’s debt by the Central Bank of Myanmar financing to be phased 
out in FY2021, as originally envisaged. 
Myanmar took steps to strengthen its health system, prevent the spread of 
COVID-19, and manage the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic. It set 
up the National Central Committee on Prevention, Control and Treatment of 
2019 Novel Coronavirus, chaired by the State Counsellor, to coordinate and 
monitor the COVID-19 responses. It tasked the COVID-19 Containment and 
Emergency Response Committee, chaired by Myanmar’s Vice President 1, 
with  overseeing  health  responses,  including  those  in  the  CERP,  such  as 
community  surveillance,  quarantine  and  risk communication,  public  space 
disinfection,  expanding  laboratory  and  clinical  capacity,  and  ensuring 
adequate health human resource and medical equipment and supplies. 
Public  debt  will  remain  sustainable  despite  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  The 
ratio of public debt to GDP is expected to increase from 39.5% in FY2019 to 
43.6% in FY2020 and 45.2% in FY2021. This is still below the IMF’s public 
debt  sustainability  threshold  of  55%  of  GDP.  The  proposed  CPRO  will 
increase the debt to GDP ratio by 0.38%. 
ADB  is  in  close  contact  with  the  IMF  on  macroeconomic  monitoring, 
particularly  on  the  impact  of  COVID-19  and  fiscal  responses.  The  IMF 
provided an assessment letter confirming that the fiscal stimulus under the 
CERP  will  be  instrumental  in  containing  the  adverse  health,  social,  and 
economic impacts of COVID-19. The IMF approved the first tranche of its 
Rapid Credit Facility and Rapid Financing Instrument of $356.5 million for 
Myanmar  on  26  June  2020,  and  its  board  will  consider  a  planned  second 
tranche by December 2020. 
issuances  allow  monetization  of 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CERP = COVID-19 Economic Relief Plan, COVID-19 = coronavirus disease, CPRO 
= COVID-19 pandemic response option, FY = fiscal year, GDP = gross domestic product, IMF = International Monetary 
Fund. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
3 
II. 
PROGRAM AND RATIONALE 
A. 
Background and Development Constraints 
High risks of COVID-19 surges despite few cases. As of 3 August 2020, Myanmar had 
5. 
353  confirmed  COVID-19  cases  and  6  deaths.  Approximately  20,000  people  were  under 
investigation and quarantined in dedicated facilities. The Yangon region accounts for 70.5% of all 
confirmed cases. The country’s testing capacity was scaled up from 320 tests per day to 2,000 
tests per day. However, the total number of tests performed per million population remains the 
lowest  in  Southeast  Asia.6 The  risk  of  community  outbreaks  remains  high  among  vulnerable 
populations including: (i) returning migrant workers; (ii) internal migrant workers and people living 
in overcrowded urban and peri-urban areas in Yangon; and (iii) people in conflict-affected areas 
who lack basic livelihood and health care services. 
6. 
Inadequate public health system. The World Health Organization (WHO) assessed the 
ability of Myanmar’s health system to detect, prevent, and respond to pandemics as limited.7 The 
health-related public expenditure per capita stood at $8.6 in 2017 and remained one of the lowest 
globally. 8  Most  facilities  operate  with  inadequate  premises,  equipment,  and  supplies.  The 
shortage  in  and  limited  technical  capacity  of  health  care  personnel  has  been  a  continuous 
challenge, particularly in hard-to-reach or conflict-affected areas. The numbers of doctors (0.68), 
nurses  and midwives  (1.0), and  hospital  beds  (0.9)  per 1,000  inhabitants  are  below the  lower 
middle-income country average and WHO-recommended levels. The Health Sector Contingency 
Plan (HSCP) which lays out measures to improve pandemic preparedness, foresees the current 
health system being quickly overwhelmed if a community outbreak occurred.9 It is imperative to 
scale up laboratory testing, clinical management capacity, and non-pharmaceutical interventions. 
7. 
Economic growth trends reversed. While the full extent of the public health impact is 
yet  to  be  seen,  the  economy  will  suffer  from  disruptions  to  economic  activities  as  well  as  the 
downturn in trade and investment. ADB revised its projection of Myanmar’s economic growth for 
2020  to  1.8%  from  a  pre-COVID-19  estimate  of  6.8%.10 The  pandemic  is  expected  to  entail 
economic losses of $3.3 billion, equivalent to 3.4% of GDP (footnote 2). Wider community spread 
and interactions with fiscal and finance sector vulnerabilities may lead to a greater contraction in 
growth in 2020 and a more sluggish recovery. COVID-19 has affected the economy through three 
primary transmission channels: (i) manufacturing and construction; (ii) tourism; and (iii) trade and 
investment flows, including remittances.  
Key affected industries. Construction (6.1% of GDP) and manufacturing (25% of GDP) 
8. 
are the industries hit hardest by the COVID-19 containment measures. Output losses from the 
two-week  lockdowns  in  April  2020  are  estimated  at  82.9%  for  construction  and  40.7%  for 
manufacturing.11 Several construction projects and contracts had to be postponed or canceled. 
In manufacturing, shortages of material and order cancellations from European countries led to 
6  A total of 118,127 tests were conducted from 22 March 2020 to 3 August 2020 (2,064 tests per million population).  
7  Myanmar  was  rated  2  out  of  5  in  each  capacity  area.  WHO.  Joint  external  evaluation  dashboard  (accessed  on  
  16 May 2020).  
8  World Bank. World Development Indicators (accessed 16 May 2020). 
9   Ministry of Health and Sports. 2020. Health Sector Contingency Plan: Outbreak Response on COVID-19 and Other 
Emerging Respiratory Disease in Myanmar. Nay Pyi Taw. 
10 ADB. 2020. Asian Development Outlook 2020 Supplement. Manila. The IMF’s revised growth projection for 2020 is 
at 1.4% (IMF. 2020. World Economic Outlook Update. Washington, DC.) 
11 The estimates (percentage) represent the declines in sectoral outputs under the two-week lockdown in comparison 
with hypothetical scenarios of no lockdown measures imposed. International Food Policy Research Institute. 2020. 
Myanmar: Impacts of COVID-19 on Economy, Agri-food System, Jobs and Incomes. Yangon. 
4 
factory closures, particularly in the garment segment. By 10 May 2020, 175 out of 600 garment 
factories had closed because of COVID-19. In addition, travel bans, border closures, and visa 
suspensions directly impacted the tourism industry, which accounts for 6.8% of GDP and 5.9% of 
total employment, with spillover effects on hotels, restaurants, and transport services (together 
15.2% of GDP). International tourist arrivals dropped by 68% year-on-year in the first quarter of 
2020. The Ministry of Hotels and Tourism projected that international arrivals would fall to 2 million 
from the earlier estimate of more than 4 million in 2020, with significant downside risks. 
Disrupted trade and investment flows. Myanmar’s high reliance on international trade 
9. 
and investment exposes it to vulnerabilities. Exports and imports represent 52.7% of GDP. Export 
growth  slowed  to  0.13%  in  March  2020  from  1.7%  in  December  2019,  especially  in  garment 
industries.  Likewise,  import  growth  declined  to  0.16%  in  March  2020  from  1.5%  in  December 
2019,  particularly  in  manufacturing  and  construction  materials.  The  COVID-19  pandemic  also 
disrupted investment flows (30% of GDP). In October 2019–June 2020, the Myanmar Investment 
Commission approved $4.4 billion (MK6.1 trillion) in investments. However, total new investment 
commitments in FY2020 will most likely miss the target of $5.8 billion given the overall sentiment.12 
Further, there are also downside risks if all the approved investments will materialize given the 
general regional and global economic slowdown.  
10. 
Significant job losses. COVID-19 has already caused dramatic declines in employment 
and  income  in many  households.  ADB estimates  that  the  pandemic  will  result  in  job  losses of 
1.2 million–2.1 million, equivalent to 5.1%–8.7% of total employment (footnote 2). COVID-19 also 
exposed  gender  inequalities  in  business.  Women  represent  60%  of  employees  in  food  and 
accommodation services, 70%–90% of street food vendors, and vast majorities in the garment 
industry. This suggests that women are more vulnerable to unpaid leave or unemployment. About 
83% of the country’s 24 million workers are in the informal sector, with more than half working in 
agriculture and small family businesses, or as own-account workers (61.8% of working women 
and 54.1% of working men). Informal sector workers are typically not eligible for social protection 
benefits, and only 37% of workers in the formal sector are covered by the social health protection 
scheme. Disruptions in agriculture supply chains, coupled with declining farm household incomes, 
also cause concern about insufficient agricultural production in the next planting season, which 
could seriously undermine food security in Myanmar. 
11. 
Disruption  of  remittances.  Business  closures  in  neighboring  countries, especially  the 
People’s  Republic  of  China  (PRC)  and  Thailand,  has  resulted  in  job  losses  among  migrant 
workers. It is estimated that 4.25 million Myanmar nationals are working outside of the country, of 
which one-third are women. By 12 June 2020, 103,163 migrant workers had returned to Myanmar 
from Thailand, the PRC, and other countries.13 In 2019, overseas work contributed about 50% of 
total new job opportunities.14 Remittances, on average, contribute 44% of household income and 
4.3% of GDP. The sudden absence of remittance income may result in higher poverty. 
12. 
COVID-19 to slow progress in poverty reduction. The 2017 poverty headcount ratio 
indicates that 19.3% of Myanmar’s population lived under the poverty line of $3.2 per day. Before 
the pandemic, this was expected to further decline to 11.5% in 2020. ADB now estimates that the 
number of poor people will increase from 6.3 million to 7.6 million, and that the projected poverty 
12 Ministry of Investment and Foreign Economic Relations. Endorsed Enterprises by Myanmar Investment Commission 
(June 2020). Nay Pyi Taw. 
13 International Organization for Migration. 2020. COVID-19 Response Situation Report No. 8. Yangon. 
14 Ministry of Labor, Immigration and Population. Nay Pyi Taw. 
5 
headcount ratio will increase from 11.5% to 13.9% in 2020.15 Women are at greater risk of falling 
back into poverty than men because they account for the majority of workers in many economic 
sectors  affected by  COVID-19, notably manufacturing,  food,  accommodation,  and  the  informal 
sector.  Low-income  and  rural  households  also  face  vulnerabilities  in  non-income  dimensions, 
such as access to education, social protection, and quality health care. Given that 62% of the 
population do not have savings, many have no buffer against COVID-19’s economic shocks.16  
13. 
Banking  system  already  constrained.  Myanmar’s  banking  system  has  been  going 
through  reforms  to  better  support  the  growing  economy  but  still  exhibits  several  structural 
vulnerabilities. 17  Its  financial  soundness  indicators  are  lower  than  those  of  regional  peers, 
especially capital adequacy and banking profitability. Moreover, risks remain high and could be 
exacerbated by the economic impact of COVID-19. In private banks, real estate and construction 
loans exceed aggregate capital, and commercial loans are  about 7 times the aggregate equity 
capital.  Yet, capital buffers are  thin.  Myanmar  banking’s aggregate  Tier 1  regulatory  capital  is 
10.8% of risk-weighted assets, against 15.8% on average in Southeast Asia. In 2019, the banking 
sector’s aggregate return on assets and equity was among the lowest in the region. 
14. 
Fiscal deficit widening. COVID-19 has exacerbated revenue compression, which further 
limits  the  fiscal  space  to  counter  economic  impacts.  The  government’s  revenue  in  FY2020  is 
projected to decline by 18.1%, from $12.7 billion to $10.4 billion, with significant downside risks 
(Table 2). Tax and nontax revenues have declined along with economic activity and commodity 
(gas) prices. Public expenditure in FY2020 is projected to remain at $14.4 billion, but that is only 
the  result  of  deferring  critical  capital  expenditures  to  prioritize  COVID-19-related  recurrent 
spending needs. The fiscal deficit is expected to widen to 5.8% of GDP in FY2020, from 4.0% in 
FY2019 and the pre-shock estimate of 2.6% in FY2020. 
Table 2: Fiscal Impacts of COVID-19 
FY2020 
FY2019 
($ billion) 
Pre-COVID-19 
($ billion) 
Total government revenue 
Of which: Taxes 
                  Nontax revenue 
Total public expenditure 
Recurrent expenditure 
Of which: CERP expenditure 
                  Capital expenditure 
Overall fiscal deficit 
       Share to GDP 
11.0 
4.5 
6.5 
13.7 
9.2 
4.5 
2.8 
4.0% 
12.7 
4.4 
8.3 
14.4 
9.1 
5.3 
1.8 
2.6% 
COVID-19 
Adjusted 
($ billion) 
10.4 
4.2 
6.2 
14.4 
9.9 
1.3 
4.5 
4.0 
5.8% 
FY2021 
($ billion) 
Change 
(%) 
(18.1) 
(4.6) 
(25.3) 
0.0 
8.8 
(18.2) 
122.2 
3.2 
11.2 
4.6 
6.6 
15.6 
10.8 
1.0 
4.8 
4.4 
5.8% 
( )  =  negative,  CERP  =  COVID-19  Economic  Relief  Plan,  COVID-19  = coronavirus  disease,  FY  = fiscal  year, GDP  
= gross domestic product. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates based on International Monetary Fund. 
15. 
Initial outbreak prevention and control. The government has taken various measures 
in  response  to  COVID-19. It  set  up  the  National Central  Committee  for  COVID-19  Prevention, 
Control and Treatment, chaired by the State Counsellor, to coordinate and monitor overall COVID-
19  responses.  The  Ministry  of  Health  and  Sports  (MOHS),  in  dialogue  with  ADB  and  other 
15 J. Bulan et al. 2020. "COVID-19 and Poverty: Some Scenarios." Unpublished note prepared for Economic Research 
and Regional Cooperation Department, Asian Development Bank. 
16 United Nations Capital Development Fund. 2018. Case Studies of Savings Mobilization in Myanmar: Opportunities 
and Challenges. New York. 
17 Currently, the system consists of 27 private banks, of which 6 are systemic, 4 are state-owned banks, and 13 are 
foreign branches. The 6 systemic banks account for 51% of system assets and 65% of total system lending. 
6 
development partners, formulated the HSCP in April 2020, which defines the health-related tasks 
of:  (i) implementing  travel  restrictions  at  points  of  entry;  (ii)  closing  schools  and  non-essential 
businesses,  and  issuing  a  nationwide  “stay  at  home”  order;  (iii)  isolating  suspected  cases  at 
designated hospitals and conducting contact tracing; (iv) distributing COVID-19 information to the 
public, including daily updates on the MOHS website; (v) improving hygiene in public areas; and 
(vi)  procuring  essential  medical  products  and  equipment.  The  health-related  measures  in  the 
CERP are designed to support the HSCP implementation. 
 Strong pro-poor countercyclical expenditure plan.  The government announced the 
16. 
CERP  on  27  April  2020  to  mitigate  the  COVID-19  impacts  and  to  lay  the  foundations  for  an 
economic recovery. The CERP comprises health, social, and economic measures. The Ministry 
of Planning, Finance and Industry (MOPFI) estimates that the CERP will stimulate fiscal spending 
by  approximately  $2.5  billion,  including  $203.5  million  in  forgone  tax  revenue  because  of  tax 
credits and deductions. The key fiscal measures are summarized in Table 3. ADB estimates show 
that the $2.5 billion fiscal package, including forgone tax revenues (3.7% of GDP), could lead to 
a  cumulative  increase  in  real  GDP  of  $3.3  billion  for  FY2020  and  FY2021.18 ADB  and  other 
development partners were consulted in the preparation of the CERP. 
Table 3: Overview of Government’s COVID-19 Economic Relief Plana 
Fiscal Response Area 
Social assistance provided to vulnerable groups and populations at risk 
Health system strengthened for COVID-19 prevention and control 
Support provided for businesses and economic recovery 
Tax relief and credit measures, including government fee waivers 
Total  
    Of which:  Government revenue losses 
                     Additional fiscal spending 
Amount ($ million) 
   711.4 
   372.8 
1,190.0 
   203.5 
2,477.6 
   203.5 
2,274.1 
COVID-19 = coronavirus disease. 
a  The detailed cost estimates by fiscal response area are in Summary of Government’s COVID-19 Economic Relief 
  Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
Sources: Ministry of Planning, Finance and Industry and Asian Development Bank. 
17. 
Strengthening  public  health system.  The  CERP  designates  five  investment  areas  to 
strengthen  the  health  care  system:  (i)  extend  and  improve  quarantine  facilities;  (ii)  import  key 
medical products; (iii) improve preventive measures; (iv) improve health sector human resource 
capacity;  and  (v) upgrade  existing  health  facilities.  The  government  repurposed  7,772  public 
premises  into  quarantine  facilities  as  of  15  June  2020.  It  is  implementing  the  systematic 
disinfection of crowded public spaces where social distancing is difficult and sanitation and waste 
management systems are limited. Mass rapid testing options are being explored as communities 
and businesses  reopen. States and  regions  will conduct human  resource  mapping and  recruit 
additional  health  workers.  Training  for  the  workforce and  volunteers  will  be  conducted  in each 
state  and  region.  Finally,  the  government  will  scale  up  laboratory  testing  and  health  facilities, 
rectify  the  unreliable  electricity  supply  at  some  state  and  regional  hospitals,  and  ensure  full 
refrigeration capacity for the storage of vaccines and special drugs.  
18. 
Cash and in-kind support to vulnerable populations. The government will provide one-
time cash transfers to vulnerable population segments, including: (i) $21.50 per elderly person 
(80–84 years old); (ii) $14.30 per disabled person; (iii) $21.50 for each woman with children under 
2  years  of  age;  and  (iv) $28.50  per  family  covering  about  5.5  million  vulnerable  households, 
18 Estimating the Overall Fiscal Impact of COVID-19 Response Packages (accessible from the list of linked documents 
in Appendix 2).  
7 
especially those affected by the closure of factories and businesses or without regular income.19 
The  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Livestock  and  Irrigation  plans  to  provide  financial  support  to 
smallholder farmers who lost sales revenue or remittance income, to enable input purchases in 
time  for  monsoon  planting  in  2020.  It  will  also  provide  support  for  enhancing  productivity  and 
market  connectivity  in  the  agriculture  sector.  The  government  has  completed  in-kind  (food) 
transfers  for  4 million  vulnerable  households  and  is  coordinating  the  cash  transfer  program.  It 
exempted 4.4 million households from electricity tariffs for up to 150 kilowatt-hours in AprilꟷJune, 
and up to 75 kilowatt-hours in July 2020. 
19. 
Fiscal measures to safeguard small businesses and workers. The government set up 
a $71.7 million COVID-19 Fund to provide working capital to the most affected MSMEs, such as 
cut–make–pack manufacturing, hotels, and tourism businesses, at a rate of 1% for 1 year.20 It 
provided working capital to 3,000 MSMEs, of which 30% are owned by women, totaling $65 million 
as of June 2020. It plans to increase the COVID-19 Fund by $358 million. The government will 
also develop a credit guarantee scheme by the end of 2020.21 The scheme will guarantee 50% of 
bank loans to enterprises (up to a turnover of MK1 billion) that are not beneficiaries of the COVID-
19 Fund, conditional upon maintenance of staff employed as of 1 February 2020.22  
20. 
Tax measures to improve liquidity. Through the CERP, the government will provide tax 
relief and tax credits to increase the liquidity of businesses and individuals. It will waive the 2% 
withholding tax on exports and specific goods, customs duties, and the commercial tax on critical 
medical  supplies  and  products  related  to  the  prevention,  control,  and  treatment  of  COVID-19. 
Moreover, the government will provide a 10% nonrefundable tax credit for incremental wage bills 
and  incremental  investments  in  capital  equipment.  It  will  grant  a  deduction  equal  to  125%  of 
wages  paid  and  a  one-time  increase  in  depreciation  equal  to  125%  of  actual  depreciation  for 
2020. To relieve the financial burden on local businesses, the government will exempt lease fee 
charges for 3–6 months for MSMEs that have leased state-owned factories for manufacturing and 
waive or reduce toll fees for cargo trucks on major roads and bridges. The total forgone revenue 
from all these measures is estimated at $203.5 million.  
21. 
Coordinated  monetary  and  banking  responses.  The  government  initiated  monetary 
and banking system stimulus measures to respond to the economic impacts of COVID-19. The 
Central  Bank  of  Myanmar  (CBM)  reduced  banks’  deposit  and  lending  rates  by  3%  and  their 
minimum  reserve  requirement  by  at  least  150  basis  points. 23 It  plans  to  establish  an  asset 
management company before the end of 2020 to manage the nonperforming loans of the banks. 
The CBM also arranged to negotiate with private financial institutions to give more flexibility  to 
households  that are most  negatively  affected by COVID-19.  The  CBM’s financing of  the  fiscal 
deficit is limited to $932 million in the FY2020 supplementary budget (37% of domestic financing) 
19 The cash transfer program for pregnant women and children under 2 years of age is an extension of the ongoing 
Maternal and Child Cash Transfer Program. For the cash transfers to 5.5 million households, the Ward and Village 
Tract Administrators will conduct means-tests to identify vulnerable households.  
20 The eligibility criteria apply to businesses that (i) are affected by COVID-19, (ii) can restart their business once the 
loan  is provided,  (iii)  obtained business  permits  before  31 March  2018, (iv) have  had annual  profits  over  the  last  
2 years, (v) have capacity to repay the loan, (vi) will use the loan only for the payment of salaries and operational 
costs, (vii) are not on any of the government’s black lists, and (viii) have paid the business tax. 
21 The ADB is also preparing the Enhancing Financial Access through Public Credit Guarantee Scheme Project, which 
will provide support for the government to set up a new government credit guarantee corporation, with due regard to 
bank credit risk practices and reporting. 
22 To be financed by the government’s funds or by funding sources from other development partners. 
23 In 2020, the CBM cut its policy interest rate by 0.5% on 12 March, 1.0% on 24 March, and 1.5% on 28 April. The 
minimum deposit rates were reduced from 8% to 5%, the maximum lending rates from 13% to 10% for collateralized 
loans, and from 16% to 13% for uncollateralized loans. 
8 
and will be gradually phased out as the economy begins to recover. Box 1 provides a snapshot 
of the COVID-19 impact and summarizes the key response measures taken by the authorities. 
22. 
Lessons learned. The proposed CARES Program takes into account the experience and 
lessons  from  other  CARES  Programs  in  the  region,  notably  that  (i)  budget  support  for  the 
countercyclical expenditure program is necessary to mitigate the adverse impact on health and 
socioeconomic  outcomes  and  to  reinstate  market  confidence,  and  (ii)  ADB’s  continued 
engagement  through  regular  policy  dialogue  and  investment  programs  is  instrumental  in 
managing  the  unfolding  impacts  of  COVID-19.  The  CARES  Program  will  also  include  a 
comprehensive monitoring and reporting framework involving committees and technical working 
groups (TWGs) under the government and engage the private sector and stakeholders throughout 
its implementation. It was designed in close consultation with other development partners, such 
as the IMF, Japan International Cooperation Agency, the WHO, and the World Bank. 
Box 1: Snapshot of COVID-19 Impact in Myanmar 
Myanmar’s vulnerabilities in the pandemic situation 
(ii) 
(i)  While the COVID-19 infection rate has been low so far, the poor living conditions in urban areas 
and the porous borders with a large migrant labor pool of more than 4 million people, all in the 
context of a weak health system, considerably expose Myanmar to future outbreaks. 
The  economic  impact  is  unprecedented—job  losses  of  1.2 million  to  2.1  million  are  expected, 
and  the  number  of  the  poor  is  likely  to  increase  by  1.3  million  people.  More  than  25%  of 
manufacturing establishments have already shut down, and more such closures are expected. 
Since more than 80% of the labor force is employed in the informal sector, 70% of them women, 
the social impact will be quite severe. 
(iii)  Conflict-affected areas are likely to be more vulnerable if large-scale outbreaks occur. 
(iv)  Recovery in low-value manufacturing businesses, construction, and tourism is likely to be slow 
and highly dependent on regional recovery. Knock-on effects are likely to be felt in the banking 
industry. 
The  fiscal  impact  of  the  crisis  is  severe—a  sharp  revenue  compression  will  lead  to  the  fiscal 
deficit widening to 5.8% of GDP and net financing needs increasing to $4.18 billion. 
(v) 
Measures taken by the authorities 
First-phase response to shore up the country’s health facilities, with ADB support 
(i) 
(ii)  Design of the CERP in a comprehensive manner, with a focus on social, economic, and fiscal–
financial aspects, and keeping an eye on facilitating a swift recovery 
(iii) 
Senior leadership engaged in the design, implementation, and monitoring of the CERP 
(iv)  Commitment to ensure that the CERP support will be distributed in an equitable manner across 
all ethnic groups and regions, including in areas where internally displaced people live 
(v)  Concerted  dialogue  and  partnership  with  development  partners,  including  the  International 
Monetary  Fund  by  seeking  $700  million  Rapid  Credit  Facility  and  Rapid  Financing  Instrument 
assistance and initiating discussion on debt service suspension 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CERP = COVID-19 Economic Relief Plan, COVID-19 = coronavirus disease. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
B. 
Proposed Program, Impacts, and ADB’s Value Addition  
23. 
The  CARES Program  is  aligned  with ADB’s  country  partnership  strategy for  Myanmar, 
2017–2021, by supporting sustainable and inclusive economic development, and job creation for 
poverty reduction.24 The impact of the program will be to mitigate the adverse impacts of COVID-
19 on health, livelihoods, and the economy. The outcome of the program will be the COVID-19 
24 ADB. 2017. Country Partnership Strategy: Myanmar, 2017–2021—Building the Foundations for Inclusive Growth. 
Manila. 
9 
outbreak effectively controlled and its adverse effects on the poor and vulnerable population and 
businesses reduced. The program has three outputs: (i) social assistance provided to the poor 
and  vulnerable  groups  and  populations  at  risk;  (ii)  health  system  strengthened  for  COVID-19 
prevention and control; and (iii) MSMEs safeguarded and workers supported during the economic 
downturn. The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1. 
24. 
ADB’s  value addition.  The  CARES  Program  leverages  ADB’s  continued  engagement 
with Myanmar and complements its projects for health, social assistance, and job creation. The 
program  will  be  complemented  by  technical  advice  and  knowledge  support  under  the  country 
engagement framework.25 In addition, ADB serves as a catalyst for development coordination and 
parallel financing. It closely engages with the MOPFI to jointly monitor the socioeconomic impacts 
of the pandemic. Through a regional technical assistance, ADB will provide policy and technical 
advice  to  the  government  to  effectively  implement  the  CERP.26 The  program  also  adheres  to 
ADB’s conflict-sensitivity approach (Box 2). 
Box 2: Conflict-Sensitivity Approach of the Program 
Objectives of conflict-sensitive approach 
ADB  applies  a  conflict-sensitive  approach to  all  its  operations  in  Myanmar.  This  seeks  to  ensure  that 
ADB  assistance  will  (i)  not  exacerbate  ongoing  conflicts,  (ii) contribute  to  inclusive  development  with 
equitable  benefits  to  all  communities,  and  (iii)  not  be  disrupted  by  local  conflicts.  A  panel  of  conflict 
advisors advises ADB on the evolving political, economic, ethnic, and other conflict-related situations. 
Application of conflict-sensitive approach to the program 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
The  government  has  provided  full  assurances  in  its  development  policy  letter  that  the  CERP 
resources will be channeled to all segments of the vulnerable population of Myanmar, without 
any differentiation or discrimination. Those with the utmost needs will be supported, regardless 
of who the beneficiaries are including the most vulnerable and ethnic minorities, as well as those 
living in areas affected by past and current conflicts. 
The government has deployed rapid response teams to manage outbreaks and operate mobile 
clinics to deliver life-saving health care services in conflict-affected areas.  
The  Maternal  and  Child  Cash  Transfer  Program  and  cash  and  in-kind  (food)  transfers  to 
vulnerable households and populations at risk include internally displaced persons in camps. 
A country engagement framework will be established as part of the CARES Program to enable 
(a) policy dialogue between the government and ADB, (b) monitoring, and (c) updating on the 
government’s countercyclical measures, which will ensure equitable coverage of the CERP for 
all states and regions.  
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CERP = COVID-19 Economic Relief Plan, COVID-19 = coronavirus disease. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
25. 
ADB supports all three areas of the CERP. First, ADB reprogrammed the ongoing Greater 
Mekong  Subregion  Health Security Project  totaling $6.6 million  to  support  the  early  COVID-19 
response,  and  is  preparing  $30  million  in  additional  financing  to  implement  the  HSCP.27 ADB 
procured medical supplies and equipment amounting to $1.7 million to address the outbreak.28 
Myanmar participates in the Greater Mekong Subregion Health Cooperation Working Group, a 
25 Country  Engagement  Framework  for  COVID-19  Response  (accessible  from  the  list  of  linked  documents  in 
Appendix 2). 
26 ADB. 2020. Technical Assistance for Policy Advice for COVID-19 Economic Recovery in Southeast Asia. Manila. 
27 ADB. 2016. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loans and Grant to 
the  Kingdom  of  Cambodia,  Lao  People’s  Democratic  Republic,  Republic  of the  Union  of  Myanmar,  and  Socialist 
Republic of Viet Nam for the Greater Mekong Subregion Health Security Project. Manila. 
28 ADB. 2020. Technical Assistance for Regional Support to Address the Outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019 and 
Potential Outbreaks of Other Communicable Diseases. Manila. 
10 
regional  policy  dialogue  mechanism  supported  by  ADB.  Second,  ADB’s  ongoing  projects  will 
provide small loans ($300/year/household) to farmers to buy seeds and fertilizer and support farm 
mechanization.29  They will also support the cash-for-work program in the CERP action plan to 
promote rural employment among laid-off workers and returning migrants.30 Finally, ADB will help 
the government establish a public credit guarantee scheme to benefit MSMEs (footnote 21).  
C. 
Development Financing Needs, Budget Support, and Debt Sustainability 
The  government’s  total  financing  requirement  is  expected  to  increase  by  13.0%,  from  
26. 
$3.70  billion  to  $4.18 billion  in  FY2020,  of  which  $2.50  billion  will  be  financed  by  domestic 
borrowing. The government plans to mobilize $1.68 billion through concessional borrowing from 
development partners and multilateral financial institutions, in line with the IMF recommendation 
(Table 4). The IMF itself plans to provide $700 million through its Rapid Credit Facility and Rapid 
Financing Instrument, and its board approved the first tranche of $356.5 million on 26 June 2020. 
Table 4: Financing Needs and Support for in FY2020 and FY2021 
($ billion) 
FY2020 
Pre-COVID-19 
3.70 
2.70 
1.00 
FY2020 
COVID-19 Adjusted 
4.18 
2.50 
1.68 
1.09 
Change 
(%) 
13.0 
(7.4) 
68.0 
Item  
Total financing requirement (net) 
  Domestic borrowing 
  Foreign borrowing 
    COVID-19 Financing 
    ADB (CPRO) 
    G20 Debt Service Suspension Initiative 
    European Union 
    International Monetary Fund (RCF/RFI) 
    Japan International Cooperation Agency 
    World Bank 
    Other Financing Sources 
0.32 
0.06 
0.35 
0.28 
0.08 
0.59 
(41.0) 
1.00 
FY2021 
4.54 
3.01 
1.53 
0.82 
0.25 
0.10 
0.06 
0.35 
0.06 
0.71 
( )  =  negative,  ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  COVID-19  =  coronavirus  disease,  CPRO  =  COVID-19  pandemic 
response option, FY = fiscal year, RCF = Rapid Credit Facility, RFI = Rapid Financing Instrument. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates based on International Monetary Fund. 
The government has requested a concessional loan of $250,000,000 from ADB’s ordinary 
27. 
capital  resources  to  help  finance  the  anticipated  deficit  from  the  pandemic  response  and 
countercyclical support expenditure. The loan will have a 24-year term, including a grace period 
of 8 years; an interest rate of 1.0% per year during the grace period and 1.5% per year thereafter; 
and such other terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan agreement. The loan is expected 
to have two equal disbursements in October and December 2020. The total loan size is based on 
Myanmar’s development spending requirements related to the CERP and its financing needs.  
Debt sustainability. Risks of external and overall debt distress are assessed as low.31 
28. 
Total public debt stood at 39.5% of GDP in FY2019, of which domestic public debt was 62.5% 
and external public debt was 37.5%. Domestic debt comprises treasury bills and bonds, a large 
share of which is held by the CBM. The largest share of external public debt is held by bilateral 
creditors, of  which the PRC and  Japan are  the  largest.  International  Development  Association 
29 ADB.  2018.  Report  and  Recommendation  of  the  President  to  the  Board  of  Directors:  Proposed  Loan  and 
Administration of Grant to the Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains 
Sector Project. Manila. 
30 ADB. 2019. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of  Directors: Proposed Loan, Grant, and 
Administration of Grant to the Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Resilient Community Development Project. 
Manila. 
31 IMF. 2020. Myanmar: 2019 Article IV Consultation. Washington, DC. 
11 
and ADB are the largest multilateral creditors. Prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, the ratio of public 
debt to GDP was expected to decline from 39.5% of GDP in FY2019 to 36.9% in FY2020, and 
then increase to 37.2% in FY2021. Given the COVID-19 pandemic, the public debt trajectory is 
now expected to rise to 43.6% of GDP in FY2020 and to 45.2% in FY2021—but still below the 
IMF’s public debt sustainability threshold at 55% of GDP. The $250 million CARES Program will 
have  only  a  small  impact,  adding  about  0.38%  to  the  debt  to  GDP  ratio,  which  remains 
sustainable.32  
D. 
Development Partner Coordination 
29. 
ADB coordinates its COVID-19 response support closely with other development partners 
and the government’s Development Aid Coordination Unit, chaired by the State Counsellor. The 
WHO  supported  the  formulation  of  the  HSCP  and  helped  coordinate  between  United  Nations 
agencies and nongovernment organizations. ADB is coordinating with the  IMF, which provided 
support through its Rapid Credit Facility and Rapid Financing Instrument, and the World Bank to 
conduct  macroeconomic  monitoring  and  to  support  the  government’s  economic  stimulus 
programs. This coordination also extends to  assessing the impact of COVID-19 and designing 
the  proposed  CARES  Program,  for  which  the  IMF  provided  an  assessment  letter. 33 ADB  is 
working closely with Agence Française de Développement, the European Union, the IMF, Japan 
International Cooperation Agency, the United States Agency for International Development, and 
the World Bank, and is exploring financing opportunities to help implement the CERP. 
E. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The  MOPFI  will  be  the  executing  agency  for  the  program.  The  government  and  ADB 
30. 
agreed  to  establish  a  country  engagement  framework  (footnote  25)  covering  policy  dialogue, 
monitoring, and reporting on the government’s countercyclical measures.  It will enable ADB to 
support the government through technical assistance to ensure the effective implementation of 
the CERP (footnote 26). The framework comprises a steering committee to guide and monitor the 
overall  implementation  of  the  CERP.  The  TWGs  will  support  the  committee  with  inputs  for 
monitoring  the  government’s  overall  COVID-19  response.  They  will  also  facilitate  the 
government’s  engagement  with  the  private  sector,  stakeholders,  and  other  ministries. 
Government representatives on the  TWGs will include officials from the  Ministry of Investment 
and Foreign Economic Relations, the MOPFI, and other ministries. The TWGs will meet at least 
once every quarter. The program implementation period is from September 2020 to September 
2021. The proceeds of the loan will be withdrawn in accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time). 
III. 
DUE DILIGENCE 
Governance. The government has improved governance and transparency through wide-
31. 
ranging  reforms.34 With  the  support  of ADB and other development partners,  it modernized  its 
public  financial  management  (PFM)  systems.  The  MOPFI  introduced  an  automated  financial 
information  reporting  system  for  the  Treasury.  A  unified  chart  of  accounts  was  developed  to 
support the automation and close gaps with international reporting standards. The modernization 
of the PFM law will continue to drive this process over the medium term. ADB provided assistance 
32 Debt Sustainability Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).  
33 IMF Assessment Letter (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
34 PEFA  Secretariat.  2012.  Republic  of the  Union  of  Myanmar:  Public  Financial  Management  Performance  Report. 
Washington, DC. 
12 
to  develop  the  financial  audit  guidelines,  which  are  aligned  with  International  Standards  for 
Supreme Audit Institutions. ADB will continue to boost the capacity of the Office of the Auditor 
General,  which  will  improve  the  financial  audit,  governance,  and  transparency  of  COVID-19-
related  public  expenditures. 35  ADB’s  Anticorruption  Policy  (1998,  as  amended  to  date)  was 
explained to and discussed with the government. 
32. 
Poverty and inequality. The COVID-19 pandemic will have a devastating and long-term 
impact  on  much  of  the  population,  particularly  on  the  poor  and  vulnerable  groups.  Many 
households have experienced sharp declines in employment and income. Rural households are 
suffering from a decline in remittances from migrant workers affected by the crisis both in-country 
and abroad. Poverty incidence  will worsen with 1.3 million people expected to  fall into poverty 
(para. 12). While the CERP lays out measures to  contain COVID-19, minimize socioeconomic 
impacts, and help vulnerable groups, its adequate resourcing and effective implementation will 
be critical to avert a sharp escalation in poverty and minimize short- and long-term social impacts.  
33. 
Gender. The CARES Program is categorized as effective gender mainstreaming. It will 
address the gender-specific impacts of COVID-19 through three channels. First, the government 
will  target  at  least  50%  female  beneficiaries  in  vulnerable  households  through  various  social 
assistance  programs. 36  Second,  the  MOHS  will  continue  to  mainstream  gender  into  health 
planning and  service delivery by ensuring that communities have access to  gender-responsive 
COVID-19 quarantine centers that are segregated, secure, and accessible for  all patients; and 
that  health  care  workers  (65%  of  whom  are  women)  (i)  undergo  routine  testing  to  reduce 
asymptomatic transmission, and (ii) receive $35.80 in supplementary compensation. Finally, the 
government  has  provided  working  capital  loans  and  tax  credits  to  MSMEs  (of  which  30%  are 
owned by women) to ensure access to credit during the recovery period. 
34. 
Safeguards. In compliance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), the program 
is classified category C for environment, involuntary resettlement, and indigenous peoples. The 
program  is  not  expected  to  have  any  environmental  or  social  safeguard  impacts  within  the 
meaning of the Safeguard Policy Statement. 
Risks and mitigating measures. Major risks and mitigating measures are summarized 
35. 
in Table 5 and described in detail in the risk assessment and risk management plan.37  
Risk Description 
Prolonged outbreak and resurgence of 
confirmed cases deepen the economic 
downturn. Myanmar has imposed several 
movement restrictions, such as the “stay at 
home” order, and curfews in Yangon and a 
few other states and regions since 19 April 
2020. However, the unfolding health impact 
of COVID-19 may exacerbate the economic 
downturn, affecting more vulnerable 
households and at-risk populations. 
Table 5: Substantial Risks and Mitigating Measures 
Mitigation Measures 
The CERP includes action plans that build on the government’s cash 
and  in-kind  transfers to vulnerable  households and  populations  at 
risk,  including  women,  children,  the  elderly,  and  people  with 
disabilities.  It  will  ramp  up  public  health  capacity  by  improving 
testing,  quarantine,  and  intensive  care  facilities,  and  medical 
staffing. In addition, financial assistance packages such as working 
capital loans and tax relief will improve the liquidity of MSMEs and 
workers.  ADB  will  provide  support for  the  government to set  up  a 
new  government  credit  guarantee  corporation,  with  due  regard  to 
bank credit risk practices and reporting. 
35 ADB.  2014.  Technical  Assistance  for  Enhancing  Roles  of  Supreme  Audit  Institutions  in  Selected  Association  of 
Southeast Asian Nations Countries. Manila. 
36 The criteria used to identify vulnerable households center on: (i) whether homes are rented or owned and the types 
of construction materials used; (ii) whether incomes are informal or precarious; (iii) whether dependency ratios are 
greater than 4; and (iv) the migrant status of households. 
37 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
13 
Risk Description 
Limited capacity and resources for 
effective public health responses and the 
implementation of the CERP. 
The health system has a chronic shortage of 
medical and other staff because of limited 
permanent staff positions and low 
compensation levels.  
Banking system vulnerabilities worsen 
economic and financial shocks. 
The banking sector is constrained by 
relatively low capital adequacy and 
profitability, which may impair its ability to 
help restart the economy, thereby 
deepening the economic downturn. 
Limited  governance  and  transparency  of 
public  expenditures  dilute  effectiveness 
of health and fiscal responses. 
Concerns regarding governance and budget 
transparency, and public expenditure 
accountability may undermine the overall 
effectiveness of health and fiscal responses 
to COVID-19. 
Mitigation Measures 
The MOHS plans to: (i) temporarily transfer health personnel from 
unaffected  areas  to  support  affected  areas  such  as  Yangon; 
(ii) mobilize  community  health  volunteers, medical  volunteers,  and 
medical  students;  and  provide  training  on  essential  COVID-19 
responses,  including  surveillance,  laboratory  testing,  and  clinical 
care; and (iii) engage development partners to provide technical and 
operational  support  to  the  MOHS,  such  as  for  procurement  of 
medical products and civil works, and community mobilization.  
The CBM introduced coordinated monetary policies to mitigate the 
pressure on banks’ liquidity. It reduced banks’ deposit and lending 
rate ceilings by 3.0% and their minimum reserve requirement by at 
least 150 basis points in March–April 2020. The CBM allowed the 
banks  to  restructure  and  reschedule  loans  already  extended  to 
MSMEs. It targets to conduct credit auctions, as necessary, to inject 
more  liquidity  into  the finance  sector.  Before the  end  of  2020, the 
government  plans  to  temporarily  reduce  treasury  bond  and  bill 
auctions to allow for an effective expansionary fiscal stance. 
The government will convene quarterly meetings with development 
partners  and  stakeholders  to  monitor  the  CERP  implementation 
progress.  The  technical  working  groups  will  be  tasked  to  engage 
with  stakeholders  and  ensure  effective  and 
transparent 
implementation  of  CERP.  CERP  expenditures  will  be  published 
quarterly, and audited financial statements, within 6 months of each 
fiscal year. In addition, the government plans to unify the automated 
budget  and  financial  reporting  systems,  which  will  be  critical  in 
enhancing  transparency  and  accuracy  of  financial  information  for 
monitoring  and  reporting  on  the  CERP.  ADB  helped  develop  the 
financial  audit  guidelines  aligned  with  International  Standard  for 
Supreme Audit Institutions and will continue providing support. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CBM = Central Bank of Myanmar, CERP = COVID-19 Economic Relief Plan, COVID-
19  =  coronavirus  disease,  MOHS  =  Ministry  of  Health  and  Sports,  MSMEs  =  micro,  small,  and  medium-sized 
enterprises. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
IV. 
ASSURANCES 
36. 
The government has assured ADB that the implementation of the CARES Program shall 
conform  to  all  applicable  ADB  policies,  including  those  concerning  anticorruption  measures, 
safeguards,  gender  equality,  procurement,  financial  management,  consulting  services,  and 
disbursement as described in detail in the loan documents.  
V. 
RECOMMENDATION 
37. 
I am satisfied that the proposed loan would comply with the Articles of Agreement of the 
Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  and  recommend  that  the  Board  approve  the  loan  of 
$250,000,000 to the Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the COVID-19 Active Response and 
Expenditure Support Program, from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, in concessional terms, with 
an  interest  charge  at  the  rate  of  1.0%  per  year  during  the  grace  period  and  1.5%  per  year 
thereafter; for a term of 24 years, including a grace period of 8 years; and such other terms and 
conditions  as  are  substantially  in  accordance  with  those  set  forth  in  the  draft  loan  agreement 
presented to the Board. 
4 August 2020 
Masatsugu Asakawa 
President 
14 
Appendix 1 
DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK 
Country’s Overarching Development Objectives 
Adverse impacts of COVID-19 on health, livelihoods, and economy mitigated (COVID-19 Economic Relief 
Plan)a  
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with Targets 
and Baselines 
Effect of the 
program 
COVID-19 outbreak 
effectively controlled 
and adverse effects 
on the poor and 
vulnerable population 
and businesses 
reducedb 
Outputs 
1. Social assistance 
provided to the poor 
and vulnerable 
groups and 
populations at risk 
2. Health system 
strengthened for 
COVID-19 prevention 
and control 
By December 2021: 
a. Poverty and unemployment 
indicators return to the pre-shock 
levels of 11.5% and 1.6%, 
respectively (2020 baseline: poverty 
at 13.9% and unemployment at 
3.1%–5.4%) 
b. Myanmar’s preparedness 
capacity, assessed by the 
Operational Readiness Index, 
increased by at least 5 points to 69% 
or more (2018 baseline: 64% 
compliance) 
By December 2020: 
1.1 To support input purchases in 
time for monsoon planting, cash or 
in-kind support provided to at least 
1.55 million smallholder farmer 
families (with at least 50% female 
household members) who have lost 
sales revenue or remittance income 
(Baseline: no smallholder farmer 
families receiving cash or in-kind 
support)  
1.2 To help cope with COVID-19, 
457,000 pregnant women and 
children under 2 years of age 
received one-off $21.50 cash 
transfer (June 2020 baseline: 
242,000) 
1.3 At least 5.5 million vulnerable 
households (at least 50% of which 
are female household members), 
especially poor people without 
regular income, received one-off 
$28.50 cash transfer (June 2020 
baseline: 25,000 households) 
2.1. At least 9,000 community 
quarantine centers for COVID-19 
operationalized and supported in 
compliance with gender-responsive 
standard operational guidelinesc 
(April 2020 baseline: 6,808)  
2.2 The number of intensive care 
beds for COVID-19 at (a) the state 
Data Sources and 
Reporting 
Mechanisms 
a. World Bank’s 
poverty data and 
International 
Labour 
Organization’s 
employment data 
b. Operational 
Readiness Index 
published by the 
World Health 
Organization  
1.1 Progress report 
from the Ministry of 
Agriculture, 
Livestock and 
Irrigation  
1.2 Progress report 
from the Ministry of 
Social Welfare, 
Relief and 
Resettlement 
1.3 Progress report 
from the General 
Administration 
Department under 
the Ministry of the 
Office of the Union 
Government 
2.1–2.4 Progress 
report from the 
Ministry of Health 
and Sports 
Risks 
Worsening 
conditions in 
international 
commodity and 
financial markets 
put further 
downward 
pressure on the 
economy and 
government 
revenues. 
Gaps in technical 
capacity limit the 
ability of 
government 
agencies to 
implement the 
health-related 
responses 
effectively. 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with Targets 
and Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting 
Mechanisms 
Risks 
Appendix 1 
15 
and regional hospitals (200 beds and 
above) and (b) the six designated 
COVID-19 hospitals increased to a 
total of 500 
(April 2020 baseline: 200) 
2.3. Daily laboratory testing capacity 
increased to 3,010 (June 2020 
baseline: 1,500) 
2.4. At least 80% of health personnel 
at the six designated COVID-19 
hospitals (at least 65% of whom are 
women) trained in COVID-19 
management protocols and standard 
operation procedures, including the 
special guidelines for the 
management of COVID-19 during 
pregnancyd (April 2020 baseline: 0 
staff trained) 
3. MSMEs 
safeguarded and 
workers supported 
during the economic 
downturn 
3.1 At least 7,000 affected MSMEs, 
of which 30% are owned by women,e 
received working capital 
(June 2020 baseline: 3,000)  
3.1–3.2 Reports 
from the Ministry of 
Planning, Finance 
and Industry 
3.2 To encourage firms to retain 
workers, at least 30,000 MSMEs (of 
which at least 30% are owned by 
womene) received 10% 
nonrefundable tax credits on the 
incremental wage bill and 125% tax 
deduction of the wage bill 
(January 2020 baseline: no MSMEs 
received tax credit or 125% tax 
deduction on the wage bill) 
Budget Support 
Asian Development Bank: $250,000,000 (loan)  
COVID-19 = coronavirus disease, MSMEs = micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises. 
a  Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar. 2020. Overcoming as One: COVID-19 Economic Relief Plan. 
  Nay Pyi Taw. 
b  Because  it  is  uncertain  how  the  COVID-19  outbreak  and  its  economic  impact  will  unfold  and  because  new  data 
collection and reporting systems to monitor the crisis are still being developed, it is not possible to set program targets 
that  are  more  specific  and  realistic  than  those  presented  in  the  design  and  monitoring  framework.  Additional 
indicators to measure the effects of the program will be identified at a later stage and used to report on the program’s 
effectiveness as comprehensively as possible in the program completion report. 
c  Being gender-responsive refers to meeting the safety and security needs of both male and female patients, including 
separate rooms or wards and segregated toilets, bathing, and disinfection facilities. In addition, the Ministry of Health 
and Sports developed separate guidelines for the management of a COVID-19 infection during pregnancy. 
d   Gender-responsive management protocols demonstrate an awareness of different health, hygiene, and safety needs 
of female health care workers and the need to control transmission between asymptomatic health care workers. 
e  Women-owned  MSMEs  are  defined  as  enterprises  with  fewer  than  300  employees  and/or  capital  of  less  than  
MK1 billion, where at least one owner is a woman. 
Source: Asian Development Bank.  
16 
Appendix 2 
LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS 
http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=54255-001-3 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
Loan Agreement 
Sector Assessment (Summary): Health 
Development Coordination 
Country Economic Indicators 
International Monetary Fund Assessment Letter 
Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy 
Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan 
List of Ineligible Items 
Debt Sustainability Assessment 
Gender Monitoring Matrix 
Supplementary Documents 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
Summary of Government’s COVID-19 Economic Relief Plan 
Employment and Poverty Impact Assessment 
Regional Cooperation and Integration Assessment Summary 
Country Engagement Framework for COVID-19 Response  
Estimating the Overall Fiscal Impact of COVID-19 Response Packages 
Summary of Strategies Related to COVID-19 
Summary Cross-Country Comparison of COVID-19 Related Data and Effects 
DEVELOPMENT POLICY LETTER 
Appendix 3 
17 
18 
Appendix 3 
Appendix 3 
19 
20 
Appendix 3 
Appendix 3 
21 
22 
Appendix 4 
ASSESSMENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH ACCESS CRITERIA FOR THE  
COUNTERCYCLICAL SUPPORT FACILITY AND COVID-19 PANDEMIC RESPONSE OPTION 
CPRO Access Criteria 
1.  Adverse  impact  of 
exogenous shocks 
ADB Staff Assessment 
On 11 March 2020, the WHO declared the COVID-19 outbreak a global pandemic. As of 3 August 2020, 
the  WHO  reported  17,396,943  million  confirmed  COVID-19  cases  and  675,060  deaths  from  COVID-19 
globally.a In Myanmar, 353 positive cases and 6 deaths have been reported as of 3 August 2020.   
Impact on economic growth. Prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, GDP growth in FY2020 was projected at 
6.8%, sustained at the same level as in FY2019. The pre-outbreak outlook was attributable to robust growth 
in garment manufacturing and construction sectors, coupled with a recovery in the agriculture sector. ADB 
revised GDP growth for FY2020 downward to 1.8%—equivalent to economic losses of $3.3 billion—with 
downside  risks from possible  surges  in  infected cases.  This  compares  to 6.8% as  forecast  in 2019  and 
4.2% as projected in March 2020  
to  medium-term  economic  challenges.  First, 
Impact  on  key  economic  sectors.  There  are  three  main  transmission  mechanisms  through  which  the 
COVID-19  pandemic  poses  short- 
labor-intensive 
manufactures have seen the biggest impact. The manufacturing purchasing managers’ index sank to 29.0 
in April 2020 from 45.3 in February 2020. This is the third straight month of contraction in the sector and 
the steepest on record. Output, new orders, purchasing, and employment all contracted at record rates as 
demand evaporated and workers returned to their hometowns. The garment manufacturing sector, which 
employs around  1.1 million  workers nationwide  and  accounts  for 24.2%  of total exports  ($4.6 billion),  is 
particularly  vulnerable  as  it  relies on  foreign markets  for  both  imported materials and  exports.  Of  those 
workers in the garment manufacturing sector, 350,000 are at risk of either being suspended without pay or 
losing  their  jobs  permanently.  Second,  the  COVID-19  pandemic  has  disrupted  domestic  and  foreign 
investment flows. From October 2019ꟷJune 2020, the Myanmar Investment Commission had approved 
$4.4  billion  (MK6.1  trillion)  in  domestic  and  foreign  investments.  However,  total  new  investment 
commitments in FY2020 will likely miss the target of $5.8 billion due to the sudden disruption  in trade and 
manufacturing and construction delays arising out of the lockdowns and closures of non-essential business 
activities.  Lastly,  the  tourism  sector,  which  accounts  for  6.8%  of  GDP  and  2.7%  of  total  employment 
(800,000 jobs), is expected to be hard hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Ministry of Hotels and Tourism 
projected international arrivals to fall to 2 million international travelers from the earlier estimate of more 
than 4 million for 2020 due to international travel restrictions and trip cancellations. Even this projection is 
likely to be highly optimistic. 
CPRO Access Criteria 
Appendix 4 
23 
ADB Staff Assessment 
Financial  sector  vulnerabilities.  The  banking  system  consists  of  27  private  banks,  of  which  6  are 
systemic, 4 are state-owned banks, and 13 are foreign bank branches. The 6 systemic banks account for 
51%  of  system  assets  and  65%  of  total  system  lending.  Total  banking  system  assets  aggregate  to  
MK63 trillion (approximately $42 billion) and represent approximately 60% of GDP. The banking sector has 
been characterized by structural  vulnerabilities prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, 
risk remains high due to relatively low capital adequacy and bank profitability. In private banks, real estate 
and construction loans exceed aggregate capital, and commercial loans account for approximately 7-times 
the aggregate equity capital. Yet capital buffers are thin. Aggregate banking sector Tier 1 regulatory capital 
is 10.8% of risk weighted assets. For FY2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Myanmar banking sector’s 
aggregate returns on assets and equity were among the lowest in the region. In recognition of all these 
challenges, the banking sector has recently been under a modernization process. 
Widening fiscal deficit. The weakened economic environment and the required policy response to contain 
the  pandemic  will  widen  the  fiscal  deficit.  The  necessary  additional  spending  on  health  and  targeted 
transfers  to  vulnerable  households  and  firms  will  raise  expenditures,  while  weaker  economic  activity, 
reduced gas revenues, and targeted tax revenue relief will lower government revenue. The budget deficit 
is expected to widen significantly to 5.8% of GDP in FY2020, an increase from 2.6% prior to the COVID-19 
pandemic and 4.0% in FY 2019. In a scenario with widespread community transmission and even weaker 
economic activity, even higher revenue losses and additional expenditures could further increase the deficit. 
Due to the adverse impact of COVID-19 and the government’s development expenditure program, the total 
financing requirement is expected to increase by 13.0% from $3.7 billion to $4.18 billion in FY2020.  
Social  impact.    Despite  the  relatively  limited  outbreak  to  date,  COVID-19  has  already  caused  severe 
declines  in  employment  and  income  in  many  households.  For  example,  the  garment  sector  has  been 
particularly hard-hit, resulting in significant layoffs. ADB estimates that the COVID-19 pandemic will result 
in 1.2 millionꟷ2.1 million jobs loss, equivalent to 5.1%ꟷ8.7% of total employment.b The employment impact 
of COVID-19 also exposed gender inequalities in the business sector. Women represent 60% of employees 
in  food  and  accommodation  services  and  70%ꟷ90%  for  street  food  vendors.  Women  also  constitute  a 
majority of employees in the garment industry. This suggests that women are more  vulnerable to unpaid 
leave or unemployment. 83% of the country’s 24 million workforce are in the informal sector, with more than 
half working in agriculture, small family business, or as own account workers (61.8% for working females 
and 54.1% for working males). Informal sector workers are typically not eligible for social protection benefits 
and  only  37%  of  workers  in  the  formal  sector  are  covered  by  the  social  health  protection  scheme.  It  is 
estimated that 4.25 million Myanmar nationals are working outside of the country. More than 0.9 million are 
migrant workers, mainly from Mon State, Kayin State, and Shan State, who cross borders to work in the 
24 
Appendix 4 
CPRO Access Criteria 
ADB Staff Assessment 
PRC and Thailand. The official overseas employment constituted more than 50% of total job creation in 
2019, and remittances constituted 4.3% of GDP in 2019 and contributed, on average, 44% of household 
income.  The  closing  of  businesses  in  the  neighboring  countries,  especially  the  PRC  and  Thailand,  has 
brought  about  job  losses  among  migrant  workers.  As  of  12  June  2020,  103,163  migrant  workers  have 
returned to Myanmar from Thailand, the PRC, and other countries.  
COVID-19 may slow Myanmar’s significant progress in reducing poverty, with large poor and vulnerable 
populations least able to cope with the impact of COVID-19. The most recent (2017) poverty headcount 
ratio indicated that 19.3% of Myanmar’s population lived under the $3.2 per day poverty line and projected 
the ratio to decline to 11.5% in 2020 in the absence of the COVID-19 pandemic.c ADB staff estimates that 
COVID-19 is likely to increase the number of the poor from 6.3 million to 7.6 million people in 2020, and 
that the projected poverty headcount ratio will increase from 11.5% to 13.9% in the same year. In addition, 
large  portions  of  the  population  (particularly  low-income  and  rural  households)  face  deprivations  and 
vulnerabilities in non-income dimensions such as access to employment opportunities, social protection, 
and  quality  health  care.  Finally,  only  17%  of  all  Myanmar  households  have  a  bank  account,  and  lower 
income and rural households have particularly limited savings and access to formal financial institutions 
(e.g., 12.4% of poor households experienced health shocks in 2017 versus 10.6% for non-poor). In view of 
such  factors,  COVID-19  could  cause  major  and  far-reaching  social  impacts,  particularly  if  the  epidemic 
expands and is prolonged.  
Health  impact.  As  of  3  August  2020,  Myanmar  had  officially  confirmed  353  cases  and  6  deaths  from 
COVID-19. At the same time, approximately 20,000 people are quarantined in dedicated isolation facilities. 
Although confirmed cases have been reported from other states and regions as well, the epicenter of the 
COVID-19 outbreak in Myanmar is the Yangon region, where 70.5% of all cases (249 out of 353) were 
recorded.d  The country  has  implemented  intensified  public  health measures  such  as  closing  of borders, 
suspension  of  visa,  travel  restrictions,  screening  incoming  travelers  at  all  points  of  entry,  quarantining 
individuals with travel history to affected countries and contact history with confirmed cases, and isolating 
suspected  cases  at  designated  hospitals.  Since  the  onset  of  the  outbreak,  the  government  has  set  up 
community quarantine centers by repurposing public premises (7,772 as of 15 June 2020). The country’s 
testing capacity has been scaled up from 320 tests per day to 2,000 tests per day by June 2020. These 
measures, in theory, will help flatten the curve of the spread of the disease, so the health system can better 
manage the outbreak.  
Myanmar is at a high risk of significant COVID-19 impact despite officially reporting a moderate number of 
confirmed cases. Notable vulnerabilities include: (i) a large influx of returning migrants from the PRC and 
CPRO Access Criteria 
2. Countercyclical 
development 
expenditures 
Appendix 4 
25 
ADB Staff Assessment 
Thailand, many of whom are crossing informal borders; (ii) high population density in urban and peri-urban 
areas  with  weak  water  and  sanitation  infrastructure;  and  (iii)  IDP  camps  that  lack  basic  livelihood  and 
medical care supplies and are prone to conflict situations. The HSCP for COVID-19 and other emerging 
respiratory  diseases  projected  that,  if  widespread  community  transmission  of  COVID-19  occurred, 
Myanmar could have 356,821 total confirmed cases and nearly 75,000 active cases at the peak. This is 
based on  the assumption  that mitigation  measures  are taken and  reduce  the  transmission  rate  by  two-
thirds.  The  country’s  healthcare  system  capacity  remains  one  of  the  weakest  in  the  region.  Myanmar 
already faces a severe shortage of professional health staff, with only about 6.8 doctors (57% female) and 
10  registered  nurses  and  midwives  (96%  female)  per  10,000  population  in  2018.  The  country  has  0.9 
hospital beds per 1,000 people, compared with 2.4 on average in lower-middle income countries, and has 
only  about  200  equipped  and  functional  intensive  care  beds.  In  the  case  of  widespread  community 
transmission, the healthcare system can be easily overwhelmed, resulting in a lack of access to services 
and a high mortality rate. Capacity to meet any surge in COVID-19 cases is urgently needed for surveillance 
and diagnosis, prevention and control, and case management. Existing and newly recruited health staff and 
volunteers need rapid training on personal protection, field laboratory work, risk communication, and patient 
management.  
On 27 April 2020, the government announced the CERP. The economic stimulus plan seeks to mitigate the 
economic  impact  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  while  establishing  foundations  to  facilitate  Myanmar’s 
economic recovery as part of a coordinated whole-of-nation response. The CERP comprises seven goals:  
(i) improve the macroeconomic environment through monetary stimulus; (ii) ease the impact on the private 
sector by enabling investment, trade, and the banking sector; (iii) ease the impact on laborers and workers; 
(iv)  ease  the  impact  on  households;  (v)  promote  innovative  products  and  platforms;  (vi)  strengthen  the 
healthcare system; and (vii) increase access to COVID-19 financing. The MOPFI estimated that around 
$2.5 billion in fiscal spending will be required. To finance the government’s efforts to contain the COVID-19 
pandemic and stabilize the economy, the CERP aims to reallocate the budget in FY2020 to create fiscal 
space for COVID-19-related responses and investment outlays. In addition, concessional financing will be 
raised 
IMF 
recommendations. The proposed CARES Program, under the CPRO, will help the government fund and 
implement the CERP. The government has consulted with development partners, including ADB, as well 
as private sector and stakeholders in formulating the CERP. ADB staff have applied a conflict sensitivity 
approach to ensure that the CERP has adequate provisions for supporting all ethnic groups living in different 
parts of the country without any differentiation. 
through  development  partners  and 
international 
institutions, 
line  with 
financial 
in 
Strengthening  healthcare  system.  The  health  sector  response  is  guided  by  the  HSCP:  Outbreak 
Response for COVID-19 and other Emerging Respiratory Disease in Myanmar. The CERP has incorporated 
26 
Appendix 4 
CPRO Access Criteria 
ADB Staff Assessment 
Goal 6 of this contingency plan: strengthening healthcare systems and  a strategy to promote healthcare 
through  increased  government  spending  and  regulatory  reform.  The  strategy  has  5  action  plans  and  
16 actions, which are aligned with the HSCP, with emphasis on: (i) increasing the number and capacity of 
quarantine facilities by turning available public buildings into quarantine centers, recruiting medical staff and 
volunteers  to  serve  in quarantine  facilities,  and ensuring  sufficient  supplies  of protective  equipment and 
medical supplies; (ii) immediately procuring the required medical products for COVID-19 prevention, control, 
and treatment with an expedited procurement process; (iii) strengthening community preventive measures 
including  establishing  hand-washing  stations  at  convenient  and  accessible  locations,  deploying  mobile 
disinfection teams to increase coverage of disinfection, deploying mobile teams for distribution of masks, 
and distributing information pamphlets to the public; and (iv) upgrading existing health facilities including 
laboratories,  hospitals,  and  healthcare  centers  at  various  levels.e  The  country  had  only  one  national 
laboratory  (BSL2)  for  COVID-19  testing  in  the  beginning  of  2020.  The  plan  is  to  establish  point-of-care 
testing sites at state and regional levels and expanding COVID-19 testing capacity in the Mandalay Public 
Health Laboratory  and  the  Department of  Medical  Research, Yangon.  The  total target  capacity  is 3,010 
tests per day. The HSCP also includes upgrading and expanding ICU capacity at public hospitals (8 central 
level hospitals and 43 hospitals at the State and regional level), which will also be supported by a World 
Bank project. The MOHS aims to increase the number of ICU beds from the current 200 beds to 500 beds. 
These challenges have been complicated by a shortage in human resource and limited basic infrastructure 
such as unreliable electricity and water supply in many parts of the country.  
Social assistance provided to vulnerable groups and populations at risk.  The government’s CERP 
has established action plans to provide cash and in-kind transfers to vulnerable households and farmers. 
The  government  will  also  exempt  public,  religious  organizations,  and  humanitarian  organizations  from 
electricity  tariffs:  specifically,  the  government  allowed  an  exemption  of  up  to  150  kilowatt-hours  in 
AprilꟷJune  and  up  to  75  kilowatt-hours  in  July  2020.  The  government  has  also  provided  in-kind  food 
transfers to vulnerable households and at-risk populations, especially poor people without regular income. 
The  General  Administration  Department  under  the  Ministry  of  the  Office  of  the  Union  Government  was 
mainly  responsible  for  the  dissemination  of  food  support.f  In  addition,  the  government  has  announced 
implementation  of  cash  transfers  of  MK40,000  ($28.50)  per  household  to  about  5.5  million  vulnerable 
families, especially those affected by the closure of factories and businesses or without regular income. 
The  existing  social  assistance  programs  will  be  scaled  up.  The  Ministry  of  Social  Welfare,  Relief  and 
Resettlement will expand the MCCT Program nationwide, which aims to improve nutritional outcomes for 
mothers and children during the critical first 1,000 days of life. The MCCT Program has been ongoing in 
Chin State since 2017 and was subsequently expanded to Rakhine State and Naga Self-Administered Zone 
of the Sagaing Region in 2018.g Under the MCCT Program, each pregnant woman and under 2-year old 
CPRO Access Criteria 
Appendix 4 
27 
ADB Staff Assessment 
child  will  be  provided  MK30,000  ($21.50)  as  one-time  payment.  In  addition  to  the  MCCT  Program,  the 
government  will  provide  one-time  payment  of:  (i)  MK30,000  ($21.50)  to  each  elderly  person  between  
80–84 years old, on top of the regular social pension for elderly persons who are at least 85 years old; and  
(ii) MK20,000 ($14.30) to disabled people as one-time allowance. To strengthen agriculture value chains 
and promote income generation and retention,  the MOALI will also support farmers, seed farmers, small 
agri-processors, and agri-businesses. To support input purchases in time for monsoon planting by the end 
of  2020,  MOALI  plans  to  provide  cash  or  lending  support  to  smallholder  farmers  who  have  lost  sales 
revenue or remittance income. MOALI also committed to offer complementary support by the end of 2020, 
providing advice to enhance productivity and market connectivity.  
Providing working capital for MSMEs. The government had established a MK100 billion ($71.7 million) 
COVID-19 Fund comprised of MK50 billion drawn from State’s Revolving Fund and MK50 billion from the 
Social Security Fund, to provide low interest working capital to the most affected industries such as cutting, 
making, and processing enterprises, MSMEs, and hotel and tourism businesses. The interest rate is 1% for 
a period of 1  year.  Working capital has been  provided  to  the enterprises  which meet  the  pre-structured 
criteria  established  by  the  government.h  Loans  have  been  provided  to  nearly  3,000  MSMEs  totaling  
$65 million as of June 2020. The government plans to increase fund size by MK200 billionꟷMK500 billion 
($143.4 millionꟷ$358.4 million), depending on the evolving needs from MSMEs. Also, the government plans 
to  expand  existing  pilot  commercial  lending  programs  to  those  townships  that  are  most  economically 
affected. The government has also arranged to offer credit guarantee schemes by the end of 2020, with the 
support of ADB. Through the credit guarantee scheme, the government will provide guarantees covering 
50% of any new loans made by banks to Myanmar enterprises up to a turnover of MK1 billion ($720,000) 
for working capital, as long as the enterprises are not beneficiaries of the COVID-19 Fund and conditional 
upon  maintenance  or  rehire  of  staff  employed  as  of  1  February  2020.  Moreover,  the  government  has 
committed  to  promote  trade  financing  for  designated  commercial  banks  through  the  establishment  of  a 
MK100 billion ($71.7 million) fund before the end of 2020. 
Social  protection  and  reemployment  of  workers.  The  government  extended  healthcare  benefits  to 
unemployed SSB members from 6 months to 1 year from the date of unemployment, with medicine benefits. 
The Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement allowed employers to defer their employees’ SSB 
contributions for 3 months. Under the CERP, the government has committed to implement labor-intensive 
community  infrastructure  before  the  end  of  2020  to  ease  unemployment  triggered  by  the  COVID-19 
outbreak.  With ADB’s  ongoing  support  under  the  Resilient  Community  Development Project,  the CERP 
includes  action  plans  for  extending  labor  benefits  and  for  implementation  of  labor-intensive  community 
infrastructure for the purpose of easing the impact on laborers. 
28 
Appendix 4 
CPRO Access Criteria 
3. Pre-shock record 
of generally sound 
macroeconomic 
management 
ADB Staff Assessment 
Tax  relief  and  tax  payment  deferral  to  increase  liquidity  among  businesses  and  individuals.  The 
government has deferred the payment of corporate income tax (Q2 payments expiring on 31 March and Q3 
payments expiring on 30 June) and commercial tax (payable every 3 months) up to 30 September 2020. 
The government waived the 2% withholding tax on exports and goods tax, customs duties, and commercial 
taxes on critical medical supplies and products related to the prevention, control, and treatment of COVID-
19. Moreover, the government expects to provide a 10% nonrefundable tax credit on incremental wage bills 
and incremental investments in capital equipment. A tax deduction equal to 125% of wages paid and 125% 
of capital depreciation will be provided to increase liquidity among MSMEs. The government estimates that 
tax revenues will decrease from 5.7% of GDP prior to COVID-19 to 4.2% of GDP in FY2020. However, 
actual tax revenues may be even lower than this primary estimation due to the economic impacts of COVID-
19 and tax reliefs measures for COVID-19 response. 
Monetary  policy and  banking sector  measures.  The  government  has  initiated monetary and  banking 
sector stimulus measures in the run-up to launching the CERP. The CBM reduced the minimum reserve 
requirement on banks by 150 basis points to better align with market conditions. The CBM allowed banks 
to restructure and reschedule existing loans extended to MSMEs that regularly pay interest and principal 
on a timely basis for a period no longer than 3 years. The CBM will conduct credit auctions as necessary 
to inject more liquidity into the banking and financial sector. It has also arranged to negotiate with private 
financial institutions to give more flexibility related to interest and mortgage payments for households that 
are most negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Finally, the government will allow  the CBM to 
finance the fiscal deficit as necessary, up to a suitable level consistent with its target for growth in the money 
supply.  
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, GDP growth was expected to pick up to 6.8% in 2020 from the average 
of 6.4% in 2015ꟷ2019, with stable inflation rate of 7.1% on average. Robust economic growth has been 
supported  by  two  key  sectors:  industry  and  services.  Industry  grew  by  8.4%  in  2019  as  garment 
manufacturing  and  construction  expanded,  while  services  saw  moderate  growth  of  8.3%  in  2019.  The 
pickup in GDP growth in the run-up to the outbreak was accompanied by an increase in the inflation rate 
from 5.9% in 2018 to 8.6% in 2019 as prices for food and imported fuel rose. 
The external position is broadly in line with economic fundamentals. The current account deficits were 
modest at an average of 4.3% of GDP in 2015ꟷ2019 due to lower FDI-related imports, including a decline 
in  iron  and  steel  imports  due  to  a  slowdown  in  construction  and  one-off  factors  related  to  changes  in 
automobile import regulations. In contrast, the exports held up, led by garment manufacturing and natural 
gas, amid global trade tensions, and the economic slowdown in the PRC. The narrower deficit offset weaker 
FDI and other inflows. This allowed a modest buildup of foreign exchange reserves via auctions to about 
$6.0 billion in April 2020, equivalent to 5 months of imports coverage. 
CPRO Access Criteria 
Appendix 4 
29 
ADB Staff Assessment 
Fiscal policy was moderately accommodative with improved budget execution and PFM. In the run-
up to the COVID-19 pandemic, the fiscal deficit was estimated at 2.6% of GDP in FY2020, narrowed slightly 
from 4.0% in FY2019, and was considered an appropriate fiscal policy stance. Improved budget execution 
and debt  issuances  had  allowed  the prospect of phasing out  CBM’s  debt monetization by  FY2021.  The 
declining  trend  in  the  revenue-to-GDP  ratio  from  18.8%  of  GDP  in  FY2018  to  around  18.0%  in 
FY2019ꟷFY2020  needs  to  be  reversed,  and  a  medium-term  revenue  strategy  with  specific  targets  is 
needed  to meet  SDG-related  spending needs under  the  Myanmar  Sustainable  Development Plan.  This 
would involve modernizing the tax system to raise revenues while improving PFM systems for more efficient 
and responsive fiscal spending. The government has taken several actions to improve procurement and 
budget disbursement for the COVID-19 responses. For example, the MOHS has enhanced procurement of 
the  required  medical  products  for  COVID-19  prevention,  control,  and  treatment  with  an  expedited 
procurement process. The MOPFI has waived customs duties and commercial tax related to the importation 
of critical medical supplies and products related to the prevention, control, and treatment of COVID-19. The 
MOPFI has introduced the automated financial information reporting system for the Treasury (FIRST). To 
improve PFM systems, the MOPFI will move to the second phase of automation to unify budget and financial 
reporting.  The  development of  a  unified chart of accounts  would also  support  the  automation  and  close 
gaps  with  international  reporting  standards.  The  modernization  of  the  PFM  law,  building  on  preliminary 
findings  of  the  PEFA,  has  made  significant  efforts  to  improve  governance  and  transparency  and  fight 
corruption through wide-ranging economic, social, institutional, and governance reforms and would support 
the  PFM  reform  process  over  the  medium-term.  ADB  support  will  continue  to  be  provided  to  improve 
financial management capacity of the OAGM. ADB has helped develop the financial audit guidelines aligned 
with International Standard for Supreme Audit Institution and  will continue  to provide support to improve 
financial management capacity of the OAGM, especially for financial audit, governance, and transparency 
of COVID-19-related public expenditures. 
Broad monetary aggregates and the exchange rate remained stable. Reserve money growth picked 
up at the end of FY2019 due to increased monetary financing but remained within target as net foreign 
assets remained broadly stable. Moreover, growth in broad money aggregates, the intermediate objective, 
moderated from 19.0%  in  FY2018  to 15.5%  in  FY2019 as  targeted.  Treasury and  deposit auction  rates 
have also remained relatively stable as excess reserves of the banking system were seasonally low and 
reserve money growth has moderated to about 6% year-on-year since September 2019. The nominal and 
real  effective  exchange  rates  have  been  broadly  stable  since  the  CBM  formally  adopted  a  market-
determined reference exchange rate. The move has better anchored market expectations and reduced the 
informal market spread with limited one-way foreign exchange intervention. 
30 
Appendix 4 
CPRO Access Criteria 
4. Structural reforms 
ADB Staff Assessment 
The  government  has  formed  the  National  Central  Committee  for  COVID-19  Prevention,  Control  and 
Treatment chaired by the State Counsellor, to coordinate and monitor the overall COVID-19 responses. 
The COVID-19 Containment and Emergency Response Committee chaired by Myanmar’s Vice President 
1 has also been established and tasked to oversee health responses, including those in the CERP. The 
MOHS has announced the HSCP, estimated to cost $300 million, covering two phases: the immediate to 
short-term (April 2020ꟷDecember 2021) and the short- to medium-term (January 2022ꟷDecember 2024). 
During  the  immediate  and  short-term,  the  focus  is  on  community  surveillance,  active  case  detection, 
quarantine measures, risk communication and community engagement, non-pharmaceutical interventions, 
strengthening laboratory supplies, protection of healthcare workers, and improving clinical capacity. Over 
the short- to medium-term, the focus will be on strengthening the resilience of the health system and its 
preparedness  for  future  outbreaks  and  other  emergencies  (see  Criteria  2  above  on  countercyclical 
development expenditures). 
In early May 2020, the government announced the COVID-19 National Response and Recovery Plan for 
the Education Sector (May 2020–October 2021). The plan includes two phases: phase 1 or response phase 
(May  2020–September  2020)  and  phase  2  or  recovery  phase  through  the  reopening  of  education 
institutions (October 2020–October 2021). The holistic plan covers all states and regions in Myanmar and 
all education subsectors under the Ministry of Education. The plan includes a framework of strategies and 
interventions  for  (i)  ensuring  continuity  of  education  for  all  learners  in  Myanmar,  (ii)  ensuring  that  the 
reopening  of  education  institutions  is  planned  properly,  and  (iii)  contributing  to  safer  and  more  resilient 
education environments. 
5. Debt sustainability  The  IMF’s  Staff  Report  for  the  2019  Article  IV  Consultation  noted  that  Myanmar’s  risks  of  external  and 
overall debt distress continue to be assessed as low. Myanmar’s total public debt is estimated to be 39.5% 
of GDP as of FY2019. Public domestic debt accounted for 62.5% of total public debt in FY2019 and external 
public debt stood at 37.5% of total public debt in FY2019. Domestic debt comprises treasury bills and bonds, 
a  large  share  of  which—mostly  3-month  treasury  bills—is  held  by  the  CBM.  The  largest  share  of  PPG 
external debt is held by bilateral creditors, amongst which the PRC and Japan are the largest creditors. The 
International Development Association and ADB are the largest multilateral creditors. Gross official reserves 
stood at $6.0 billion (5 months of imports equivalence) in April 2020, up from $5.7 billion in FY2019. 
Prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, the public debt to GDP ratio was expected to decline from 39.5% in FY2019 
to 36.9% in FY2020 and edge up to 37.2% in FY2021. COVID-19 will affect the public debt to GDP ratio by 
(i)  increasing  public  debt  levels  as  the  result  of  higher  budget  deficit,  and  (ii)  contracting  GDP.  ADB 
estimates that the COVID-19 pandemic will increase the public debt to GDP ratio from 39.5% in FY2019 to 
43.6% in FY2020 and 45.2% in FY2021—still well below IMF’s debt sustainability threshold of 55%. The 
Appendix 4 
31 
CPRO Access Criteria 
6. Coordination with 
International 
Monetary Fund 
ADB Staff Assessment 
CARES  Program  under  the  CPRO  ($250  million)  is  estimated  to  generate  only  a  small  impact,  adding 
around  0.38%  to  the  public  debt  to  GDP  ratio.  Therefore,  the  existing  debt  ratio  and  projected  public 
indebtedness, including the potential impact of the proposed CPRO borrowing, are sustainable. 
ADB  is  closely  coordinating  with the  IMF  on macroeconomic monitoring and  is assessing  the  impact of 
COVID-19 on the economy and government finances of Myanmar. The government and the IMF have an 
agreement in place for budget support using the Rapid Credit Facility and Rapid Financing Instrument worth 
up to $700 million in response to the pandemic. The first tranche of $356.5 million was approved by the 
IMF’s  Board  on  26  June  2020  and disbursed  on  2  July 2020.  The  IMF’s  Board  will  consider  a planned 
second tranche of about $350 million by December 2020. ADB has been in close contact with the IMF on 
the  proposed  CARES  Program.  The  government  is  also  requesting  financial  assistance  from  other 
development  partners  and  ADB  is  closely  coordinating,  and  exploring  parallel  opportunities,  with  other 
development partners such as the Japan International Cooperation Agency, the European Union, and the 
World Bank. The IMF has provided an assessment letter (circulated to ADB’s Board of Directors on 16 June 
2020)  confirming that the fiscal  stimulus  under  the  CERP  will be  instrumental  in  containing  the  adverse 
health, social, and economic impacts of COVID-19. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CARES = COVID-19 Active Response and Expenditure Support, CBM = Central Bank of Myanmar, CERP = COVID-19 Economic 
Relief  Plan,  COVID-19  =  coronavirus  disease,  CPRO  =  COVID-19  pandemic  response  option,  FDI  =  foreign  direct  investment,  FY  =  fiscal  year,  GDP  =  gross 
domestic product, HSCP = Health Sector Contingency Plan, ICU = intensive care unit, IDP = internally displaced person, IMF = International Monetary Fund, MCCT 
= Maternal and Child Cash Transfer, MK = Myanmar kyat, MOALI = Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation, MOHS = Ministry of Health and Sports, MOPFI 
= Ministry of Planning, Finance and Industry, MSMEs = micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises, OAGM = Office of the Auditor General of the Union of Myanmar, 
PEFA = Public expenditure and Financial Accountability, PFM = public financial management, PPG = public and publicly guaranteed, PRC = People’s Republic of 
China, Q = quarter, SDG = Sustainable Development Goals, SSB = Social Security Board, WHO = World Health Organization. 
a  WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard. 
b  ADB. 2020. Updated Assessment of the Potential Economic Impact of COVID-19. Manila. 
c  World Bank’s PovCalNet database available at: http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/povOnDemand.aspx. 
d  Including Chin, Sagaing, Bago, Shan (North), Shan (East), Mandalay, Nay Pyi Taw, Mon, and Magway. 
e  For the medium-term, mass testing is an aspirational goal for Myanmar as the exact technology to be used and implementation plan are yet to be decided. Areas 
with limited sanitation and hygiene infrastructure require urgent work to improve solid waste and wastewater management systems, and the drainage system 
needs to be cleaned. The quality and number of health sector professionals also need to be improved.  
f  The in-kind food transfers include 4.4 kilograms of rice, 815 grams of cooking oil, 815 grams of salt, 1.63 kilograms of lentils, and 1.63 kilograms of onions for 
each household. 
g  Cash  transfers  to  mothers  and  children  under  CERP  builds  upon  the  existing  mechanism  of  the  MCCT  Program  supported  by  the  World  Bank.  The  impact 
evaluation study by UNICEF concluded that the MCCT achieved desirable outcomes for women and children, especially nutritional and health outcomes. United 
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2020. Country-led Formative Evaluation: The Maternal and Child Cash Transfer Programme in Chin and Rakhine States in 
Myanmar. Yangon. 
h  The eligibility criteria include: (i) are affected by COVID-19; (ii) can restart their business once the loan is provided; (iii) obtained business permits before 31 March 
2018; (iv) have had annual profits over the last 2 years; (v) have capacity to repay the loan; (vi) will use the loan only for the payment of salaries and operational 
costs; (vii) are not on any of the government’s black lists; and (viii) have paid the business tax. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
