Air Quality Improvement in the Greater Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei 
Region—Regional Emission-Reduction and Pollution-Control 
Facility (RRP PRC 51181) 
Project Administration Manual 
Project Number: 51181 
Loan Number: LXXXX 
November 2017 
People’s Republic of China: Air Quality Improvement 
in the Greater Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei Region 
—Regional Emission-Reduction and Pollution-
Control Facility 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB 
BTH 
CAAP 
–  Asian Development Bank 
–  Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei 
–  Comprehensive  Action  Plan  for  Air  Pollution  Prevention  and 
Control 
CCA 
CECEP 
CECEP Huayu 
CERT 
CO2 
CNY 
EWA 
ESCOs 
ESMS 
FCA 
FIL 
FMA 
MOF 
NDRC 
PAM 
PMO 
PRC 
RFA 
SPDB 
SMEs 
–  CNY conversion account 
–  China Energy Conservation and Environmental Protection Group 
–  CECEP Huayu Fund Management Co., Ltd. 
–  China Environmental Resources Technology Co., Ltd. 
–  carbon dioxide 
–  Chinese yuan 
–  euro withdrawal account 
–  energy service companies 
–  environmental and social management system 
– 
– 
– 
–  Ministry of Finance  
–  National Development and Reform Commission  
–  project administration manual 
–  project management office 
–  People’s Republic of China 
– 
revolving funds account 
–  Shanghai Pudong Development Bank 
–  small- and medium-sized enterprises 
framework cooperation agreement 
financial intermediation loan 
financial management assessment 
total assets 
– 
GLOSSARY 
the aggregate at such time of current assets, including cash 
& equivalent, tradable financial assets, notes receivable, net 
accounts  receivable,  accounts  prepaid,  interest  receivable, 
dividend  receivable,  other  receivables,  inventories,  prepaid 
and  deferred  expenses,  long-term  bonds  due  in  a  year, 
other current assets 
non-current  assets,  including  available  for  sale  financial 
long-term  account 
assets,  hold-to-maturity 
invested  real 
receivable, 
investment, 
in  progress, 
fixed  assets,  construction 
estate,  net 
engineering material, disposal of fixed assets 
long-term  equity 
investment, 
total liabilities 
– 
intangible  and  deferred  assets,  including  intangible  assets 
(land,  patents  etc.),  R&D  expenditures,  goodwill,  long-term 
amortizable expenses 
the aggregate at such time of:  
Current Liabilities, including short-term loans, Inter-company 
borrowings,  Tradable 
financial  debt,  Notes  payable, 
Accounts  payable,  Advances  from  customers,  Payroll  and 
welfare  payable,  Taxes  and  administration  fees  payable, 
Interest payable, Dividend payable, Other accounts payable 
Debt  from  broking  security  trade,  Long-term  liabilities  due 
within one year, Other current liabilities 
Long-term  Liabilities,  including  Long-term  loans  payable, 
Bonds  payable,  Long-term  accounts  payable,  Special 
program  account  payable,  Anticipated  liabilities,  Deferred 
revenues, Deferred tax liabilities, Other long-term liabilities 
CONTENTS 
I. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Impacts and Outcome 
Outputs 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
Project Readiness Activities 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
Project Implementation Arrangements and Procedures 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Project Organization Structure 
IV. 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions 
Key Assumptions 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve 
Fund Flow Diagram 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Financial Management Assessment 
Disbursement 
Accounting 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Advance Contracting and Retroactive Financing 
Procurement of Goods, Works 
Procurement Plan 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
Environmental and Social Safeguards 
Environmental and Social Management System 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
IX. 
X. 
XI. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND 
COMMUNICATION 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
Monitoring 
Evaluation 
Reporting 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
1 
5 
5 
6 
6 
8 
10 
10 
14 
17 
18 
20 
20 
21 
22 
24 
25 
28 
29 
30 
32 
32 
38 
40 
40 
43 
43 
43 
43 
44 
44 
44 
45 
46 
46 
49 
49 
50 
50 
52 
53 
XII. 
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
54 
APPENDICES 
1. DESCRIPTION OF PROJECT FINANCIAL PRODUCTS 
2. DRAFT TERM SHEETS 
3. SUBPROJECT SELECTION CRITERIA 
4. ADB PROHIBITED INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES LIST 
5. SAMPLE STATEMENT OF UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
6. PROCUREMENT MANUAL 
7. TEMPLATE FOR SEMI-ANNUAL PROGRESS REPORT 
55 
57 
63 
68 
69 
70 
79 
Project Administration Manual Purpose and Process 
  The  project  administration  manual  (PAM)  describes  the  essential  administrative  and 
management requirements to implement the project on time, within budget, and in accordance 
with the policies and procedures of the government and Asian Development Bank (ADB). The 
PAM  should  include  references  to  all  available  templates  and  instructions  either  through 
linkages to relevant URLs or directly incorporated in the PAM. 
  The  China  Energy  Conservation  and  Environmental  Protection  Group  as  the  executing 
agency,  is  wholly  responsible  for  the  implementation  of  ADB-financed  projects,  as  agreed 
jointly between the borrower and ADB, and in accordance with the policies and procedures of 
the  government  and  ADB.  ADB  staff  is  responsible  for  supporting  implementation  including 
compliance  by  the  China  Energy  Conservation  and  Environmental  Protection  Group  of  their 
obligations  and  responsibilities  for  project  implementation  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  policies 
and procedures. 
  At  loan  negotiations,  the  borrower  and  ADB  shall  agree  to  the  PAM  and  ensure  consistency 
with  the  loan  agreement.  Such  agreement  shall  be  reflected  in  the  minutes  of  the  loan 
negotiations. In the event of any discrepancy or contradiction between the PAM and the loan 
agreement, the provisions of the loan agreement shall prevail. Defined terms used in the PAM 
have the same meanings as in the Loan Agreement and Project Agreement unless otherwise 
defined in the PAM. 
  After ADB Board approval of the project's report and recommendations of the President (RRP), 
changes in implementation arrangements are subject to agreement and approval pursuant to 
relevant government and ADB administrative procedures (including the Project Administration 
Instructions) and upon such approval, they will be subsequently incorporated in the PAM. 
I. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
1. 
The  project  is  the  third  in  a  multi-year,  multi-sectoral  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB) 
support for air quality improvement in the greater Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei (BTH) region. 1 The first 
loan,  approved  in  2015,  focused  on  policy  reforms  and  strengthening  regulatory  capacity  in 
Hebei  province. 2 The  second  loan,  approved  in  2016,  targeted  improved  access  to  finance, 
especially  for  small  and  medium  sized-enterprises,  to  scale  up  investments  in  pollution 
reduction  projects  in  the  region.3 This  third  project4 will  complement  previous  projects  and  will 
directly address barriers to deploying high technologies that reduce air pollution from industries, 
urban infrastructure, and agriculture.5 
2. 
The  greater  BTH  region,  one  of  the  most  important  economic  regions  in  the  People’s 
Republic of China (PRC), generates more than a third of the country’s gross domestic product.6 
However,  the  region’s  impressive  economic  growth,  based  on  energy  intensive  and  highly 
polluting  industries  has  resulted  in  widespread  air  pollution.7   Cities  in  the  greater  BTH  region 
consistently  rank  highest  in  the  country  for  particulate  matter  less  than  2.5  micrometers  in 
diameter  (PM2.5)—of  which  more  than  half  is  attributed  to  coal-based  and  energy  intensive 
industries—and  other  air  pollutants  which  make  up  the  air  quality  index  (AQI).8 High  levels  of 
PM2.5 are serious health risks and can lead to premature deaths.    
The  Government  of  the  PRC  recognizes  the  importance  of  addressing  air  pollution.  In 
3. 
2013,  it  launched  the  Comprehensive  Action  Plan  for  Air  Pollution  Prevention  and  Control 
(CAAP) 2013–2017, which introduced the PRC’s most stringent air quality measures to reduce 
air pollution by setting specific emissions targets on sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxide (NOx), 
PM2.5,  and  volatile  organic  compounds  nationally  and for  the  BTH  region.9 The Government  in 
its  Thirteenth  Five-Year  Plan  also  requires  hundreds  of  cities  to  meet  “good”  or  “excellent” 
standards 80% of the time and it targets a total energy consumption cap,10 set at five billion tons 
per  year  of  coal  equivalent.  In  support  of  CAAP  implementation,  ADB  and  the  World  Bank 
contributed targeted and coordinated financing of $800 million (footnotes 2 and 3) and $1 billion, 
respectively. Since then, air pollution and PM2.5 concentration levels across the BTH region has 
declined each year—by 9.8% in 2014, 21.3% in 2015, and 7.8% in 2016—reversing the trend of 
increasing  air  pollution  in  the  pre-CAAP  years.  The  number  of  days  with  good  AQI  has  also 
improved across the region, demonstrating the effectiveness of the CAAP and its actions.  
1   The greater BTH region refers to Beijing and Tianjin municipalities; Hebei, Henan, Shandong, Shanxi and Liaoning 
provinces; and Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. 
2  ADB. 2015. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Policy-Based Loan 
to  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  for  Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei  Air  Quality  Improvement—Hebei  Policy  Reforms 
Program. Manila. 
3   ADB.  2016.  Report  and  Recommendation  of  the  President  to  the  Board  of  Directors:  Proposed  Loan  to  the 
People’s  Republic  of  China  for  Air  Quality  Improvement  in  the  Greater  Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei  Region—China 
National Investment and Guaranty Corporation’s Green Financing Platform Project. Manila. 
4  The project is included in the Country Operations Business Plan: People’s Republic of China, 2017–2019. 
5   “High  technologies”  refers  to  technologies  which  have  higher  upfront  costs  but  better  lifecycle  value  than  the 
widely-used technologies, or which have been proven at scale in other countries but not deployed at scale in the 
PRC.  
6  The greater BTH region accounts for more than 32% of national gross domestic product (CNY23.5 trillion in 2016).  
7  The region includes more than half of the PRC’s highly energy and pollution intensive steel and cement production 
capacity,  about  one-third  of  the  PRC’s  cars  and  other  automobiles,  and  heavy  concentration  of  urban  and  rural 
housing and energy use as about 370 million of PRC’s 1.3 billion population live in the region.   
8   AQI is a common measure of the quality of air and its potential health impacts. AQI includes consideration of six 
atmospheric  pollutants:  SO2, NOx,  particulate matter  less  than  10 micrometers  in  diameter  (PM10),  PM2.5,  carbon 
monoxide, and ozone. In the PRC, the AQI is categorized from 50 (excellent) to 500 (severe pollution).  
9  CAAP aims to cut the level of fine particulate matter in the BTH region by 25%–30% compared to the 2013 level.  
10  Meaning they must score below 100 on the PRC’s AQI. 
2 
4. 
Despite  this  initial  improvement,  the  annual  average  PM2.5  concentration  level  across 
more than 95% of the cities in the region is still above World Health Organization and national 
ambient air quality standards.11 In the first quarter of 2017, PM2.5 levels rebounded in the region 
for the first  time  since  2013  in  tandem  with  high  economic growth  rates.  Thus,  existing efforts 
need  to  be  intensified  and  fundamental  changes  made  to  the  region’s  energy  and  industry 
structure  to  strongly  encourage  the  adoption  of  cleaner  production  methods  and  high 
technology, so that robust economic growth is de-coupled from rising air pollution.12  
5. 
In response to the CAAP, industrial enterprises have generally preferred to invest in low 
cost,  end-of-pipe  measures  instead  of  more  advanced  and  cleaner  production  technologies. 
There  are  several  reasons  for  this,  including:  (i)  a  gradually  tightening  regulatory  system  that 
encourages  end-of-pipe  control  measures  rather  than  incentivize  best  practices  production 
technologies;  (ii)  management  preference  to  follow  cheaper,  high-return  investments  in 
expansion and diversification instead of more capital-intensive but less polluting processes; (iii) 
limited knowledge of financially viable high technology options; and (iv) absence of appropriate 
financing instruments to address risks associated with high technology investments. The PRC’s 
efforts 
the 
Environmental  Protection  Law,  most  recently  released  “Implementation  Plan  for  the  Licensing 
System  to  Control  Pollutant  Emission”  and  the  soon  to  be  implemented  environmental 
protection tax initiative starting from 1 January 2018—have strengthened the regulatory system. 
But it is in the early stages of implementation and may need further strengthening.   
improve  environmental  monitoring  and  enforcement—through  reform  of 
to 
to  enhance  environmental  outcomes 
6. 
The  PRC’s  economy  is  undergoing  a  fundamental  change.  Its  economic  structure  is 
gradually  moving  away  from  export-oriented  industrial  growth  to  consumption-based  service 
sector  growth.  But 
this  macro-economic 
transformation  it  needs  to  be  supplemented  by  systematic  micro-economic  transformations  in 
industries  and  infrastructure  services.  Meeting  longer-term  air  quality  standards  can  be 
achieved  only  if  major  polluting  sources  adopts  high  technologies  and  cleaner  production 
practices to meet stringent emissions standards. In addition to stringent standards and a robust 
enforcement  system,  investments  in  air  pollution  reduction  must  also  be  cost-effective  to 
business owners. The role of advanced or high technologies in such paradigm is of paramount 
importance because it can improve process efficiency while reducing emissions. Thus, it directly 
translates  into  improved  bottom-line  financial  performance  even  if  it  requires  higher  capital 
expenditure. This compares favorably with end-of-pipe measures, which generally require lower 
capital expenditure but also results in further loss of efficiency of production.   
from 
7. 
Advanced  or  high  technologies must  be combined  with  targeted financing  to  overcome 
existing  barriers  (para.  5).  At  the  industry  and  infrastructure  service  level,  a  suite  of  high 
technologies can be packaged together for a more comprehensive low-emission solution for any 
specific applications: for example, an energy efficient building retrofit could include rooftop solar 
energy, more  efficient  lighting,  advanced thermal  management  systems for  space  heating  and 
cooling, and an intelligent digital control system that ensures all these high technologies work in 
sync as a system. The general strategy described above thus requires bringing together a high 
level of technical expertise on relevant high technologies, appropriate financing and innovative 
11 40% targeted reduction in PM2.5 level from 2013 will still be about 50 micrograms per cubic meter (µg/m3) or about 
50% higher than the national standard. The air quality standard for PM2.5 (GB 3095-2012) in the PRC is 35 µg/m3, 
compared with 15 µg/m3 for the United States and Japan, and 10 µg/m3 for the World Health Organization.  
12 China  Council  for  International  Cooperation  on  Environment  and  Development  (CCICED),  2015.  Performance 
Evaluation  on  the  Action  Plan  of  Air  Pollution  Prevention  and  Control  and  Regional  Coordination  Mechanism. 
China. 
3 
business  models  to  a  diverse  set  of  industries  and  infrastructure  services  in  the  greater  BTH 
region.13 Demonstrating this approach on a selected portfolio of subprojects—distributed across 
various  industries  and  infrastructure  services  can  reinforce  confidence  in  the  commercial 
viability of such approach and stimulate further demand.  
8. 
The  project  will  implement  the  strategy  described  in  para.  7  by  establishing  a  regional 
emission-reduction  and  pollution-control  facility  for  the  greater  BTH  region  (the  Facility)  to 
finance deployment of high technologies particularly suited to major emitters in the region. The 
facility  will  be  held  and  controlled  by  China  Energy  Conservation  and  Environment  Protection 
Group (CECEP).14 CECEP is well regarded in the PRC, and internationally, for its high-level of 
technical  expertise  across  key  sectors.  It  also  has  a  proven  track  record  of  successfully 
managing  similar  investment  funds.  It  will  identify  subprojects,  match  them  with  appropriate 
business models for deploying high technologies at scale and will provide financing through the 
Facility.  To  ensure  that  the  Facility  will  have  the  right  focus  and  diverse  reach,  it  will  invest 
through  three  types  of  investment  funds:  a  region-wide  fund,15   provincial-  or  municipal-level 
funds  involving  local-government  investors, 16  and  technology-  or  industry-specific  funds 
targeting high polluting sources.17 Approximately 10% of the Facility is expected to be invested 
directly  into  companies  pursuing  subprojects,  with  the  remainder  invested  via  funds  (“Fund” 
herein  has  the  same  meaning  as  in  the  Loan  Agreement  and  Project  Agreement). The  Funds 
will  leverage  financing  from  domestic  institutional  investors,  commercial  banks  and  provincial 
and municipal governments to scale up investments in high technology applications.  
9. 
A  description  of  the  project’s  financial  products  is  provided  in  Appendix  1.  The  project 
will  limit  the  overall  use  of  the  Facility  for  investment  of  equity 18 into  companies  pursuing 
subprojects. 19 All  Equity  Investments  by  the  Facility  or  the  Funds  into  subproject  companies 
must  either  be  Put-protected  Equity  or  must  have  another  viable  exit  strategy  that  will  enable 
CECEP  to  recover  the  investment  in  a  timely  manner.  Equity  Investments  without  a  Put  are 
suitable to support companies which require growth capital to achieve the growth and expansion 
of  proven, financially  and  economically  viable  technologies  which  need scaling  up  in  industrial 
applications, or high technology applications by companies that cannot meet commercial banks’ 
collateral  or  the  Funds’  debt  requirements.  Investee  companies  for  both  Put-protected  Equity 
and  Equity  without  a  Put  will  have  the  following  characteristics;  (i)  profitable,  (ii)  a  proven 
management team, and (iii) clear routes of enhancing value. In the case of Put-protected Equity, 
13 The BTH air quality targets will require more than CNY250 billion in the foreseeable future. 
14 CECEP  is  the  PRC’s  largest  technology-based  and  service-oriented  industrial  group  in  energy  conservation  and 
environmental  protection  with  total  assets  of  CNY144  billion.  The  group  of  company  focuses  their  business  on 
energy efficiency, clean energy, environmental protection, and resources recycling. 
15 The  Facility  is  expected  to  provide  up  to  CNY1.75  billion  and  People’s  Insurance  Company  of  China  at  least 
CNY1.75 billion (maximum to CNY4.25 billion). This Fund is mainly to be used to support CECEP’s projects which 
are located in the greater BTH region and using high technologies.  
16 Jinan Municipal Government is expected to contribute CNY500 million to a local Fund, the Facility CNY500 million, 
and  Industrial  Bank  CNY1  billion.  Discussion  with  other  municipal  governments  is  also  ongoing,  including 
Shenyang and Zhangjiankou Municipalities. 
17 A  Deep  Well  Geothermal  Development  Fund  is  being  set  up  to  support  deep  well  geothermal  for  clean  heating 
technology. Dezhou Municipal Government is expected to contribute CNY100 million, while the Facility is expected 
provide  CNY150  million,  and  Shanghai  Pudong  Development  Bank  is  expected  to  contribute  CNY750  million.  A 
memorandum of understanding was signed.  
18 Most investments into Funds will be equity so that the Funds themselves are not indebted, but the Funds will be 
required  to  use  the  facility’s  money  primarily  to  invest  as  debt  or  as  Put-protected  Equity  into  subproject 
companies. 
19 Financially  creditworthy  means  the  Put provider shall  not have  a  poor  credit  record,  as  recorded  in  the  People’s 
Bank  of  PRC  credit  history  database.  CECEP  should  monitor  the  creditworthiness  of  the  put  providers 
semiannually  and  inform  ADB  if  the  creditworthiness  drops.  When  it  has  dropped,  the  equity  holding  Facility  or 
Fund must take additional measures to mitigate the risks. 
4 
the Facility or Funds may support (i) special purpose vehicles for stand-alone Qualified Equity 
Subprojects  to  finance  financially  viable  and  capital  intensive  Qualified  Equity  Subprojects 
where  the  sponsor  lacks  sufficient  registered  capital  to  raise  necessary  debt  funding  or  (ii) 
enterprises  which  take  on  capital  intensive  Qualified  Equity  Subprojects  that  need  equity 
financing matching their risk profiles.   
10. 
Part  of  the  Facility  investment  is  expected  to  be  either  directly  or  through  one  or  more 
Funds  in  energy  service  companies  (ESCO)  that  will  invest  in  multiple  subprojects  in  one  or 
several large enterprises in a selected industrial sector. The ESCO sector has been effective in 
driving energy efficiency investments in other countries, and is a priority for the Government of 
the PRC. However, only a limited number of ESCOs in the region have the capacity to finance 
and  implement  complex  and  larger  industrial  energy  efficiency  projects  deploying  high 
technologies.    An  Steel  Group  Energy  Saving  Technology  Co.,  Ltd.,  which  is  expected  to 
cofinance a Fund with the Facility and a commercial bank, is an ESCO under An Steel Group,20 
and is one of the only two registered ESCOs recognized by National Development and Reform 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance (MOF) in the iron and steel industry. The ESCO Fund 
with  An  Steel  is  expected  to  support  energy  saving  and  emission  reduction  subprojects  in  the 
iron and steel industry.21 More than 80 subprojects across the iron and steel industry covering a 
few  large  enterprises  have  been  identified  for  the  investment  pipeline. 22 There  are  also  two 
“super-ESCOs”  in  the  CECEP  group  of  companies  that  may  receive  funding  through  the 
Regional Fund for further investment in Qualified Subprojects.  
11. 
The  project  is  fully  aligned  with  the  PRC  country  partnership  strategy’s  (2016–2020) 
priority  of  managing  climate  change  and  environment  to  support  the  government’s  priorities  in 
realizing an ecological civilization.23 Specifically, the project provides multi-sectoral support by: 
(i)  promoting  the  development  of  high  technologies  to  scale  up  the  PRC’s  capacity  for  carbon 
dioxide  (CO2)  mitigation;  (ii)  bringing  an  international  dimension  and  good  practices  into  the 
project  design;  (iii)  promoting  high  technologies  on  green,  clean,  and  energy  efficient 
development through low-cost and longer tenor financing from ADB, that are perceived as risky 
by  domestic  commercial  banks;  and    (iv)  as  part  of  a  multi-year  lending  program  to  provide 
continuous support to BTH air pollution improvement through deployment and scaling-up of high 
technologies.  The  project  will  also  support  the  strategic  priorities  of  ADB’s  Midterm  Review  of 
Strategy 2020 to mitigate climate change and promote environmental sustainability.24  
12. 
The project will use the financial intermediation loan modality, which is best suited to (i) 
extending  the  project’s  reach  across  multiple  sectors  and  a  wide  range  of  enterprises  and 
locations; (ii) aggregating a number of investments in medium to large enterprises with a short 
payback  period  (5–7  years);  (iii)  working  in  close  partnerships  with  large  commercial  banks, 
institutional  investors  and  provincial/municipal  governments  to  enhance  their  understanding  of 
risk  allocations  and  appraisal  to  scale-up  deployment  of  high  technologies;  and  (iv)  recycling 
loan proceeds to leverage impacts of the project.  
20 An Steel Group Energy Saving Technology Services Co., Ltd. was formally established in 2010 with a registered 
capital of CNY20 million which gradually increased to CNY100 million. 
21 An Steel Group is expected to contribute CNY100 million to an ESCO Fund, while the Facility will provide CNY300 
million, and Shanghai Pudong Development Bank will also contribute CNY1.2 billion. 
22 Iron and steel industry is a highly energy and pollution intensive industry in the region. The greater BTH region also 
has a high concentration of iron and steel plants.   
23 ADB.  2016.  Transforming  Partnership:  People’s  Republic  of  China  and  Asian  Development  Bank,  2016–2020. 
Manila. 
24 ADB.  2014.  Midterm  Review  of  Strategy  2020:  Meeting  the  Challenges  of  a  Transforming  Asia  and  the  Pacific, 
2008–2020. Manila. 
5 
Impacts and Outcome 
13. 
The project will be aligned with the following impact: reduced air pollution and improved 
public health in the BTH region (consistent with the CAAP and Thirteenth Five-Year Plan). The 
project’s  outcome  will  air  pollution  reduced  and  high  technology  deployed  across  the  greater 
BTH region.  
14. 
Outputs 
The outcome will be achieved through the following outputs: 
(i)  Output  1:  Regional  Emission-Reduction  and  Pollution-Control  Facility 
established.  By  2023,  the  project  will  establish  a  facility  comprising  regional, 
municipal,  or  provincial  and  technology-  or  industry-specific  funds  totaling  €428.0 
million. 
(ii)  Output  2:  High  technologies  to  reduce  air  pollution  in  agriculture,  distributed 
energy,  heating,  transport,  and  iron  and  steel  industry  deployed. By 2023, the 
facility  will  provide  at  least  €1,721.2  million  in  financing  for  deploying  high 
technologies  to  reduce  emissions  and  pollution.  This  output  will  cover  the  (i) 
construction of three biogas and organic fertilizer production facilities, (ii) natural gas 
production from coke oven gas established at two coke oven facilities, (iii) two smart 
micro-grids  constructed  in  industrial  parks,  (iv)  geothermal-based  district  heating 
provided  to  two  million  square  meters  of  floor  area,  (v)  completion  of  energy-
efficiency  measures  in  five  iron  and  steel  plants,  and  (vi)  hydrogen  fuel  cell  based 
public transport pilot tested. 
(iii) Output  3:  Capacity  of  key  stakeholders  to  deploy  high  technologies  for 
pollution reduction in the greater BTH region improved. By 2023, the project will 
train at least 200 individuals from five key stakeholders in high technologies, selection 
of  appropriate  business  models,  and  investment  decision-making.  In  addition,  the 
project  will  prepare  and  disseminate  a  guideline  on  selecting,  appraising,  and 
implementing such projects in selected industries.  
6 
II.          IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
Project Readiness Activities 
Prior to ADB’s loan fact-finding mission, as the executing agency of the project, CECEP, 
15. 
relevant agencies thereof, had already undertaken the following project readiness activities: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
A  project  management  office  (PMO),  with  around  20  staff  has  been 
established in CECEP in December 2016;  
Due diligence of sample subprojects was conducted since February 2017; 
Subproject  Selection  Criteria  has  been  discussed  and  agreed  between 
CECEP and ADB; 
Environmental  and  social  management  system  (ESMS)  preparation  had 
been carried out in March 2017; 
Using  a  competitive  process  agreed  with  ADB,  CECEP  has  selected 
Shanghai Pudong Development Bank (SPDB) to act as the Account Bank 
to  administer  the  project  accounts  and  direct  debt  investments  by  the 
Facility; 
Domestic  process  for  identifying  potential  fund  cofinanciers  has  been 
carried out in February 2017; 
Facility and Fund structures have been discussed;  
(vii) 
(viii)  Draft  term  sheets  for  the  Regional  Fund,  a  Local  Fund  (namely  Jinan 
Fund)  and  a  Technology/Industry  Specific  Fund  (Appendix  2)  had  been 
discussed among CECEP and ADB; and 
China  Environmental  Resources Technology  Co.,  Ltd.  (CERT)  has  been 
the  ESMS  establishment  and 
to 
selected 
implementation, a Strategy Cooperation Framework Agreement has been 
negotiated  with  CERT  and  to  be  signed  before  the  ADB  Board’s 
consideration.   
for  providing  support 
(ix) 
16. 
The  indicative  information  of  the  representative  Subprojects  is  summarized  in  Table  1. 
The energy and emission saving data is incomplete as the assessment of the other Subprojects 
is currently being undertaken. 
Table 1: Indicative Representative Subprojects  
No.
Focused Area
Borrower
Project Location
Project Cost 
(CNY million)
Project Cost 
(€ million)
ADB Loan 
(€ million)
Tenor 
(Year)
Coal (tons of 
SCE)
Diesel Reduction 
(Liter/year)
CO2 Reduction 
(t)
SO2 Reduction 
(t)
NOx Reduction (t) PM Reduction (t)
THC/VOC 
Reduction (t)
CO Reduction (t) FIRR (%) EIRR (%)
Advanced biogas and 
organic fertilizer
Industrial by-product 
gas utilization
Smart industrial zone 
development
CECEP (Fengqiu) Biomass 
Energy Co., Ltd.
Shanxi Liheng Iron & Steel 
Co., Ltd
Integrated Electronic 
Systems Lab Co., Ltd 
(iESLab)
Henan/Fengqiu 
County
134.49
17.47
14.65
Shanxi
669.65
86.97
60.51
3
5
5,318.00
-
11,569.00
17.90
7.80
0.12
6.10
114.20
10.85% 22.07%
-
239,400,000.00
580,964.40
691.20
1,942.04
48.60
15.80
29.70
38.02% 43.16%
Shandong/Jinan City
515.93
67.01
46.39
10
30,659.80
-
-
76,846.40
366.20
198.70
385.50
35,237.90
140.50
122.00
4.90
-
-
-
-
7.86% 7.49%
11.24% 9.23%
13,119.90
Deep-well geothermal 
district heating
Shandong Luhai Petrol 
Technology Co., Ltd
Shandong/Dezhou 
City
127.85
16.60
7.88
H2-based low-
emissions transport
Super-ESCO
Beijing Blue-G Renewable 
Energy Technology Co., Ltd
An Steel Energy-saving 
Technology Service Co., Ltd 
(An Steel ESCO)
Hebei Zhangjiakou
175.00
22.73
15.91
Liaoning/Anshan, 
Chaoyang, Yingkou 
and Bayuquan City
114.06
14.81
13.44
3
8
6
6,336,000.00
16,663.70
0.51
197.80
7.66
3.17
59.40
25.86% 14.86%
35,877.73
-
100,135.10
8,668.60
272.20
1,464.60
-
-
21.57% 44.00%
1
2
3
4
5
6
Total
       1,736.97 
225.60
158.78
84,975.43
245,736,000.00
821,416.50
9,884.91
2,740.54
1,911.38
25.07
203.30
 - 
 - 
CECEP  =  China  Energy  Conservation  and  Environment  Protection  Group,  CO  =  carbon  monoxide,  CO2  =  carbon  dioxide,  EIRR  =  economic  internal  rate  of 
return, ESCO = energy service company, FIRR = financial internal rate of return, NOx = nitrogen oxide, PM = particulate matter, SCE = standard coal equivalent, 
SO2 = sulfur dioxide, t = ton, THC/VOC = total hydrocarbons/volatile organic compound. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.  
7
8 
Table 2 presents the indicative timing of the main project readiness activities that needs 
17. 
to  be  accomplished  in  order  to  achieve  loan  effectiveness  in  May  2018.  CECEP  will  establish 
the  (i)  Euro  Withdrawal  account  (EWA)  denominated  in  euro  at  the  Account  Bank  to  receive 
euro from ADB, (ii) CNY Conversion Account (CCA) in CNY to receive the conversion of euro to 
CNY  before  transferring  loan  proceeds  to  the  Facility,  Funds,  and  Subprojects,  and  (iii) 
Revolving  Funds  Account  (RFA),  dominated  in  CNY,  to  receive  reflows  (principal  amount  and 
interests) and (vi) Facility Account, dominated in CNY, to receive loan proceeds from CCA.  
Table 2: Project Readiness Activities   
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  CCA  =  CNY  conversion  account,  CECEP  =  China  Energy  Conservation  and 
Environmental  Protection  Group,  ESMS  =  environmental  and  social  management  system,  EWA  =  euro  withdrawal 
account, FCUP = Foreign Capital Utilization Plan, LP = limited partner, MOF = Ministry of Finance, NDRC = National 
Development and Reform Commission, RFA = revolving funds account.  
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.  
Overall Project Implementation Plan  
Although the project implementation period is 15 years, the ADB loan will be drawn out 
18. 
over  a  period  of  5  years  and  is  expected  to  close  on  30  November  2023.  The  loan 
implementation schedule is provided in Table 3.  
Activity
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Table 3: Project Implementation Plan  
Output 1:Regional Emission-Reduction and Pollution-
Control Facility established 
1. Establish BTH-dedicated emission control and pollution 
reduction facility (Q2 2018)
2. Leverage CNY6 billion commercial cofinancing by the 
Facility (Q4 2023)
Output 2: High technologies to reduce air pollution in 
agriculture sector, distributed energy, heating, 
transport, and iron and steel industry deployed 
1. Implement integrated low-emission solutions for 
municipal and agriculture waste projects (Q4 2020).
2. Promote super-ESCOs and implement energy 
efficiency improvement and emission reduction projects in 
industries (Q4 2019).
3. Implement industrial by-product gas utilization project 
(Q4 2020).
4 Implement deep-well geothermal for district heating 
project (Q4 2020).
5 Implement smart industrial zone development project 
(Q4 2019).
6 Promote hydrogen-based low-emission transport 
projects (Q1 2023).
Output 3:  Capacity for key stakeholders to deploy high 
technologies for pollution reduction in greater BTH 
region improved 
1. Adopt and implement ESMS (Q4 2017).
2. Approval of ESMS by ADB (Q4 2017).
3. Organize workshops on project appraisal and 
management (Q4 2018).
4. Organize workshops on new business models for high 
technologies (Q4 2021).
5. Organize workshops on high technologies (Q4 2022).
Reporting and Monitoring
Recruitment of China Environmental Resources 
Technology Co., Ltd
Inception/annual/midterm review mission
Project progress reports and safeguards report
Porject audited report
Project completion report
ADB = Asian Development Bank, BTH = Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei, ESCO = energy service company, ESMS = environmental and social management system. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.  
Loan Effectiveness
Loan closing
9
10 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS25 
Project Implementation Arrangements and Procedures 
1. 
General 
19. 
CECEP, a state-owned enterprise, will act as the executing agency. CECEP’s majority-
owned  subsidiary,  CECEP  Huayu  Fund  Management  Co.,  Ltd.  (CECEP  Huayu)  or  another 
CECEP subsidiary, with equivalent experience, approved by ADB after due diligence, will be the 
facility and fund manager (the Management Company) to manage the Facility and the Funds.26 
CECEP  Huayu  has  extensive  experience  in  design,  implementation,  supervision,  evaluation, 
financing,  and  management  of  energy  efficiency  and  environmental  protection  funds.  CECEP 
Huayu  has  managed many  of  CECEP’s  clean  energy funds. With  the  extensive  experience  of 
CECEP and CECEP Huayu, the Facility will focus on (i) financing medium and large emission 
control  and  pollution  reduction  projects,  (ii)  providing  capacity  development  and  technical 
support to enhance the project readiness of Subprojects using advanced technologies, and (iii) 
knowledge  transfer  and  new  technology  demonstration  with  new  business  models  to  scale-up 
those  technologies.  The  Facility  and  the  Funds  shall  invest  in,  among  others,  the  following 
technologies: (i) deep-well geothermal for district heating, (ii) hydrogen fuel cell buses, (iii) coke 
oven  gas  to  synthetic  natural  gas,  (iv)  smart  micro-grid,  (v)  advanced  biogas  and  organic 
fertilizer, and (vi) package of energy efficiency improvement measures in iron and steel sector.  
20. 
CECEP  is  particularly  suited  to  be  the  executing  agency  because  of  its  extensive 
experience  in  investing  in  cleaner  technologies  for  energy  and  other  industries  and  managing 
clean energy funds. CECEP has an excellent grasp of the best-available technologies and how 
best  to  finance  and  implement  them. 27  CECEP’s  expertise  will  be  made  available  to  the 
Management Company, the Facility, and the Funds by way of an “experts’ committee” that will 
be  available  to  advise  the  Management  Company,  the  Facility,  and  the  Funds  on  potential 
investments.  Based on the initial set of representative subprojects and the potential subprojects 
in the pipeline, a qualified expert committee with the following expertise is suggested as shown 
in Table 4. CECEP should maintain an available expert committee within the group or outsource 
it when the required expertise is needed but not available inside CECEP.  
21. 
As  fund  manager,  the  Management  Company  will  assess  and  approve  investments  in 
Funds and individual subprojects through investment committees at the Facility and each Fund. 
The  investment  review  and  approval  process  will  include  investment  structuring  to  mitigate 
technical  and  financial  risks  and  appraisal  of  environmental  impact  and  risk  under  the 
environmental and social management system (ESMS). An ESMS has been developed, and will 
be  adopted  and  implemented  by  CECEP  and  the  Management  Company  in  accordance  with 
national  policies  and  regulations,  and  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009,  as  amended 
25 Unless  otherwise  defined  in  this  project  administration  manual  (PAM),  terms  used  in  this  PAM  have  the  same 
meaning given to them in the Loan Agreement.  
26 CECEP  Huayu  Fund  was  established  in  2011  to  focus  on  investment  in  energy  conservation  and  environmental 
protection and has managed more than CNY7 billion in funds. CECEP Huayu has thee shareholders with CECEP 
Capital, the second-tier subsidiary of CECEP, has the controlled share of 55%. Integrity due diligence of CECEP, 
CECEP  Huayu,  and  Shanghai  Pudong  Development  Bank  has  been  undertaken  in  consultation  with  Office  of 
Anticorruption and Integrity and Office of Cofinancing Operations.  
27 CECEP’s  main  business  is  focused  on  energy  conservation,  emissions  reduction  and  environmental  protection, 
with subsidiaries involved in industrial and building energy efficiency, solid waste treatment, solar and wind energy, 
soil  remediation  and  pollution  control,  and  recycling  of  organic  and  inorganic  wastes.  It  also  has  an  extensive 
network of internal and external experts in these sectors, and extensive experience of planning, implementing and 
monitoring investments in them. 
11 
from  time  to  time).  Prior  to  recommending  an  investment  to  the  Facility  or  a  Fund,  the 
Management  Company  will  conduct,  and  will  confirm  to  the  relevant  investment  committee, 
environmental  and  social  due  diligence  to  confirm  compliance  with  the  ESMS,  and  national 
environment,  health  and  safety  law  and  regulations.  The  Management  Company  will  consider 
technical merit, credit quality, environmental, and social due diligence based on the Subproject 
selection  criteria. 28    The  Management  Company  will  also  monitor  the  implementation  and 
performance  of  Subprojects,  including  measurement  and  verification  of  emission  and  pollution 
reduction,  and  preparation  of  periodic  progress  reports  on  project  implementation  to  be 
submitted to ADB. 
Table 4. Suggested Expertise within the Expert Committee 
ESCO = energy service company. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
2. 
Special Features of Financial Intermediation Loan (FIL) 
22. 
The project will establish a focused mechanism under a Facility to finance deployment of 
low-emission  technologies  in  key  sectors,  targeting  major  emitters  in  the  greater  BTH  region. 
The  Management  Company  will  identify  subprojects  with  appropriate  business  models  for 
deploying  low-emission  technologies  at  scale  and  will  provide  financing  that  addresses  the 
issues  identified.  CECEP  will  invest  in  Qualified  Subborrowers  and  Qualified  Investees  only 
through the Facility, or through Funds to be established under the Facility. The Funds may not 
invest  in  other  funds,  only  in  Qualified  Enterprises.  Domestic  institutional  investors  and 
commercial banks will participate in the Funds and in financing some of the companies directly 
financed  by  the  Facility.  Unless  ADB  otherwise  agrees,  investment  from  the  Facility  into  the 
Regional  Fund  shall  not exceed  50%  of the  Facility.  Subprojects  in  which  any  CECEP  affiliate 
28 The eligibility criteria for the financed subprojects can be accessed in Appendix 3.  
12 
has an investment interest shall only be financed under the Regional Fund. No more than 10% 
of  the  Facility  shall  be  invested  directly  into  companies  pursuing  subprojects:  unless  ADB 
otherwise agrees, the Facility will invest 90% of the Relent Proceeds into Funds. No more than 
30%  of  the  Relent  Proceeds  shall  be  used  for  Put-protected  Equity  Investments  and  no  more 
than 10% of the Relent Proceeds shall be used for Equity Investments without a Put.  
23. 
Entrusted  Loans’  Tenor.  The  tenor  of  Entrusted  Loans  will  vary  depending  on  the 
nature of the subprojects. For clean energy and waste-to-energy projects, it normally takes 5–10 
years  for  the  Qualified  Subborrowers  to  payback  loans,  while  for  energy  efficiency  projects,  it 
may  take  3–5  years.  As  Entrusted  Loans  are  repaid  to  the  Facility,  and  as  Funds  and  Equity 
Investments return funds to the Facility, the principal portion of the proceeds will be reutilized to 
set up Funds and reinvested in other subprojects. A Facility Account will be set up at the Facility 
to receive funds from CECEP and invest to qualified subprojects, and receive repayments of the 
Entrusted  Loans  made  by  the  Facility  and  the  returns  on  its  Equity  Investments  in  Qualified 
Enterprises  and  Funds.  29 It  is  expected that  the  ADB  loan  proceeds  will  be  re-utilized  at  least 
once before it is repaid to ADB. It is required that CECEP, through the Management Company, 
the  Facility  and  the  Funds,  will  ensure  that  all  Subprojects  and  investees  comply  with  (i)  all 
Subproject  and  investee  selection  criteria  (Appendix  3)  applicable  to  the  particular  type  of 
investment, and (ii) the ESMS (Linked Document 12 of the RRP). 
3. 
Subproject Selection Procedure 
24. 
Detailed  Subproject  Selection  Criteria  (Appendix  3) have  been  prepared  to  ensure  that 
only subprojects meeting the development objectives of the project and complying with relevant 
ADB policies are selected to receive support from the Facility or the Funds.   
25. 
A  list  of  initial  representative  subprojects  has  been  prepared  during  the  project 
preparation and the initial due diligence have been carried out by CECEP jointly with the ADB 
project team. A free limit of €80 million has been set. The Facility or the Funds are free  (except 
as specified elsewhere in this PAM or the Project Agreement)to approve Entrusted Loans where 
the  Facility’s  and  Funds’  total  investment  amounts  to  less  than  the  free  limit  without  seeking 
ADB’s  no  objection.  For  Entrusted  Loans  where  the  amount  of  financing  from  the  Facility  and 
Funds  exceeds  the  Free  Limit,  CECEP  shall  submit  the  screening  results  and  safeguard  due 
diligence reports to ADB for review prior to approval. The Management Company shall keep a 
record of the results of its due diligence as Facility and Fund manager to be made available for 
inspection by representatives from ADB upon request. The Management Company is required 
to prepare subproject appraisal reports to verify compliance with the applicable selection criteria 
and  obtain  ADB’s  “no  objection”  for  Subprojects  (i)  financed  with  retroactive  financing;  (ii)  that 
receive  aggregate  financing  from  the  Facility  and  Funds  in  an  amount  greater  than  the  “free 
limit”  of  €80  million  for  Entrusted  Loans;  (iii)  financed  by  Equity  Investment;  and  (iv)  that  are 
otherwise required to have ADB’s prior review under the Project Agreement or this PAM. 
4. 
Specific  Implementation  Arrangements  for  Funds,  Equity  Investments  and 
Entrusted Loans 
26. 
Before  the  Facility  agrees  to  invest  or  invests  in any  Fund, the  Management  Company 
shall submit a report on the proposed fund investment for ADB’s prior review and approval, and 
29 Entrusted  loan  means  a  secured  or  unsecured  loan  m ade  under  an  Entrusted  Loan  Agreement  a n d   using 
Relent  Proceeds  ( i )   made  by  the Facility  or  a  Fund  to  a  Qualified  Subborrower,  or  (ii)  made  by  the Facility  to 
a  Fund. 
13 
approval  of  documentation  related  to  such  proposed  fund,  including  but  not  limited  to,  a  draft 
Limited  Partnership  Agreement,  a  proposal  describing  the  purpose,  terms  and  implementation 
arrangements  of  such  proposed  fund,  or  such  other  documentation  as  ADB  shall  reasonably 
request.  Neither  the  Facility  nor  any  Fund  that  will  receive  debt  or  equity  from  the  Facility  will 
fund any subproject that is in the ADB SPS Prohibited Investment and Activities List (Appendix 
4).  The  Facility  and  each  Fund  that  receives  debt  or  equity  from  the  Facility  must  adopt  the 
ESMS prepared for the Project and must carry out environmental and social due diligence of the 
subprojects  to  be  financed  by  the  Facility  or  such  Fund.    It  will  be  a  requirement  of  ADB’s 
approval  of  each  Fund  that  the  Management  Company  act  as  the  fund  manager  and  that  all 
investors agree that Fund investments must satisfy all of ADB’s project requirements.   
27. 
Prior to providing or committing to provide any Relent Proceeds for (i) investment in the 
Facility,  (ii)  any  investment  by the  Facility  in  a  Fund, (iii)  the first  Entrusted  Loan made  by  the 
Facility and by the first Fund to make an Entrusted Loan; (iv) the first Equity Investment without 
a Put made by the Facility and by the first Fund to make an Equity Investment without a Put; (v) 
the  first  Put-protected  Equity  investment  by  the  Facility  and  by  the  first  Fund  to  make  a  Put-
protected Equity investment, and (vi) the first Entrusted Loan or Put-protected Equity investment 
made  by  the  Facility  to  an  ESCO  and  by  the  first  Fund  to  make  an  Entrusted  Loan  or  Put-
protected  Equity  Investment  to  an  ESCO;  CECEP  shall  submit  for  ADB’s  prior  review  and 
approval  documentation  related  to  such  proposed  transaction  including  an  appraisal  report,  in 
such  form  and  detail  as  ADB  may  request,  describing  the  proposed  investment,  the  Facility, 
Fund or Qualified Enterprise, the terms and conditions of the proposed investment, and drafts of 
the Project Implementing Contracts relevant to the transaction.  
28.  Whenever  the  Facility  or  a  Fund  proposes  to  make  any  Equity  Investment,  the 
Management Company shall before the Facility or the Fund enters into or agrees to the related 
investment,  submit  to  ADB  a  “no  objection”  application  for  approval  of  the  related  investment. 
Such  application  shall  be  in  a  form  satisfactory  to  ADB  and  shall  contain  a  description  and 
appraisal  of  the  subproject,  the  Qualified  Investee,  the  identity  of  the  Put  counterparty  if  the 
investment  is  Put-protected  Equity  or  other  proposed  exit  strategy  if  it  is  an  Equity Investment 
without a Put, and such other information as ADB shall reasonably request.  
The Management Company shall ensure that each Qualified Subborrower and Qualified 
29. 
Investee,  prior  to  receiving  any  financial  assistance  from  the  project,  enters  into  an  Entrusted 
Loan Agreement or an Equity Investment Agreement, in each case in a form acceptable to ADB 
and  that  reflects  the  applicable  requirements  of  the  Loan  Agreement,  the  Project  Agreement, 
this PAM and the ESMS, in addition to any other provisions a prudent financier would request 
and that describes clearly and in reasonable detail the Subproject for which the Entrusted Loan 
or  Equity  Investment  is  to  be  used.  For  Entrusted  Loans,  the  ADB  requirements  may  be  in  a 
Subproject Agreement separate from the Entrusted Loan Agreement provided that the financing 
is clearly linked to fulfillment of all Subproject Agreement requirements. In the case of Entrusted 
Loans and Put-protected Equity, the debt must be subject to early repayment, or the equity Puts 
must be exercisable, if the ADB project requirements are not implemented.  
30. 
For  Put-protected  Equity,  investment  will  be  structured  as  registered  capital  but  with  a 
put  option  against  a  creditworthy  third  party  (not  the  equity  issuer)  in  favor  of  Facility  or  the 
relevant  Fund.  In  case  the  investee  company  is  not  able  to  give  an  exit  to  the  Facility  or  the 
relevant Fund through an initial public offering within the Facility’s or Fund’s required timeframe, 
strategic  sale  or  other  secondary  transaction,  the  Put  counterparty  will  buy  the  stake  at  an 
agreed  price.  The  Put  will  significantly  reduce  the  risks  in  executing  exit  of  the  investments, 
which  makes  the  risk  profile  of  Put-protected  Equity  Investment  similar  to  that  of  a  debt 
14 
financing. Puts for Put-protected Equity Investment shall be secured, and the maximum amount 
of  the  Put  price  (the  acquisition  price  by  the  Put  provider  of  the  subject  equity,  including  a 
return) shall not exceed 70% of the net asset value of the security provided by or on behalf of 
the Put provider. 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
The roles and responsibilities of the different entities involved in project implementation 
31. 
and oversight are summarized in Table 5.  
Project 
Implementation 
Organizations 
Executing Agency 
(CECEP) 
Facility and Fund 
Manager 
(the Management 
Company) 
Table 5: Roles and Responsibilities 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Enter into onlending agreement with MOF; 
•  Enter  into  Project  Agreement  with  ADB  and  ensure  compliance  with  its 
covenants and provisions; 
•  Provide  overall  guidance  and  supervision 
for  project  preparation  and 
implementation;  
•  Responsible 
for  coordinating  project 
implementation  activities  among 
government agencies;  
•  Ensure  that  ESMS  is  established  and  implemented  by  the  Management 
Company; 
•  Overall responsibility for ESMS implementation;  
•  Enter  into  FCA  with  the  Account  Bank  to  establish  and  monitor  (i)  EWA  for 
receiving ADB loan proceeds; (ii) CCA for receiving conversion of euro to CNY 
before transferring to Funds and Subprojects; (iii) RFA for receiving repayments 
from the Facility, and (iv) Facility Account at the Facility; 
•  As  limited  partner,  enter  into  a  Limited  Partnership  Agreement  for  the  Facility, 
with  the  Management  Company  acting  as  General  Partner  and  fund 
manager; and 
•  Prepare and submit annual audited entity financial statements to ADB. 
•  Act  as  facility  and  fund  manager  of  the  Facility  and  Funds  and  assume  major 
responsibility for day-to-day project implementation; 
•  Provide  staff  resources  with  competence  in  technical,  environmental,  and 
financial issues pertaining to the project implementation;  
•  As general partner, enter into Limited Partnership Agreements with CECEP for 
the Facility and with the Facility and other limited partners for the Funds; 
•  Review  and  assess  subproject  applications  according  to  the  selection  criteria 
and approval process for subprojects described in this PAM;  
•  Recommend  subprojects  to  be  financed  by  the  Facility  or  the  Funds  to  the 
investment committee; 
•  Obtain ADB’s no objection where required;   
•  On  behalf  of  the  Facility  or  the  Funds,  sign  Entrusted  Loan  Agreements  with 
Qualified  Subborrowers  (and  Funds)  for  Entrusted  Loans,  and  Subproject 
Agreements where required; 
•  On behalf of the Facility or the Funds, sign Equity Investment Agreements with 
Qualified Investee companies, and Puts where the investment is Put-protected 
Equity; a  
•  Establish a credit risk management mechanism to monitor the Facility’s and the 
Funds’ credit risk and interest rate risk in connection with the project; 
•  Ensure the establishment and implementation of an ESMS, and environmental 
and  social  safeguards  compliance  of  the  Facility  and  the  Funds  and  all 
15 
Project 
Implementation 
Organizations 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
Subprojects under the project; 
•  Establish and implement GRM at the Facility, Fund, and subproject level; 
•  Monitor  the  implementation  progress  of  the  Facility,  Funds,  and  subprojects, 
including compliance with the terms and conditions of the Project Implementing 
Contracts.  Require  remedial  actions  in  the  event  of  noncompliance  with  the 
obligations;  
•  Prepare  ADB  loan  withdrawal  applications  with  the  necessary  supporting 
documents described in the disbursement section of this PAM; 
•  Participate in the external audit of project accounts by providing ADB access to 
project auditors;  
•  Monitor 
interest  payment,  return 
Investment,  and  principal 
repayment  of  Entrusted  Loan  by  the  Qualified  Subborrowers  and  Qualified 
Investees;  
from  Equity 
•  Monitor the performance of Entrusted Banks; 
•  Prepare  and  submit  (i)  semi-annual  project  progress  report;  (ii)  semi-annual 
ESMS  implementation  reports  during  the  implementation  stage  (first  5  years 
after loan effectiveness) and annual reports in the following 10 years; (iii) semi-
annual consolidated environmental and social monitoring reports during  project 
implementation  stage  and  annually  until  project  closure;  (iv)  consolidated 
audited  statement  of  utilization  of  funds;  (v)  audited  entity  financial  statements 
of  CECEP,  the  Management  Company,  the  Facility,  and  Funds;  and  (vi)  a 
completion  report  on  the  utilization  of  the  Loan,  the  execution  of  the 
Subprojects,  their  costs,  the  performance  by  CECEP  and  the  Management 
Company of the obligations under or referenced in the Project Agreement and 
the  accomplishment  of  the  purposes  of  the  Loan  within  6  months  after  the 
completion date of the project or as ADB otherwise specified; and 
•  Liaise  with  ADB,  the  Account  Bank,  other  limited  partners  of  all  Funds, 
cofinancing  commercial  banks,  Qualified  Subborrowers,  Qualified  Equity 
Investees, and other stakeholders.  
•  Provide counter guarantee to MOF for the ADB loan for CECEP; 
•    
•  Enter into FCA with CECEP; 
•  Manage (i) EWA, (ii) CCA, (iii) RFA, and (vi) Facility Account; 
•  Participate in subproject due diligence along with the Management Company 
when the Account Bank proposes to cofinance with the Facility and/or Funds; 
•  Manage exchanges of foreign and domestic currencies for CECEP; 
•  Disburse the Entrusted Loan to Qualified Subborrowers from the Facility and to 
Funds and Qualified Investees invested by the Facility within 3 days of receipt 
of ADB loan proceeds to CECEP’s EWA; 
•  Repay the loan principal;  
•  Pay interest in a timely manner as stated in the relevant agreements; 
•  Implement subprojects in accordance with the Project Implementing Contracts;  
•  Comply  with  the  requirements  assigned  to  them  under  the  ESMS,  including 
providing information and reports required to the Management Company; 
•  Establish GRM at subprojects level; 
•  Get approvals from relevant authorities such as  local environmental protection 
bureaus and the development and reform commissions; 
•  Undertake  the  procurement  of  goods  and  works  in  compliance  with  the 
procurement manual; and 
•  Provide monitoring and evaluation information and participate in the completion 
review of the subproject. 
Counter  Guarantee 
Provider  
The Account Bank 
Qualified 
Subborrowers and 
Equity Investees 
(end-borrowers and 
investees of the 
Facility and Funds) 
16 
Project 
Implementation 
Organizations 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
ADB 
•  Provide  guidance  and  support  to  executing  and  other  relevant  agencies  to 
ensure compliance with Loan and Project Agreements; 
•  Disburse  the  loan  in  accordance  with  the  agreed  procedures  upon  receipt  of 
supporting 
duly  authorized  withdrawal  applications  and  necessary 
documentation;  
•  Review project progress reports and monitors implementation of ESMS;  
•  Review and endorse applications of certain Subprojects; 
•  Require  CECEP  and 
noncompliance issues; 
the  Management  Company 
to  act  on  any 
•  Conduct  regular  loan  review  missions,  midterm  review  mission,  and  project 
completion mission; and 
•  Review annual audit reports and follow up on audit recommendations. 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  CCA  =  CNY  conversion  account,  CECEP  =  China  Energy  Conservation  and 
Environmental  Protection  Group,  ESMS  =  environmental  and  social  management  system,  EWA  =  euro  withdrawal 
account,  FCA  =  framework  cooperation  agreement,  GRM  =  grievance  redress  mechanism,  MOF  =  Ministry  of 
Finance, PAM = project administration manual, RFA = revolving funds account. 
a  Including ownership enlargement agreement, capital contribution agreement and equity transfer agreement. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation  
17 
Oversight Body 
Executing Agency 
CECEP Group 
CECEP Huayu 
Mr. Guan Di 
Manager, Financial Management Department, CECEP 
Group 
Telephone No.: +86 10 6224 8531 
Fax No.: +86 10 6224 8813 
Email: guandi@cecep.cn 
Address: 18th Floor, Energy Saving Building, No. 42 
Xizhimen North Street, Haidian District, Beijing 
Mr. Tao Minjie  
Deputy General Manager, CECEP Huayu Fund 
Management Co., Ltd  
Telephone No.: +86 10 8349 6706 
Fax No.: +86 10 8349 6701 
Email: taominjie@cecep.cn 
Address: 15th Floor, New Era Building, No. 26 Pinganli 
West Street, Xicheng District, Beijing  
Asian Development Bank 
Energy Division, East Asia 
(EAEN) 
Mission Leader 
Ms. Sujata Gupta 
Director  
Telephone No: +63 2 632 6156 
Fax No.: + 63 2 636 2302 
Email address: sgupta@adb.org 
Ms. Lin Lu 
Senior Energy Specialist 
Telephone No.: +63 2 632 4703 
Fax No.: + 63 2 636 2302 
Email address: llu@adb.org 
18 
Project Organization Structure  
Figure 1: Project Organization Chart 
CECEP = China Energy Conservation and Environmental Protection Group, EA = executing agency, EPC = energy 
performance contract, FCA = framework cooperation agreement, LPA = limited partnership agreement.  
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
32. 
CECEP has established a dedicated full-time PMO with around 20 experienced staff with 
academic  qualifications  and  experience  in  technical,  environmental,  and  financial  responsible 
for implementation and management of the project including one staff responsible for the ESMS 
establishment, operation, and reporting. The Management Company will provide staff resources 
and keep sufficient experienced staff in the PMO. The PMO should at least include and maintain 
the  positions  shown  in  Figure  2.  The  PMO  must  have  a  team  of  experts  with  expertise  to 
conduct  all  of,  but  not  limited  to,  the  following  (i)  assessing  the  risk  profile  of  the  potential 
Subprojects;  (ii)  evaluating  the  technology  and  business  model;  (iii)  assessing  capacity  of  the 
potential  subborrowers,  potential  investees  and  potential  limited  partners  for  Funds;  (iv) 
reviewing and assessing subproject applications according to the selection criteria and approval 
process  for  subprojects;  (v)  recommending  approval  of  Entrusted  Loans  for  subprojects  and 
Equity  Investment  to  the  Facility’s  or  Funds’  investment  committees  to  be  financed;    (vi) 
obtaining  ADB’s  no  objection  where  required;  (vii)  establishing  a  credit  risk  management 
19 
mechanism  to  monitor  the  Facility’s  and  the  Funds’  credit  risk  and  interest  rate  risk  in 
connection  with  the  project;  (viii)  monitoring  the  implementation  progress  of  Subprojects, 
including  compliance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  project  implementing  contracts;  (ix) 
taking  remedial  actions  in  the  event  of  noncompliance  with  the  obligations;  (x)  preparing  the 
ADB loan withdrawal applications; (xi) participating in the external audit of project accounts by 
providing  ADB  access  to  project  auditors;  (xii)  monitoring  interest  payment,  return  from  Equity 
Investment,  and  principal  repayment  of  Entrusted  Loans  by  the  Qualified  Enterprises;  (xiii) 
monitoring  the  performance  of  the  Account  Bank  and  the  Funds’  Entrusted  Banks;  and  (xiv) 
prepare  and  submit  semi-annual  project  progress  report,  semi-annual  ESMS  implementation 
reports  during  the  implementation  stage  and  annual  reports  in  the  following  10  years;  semi-
annual consolidated environmental and social monitoring reports during the first 5 years during 
implementation  stage  and  annually  in  the  following  10  years;  project  consolidated  audited 
financial  statement;  audited  entity  financial  statements  of  CECEP  and  the  Management 
Company, the Facility and each Fund; and a project completion report (PCR). 
Figure 2: PMO Organizational Chart 
PMO Director
Deputy Director 
ESMS & Technical
Deputy Director
Project Development
[Deal Flow]
Deputy Director
Risk Control & Accounting
ESMS (1)
Project Managers (6) 
Appraisal (4) 
In-house Expert 
Group
Project 
Coordinators (1) 
Office Administrators (2)
Risk Control Manager -
Implementation Oversight 
(1)
Accountant (2) 
Auditor (1) 
Lawyer (1)
PMO = project management office, ESMS = environmental and social management system. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
20 
IV. 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
33. 
The  project  consists  of  establishing  the  Facility  and  Funds  to  mobilize  financing  to 
deploy  low-emission  technologies.  The  specific  subprojects  will  be  undertaken  by  Qualified 
Enterprises. The financing provided through the Facility and by Funds will mainly be utilized by 
Qualified Enterprises for purchase and installation of equipment. It is not envisaged that the air 
quality improvement projects to be financed under the project will have significant civil works or 
require land acquisition. The subprojects will be financed through a combination of counterpart 
funding  from  the  Qualified  Investees  and  Entrusted  Loans  or  Equity  Investments  using  ADB 
loan  funds  and  cofinancing  provided  by  domestic  commercial  banks  or  other  Fund  investors 
and,  potentially,  funds  from  other  investors  in  the  Qualified  Enterprise.  The  interest  during 
construction  of  subprojects  is  included  in  the  cost  estimates  of  appraised  subprojects.  The 
subproject cost estimates also include the taxes and duties, transport, and insurance cost.   
34. 
The investment cost of the first batch of subprojects is estimated to be €1,747.0 million 
including the finance  charges  on  debts.  An  estimated  €1,319.0 million  cofinancing  is  expected 
for the first batch subprojects. Since the payback period of Subprojects is typically 3–7 years, as 
the initial batch of subprojects is repaid and Equity Investments returned, the proceeds will be 
reinvested  into  another  set  of  subprojects  and  Funds.  CECEP  will  exert  its  best  endeavors  to 
ensure  that  the  reflows  from  subprojects  will  be  reinvested  to  finance  additional  batches  of 
subprojects  having  an  investment  requirement  of  approximately  €1.75  billion.  Hence,  the  total 
investment to be mobilized by the Facility is expected to be in the range of €3.6 billion. 
35. 
The  government  has  requested  a  loan  of  €428.0  million  from  ADB’s  ordinary  capital 
resources  to  help  finance  the  project.  The  loan  size  is  based  on  government’s  development 
financing  needs  and  potential  development  impact.  The  government’s  green  development-
related  financing  need  is  estimated  at  $1  trillion  from  2016–2020.  The  government  intends  to 
meet this gap by mobilizing cofinancing from domestic and international sources. For the loan, 
domestic  cofinancing  should  comprise  contribution  of  €642.0  million  from  local  government, 
institutional  investors  and  domestic  commercial  banks,  including  but  not  limited  to  SPDB, 
Industrial Bank, and People’s Insurance Company of China. ADB’s project will help meet part of 
the financing needs.  
The  loan  will  have  a  15-year  term,  including  a  grace  period  of  10  years,30 an  annuity 
36. 
repayment  at  the  10%  discount  rate  option,  an  annual  interest  rate  determined  in  accordance 
with ADB’s London interbank offered rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility, a commitment charge 
of  0.15%  per  year,  and such  other terms  and  conditions  set forth  in  the draft  loan  and  project 
agreements. Based on this, the average loan maturity is 12.95 years, and there is no maturity 
premium  payable  to  ADB.  ADB  lending  is  expected  to  leverage  €1,293.2  or  about  3  times  its 
amount through commercial and local government investments and counterpart financing. This 
includes  an  estimated  €642.0  million  from  institutional  investors,  local  government  and 
commercial  banks,  and  an  estimated  €651.0  million  from  Qualified  Enterprises  as  counterpart 
contributions. 
Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions  
37. 
The  cost  estimates  for  appraised  subprojects  have  been  prepared  based  on  the 
information from subproject feasibility studies. The feasibility studies have been prepared by the 
potential investees using domestic accredited engineering design institutes. The cost estimates 
30 A longer grace period is essential to seek the rollover of ADB loan proceeds and larger impacts. 
of subprojects to be identified and subsequent batches of subprojects are preliminary estimates 
and  these  estimates  will  be  revised  when  these  subprojects  are  identified  and  appraised.  As 
and when the Subproject cost estimates are verified, the cost estimates in Tables 7, 9, 10, and 
11 will be revised.   
Key Assumptions 
21 
38. 
the 
The following key assumptions underpin the cost estimates and financing plan: 
Exchange rate: CNY7.6993 = €1.00 (as of 7 November 2017).31 
(i) 
Physical  contingencies  computed  at  5%  of 
total  base  cost.  Price 
(ii) 
contingencies  based  on  expected  cumulative  inflation  over  the  implementation 
period  are  presented  in  Table  6.  Contingencies  include  provision  for  potential 
exchange  rate  fluctuation  under  the  assumption  of  the  purchasing  power  parity 
exchange rate. 
Interest  during  implementation  for  ADB  loan  has  been  computed  at  the  euro  5-
year swap rate plus a spread of 0.5%. Commitment charges for an ADB loan are 
0.15% per year to be charged on the undisbursed loan amount. 
The  interest  during  construction  of  Subprojects  and  cofinancing  loans  were 
calculated assuming an interest rate of 5%.  
CECEP and the Management Company will provide some in-kind contributions in 
the form of office space and shared use of facilities. These were not included in 
the project cost estimates.  
(iv) 
(iii) 
(v) 
Table 6: Escalation Rates for Price Contingency Calculation (%) 
Item 
Foreign rate of price inflation 
Domestic rate of price inflation 
2017 
1.4 
2.3 
2018 
1.5 
2.4 
2019 
1.5 
2.4 
2020 
1.5 
2.4 
2021 
1.5 
2.4 
Average 
1.5 
2.4 
  Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
31 http://www.exchangerates.org.uk/USD-CNY-exchange-rate-history.html  
22 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category  
39. 
The detailed cost estimates for appraised subprojects by expenditure category together 
is provided in Table 7. The cost estimates by expenditure category for the subsequent batches 
of subprojects will be prepared during project implementation.  
Table 7: Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
 Item 
Foreign 
Exchange 
In CNY million 
Local 
Currency 
Total 
Foreign 
Exchange 
In € million 
Local 
Currency 
Total 
% of Base 
Cost 
I. Appraised Subprojects  
Subproject 1 (Advanced biogas and organic fertilizer) - CECEP (Fengqiu) Biomass Energy Co., Ltd. 
1.  Base Costs 
a.  Civil Works 
b.  Equipment 
Cost 
c.  Subproject 
Management 
Cost 
d.  Working 
capital 
2.  Contingencies 
3.  Financial 
Charges  During 
Construction 
Period 
4.  Recurrent cost 
Subtotal (1) 
126.45 
35.18 
62.28 
0.00 
0.00 
126.45 
35.18 
0.00 
62.28 
16.42 
4.57 
8.09 
0.00 
0.00 
16.42 
4.57 
94.02% 
26.16% 
0.00 
8.09 
46.31% 
12.46 
0.00 
12.46 
1.62 
0.00 
1.62 
9.26% 
16.53 
3.52 
0.00 
16.53 
0.00 
3.52 
2.15 
0.46 
0.00 
2.15 
12.29% 
0.00 
0.46 
2.62% 
4.52 
0.00 
4.52 
0.59 
0.00 
0.59 
3.36% 
0.00 
134.49 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
134.49 
0.00 
17.47 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
17.47 
0.00% 
100.00% 
Subproject 2 (Industrial by-product gas utilization) - Shanxi Liheng Iron & Steel Co., Ltd. 
1.  Base Costs 
a.  Civil Works 
b.  Equipment 
Cost 
c.  Subproject 
Management 
Cost 
d.  Working 
capital 
2.  Contingencies 
3.  Financial 
Charges  During 
Construction 
Period 
618.40 
219.17 
356.81 
0.00 
0.00 
618.40 
219.17 
0.00 
356.81 
80.32 
28.47 
46.34 
0.00 
0.00 
80.32 
28.47 
92.35% 
32.73% 
0.00 
46.34 
53.28% 
38.37 
0.00 
38.37 
4.98 
0.00 
4.98 
5.73% 
4.05 
39.76 
0.00 
4.05 
0.00 
39.76 
0.53 
5.16 
0.00 
0.53 
0.00 
5.16 
0.60% 
5.94% 
11.49 
0.00 
11.49 
1.49 
0.00 
1.49 
1.72% 
4.  Recurrent cost 
0.00 
0.00 
Subproject 3 (Smart industrial zone development) - Integrated Electronic Systems Lab Co., Ltd. (iESLab) 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00   86.97  
0.00 
669.65 
0.00 
669.65 
0.00 
86.97  
Subtotal (2) 
0.00% 
100.00% 
1.  Base Costs 
a.  Civil Works 
b.  Equipment 
Cost 
c.  Subproject 
Management 
Cost 
d.  Working 
capital 
2.  Contingencies 
3.  Financial 
Charges  During 
410.95 
78.60 
305.05 
24.20 
0.00 
435.15 
78.60 
24.20 
329.25 
53.37 
10.21 
39.62 
3.14 
0.00 
56.52 
10.21 
84.34% 
15.23% 
3.14 
42.76 
63.82% 
21.90 
0.00 
21.90 
2.84 
0.00 
2.84 
4.24% 
5.40 
23.11 
56.45 
0.00 
1.21 
5.40 
24.32 
0.00 
56.45 
0.70 
3.00 
7.33 
0.00 
0.16 
0.70 
3.16 
1.05% 
4.71% 
0.00 
7.33 
10.94% 
23 
Foreign 
Exchange 
In CNY million 
Local 
Currency 
Total 
Foreign 
Exchange 
In € million 
Local 
Currency 
Total 
% of Base 
Cost 
 Item 
Construction 
Period 
4.  Recurrent cost 
Subtotal (3) 
0.00 
490.52 
0.00 
25.41 
0.00 
515.93 
0.00 
63.71  
0.00 
0.00 
3.30   67.01  
0.00% 
100.00% 
Subproject 4 (Deep-well geothermal district heating) - Shandong Luhai Petrol Technology Co., Ltd. 
1.  Base Costs 
a.  Civil Works 
b.  Equipment 
Cost 
c.  Subproject 
Management 
Cost 
d.  Working 
capital 
2.  Contingencies 
3.  Financial 
Charges  During 
Construction 
Period 
4.  Recurrent cost 
Subtotal (4) 
115.75 
65.65 
37.60 
6.00 
6.50 
8.45 
3.65 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
115.75 
65.65 
37.60 
15.03 
8.53 
4.88 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
15.03 
8.53 
90.54% 
51.35% 
4.88 
29.41% 
0.00 
6.00 
0.78 
0.00 
0.78 
4.69% 
0.00 
0.00 
6.50 
8.45 
0.84 
1.10 
0.00 
0.00 
0.84 
1.10 
5.08% 
6.61% 
0.00 
3.65 
0.47 
0.00 
0.47 
2.86% 
0.00 
127.85 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
127.85 
0.00 
16.60  
0.00 
0.00 
0.00   16.60  
0.00% 
100.00% 
Subproject 5 (Hydrogen-based low-emissions transport) - Beijing Blue-G Renewable Energy Technology Co., 
Ltd. 
1.  Base Costs 
a.  Civil Works 
b.  Equipment 
Cost 
c.  Subproject 
Management 
Cost 
d.  Working 
capital 
2.  Contingencies 
3.  Financial 
Charges  During 
Construction 
Period 
4.  Recurrent cost 
Subtotal (5) 
175.00 
0.00 
175.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
175.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
175.00 
22.73 
0.00 
22.73 
0.00 
0.00 
22.73 
0.00 
100.00% 
0.00% 
0.00 
22.73 
100.00% 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00% 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00% 
0.00% 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00% 
0.00 
175.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
175.00 
0.00 
22.73  
0.00 
0.00 
0.00   22.73  
0.00% 
100.00% 
Subproject 6 (Super-ESCO) - An Steel Energy-saving Technology Service Co., Ltd. (An Steel ESCO) 
14.06 
3.72 
1.  Base Costs 
108.26 
28.65 
108.26 
28.65 
14.06 
3.72 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
94.91% 
25.12% 
a.  Civil Works 
b.  Equipment 
Cost 
c.  Subproject 
Management 
Cost 
d.  Working 
capital 
2.  Contingencies 
3.  Financial 
Charges  During 
Construction 
Period 
4.  Recurrent cost 
Subtotal (6) 
Subtotal (1–6) 
70.67 
0.00 
70.67 
9.18 
0.00 
9.18 
61.96% 
8.34 
0.60 
2.87 
2.94 
0.00 
8.34 
1.08 
0.00 
1.08 
7.31% 
0.00 
0.00 
0.60 
2.87 
0.08 
0.37 
0.00 
0.08 
0.00 
0.37 
0.53% 
2.51% 
0.00 
2.94 
0.38 
0.00 
0.38 
2.57% 
0.00 
114.06 
1,711.56  
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
114.06 
25.41  1,736.97  
0.00 
14.81  
222.30  
0.00 
0.00 
0.00   14.81  
3.30   225.60  
0.00% 
100.00% 
24 
 Item 
Foreign 
Exchange 
In CNY million 
Local 
Currency 
Total 
Foreign 
Exchange 
In € million 
Local 
Currency 
Total 
% of Base 
Cost 
5,181.74  
6,333.24  11,514.98  
II. Subprojects to be 
Identifieda 
III. Project 
Management 
Expenses of CECEP 
Total Project Cost 
(I+II+III) 
CECEP = China Energy Conservation and Environmental Protection Group, ESCO = energy service company.  
a Including financial charges during construction. 
Sources: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
6,557.46  13,450.76  
198.81   198.81  
851.69  1,747.00  
822.57  1,495.58  
25.82   25.82  
6,893.30  
895.31  
673.01  
0.00  
0.00  
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds  
40. 
The ADB loan proceeds have been allocated as described in Table 8. The category for 
allocation of Entrusted Loan and Equity Investment includes allocation to Subprojects which are 
already  appraised,  to  be  appraised  and  identified  during  loan  implementation  based  on  the 
financing requirements of these Subprojects.  
Table 8: Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
Category 
Total Amount Allocated for 
ADB Financing (€ million) 
Percentage and Basis for 
Withdrawal from the Loan 
Account 
Provision of Entrusted Loan and 
Equity Investmentsa 
428.0 
100% of expenditures claimed 
No. 
1. 
Total 
€ = euro; ADB = Asian Development Bank.  
a Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 7 of Schedule 2 of the Loan Agreement.  
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
428.0  
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
Table 9: Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
(€ million) 
ADB Loan
Commercial bank/other 
financial institution
Item
Subborrower
CECEP Huayu
Total
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
I. Appraised Subprojects
Subproject 1 (Advanced biogas and organic fertilizer) - CECEP (Fengqiu) Biomass Energy 
Co., Ltd.
14.7
83.87%
Subproject 2 (Industrial by-product gas utilization) - Shanxi Liheng Iron & Steel Co., Ltd.
60.5
69.58%
Subproject 3 (Smart industrial zone development) - Integrated Electronic Systems Lab Co., 
Ltd. (iESLab)
Subproject 4 (Deep-well geothermal district heating) - Shandong Luhai Petrol Technology 
Co., Ltd.
Subproject 5 (Hydrogen-based low-emissions transport) - Beijing Blue-G Renewable 
Energy Technology Co., Ltd.
Subproject 6 (Super-ESCO) - An Steel Energy-saving Technology Service Co., Ltd. (An Steel 
ESCO)
Subtotal (1–6)
II. Subprojects to be Identifieda
III. Project Management Expenses of CECEP
46.4
69.23%
7.88
47.46%
15.9
70.00%
13.4
90.72%
158.8
269.2
-
70.38%
18.00%
0.00%
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
642.00
-
0.00%
2.82
16.13%
0.00%
26.46
30.42%
0.00%
20.62
30.77%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
42.93%
0.00%
8.72
52.54%
6.82
30.00%
1.37
9.28%
66.81
584.36
-
29.62%
39.07%
0.00%
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.00%
17.47
100.00%
0.00%
86.97
100.00%
0.00%
67.01
100.00%
0.00%
16.60
100.00%
0.00%
22.73
100.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
14.81
100.00%
225.60
100.00%
1,495.58
100.00%
25.82
100.00%
25.82
100.00%
Total Project Cost (I+II+III)
1.48%
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CECEP = China Energy Conservation and Environmental Protection Group, Ltd., ESCO = energy service company. 
a including financial charges during construction. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.
24.50%
37.27%
36.75%
651.18
642.00
428.0
25.82
1,747.00
100.00%
2
5
26 
Table 10: Detailed Cost Estimates by Output  
(€ million) 
Total Cost 
Output 1: Regional 
Emission-Reduction 
and Pollution-
Control Facility 
established 
Output 2: High 
technologies to 
reduce air pollution 
in agriculture sector, 
distributed energy, 
heating, transport, 
and iron and steel 
industry deployed 
Output 3: Capacity 
for key 
stakeholders in 
deployment of high 
technologies for 
pollution reduction 
in greater BTH 
region improved 
I. Appraised Subprojects 
Subproject 1 (Advanced biogas and organic fertilizer) - CECEP (Fengqiu) Biomass Energy Co., Ltd. 
1. Base Costs 
Subproject 2 (Industrial by-product gas utilization) - Shanxi Liheng Iron & Steel Co., Ltd. 
1. Base Costs 
16.42 
4.57 
8.09 
8.21 
2.28 
4.04 
1.62 
2.15 
0.46 
0.59 
0.00 
17.47 
0.00 
1.07 
0.23 
0.29 
0.00 
8.73 
0.00 
1.07 
0.23 
0.29 
0.00 
8.73 
8.21 
2.28 
4.04 
40.16 
14.23 
23.17 
80.32 
28.47 
46.34 
40.16 
14.23 
23.17 
4.98 
0.53 
5.16 
1.49 
0.00 
0.26 
2.58 
0.75 
0.00 
0.26 
2.58 
0.75 
1.62 
4.98 
Subtotal (2) 
0.00 
43.49 
Subproject 3 (Smart industrial zone development) - Integrated Electronic Systems Lab Co., Ltd. (iESLab) 
28.26 
1. Base Costs 
5.10 
21.38 
56.52 
10.21 
42.76 
28.26 
5.10 
21.38 
0.00 
86.97 
0.00 
43.49 
2.84 
0.70 
3.16 
7.33 
0.00 
67.01 
0.00 
0.35 
1.58 
3.67 
0.00 
33.50 
2.84 
0.00 
0.35 
1.58 
3.67 
0.00 
33.50 
Subproject 4 (Deep-well geothermal district heating) - Shandong Luhai Petrol Technology Co., Ltd. 
1. Base Costs 
15.03 
8.53 
4.88 
7.52 
4.26 
2.44 
7.52 
4.26 
2.44 
0.78 
0.84 
1.10 
0.47 
0.00 
16.60 
0.00 
0.42 
0.55 
0.24 
0.00 
8.30 
0.78 
0.00 
0.42 
0.55 
0.24 
0.00 
8.30 
Subproject 5 (Hydrogen-based low-emissions transport) - Beijing Blue-G Renewable Energy Technology Co., 
a. Civil Works 
b. Equipment Cost 
c. Subproject 
Management Cost 
d. Working capital 
2. Contingencies 
3. Financial Charges 
During Construction Period 
4. Recurrent cost 
Subtotal (1) 
a. Civil Works 
b. Equipment Cost 
c. Subproject 
Management Cost 
d. Working capital 
2. Contingencies 
3. Financial Charges 
During Construction Period 
4. Recurrent cost 
a. Civil Works 
b. Equipment Cost 
c. Subproject 
Management Cost 
d. Working capital 
2. Contingencies 
3. Financial Charges 
During Construction Period 
4. Recurrent cost 
Subtotal (3) 
a. Civil Works 
b. Equipment Cost 
c. Subproject 
Management Cost 
d. Working capital 
2. Contingencies 
3. Financial Charges 
During Construction Period 
4. Recurrent cost 
Subtotal (4) 
27 
Total Cost 
Output 1: Regional 
Emission-Reduction 
and Pollution-
Control Facility 
established 
Output 2: High 
technologies to 
reduce air pollution 
in agriculture sector, 
distributed energy, 
heating, transport, 
and iron and steel 
industry deployed 
Output 3: Capacity 
for key 
stakeholders in 
deployment of high 
technologies for 
pollution reduction 
in greater BTH 
region improved 
Ltd. 
1. Base Costs 
a. Civil Works 
b. Equipment Cost 
c. Subproject 
Management Cost 
d. Working capital 
2. Contingencies 
3. Financial Charges 
During Construction Period 
4. Recurrent cost 
Subtotal (5) 
22.73 
0.00 
22.73 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
22.73 
11.36 
0.00 
11.36 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
11.36 
0.00 
11.36 
0.00 
11.36 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
11.36 
Subproject 6 (Super-ESCO) - An Steel Energy-saving Technology Service Co., Ltd. (An Steel ESCO) 
1. Base Costs 
a. Civil Works 
b. Equipment Cost 
c. Subproject 
Management Cost 
d. Working capital 
2. Contingencies 
3. Financial Charges 
During Construction Period 
4. Recurrent cost 
Subtotal (6) 
14.06 
3.72 
9.18 
7.03 
1.86 
4.59 
0.00 
14.81 
225.60 
0.00 
7.41 
112.80 
1.08 
0.08 
0.37 
0.38 
0.00 
0.04 
0.19 
0.19 
1.08 
0.00 
0.04 
0.19 
0.19 
7.03 
1.86 
4.59 
0.00 
7.41 
112.80 
747.79  
1,495.58  
Subtotal (1–6) 
II. Subprojects to be 
Identified a 
III. Project Management 
Expenses of CECEP 
Total Project Cost 
(I+II+III) 
CECEP = China Energy Conservation and Environmental Protection Group, ESCO = energy service company. 
a including financial charges during construction.  
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
1,747.00  
673.01  
74.78  
100.6  
25.82  
25.82  
860.6  
785.8  
0.00 
- 
- 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
41. 
The yearly breakdown of subproject cost estimates by subproject approval and utilization is provided in the Table 11 for the 
appraised subprojects. The details of subprojects to be identified are indicative at this stage and these will be verified and Table 11 
will be revised during loan implementation. 
Item
Total cost
Table 11: Detailed Cost Estimates by Year (€ million) 
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Approval
Utilization
Approval
Utilization
Approval
Utilization
Approval
Utilization
Approval
Utilization
2
8
26.09
60.88
17.47
17.47
86.97
33.50
67.01
17.47
86.97
67.01
I   Appraised Subprojects
Subproject 1 (Advanced biogas and 
organic fertilizer) - CECEP (Fengqiu) 
Biomass Energy Co., Ltd.
Subproject 2 (Industrial by-product gas 
utilization) - Shanxi Liheng Iron & Steel 
Co., Ltd.
Subproject 3 (Smart industrial zone 
development) - Integrated Electronic 
Systems Lab Co., Ltd. (iESLab)
Subproject 4 (Deep-well geothermal 
district heating) - Shandong Luhai Petrol 
Technology Co., Ltd.
Subproject 5 (Hydrogen-based low-
emissions transport) - Beijing Blue-G 
Renewable Energy Technology Co., Ltd.
Subproject 6 (Super-ESCO) - An Steel 
Energy-saving Technology Service Co., 
Ltd. (An Steel ESCO)
Subtotal (1–6)
II. Subprojects to be Identifieda
III. Project Management Expenses of 
CECEP
Total Project Cost (I+II+III)
CECEP = China Energy Conservation and Environmental Protection Group, ESCO = energy service company.  
a including financial charges during construction. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
225.60
1,495.58 
0.00
224.34
52.67
224.34
0.00
523.45
1,747.00 
224.34 
523.45 
159.22 
225.60 
281.91 
225.60
154.55
25.82 
22.73
14.81
14.81
14.81
22.73
22.73
16.60
16.60
20.10
0.00
0.00
6.48
5.15
4.67
4.91
0.00
13.40
4.98
18.38
523.45
5.15
546.99 
0.00
448.67
0.00
299.12
0.00
448.67
5.41
0.00
299.12
5.68
448.67 
454.08 
299.12 
304.80 
29 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve  
42. 
The  S-curve (Figure  3) provides  estimates  of how  the  ADB  loan  will  be committed  and 
disbursed  during  the  course  of  loan  implementation. It  is  only  the  ADB financing  which  will  be 
recorded  in  ADB’s  systems  for  internal  monitoring  and  reporting  purposes.  Counterpart  funds 
and  any  other  cofinancing  are  therefore  excluded.  The  projection  for  commitment  in  this  case 
relates to approval of Entrusted Loans and Equity Investments.  
Table 12: Commitment and Disbursements Projections 
(€ million) 
YEAR
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
TOTAL
Subloan Commitments
Q1
Q2
17.12
25.68
25.68
25.68
4.28
17.12
25.68
34.24
25.68
Q3
4.28
25.68
34.24
34.24
17.12
Q4
8.56
25.68
34.24
34.24
8.56
Total
12.84
85.60
119.84
128.40
77.04
4.28
428.00
Q1
4.28
25.68
34.24
34.24
17.12
Disbursements
Q2
Q3
8.56
25.68
34.24
34.24
8.56
8.56
25.68
34.24
34.24
4.28
Q4
4.28
8.56
25.68
25.68
25.68
4.28
Total
4.28
29.96
102.72
128.40
128.40
34.24
428.00
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Figure 3: Commitment and Disbursements S-Curve 
(€ million) 
30 
Fund Flow Diagram 
Figure 4: Fund Flow Diagram
CCA  =  CNY  conversion  account,  CECEP  =  China  Energy  Conservation  and  Environmental 
Protection Group, EWA = euro withdrawal account, FCA = framework cooperation agreement, LPA = 
limited partnership agreement, RFA = revolving fund account, PRC = People’s Republic of China. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
31 
43. 
Figure 4 shows the (i) agreements between ADB, PRC/MOF, CECEP, the Account Bank, 
Qualified Investees, and Qualified Subborrowers; and (ii) cash flows of ADB loan funds to and 
from  Qualitied  Enterprises.  The  agreement  flow,  loan  disbursement  and  fund  flow  are  as 
follows: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
ADB  will  enter  into  a  Loan  Agreement  with  the  PRC,  acting  through  MOF,  and 
MOF will enter into an onlending agreement with CECEP on the same terms as 
the agreement between ADB and MOF. 
CECEP will enter into an FCA with the Account Bank for the operation of the euro-
denominated EWA and CCA, as well as acting as Entrusted Bank for Entrusted 
Loans directly made by the Facility. 
CECEP  will  enter  into  a  Limited  Partnership  Agreement  with  the  Management 
Company to create the Facility. 
The Facility will enter into Limited Partnership Agreements with other investors in 
Funds and the Management Company as general partner and fund manager; 
The  Facility  and  the  Funds  will  enter  into  (a)  Entrusted  Loan  Agreements  and 
where  required,  Subproject  Agreements  with  Qualified  Subborrowers  for  the 
Entrusted  Loans,  and  (b)  Equity  Investment  Agreements  and,  for  Put-protected 
Equity, Puts, with the Qualified Investees. 
ADB loan proceeds will be disbursed to CECEP’s EWA maintained at the Account 
Bank. 
(vii)  Upon  receipt  of  loan  proceeds,  the  Account  Bank  will  convert  the  loan  proceeds 
into  CNY  in  the  CCA,  and  transfer  the  loan  proceeds  to  the  Facility  Account  in 
the Facility, (a) for those Subprojects directly financed by the Facility, the Account 
Bank will transfer the funds to the Qualified Enterprises account within 3 days of 
receipt  of  funds,  and  (b)  for  Entrusted  Loans  or  Equity  Investments  from  the 
Facility  to  Funds,  the  Account  Bank  will  transfer  the  funds  to  the  account  of 
Entrusted  Banks  for  the  Funds  within  3  days  of  receipt  of  loan  proceeds,  and 
such  banks  will  have  to  transfer  the  funds  to  the  Funds’  Qualified  Enterprises 
accounts within 3 days of receipt of the loan proceeds from the Account Bank. 
(viii)  The repayments of the Entrusted Loans and return of Equity Investments from its 
direct  investments  by  the  Facility  and  from  Funds  will  be  repaid  to  the  Facility 
Account.  
The  cash  accumulated  in  the  Facility  Account  will  be  used  for  setting  up  new 
Funds and financing Subprojects until ADB loan principal repayments are due. 
(ix) 
Loan  Proceeds  Re-deployment.  CECEP  shall  and  shall  cause  the  Facility  and  the 
44. 
Funds (during their respective reinvestment periods) to, relend or redeploy all repaid or returned 
principal  to make further  investments  in Qualified  Enterprises (or  in the case  of the  Facility,  in 
other Funds) as quickly as feasible after amounts are repaid or returned. CECEP shall ensure 
that  the  Facility  and  all  Funds  require  that  principal  will  be  repaid  to  investors  if  it  is  not 
redeployed  within  6  months  after  receipt.  Where  principal  is  repaid  to  the  Facility  and  not 
redeployed within 6 months after receipt the Facility will repay that amount to CECEP which will 
return it to the government as a loan prepayment unless ADB otherwise agrees. 
32 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Financial Management Assessment 
The  financial  management  assessment  (FMA)  was  conducted  in  April  2017  in 
45. 
accordance with ADB’s Guidelines for the Financial Management and Analysis of Projects and 
the Financial Due Diligence: A Methodology Note. The FMA considered the capacity of CECEP, 
CECEP  Huayu  and  SPDB  which  ADB  would  accept  as  the  Management  Company  and  the 
Account  Bank,  including  funds-flow  arrangements,  staffing,  accounting  and  financial  reporting 
systems, financial information systems, and internal and external auditing arrangements.32 
46. 
The  FMA  results  for  CECEP,  CECEP  Huayu,  and  SPDB  show  that  financial 
management systems and procedures of CECEP, CECEP Huayu, and SPDB are all in place to 
perform proper financial management and reporting necessary for smooth implementation of the 
project. SPDB, as the Account Bank and potential co-investment partner of certain Funds, has 
complied with the requirements of establishing sustainable operation systems that are adequate 
for  project  implementation.  CECEP,  and  its  subsidiary  CECEP  Huayu,  practice  accrual-based 
accounting and follow business accounting standards of the PRC, which are consistent with the 
international  accounting  standards.  Their  accounting  procedures  are  aligned  with 
the 
regulations  and  policies  issued  by  MOF,  which  are  considered  effective  and  adequate  for  the 
project.  
47. 
The designated accounting and financial staff of CECEP are recognized as sufficient for 
the  project  and  CECEP  has  a  lot  of  experience  of  participating  in  international  financial 
institutions  loan projects or technical assistance projects.33 However, CECEP Huayu is found to 
be short of human power to undertake the designated tasks. For this ADB loan, CECEP Huayu 
has formed a very capable top management team with sufficient experiences in both debt and 
equity  investment  funds,  however,  its  staffing  in  the  implementing  level  is  found  insufficient. 
There is a need for CECEP Huayu to hire more and retain capable debt and equity investment 
professionals.  A  new  recruitment  plan  and  a  compensation  incentive  policy  specially  for  the 
ADB  loan  project  have  been  formulated  by  CECEP  Huayu  and  submitted  to  CECEP  for 
approval. Once approved, the lack of staffing of CECEP Huayu and difficulty to retain capable 
equity investment managers will be addressed. On the other hand, the newly recruited staff are 
likely  to  be  not  familiar  with  ADB's  guidelines  and  procedures  on  procurement,  disbursement 
and  safeguard  standard  required  by  ADB.  Appropriate  measures 
including  capacity 
development  activities for  CECEP  Huayu  staff  were  agreed  between  CECEP  Huayu  and  ADB 
and will be implemented before loan effectiveness.   
48. 
CECEP  is  one  of  the  largest  central  state-owned  enterprises  (SOE)  specialized  in 
energy  conservation,  clean  energy,  resource  recycling,  and  environmental  protection 
businesses. Its profit margin is not high but the cash flows are stable. It is financially robust and 
has  the  financial  strength  to  undertake  the  fundamental  investment  risks  including  technical, 
financial, and credit risks, and market risks including foreign exchange rate risk and interest rate 
risk  associated  with  the  ADB  loan.  When  dealing  with  foreign  exchange  rate  risk  and  interest 
rate risk, CECEP expects to obtain regular monitoring report and professional advices from the 
32 Financial  Management  Assessment  (accessible  from  the  list  of  supplementary  documents  in  Appendix  2  of  the 
Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors). 
33 For  example,  CECEP  acted  as  Project  Management  Office  for  Energy  Efficiency  Financing  Project  of  the World 
Bank,  and  its  consulting  subsidiary  has  undertaken  many  technical  assistance  projects  for  ADB  and  the  World 
Bank. 
33 
Account  Bank  and  will  have  timely  access  to  related  risk-mitigating  financial  instruments  and 
measures arranged by the Account Bank. 
49. 
For the past 4 years CECEP’s, CECEP Huayu’s, and SPDB’s external audit reports had 
an  unqualified  opinion.  SPDB  fully  complies  with  prudential  regulations  set  by  the  regulator, 
China  Banking  Regulatory  Commission. The financial  management risks were  assessed to  be 
low. Risk analysis of CECEP, CECEP Huayu, and other key institutional arrangement identifies 
four substantial risk factors: (i) financial sustainability of the project implementation structure, (ii) 
timely establishment of various dedicated Funds and timely identification of sufficient number of 
Subprojects to be invested by these funds, (iii) performance of fund investments, and (iv) fund 
management  team  staffing.  Conclusion  of  risk  analysis  is  that  the  project  is  feasible  with 
consideration of CECEP Huayu’s capacity, its firm commitment, and CECEP’s resource.  
50. 
The  overall  assessment  concluded  that  the  financial  management  risk  level  of  the 
project  is  moderate.  The  project  risks  can  be  mitigated  to  low  level  if  the  recommended 
mitigation measures below are adopted.   
Table 13: Financial Management, Internal Control and Risk Assessment Table 
3
4
Risks  
Inherent Risks 
For CECEP (EA): 
Country  Specific  Risks–  National  accounting  standards  as 
issued  by 
to 
International  Accounting  Standards  and  acceptable  to  ADB.  
Audit reports of supreme audit institution are submitted timely 
in accordance with ADB requirements. 
the  Ministry  of  Finance  are  equivalent 
ADB  experiences  in  project  implementation  shows  generally 
high  financial  management  capacity  and  high  rate  of  timely 
implementation  of  projects.  Audit  reports  of  supreme  audit 
institution  are  submitted  timely  in  accordance  with  ADB 
requirements. 
Entity  Financial  Strength  -  CECEP  as  the  only  one  central 
SOE  specialized  in  energy  conservation  and  environmental 
protection  business  holds  a  robust  financial  standing.  Its  low 
debt  service  coverage  ratio  will  not  cause  liquidity  problem 
since  it  has  CNY22  billion  of  cash  and  cash  equivalent, 
tradable  financial  assets  and  available  for  sales  financial 
assets at the end of 2016, which is six times of the ADB loan 
size, and has unique capability to issue bonds with AAA rating, 
has  CNY450  billion  of  unused  credit  lines  (120  times  of  the 
ADB loan amount) to borrow from bank, and obtain new capital 
injection  from  SASAC  for  developing  new  capital  expenditure 
projects. Compared to the ADB loan amount, it has very large 
asset  scales,  and  holds  great  amount  of  cash  and  tradable 
financial assets. Its business plan by 2020 also indicate that its 
financial standing will continually improve. 
For the Management Company 
Entity  Specific  Risks–The  complexity  of  the  structure  to  set 
up  the  Facility  and  various  Funds  may  cause  problem. 
However,  this  risk  can be  resolved since  the  Facility has sole 
LP, likely partners of major Funds have been identified and the 
preliminary cooperation willingness among partners are strong. 
Also,  the  low  cost  of  ADB  loan  provides  plenty  of  space  for 
deal  negotiation.  Roles  and  responsibilities  of  each  partner  in 
the  Fund  level  will  be  reasonably  distributed  and  clearly 
specified in the legally binding limited partnership agreements, 
which are subject to ADB's prior acceptance 
CECEP  Huayu  has  CNY200  million  of  registered  capital,  and 
Impact 
Likelihood 
Risk 
Assessment 
Proposed Mitigation 
low 
less likely 
low 
low 
less likely 
low 
CECEP  is  required  to  keep  its  total 
liabilities  to  total  assets  ratio  to  be  not 
more than 70% on a consolidated basis. 
Audited 
financial  statements  of  both 
CECEP  and  the  Management  Company 
will  be  provided  to  ADB  each  year  for 
monitoring purpose. 
that 
It  will  be  covenanted 
total 
liabilities  to  total  assets  ratio  of  CECEP 
shall be no more than 70%, which will be 
monitored  each  year  before  the  loan 
closure. 
the 
high 
less likely 
substantial 
The  limited  partnership  agreements  for 
all  Funds  shall  be  developed  by  Huayu 
and  provided  to  ADB  for  acceptance 
before their signature. 
low 
less likely 
low 
A binding undertaking acceptable to ADB 
Risks  
so far just CNY60 million of committed capital is paid in, There 
is  a  large  space  for  it  to  obtain  shareholder's  cash  capital 
injection. 
Impact 
Likelihood 
Risk 
Assessment 
Project Risks 
Specific Risks for CECEP  
Financial  sustainability  of  the  project  implementation 
structure–  has  been  modeled  with  positive  cash  flows  under 
conservative assumptions. 
low 
less likely 
low 
Proposed Mitigation 
the 
from  all  of 
from  CECEP  or 
shareholders 
the  Management 
of 
Company  to  contribute  registered  capital 
to  the  Management  Company  in  such 
amounts and at such times as required to 
pay the costs of administering the Facility 
and 
to  satisfy  Project 
standards and requirements. t. 
the  Funds 
ADB  loan  proceeds  should  be  kept  in 
separate  accounts  from  the  other  Funds 
of CECEP. 
for 
independent 
CECEP  is  the  leading  and  largest  enterprise  in  PRC  in  the 
sector  of  EEER.  It  has  strong  technical  capacity  available  for 
the  Management  Company  to  assess  the  technical  risk  of 
subprojects. 
Staffing–CECEP  and  SPDB  are  sufficiently  staffed 
accounting, auditing, and financial management. 
internal  audit 
Internal  audit–CECEP  has 
department  which 
is  sufficiently  staffed  with  qualified 
personnel.  Under  the  group  of  CECEP  there  is  a  total  of  500 
internal  audit  professionals.  The  Facility,  Funds,  and 
subproject companies are subject to internal audit of CECEP. 
The government of the PRC is cracking down on corruption, in 
particular  in  central  state-owned  enterprises.  The  governance 
during  the  project  implementation  is  ensured.  Continuous 
routine  internal  audits  are  carried  out  for  CECEP  and  the 
Management  Company  as  well  as  for  all  new  investment 
project companies. The Audit Department of CECEP has vast 
experience in project auditing. 
Specific Risks for the Management Company 
Financial  sustainability  of  the  project  implementation 
structure–has  been  modeled  with  positive  cash  flows  under 
conservative assumptions.  
CECEP  is  the  leading  and  largest  enterprise  in  PRC  in  the 
sector  of  EEER.  It  has  strong  technical  capacity  available  for 
the  Management  Company  to  assess  the  technical  risk  of 
subprojects. 
low 
low 
less likely 
low 
likely 
moderate 
is  subject 
to  CECEP-
The  project 
organized  routine 
internal  audit,  with 
necessary  adaptation  to  meet  special 
ADB 
reporting 
requirement. 
monitoring 
and 
high 
less likely 
substantial 
ADB  loan  proceeds  should  be  kept  in 
separate accounts from the other Funds.  
Risk-adjusted  pricing:  The  Facility  shall, 
and shall cause each Fund to, establish a 
reasonable  target  floor  rate  of  return  for 
investment  which  has  properly 
each 
and 
interest 
considered 
risk 
the 
3
5
total 
Risks  
Identification of sufficient subprojects–Total capital of all Funds 
is  CNY8.6  billion  and  the  invested  subprojects  will  have 
CNY13.8  billion  of 
investment.  The  Management 
Company  and  its  local  partner  shall  have  the  capability  to 
solicit  sufficient  number  of  eligible  subprojects  for  the  related 
invest. 
to 
Funds 
The wide geographic region, a large portion of CECEP internal 
subprojects, the involvement of various types of local partners 
who  will  not  only  provide  funds  but  also  provide  potential 
Subprojects  and  the  recruitment  of  investment  professionals 
with rich business outreach can reduce this risk. 
hired 
performance–CECEP 
Poor 
experienced  top  management  members  with  successful  fund 
management  track  records  since  late  2015  and  will  recruit 
more implementing team members soon. All together, they are 
expected  to  be  capable  of  running  the  fund  business  as 
designed under the FIL. To further motivate their engagement 
in  the  investment  management,  a  reasonable  compensation 
incentive  policy  applicable  to  the  fund  management  team 
should  be  adopted  by  the  Management  Company  with  prior 
approval from CECEP. 
investment 
has 
Staffing–The accounting department of CECEP Huayu is fully 
staffed,  the  top  leaders  with  rich  debt  and  equity  investment 
experience  are  in  place  as  well,  but  CECEP  Huayu  is  not 
sufficiently  staffed  in  its  implementation  team  for  undertaking 
the  assigned  tasks  in  the  FIL  as  assessed  in  April  2017. 
CECEP  Huayu  argued  that  there  is  no  need  for  a  big 
implementing 
the  moment,  which  will  create 
unnecessary financial burden. CECEP Huayu has developed a 
new  recruitment  plan  with  sufficient  staffing  (around  20 
employees)  for  the  FIL  and  will  implement  it  in  line  with  the 
ADB loan project implementation progress.  
team  at 
General  Risks  for  both  CECEP  and  the  Management 
Company 
Accounting  policies  and  financial  management  system–
CECEP,  CECEP  Huayu,  and  SPDB  practice  accrual 
accounting in accordance with the PRC's GAAP. CECEP and 
Impact 
Likelihood 
Risk 
Assessment 
Proposed Mitigation 
3
6
The 
risk. 
projected 
investment 
investment return requirement on sample 
subprojects  will  be  reviewed  by  ADB  in 
advance.  
Loan  disbursement  will  be  made  upon 
provision of signed subproject investment 
agreements. 
High 
less likely 
substantial 
low 
likely 
moderate 
the 
one 
year 
after 
The  Management  Company  will  be  held 
accountable  for  ensuring  the  eligibility  of 
invested  subprojects  in  accordance  with 
the  PAM.  Implementation  of  the  market-
based  compensation  incentive  policy  by 
the  Management  Company  for  its  staff 
and  management  will  be  carried  out 
within 
loan 
effectiveness  and  will  be  reviewed  by 
mission. 
ADB 
Periodic 
CECEP 
(semiannual)  on  Facility  and  Funds 
investment's  performance 
shall  be 
implemented. 
The  Management  Company’s  suitable 
implementation of staffing plan should be 
in  compliance  with  the  ADB  loan  project 
implementation  schedule  and  will  be 
monitored  and  reviewed  by  ADB  during 
review mission.  
review 
evaluation 
by 
low 
less likely 
low 
Capacity  training  on  ADB  requirements 
and  procedures  of  disbursement  and 
procurement  will  be  provided  to  ensure 
in  auditing 
firms  are  experienced 
Risks  
CECEP  Huayu  have  all  adopted  Accounting  Standards  for 
Business  Enterprises  approved  by  MOF,  which  is  consistent 
with IAS on a project accounting level.  
External  Audit–CECEP  and  its  subsidiaries  are  subject  to 
annual  external  audits  on  a  rotating  basis  by  CPAs  auditing 
firms  designated  by  SASAC.  All  these  SASAC-designated 
auditing 
large-scale 
businesses, are familiar with the IAS and can provide proficient 
auditing services to the ADB loan related entities. The project 
will  also  receive  government-organized  audits  after  project 
completion.  
Reporting  and  Monitoring–The  reporting  and  monitoring  of 
the  project  will  be  carried  out  mainly  by  the  Management 
Company with guidance by the PAM.  
loan 
Funds  flow/Disbursement  Arrangements–All  ADB 
proceeds  shall  be  made  to  the  EA  and  transferred,  after 
conversion  into  CNY,  to  the  Facility  and  Funds  and  then  to 
subprojects through a chain of escrow accounts in which fund 
flows can be clearly traced. 
Project  implementation  delay  risks–numerous  onlending 
arrangements  must  be  formulated  and  agreed  among  the 
entities  in  combination  with  ADB  inherent  risks  to  engage 
qualified legal counsels.  
Information  Systems–CECEP  Huayu  uses  computerized 
accounting  software,  which  is  in compliance  with  the  Chinese 
Accounting  Standards.  SPDB  has 
further  sophisticated 
accounting software  that can provide  detailed  project  account 
transaction  recording,  loan  fund  flow  tracking,  financial  book 
summary and archive index management. 
Overall Project Risk 
Overall Risk 
Impact 
Likelihood 
Risk 
Assessment 
low 
less likely 
low 
Proposed Mitigation 
they are understood by all related staff in 
CECEP, the Management Company, and 
the Account Bank in advance. 
The  project  will  be  subject  to  annual 
external audit and government-organized 
acceptance audit. 
low 
less likely 
low 
high 
less likely 
substantial 
low 
likely 
moderate 
low 
less likely 
low 
The PAM includes guidance on preparing 
progress  reports  and  annual  reports 
acceptable to ADB. 
A disbursement manual will be prepared.  
A  disbursement  training  will  be  provided 
to strengthen capacity of all stakeholders. 
ADB  will  provide  support  for  formulation 
of key agreement templates. 
The  Management  Company  Huayu  shall 
requirement  on 
monitor 
reporting. 
the  PAM's 
Moderate 
Moderate 
likely 
likely 
Moderate 
the  mitigation  actions 
Implementing 
mentioned  above  will  reduce  the  risk  to 
low. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CECEP = China Energy Conservation and Environmental Protection Group, CECEP Huayu = CECEP Huayu Fund Management 
Co., Ltd, CPAs = Certified Public Accountants, EA = executing agency, EEER = energy efficiency and emission-reduction, FIL = financial intermediation loan, GAAP 
= generally accepted accounting principles, IAS = international accounting standard, LP = limited partner, MOF = Ministry of Finance, PAM = project administration 
manual, PRC = People’s Republic of China, SASAC = State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council, SOE = state-owned 
enterprise, SPDB = Shanghai Pudong Development Bank.  
a Debt Service Converge Ratio = Cash flow from operations divided by annual debt service obligations (interest and principal). 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
3
7
38 
51. 
The following actions are required to be taken by the related parties: 
No.  Actions 
1 
Table 14: Finance Management Action Plan 
Timeline 
Before it is signed 
The  framework  cooperation  agreement  between 
CECEP, the Facility and the Account Bank shall be 
reviewed by ADB 
the 
Investment  strategy,  exit  strategy,  and 
selection  process  of  Equity  Investments  shall  be 
reviewed and accepted by ADB 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Limited  Partnership  Agreements  for  the  Facility 
and  Funds  are 
the 
Management  Company  with  support  from  ADB 
and approved by ADB in each instance 
to  be  developed  by 
A binding undertaking acceptable to ADB from 
CECEP or from all of the shareholders of the 
Management Company to contribute registered 
capital to the Management Company in such 
amounts and at such times as required to pay the 
costs of administering the Facility and the Funds 
to satisfy Project standards and requirements  
Limited  Partnership  Agreement  for  the  Facility 
and  Funds  shall  be  signed  by  the  relevant 
underlying  Entrusted 
investors 
the 
Loan/Subproject/Equity 
Investment  Agreement 
shall  be  signed  by  the  related  Facility  or  Funds 
and the Qualified Enterprises 
The  Management  Company  needs  to  get  the 
market-based  compensation  incentive  policy  for 
its staff approved by CECEP and implement it in 
practice 
The Management Company needs to get its new 
recruitment  plan  approved  by  CECEP  and 
execute it on a timely basis 
and 
At  the  time  of  ADB’s  prior 
review  of  the  Facility  and 
each  Fund  and  before  all 
Equity 
are 
Investment 
approved or signed. 
For  the  Facility,  prior  to 
initial  loan  withdrawal,  for 
each  Fund,  before 
the 
agreement  is  signed  and 
before  any 
funds  are 
committed or invested 
Prior 
to 
withdrawal 
initial 
loan 
Prior 
disbursement 
to 
any 
loan 
Within  one  year  after  the 
loan effectiveness 
In  line  with  the  ADB  loan 
project 
implementation 
progress 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  CECEP  =  China  Energy  Conservation  and  Environmental  Protection 
Group. 
Disbursement 
1.  Disbursement Arrangements for ADB Funds 
52. 
The  loan  proceeds  will  be  disbursed  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement 
Handbook  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),  and  detailed  arrangements  agreed  upon 
between the government and ADB. Online training for project staff on disbursement policies and 
39 
procedures  is  available.34 Project  staff  are  encouraged  to  avail  of  this  training  to  help  ensure 
efficient  disbursement  and  fiduciary  control.  Pursuant  to  ADB‘s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement 
(2009, as amended from time to time), ADB funds may not be applied to the activities described 
in  ADB’s  Prohibited  Investment  Activities  List  set  forth  in  Appendix  4.  CECEP  and  the 
cofinanciers  will  also  ensure  that  their,  and  the  Facility’s  and  Funds’  investments  are  in 
compliance with all applicable national laws and regulations.  
53. 
Before  the  submission  of  the  first  withdrawal  application,  CECEP,  through  MOF,  will 
submit to ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person(s) who will sign the withdrawal 
applications on behalf of the government, together with the authenticated specimen signatures 
of each authorized person. The minimum value per withdrawal application is in accordance with 
the Loan Disbursement Handbook. Individual payments below such amount should be paid by 
CECEP and subsequently claimed to ADB through reimbursement, unless otherwise accepted 
by ADB.  
54. 
Loan  proceeds  will  be  used  for  making  Entrusted  Loans  and  Equity  Investments  to 
Qualified Enterprises through the Facility and Funds and to provide Entrusted Loans and Equity 
Investments to Funds. Prior to withdrawal of Loan funds, the due diligence review document for 
every  subproject  including  technical,  economic, financial,  environmental and  social  safeguards 
based on the selection criteria and requirements in the ESMS,  will also need be submitted for 
review. CECEP is required to provide the following project implementing contracts to ADB and 
obtain a subproject number from ADB before submitting a withdrawal application. 
(i) 
(ii) 
For  Entrusted  Loans  to  Qualified  Subborrowers,  Entrusted  Loan  Agreement 
signed  between  an  Entrusted  Bank,  the  Facility  or  Fund  and  a  Qualified 
Subborrower, and, where the Entrusted Loan Agreement does not include all of 
the  requirements  herein  and  in  the  Loan  Agreement  and  Project  Agreement 
related to the Qualified Subborrower and Subproject, a Subproject Agreement. 
For Equity Investment, Equity Investment Agreement signed between the Facility 
or  Fund  and  a  Qualified  Investee  and,  where  the  investment  is  Put-protected 
Equity, a Put. 
55. 
Loan proceeds will be disbursed to CECEP’s EWA to be set up at the Account Bank. The 
EWA  will  be  denominated  in  euro.  The  Account  Bank  will  convert  the  ADB  funds  into  CNY  in 
CECEP’s CCA. The Account Bank will disburse the loan proceeds to Qualified Subborrowers and 
Qualified Investees or to bank accounts set up by the Funds at their respective Entrusted Banks 
within three days of receipt of ADB loan proceeds. CECEP will submit withdrawal applications 
for payment or reimbursement of eligible expenditures in CNY as described in the statement of 
expenditure  (SOE)  sheets.  CECEP  will  indicate  special  instructions  that  payment  will  be  in 
euro.35    
Statement  of  expenditure. The SOE for financial intermediation loan may be used for 
56. 
reimbursement  and  payment  to  the  EWA  account. 36  The  applicable  project  implementing 
contracts  in  para.  54  should  be  maintained  and  made  readily  available  for  review  by  ADB’s 
disbursement and review missions, upon ADB’s request, and for independent audit. CECEP has 
adequate capacity to manage SOE procedures.  
34 Disbursement eLearning. http://wpqr4.adb.org/disbursement_elearning  
35 Refer to Section 3D of Appendix 7A of the Loan Disbursement Handbook. 
36 Appendix 7D of the Loan Disbursement Handbook. 
40 
Conditions  for  all withdrawals.  No withdrawals shall be made from the Loan Account 
57. 
until (a) the Onlending Agreement and the Framework Cooperation Agreement with the Account 
Bank  and  with  the  Entrusted  Bank  for  any  Fund  then  in  existence  have  been  signed;  (b)  a 
Limited  Partnership  Agreement  has  been  signed  for  the  Facility  and  for  any  Fund  then  in 
existence; (c) if ADB considers it necessary, a Management Agreement with the Managements 
Company has been signed; (d) templates for an Entrusted Loan Agreement for loans to Funds, 
an  Entrusted  Loan  Agreement  for  loans  to  Qualified  Subborrowers,  a  Subproject  Agreement 
ancillary to Entrusted Loan Agreements for use in connection with Entrusted Loans to Qualified 
Subborrowers,  an  Equity  Investment  Agreement  and  Put  for  Put-protected  Equity  investments 
and  for  Equity  Investments  without  a  Put  and  such  other  Project  Implementing  Contracts  as 
ADB may specify have been approved by ADB;  (e) CECEP shall have opened in the Account 
Bank  a  Euro  account  for  receiving  funds  from  ADB  and    a  Renminbi  account  for  receiving 
converted  monies  from  the  Euro  account,  and  the  Facility  shall  have  opened  in  the  Account 
Bank a Renminbi account for receiving Recycled Funds, all on terms acceptable to ADB; (f) an 
ESMS has been adopted by CECEP, the Management Company, the Facility and by any Fund 
that  has  then  come  into  existence;  and  (g)  a  binding  undertaking  acceptable  to  ADB  from 
CECEP  or  from  all  of  the  shareholders  of  the  Management  Company  to  contribute  registered 
capital to the Management Company in such amounts and at such times as required to pay the 
costs of administering the Facility and the Funds to satisfy Project standards and requirements.  
Furthermore, to ensure the smooth implementation of the FIL, CECEP shall not exceed 
58. 
the  maximum  of  70%  of  total  liabilities  to  total  assets  ratio,  which  will  be  monitored  by  ADB 
before loan closure and ADB shall have the right to ask CECEP to take correction actions if it 
does not meet the requirement, and CECEP shall take such actions. 
Accounting 
59. 
CECEP shall (i) maintain separate accounts for (a) EWA, (b) CCA, (c) RFA, and (d) shall 
ensure that the Facility Account is maintained at the Facility; (ii) maintain records for the project, 
and shall cause the Fund manager to maintain and provide to CECEP separate accounts and 
records for each Fund; and (iii) prepare an annual consolidated statement of utilization of funds 
(SUF)37 for  the  project  in  accordance  with  accounting  principles  acceptable  to  ADB.  A  sample 
SUF is in Appendix 5.  
60. 
In  addition  to  the  annual  SUF,  CECEP,  the  Management  Company,  the  Facility,  and 
each  Fund  shall  provide  to  ADB  its  annual  financial  statements  prepared  in  accordance  with 
financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB. 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
CECEP  will  cause  the  annual  consolidated  SUF  to  be  audited  annually  in  accordance 
61. 
with  international  standards  on  auditing  and  with  the  government's  audit  regulations,  or  with 
auditing  standards  acceptable  to  ADB,  by  an  independent  auditor  whose  qualifications, 
experience  and  terms  of  reference  are  acceptable  to  ADB.  Currently,  the  external  audit  for 
37 In the case of financial intermediation loans, an audited SUF will be submitted in lieu of the audited project financial 
statements.  The  audited  SUF  will  indicate:  (i)  the  opening  balance;  (ii)  the  name  of  financial  intermediary;  (iii) 
details of subloans; (iv) closing balance; (v) comparative figures for prior year; and (vi) cumulative amount to date. 
The  audited  SUF  will  also  be  accompanied  by  adequate  explanatory  notes  which  will  include  the  basis  of 
preparation, reporting currency, undrawn external assistance, and details of subloans such as amounts committed, 
disbursed  up  to  the  previous  year,  disbursed  during  the  current  reporting  period,  cumulative  disbursement, 
undisbursed commitments, percentage of loan utilized, etc. 
41 
CECEP  is  undertaken  by  Zhongqinwanxin  CPAs,  which  is  acceptable  to  ADB.  CECEP  shall 
seek ADB’s no objection if it proposes to change the auditor. The audited SUF together with the 
auditor’s  report  will  be  furnished  in  the  English  language  by  CECEP  to  ADB  within  6  months 
after the close of the fiscal year to which they relate.   
62. 
The  audit  report  for  the  SUF  will  include  a  management  letter  and  auditor’s  opinions, 
which cover (i) whether the project financial statements present an accurate and fair view or are 
presented  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  in  accordance  with  the  applicable  financial  reporting 
standards; (ii) whether the proceeds of the loan were used only for the purposes of the project; 
and  (iii)  whether  the  borrower  or  executing  agency  was  in  compliance  with  the  financial 
covenants contained in the legal agreements and the PAM (where applicable).  
In  addition  to  the  annual  audited  SUF,  CECEP  will  (i) have  its  financial  statements 
63. 
audited  annually  by  independent  auditors  whose  qualifications,  experience  and  terms  of 
reference  are  acceptable  to  ADB,  in  accordance  with  international  auditing  standards    or  the 
national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (ii) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare 
the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and compliance with any financial covenants 
it is required to maintain as specified in the loan or project agreements; and (iii) furnish to ADB 
not  later  than  6  months  after  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year  to  which  they  relate,  copies  of  such 
audited financial statements and auditors’ opinion(s), all in the English language, and such other 
information  concerning  these  documents  and  the  audit  as  ADB  shall  from  time  to  time 
reasonably request. 
64. 
In addition to the annual audited statement of utilization of funds referred to in paras. 59–
63 hereinabove, CECEP shall, and shall cause the Facility and each Fund to (i) provide to ADB 
their  annual  financial  statements  prepared  in  accordance  with  national  accrual-based  financial 
reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (ii) have such financial statements audited annually by 
independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to 
ADB,  in  accordance  with  international  standards  for  auditing  or  the  national  equivalent 
acceptable  to  ADB;  (iii)  as  part  of  each  such  audit,  have  the  auditors  prepare  the  auditors’ 
opinion(s) on the financial statements and compliance with any financial covenants it is required 
to maintain as specified in the Loan Agreement or the Project Agreement, and a management 
letter;  and (iv) furnish  to  ADB  not  later than  6 months  after the  end  of the fiscal  year  to  which 
they  relate,  copies  of  such  audited  financial  statements  and  auditors’  opinion(s),  all  in  the 
English  language,  and  such  other  information  concerning  these  documents  and  the  audit 
thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request. 
65. 
CECEP shall require the Account Bank to provide to CECEP, and CECEP shall provide to 
ADB  copies  of  the  Account  Bank’s  audited  annual  financial  statements  immediately  on  their 
publication  by  such  entity  and  in  any  event,  not  later  than  6  months  after  the  end  of  the fiscal 
year to which they relate. 
66. 
The  Government,  CECEP,  and  CECEP  Huayu  have  been  made  aware  of  ADB’s 
approach to delayed submission, and the requirements for satisfactory and acceptable quality of 
the  SUF. 38 ADB  reserves  the  right  to  require  a  change  in  the  project  account  auditor  (in  a 
38 ADB’s approach and procedures regarding delayed submission of audited project financial statements:  
(i)  When audited project financial statements are not received by the due date, ADB will write to the executing 
agency advising that (a) the audit documents are overdue; and (b) if they are not received within the next 6 
months,  requests  for  new  contract  awards  and  disbursement,  processing  of  new  reimbursement,  and 
issuance of new commitment letters will not be processed. 
42 
manner consistent with the constitution of the borrower), or for additional support to be provided 
to the auditor, if the audits required are not conducted in a manner satisfactory to ADB, or if the 
audits are substantially delayed. ADB reserves the right to verify the project's financial accounts 
to  confirm  that  the  share  of  ADB’s  financing  is  used  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  policies  and 
procedures.  
67. 
Public  disclosure  of  the  annual  audited  SUF  for  the  project,  including  the  auditor’s 
opinion on the statements, will be guided by ADB’s Public Communications Policy 2011.39 After 
the  review,  ADB  will  disclose  the  audited  SUFs  and  the  opinion  of  the  auditors  on  the 
statements no later than 14 days after ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them 
on  ADB’s  website.  The management  letter,  additional  auditor’s  opinions,  and  audited  CECEP, 
the  Management  Company  and  the  Account  Bank  entity  financial  statements  will  not  be 
disclosed.40 
(ii)  When  audited  project  financial  statements  are  not  received  within  6  months  after  the  due  date,  ADB  will 
withhold processing of requests for disbursement, processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new 
commitment letters. ADB will (a) inform the executing agency of ADB’s actions; and (b) advise that the loan 
may be suspended if the audit documents are not received within the next 6 months. 
(iii)  When audited project financial statements are not received within 12 months after the due date, ADB may 
suspend the loan. 
39 Public Communications Policy: http://www.adb.org/documents/pcp-2011?ref=site/disclosure/publications. 
40 This  type  of  information  would  generally  fall  under  public  communications  policy  exceptions  to  disclosure.  ADB. 
2011. Public Communications Policy. Para 97(iv) and/or 97(v). 
43 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
Advance Contracting and Retroactive Financing 
All  advance  contracting  and  retroactive  financing  will  be  undertaken  in  conformity  with 
68. 
ADB Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time). The borrower and CECEP 
have  been  advised  that  approval  of  advance  contracting  and  retroactive  financing  does  not 
commit ADB to finance the project. 
69. 
Advance  contracting  and  retroactive  financing.  Subprojects  to  be  retroactively 
financed  must  comply  with  the  ESMS.  All  retroactive  financing  of  Subprojects  before  the  loan 
effective  date  is  subject  to  ADB’s  prior  review  and  approval  of  documentation  related  to  such 
proposed transaction including an appraisal report, in such form and detail as ADB may request, 
describing  the  subproject,  the  Qualified  Enterprise,  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  proposed 
use of proceeds and drafts of the proposed project implementing contracts for the transaction. 
Retroactive  financing  may  be  made  for  (i)  refinancing,  with  Entrusted  Loans,  loans  made  by 
CECEP  or  the  Facility  before  the  loan  effective  date,  and  (ii)  making  Entrusted  Loans  to 
Qualified Subborrowers to finance subprojects which commenced before the loan effective date, 
provided  that  any  loan  being  refinanced  and  each  expenditure  supported  by  the  refinancing 
Entrusted  Loan  was  incurred  not  earlier  than  12  months  before  the  signing  of  the  ADB  loan 
agreement,  the  subproject  to  be  refinanced  has  been  evaluated  under  the  ESMS  and  is  fully 
compliant, and the amount of aggregate retroactive financing does not exceed 20% of the total 
ADB loan amount. 
B. 
Procurement of Goods, Works 
70. 
Procurement activities will be carried out in accordance with ADB‘s Procurement Policy 
applicable  to  FILs,  and  adopt  appropriate  procedures,  including  (i)  payment  of  reasonable 
prices, and (ii) fair canvassing when selecting suppliers. Procurement by Qualified Enterprises 
supported by the Facility (or in any other circumstance where there is no cofinancing of Facility 
funds)  must  be  from  ADB  member  countries.  Procurement  by  Qualified  Enterprises  receiving 
financing  from  a  Fund  comprising  both  Facility  money  and  cofinancing  where  the  cofinancier 
has signed an memorandum of understanding with ADB, as will generally be the case in Fund 
investments,  may  procure  from  ADB  member  countries  or  from  non-members.  All  Qualified 
Enterprises  will  be  encouraged  to  procure  all  goods  through  competitive  bidding  or  shopping 
when such procedures are most appropriate in the interest of economy and efficiency. CECEP 
should  monitor  procurement  and  report  to  ADB  if  there  occurs  any  inconsistency  with  ADB 
procurement  guidelines  and  PRC’s  procurement  laws.  To  provide  guidance  to  Qualified 
Subborrowers  and  Qualified  Investees  in  undertaking  procurement  using  ADB  loan  proceeds, 
and  for  CECEP  to  monitor  the  procurement  activities  undertaken  by  Qualified  Enterprises,  a 
project specific procurement manual has been prepared and included in Appendix 6. 
C. 
Procurement Plan 
As  the  project  is  using  FIL  modality,  CECEP  is  not  responsible  for  directly  procuring 
71. 
goods and services, and a procurement plan has not been prepared. However, a procurement 
manual is prepared to regulate the procurement activities under the project (Appendix 6).  
44 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
Environmental and Social Safeguards  
Environment safeguards. The project follows FIL modality and an ESMS is developed 
72. 
to  meet  FIL  requirements.  The  FIL  project  will  not  include  subprojects  with  category  A  for 
environment.  
Social safeguards. The Subproject Selection Criteria (Appendix 3) exclude subprojects 
73. 
that (i) have any land acquisition and house demolition, (ii) result in labor retrenchment or labor 
redundancies, and (iii) have impacts on ethnic minorities. CECEP is required to ensure that this 
requirement is met during the screening of newly identified subprojects in accordance with the 
procedures stipulated in the ESMS.  
Environmental and Social Management System 
The ESMS describes (i) institutional due diligence of CECEP, CECEP Huayu, and CERT 
74. 
involved in the Facility; (ii) ESMS policy; (iii) environmental and social safeguards requirements; 
(iv)  Subproject  selection  criteria;  (v)  ADB  prohibited  investment  activity  list;  (vi)  environmental 
and social management procedures, including establishment and operation of Subproject level 
and  Facility  level  grievance  redress  mechanism  (GRMs);  (vii)  institutional  responsibilities, 
staffing, training, and ESMS operation budget; and (viii) assurances of the project.  
75. 
CECEP  shall adopt  and shall  cause the  Management  Company, the  Facility,  and  each 
Fund to adopt, in the case of CECEP, the Management Company, and the Facility not later than 
the  signing  date  of  the  Loan  Agreement,  an  ESMS  that  meets  the  requirements  of  ADB’s 
Safeguards Policy Statement (2009) and has been approved in writing by ADB, and shall, and 
shall cause the Facility and each Fund to implement it in reviewing, approving, and monitoring 
each  Subproject.  CECEP  shall  ensure  that  all  investors  in  Funds  agree  in  the  Fund 
documentation that all Fund investments must comply with ADB’s Project requirements. CECEP 
will take final responsibility of ESMS implementation while the Management Company will take 
day-to-day responsibility of implementation of ESMS. Due to limited experience and insufficient 
expertise on environmental and social safeguards of CECEP Huayu, CECEP made a long-term 
partnership  and  contractual  arrangement  with  CERT,  a  qualified  and  specialized  institute  for 
environmental  impact  assessment.  CERT  will  actively  support  the  Management  Company  on 
ESMS  implementation.  CECEP  shall  not  provide  or  permit  to  be  provided  financial  support  to 
any subprojects, unless the subprojects have been assessed and confirmed to be in compliance 
with  all  ESMS  requirements,  by  the  CERT  or  another  consultant  approved  in  writing  by  ADB. 
After  1  year  of  implementing  the  ESMS,  ADB  will  reassess  the  capacity  of  CECEP’s  internal 
safeguards experts. If ADB is satisfied with their capacity, CECEP’s internal safeguard experts 
can  then  sign  off  and  approve  safeguard  assessments  of  Subprojects.  ESMS  will  be 
implemented for all the subprojects financed by the project beyond the ADB project completion.  
76. 
Environmental and social performance will be evaluated on a semiannual basis. CECEP 
will  ensure  that  environmental  and  social  safeguard  monitoring  requirements  indicated  in  the 
ESMS  are met.  CECEP  shall  ensure that  safeguard GRMs  are  established  as provided  in  the 
ESMS. 
CECEP  shall  ensure  that  design  changes/adaptation  options  prescribed  in  the  climate 
77. 
risk and vulnerability assessment will be taken into account in the final subproject design. 
45 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
78. 
CECEP shall and shall cause the Facility and the Funds to ensure that contractors and 
service  providers  engaged  in  the  Project  and  in  Subprojects  (i)  give  equal  pay  for  equal  work 
regardless of gender, ethnicity or social group; (ii) give priority to women in the employment and 
training opportunities generated under the Project; (iii) maximize the employment of local people 
who  meet  the  job  and  efficiency  requirements  for  subproject  construction,  operation  and 
maintenance; (iv) provide workers with adequate on-the-job and safety training; (v) disseminate 
information  on  sexually  transmitted  diseases  (including  HIV/AIDS)  and  human  trafficking  to 
subcontractors/employees and local communities surrounding the subproject construction sites; 
(vi) implement HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention training for sub-contractors/employees; (vii) 
implement human trafficking awareness activities; (viii) provide necessary measures to ensure 
the  safety  and  health  of  its  sub-contractors/employees;  and  (ix)  observe  local  customs 
concerning  acceptable  behavior  towards  the  local  population.  This  is  included  in  Subproject 
Selection  Criteria  and  CECEP  is  required  to  ensure  this  requirement  is  met  with  respect  to 
future Subprojects. 
79. 
CECEP  shall  and  shall  cause  the  Facility  and  the  Funds  to  ensure  that  the  core  labor 
standards and the PRC’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Subproject 
implementation  and  that  specific  provisions  are  included  in  bidding  documents  and  contracts 
financed by the ADB Loan under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: 
(a)  comply  with  the  PRC’s  applicable  labor  law  and  regulations  and  incorporate  applicable 
workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers 
in  respect  of  employment  and  occupation;  (d)  do  not  use  forced  labor;  and  (e)  do  not  restrict 
workers  from  developing  any  legally  permissible  means  of  expressing  their  grievances  and 
protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment. 
46 
IX. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND 
COMMUNICATION 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
A. 
Impact the Project is Aligned with 
Air  pollution  reduced  and  public  health  in  the  BTH  region  improved  (Comprehensive  Action  Plan  for  Air 
Pollution Prevention and Control of the PRC and the Thirteenth Five-Year Plan)a 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
Air pollution reduced 
and high technology 
deployed across the 
greater BTH region 
Outputs 
1. Regional 
Emission-Reduction 
and Pollution-
Control Facility 
established 
2. High technologies 
to reduce air 
pollution in 
agriculture, 
distributed energy, 
heating, transport, 
and iron and steel 
industry deployed  
Performance Indicators 
with Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanisms 
Risks 
a. Semiannual 
implementation 
reports prepared by 
CECEP 
Macroeconomic 
slowdown constrains 
( i )   investments from 
cofinancing partners 
in the facility and 
(ii) private sector 
investments  in high-
technology projects 
with high perceived 
risk. 
b. Subproject completion 
reports prepared by 
CECEP 
1. Semiannual 
implementation 
reports prepared by 
CECEP 
Weak demand from 
borrowers may slow 
implementation. 
2a–b. Subproject 
completion reports 
prepared by CECEP 
By 2024: 
 a. At least (i) one million 
tons of standard coal 
equivalent saved; (ii) six 
million cubic meters of 
synthetic natural gas 
produced, (iii) 5,000 GWh of 
micro-grid and rooftop 
electricity used, and (iv) 
100 million square meters of 
clean space heating 
provided (2016 baseline: all 
0) 
b. At least (i) five million 
tons of CO2, (ii) 20,000 tons 
of SO2, (iii) 3,000 tons of 
NOx, and (iv) 3,000 tons of 
PM2.5 emissions avoided per 
year (2016 baseline: 0) 
By 2023: 
1. The facility comprising 
regional, municipal or 
provincial and technology- or 
industry-specific funds 
totaling €428.0 million 
established (2016 baseline: 
Not established) 
2a. At least €1,721.2 million 
in financing provided by the 
facility, cofinancing, and 
counterpart financing 
(2016 baseline: 0) 
2b. At least (i) construction of 
three biogas and organic 
fertilizer production facilities, 
(ii) natural gas production 
from coke oven gas 
established at two coke oven 
facilities, (iii) two smart 
micro-grids constructed in 
industrial parks, (iv) 
geothermal-based district 
47 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanisms 
Risks 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators 
with Targets and Baselines 
heating provided to 2 million 
square meters of floor area, 
(v) completion of energy-
efficiency measures in five 
iron and steel plants, and (vi) 
hydrogen fuel cell based 
public transport pilot tested 
(2016 baseline: all 0) 
3. Capacity of key 
stakeholders to 
deploy high 
technologies for 
pollution reduction in 
the greater BTH 
region improved 
By 2023: 
3a. At least 200 individuals 
from five key stakeholders 
trained in high technologies, 
selection of appropriate 
business models, and 
investment decision-making 
(2016 baseline: 0) 
3a–b. Semiannual 
implementation reports 
prepared by CECEP 
3b. Guideline on selection, 
appraisal, and 
implementation of such 
projects prepared and 
disseminated by CECEP 
(2016 baseline: Not 
prepared) 
Key Activities with Milestones 
Output 1: Regional Emission-Reduction and Pollution-Control Facility established 
1.1  Establish BTH-dedicated emission-control and pollution-reduction facility (Q2 2018) 
1.2  Leverage CNY6 billion in commercial cofinancing by the facility (Q3 2023) 
Output 2: High technologies to reduce air pollution in agriculture, distributed energy, heating, 
transport, and iron and steel industry deployed 
2.1  Implement integrated low-emission solutions for municipal and agriculture waste projects (Q4 2020) 
2.2  Promote super ESCOs and implement energy-efficiency improvement and emission-reduction projects 
in industries (Q4 2019) 
2.3  Implement industrial by-product gas use project (Q4 2020) 
2.4  Implement deep-well geothermal for district heating project (Q4 2020) 
2.5  Implement smart industrial zone development project (Q4 2019) 
2.6  Promote hydrogen-based low-emission transport projects (Q1 2023) 
Output 3: Capacity of key stakeholders to deploy high technologies for pollution reduction in the 
greater BTH region improved 
3.1  Adopt and implement ESMS (Q4 2017) 
3.2  Gain approval of ESMS by ADB (Q4 2017) 
3.3  Organize workshops on project appraisal and management (Q4 2018) 
3.4  Organize workshops on new business models for high technologies (Q4 2021) 
3.5  Organize workshops on high technologies (Q4 2022) 
Inputs 
ADB: €428,000,000 (loan) 
Subborrowers: €651,200,000 
Local governments, commercial banks, and institutional investors: €642,000,000 
CECEP: €25,800,000 
Assumptions for Partner Financing 
Not applicable. 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  BTH  =  Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei,  CECEP  =  China  Energy  Conservation  and 
Environmental Protection Group, CO2 = carbon dioxide, ESCO = energy service company, ESMS = environmental and 
48 
social  management  system,  GWh  =  gigawatt-hour,  PM2.5 =  particulate  matter  less  than  2.5  micrometers  in  diameter, 
SO2 = sulfur dioxide, NOx = nitrogen oxide. 
a  Government  of  the  PRC.  2013.  Comprehensive  Action  Plan  for  Air  Pollution  Prevention  and  Control  of  the  People’s 
Republic  of  China.  Beijing;  and  Government  of  the  PRC.  2015.  The  13th  Five-Year  Plan  for  Economic  and  Social 
Development of the People’s Republic of China, 2016–2020. Beijing. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
49 
B. 
Monitoring  
80. 
Project  performance  monitoring.  The  project  performance  will  be  monitored  through 
the project performance management system (PPMS). The total project implementation period 
is 15 years and the loan implementation period is 5 years from the date of loan effectiveness. 
The  estimated  loan  closing  date  is  30  November  2023  and  the  project  completion  date  is  31 
May 2023. The Management Company will establish the PPMS in a form acceptable to ADB to 
monitor  the  progress  in  project  implementation  during  the  loan  implementation  period.  The 
PPMS will ensure the monitoring of project‘s impacts, outcomes and outputs with respect to the 
performance  targets  set  forth  in  the  design  and  monitoring  framework.  CECEP  and  the 
Management  Company  will  exert  their  best  endeavors  to  meet  the  performance  targets  set  in 
the design and monitoring framework. 
81. 
The  Management  Company  will  prepare  a  semiannual  progress  reports  in  a  format 
acceptable  to  ADB  and  submit  these  reports  within  30  days  of  the  end  of  each  semi-annual 
in  project 
period.  These  reports  will  provide  (i)  a  narrative  description  of  progress 
implementation;  (ii)  any  changes  to  the  subproject  implementation  schedule;  (iii)  problems  or 
difficulties  encountered,  including  the  monitoring  of  creditworthiness  of  the  put  providers;  (iv) 
work to be carried out in the next 6 months with respect to each component and Subproject; and 
(v)  compliance  with  ESMS,  and  include  the  environmental  management  plans  prepared  for 
subprojects.  The  progress  report  will  also  report  summary  statement  of  EWA,  CCA,  RFA,  the 
Facility  Account,  and  any  new  subprojects  approved.  The  template  for  preparing  the  progress 
reports is in Appendix 7. 
82. 
The  Management  Company  will  prepare  a  consolidated  English  environmental 
monitoring report semi-annually during the first 5 years after loan effectiveness, and annually in 
the following 10 years for submission to ADB. In addition, ESMS implementation reports will be 
prepared  during  the  first  5  years  after  loan  effectiveness  and  annual  ESMS  implementation 
reports  will  be  prepared  for  the  next  10  years  for  submission  to  ADB.  The  consolidated 
environmental  and  social  monitoring  report  will  be  prepared  semi-annually  during  the  first  5 
years  of  loan  implementation  and  annually  in  the  following  10  years.  The  consolidated 
environmental monitoring reports will be disclosed in ADB website. 
83. 
Compliance  monitoring.  The  compliance  status  of  loan  and  project  covenants, 
including  the  provisions  of  the  ESMS  will  be  reported  and  assessed  through  the  semi-annual 
progress reports and verified by ADB review missions.  
C. 
Evaluation 
ADB  and  the  government  will  review  the  project  implementation  jointly  at  least  once  a 
84. 
year.  In  addition,  ADB  and  the  government  will  undertake  a  comprehensive  midterm  review 
approximately 2 years after the start of project implementation. This midterm review will include 
a  detailed  evaluation  of  the  project  scope,  selection  criteria,  implementation  arrangements, 
achievement  of  scheduled  targets,  and  progress  on  engaging  a  subsequent  batch  of 
Subprojects  to  be  financed  by  the  FIL  reflow  funds.  Within  3  months  after  the  end  of  grace 
period  of  the  project,  CECEP  or  the  Management  Company  will  submit  a  PCR  to  ADB.  This 
report  will  then  be  the  basis  for  a  joint  evaluation  of  the  project  conducted  by  CECEP,  the 
Management Company, and ADB during a project completion review mission to be conducted 
by ADB. CECEP or the Management Company shall engage an accredited agency or agencies 
acceptable to ADB to undertake, within 6 months after the physical completion of each Qualified 
50 
Subproject, measurement and verification of the energy savings and reduction in emissions of 
CO2,  SO2,  NOx,  PM10,  PM2.5,  ozone,  and  volatile  organic  compounds  achieved  by  such 
subproject  and  shall  provide  to  ADB  the  consolidated  results  of  the  measurement  and 
verification  of  such  savings  and  reductions  of  all  physically  completed  Qualified  Subprojects, 
the  project 
with  reference  to 
implementation and from time to time at ADB’s request. 
the  energy  and  emissions  baseline  established  before 
D. 
Reporting  
85. 
During  the  loan  implementation  period,  CECEP  or  the  Management  Company  will 
provide  ADB  with  (i)  semi-annual    progress  reports  in  a  format  consistent  with  ADB's  project 
performance reporting system including (a) progress achieved by output as measured through 
the indicator's performance targets, (b) key implementation issues and solutions, (c) an updated 
lending and disbursement plan, and (d) updated implementation plan for the next 6 months; (ii) 
consolidated  audited  SUF  and  entity  financial  statements;  (iii)  semiannual  environmental  and 
social monitoring reports and ESMS implementation reports in a format that agreed with ADB; 
and (iv) a PCR within 6 months of physical completion of the project. To ensure that projects will 
continue  to  be  both  viable  and  sustainable,  project  accounts  and  entity  audited  financial 
statements  together  with  the  associated  auditor's  report,  should  be  adequately  reviewed.  The 
template  to  be  used  in  preparing  semiannual  progress  reports  is  in  Appendix  7.  Table  15 
summarizes the key reporting requirements during project implementation. 
Name of Report/Documents 
Semiannual progress reports 
Timing of reporting 
Table 15: Summary of Key Reporting Requirements During Implementation 
Remarks 
First report to cover the half 
year  ended  31  December 
2018  
First report due by 30 June 
2019 
Every 6 months until loan completion 
Before  30  June  of  each  year  throughout 
the  loan  implementation  period,  i.e.,  from 
loan effectiveness until loan closing date  
Consolidated audited 
statement of utilization of 
funds including 
Auditor's report  
Audited entity financial 
statements of CECEP, the 
Management Company, 
Facility and Funds  
ESMS implementation report 
Consolidated environmental 
and social monitoring report 
Project completion report 
Before  30  June  of  each  year  throughout 
the  loan  implementation  period,  i.e.,  from 
loan effectiveness until loan closing date  
First report due by 30 June 
2019 
Semiannually during the first 5 years after 
loan  effectiveness,  and  annually  in  the 
next 10 years 
Semiannually during the first 5 years after 
loan  effectiveness,  and  annually  in  the 
following 10 years 
Within  3  months  after  the  end  of  grace 
period  of  the  project  or  otherwise  agreed 
between ADB and EA 
Tentatively  30  November 
2023 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CECEP = China Energy Conservation and Environmental Protection Group, EA = 
executing agency, ESMS = environmental and social management system. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
E. 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy  
Consultation 
86. 
communication strategy has four major themes, which are to ensure:  
important  aspect  of 
is  an 
the  project.  The  project’s  stakeholder 
51 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
The  project  is  implemented  in  an  open  and  transparent  manner  that  provides 
access to ADB funds in an equitable manner to the qualified applicants to receive 
them based on the project selection criteria.  
Stakeholders  who  might  be  adversely  affected  by  the  project  are  identified  and 
engaged in consultations with a view to protecting their interests. 
Benefits arising from the project are communicated to interested parties in order 
to  promote  (a)  the  further  development  of  the  Facility  and  Funds;  (b)  similar 
initiatives by other provinces or cities; and (c) the benefits of emission reduction 
and energy conservation generally.  
Corruption risk is minimized (discussed separately in Section X of this PAM). 
87. 
In order to implement this strategy the following steps have or will be taken: 
(i) 
Opportunities to  access project funds to  be  openly  and  widely  advertised  within 
the  greater  BTH  region  using  a  variety  of  media  selected  to  reach  the  targeted 
enterprises most likely to benefit from the Facility and Funds. 
The Management Company and limited partner(s) of the Facility and each Fund 
will  ensure  that  local  communities  affected  by  the  Project  are  consulted  before 
each  subproject  approval  under  the  provisions  of  ESMS,  and  after  subproject 
implementation, to identify, assess, and remedy any residual concerns. 
(ii) 
(iii)  Within  2  months  from  the  loan  effectiveness,  the  Management  Company  will 
commence disclosure of all key project-related information, including the scope, 
financial and institutional arrangements of the project; and a semi-annual project 
progress report.  
52 
X. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
88. 
ADB‘s  Anticorruption  Policy  was  explained  to  and  discussed  with  the  government, 
CECEP, and CECEP Huayu and it was emphasized that ADB reserves the right to investigate, 
directly  or through  its  agents,  any  alleged  violations  of the  Anticorruption  Policy  relating  to  the 
Project.41 CECEP  and  the  Management  Company  shall  ensure  that  all  agreements  and  other 
contracts  it,  the  Facility  or  the  Funds  enter  into  in  relation  to  the  Project  include  provisions 
specifying  the  right  of  ADB  to  audit  and  examine  the  records  and  accounts  of  financial 
organizations, contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to 
the  Project.  Individuals  and/or  entities  on  ADB’s  anticorruption  debarment  list  are  ineligible  to 
participate in ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the project.42  
To support these efforts, relevant provisions of ADB‘s Anticorruption Policy are included 
89. 
in the loan and project agreements under the Project. In addition, the following characteristics of 
the  Project  promote  transparency  and  strengthen  governance:  (i)  scrutiny  of  the  subprojects 
(technical,  financial,  economic,  environmental,  and  social),  Qualified  Enterprises  by  the 
Management Company; (ii) the inclusion of anticorruption provisions in the project implementing 
contracts  including  agreements  between  CECEP  and  the  Account  Bank,  and  in  all  Limited 
Partnership  Agreements  (or  other  fund  constitutional  documents)  and  fund  management 
contracts,  Equity  Investment  Agreements  and  Entrusted  Loan  Agreements;  and  (iii)  an 
information campaign to be carried out by the Management Company to inform enterprises and 
other large energy consumers about the Project and their entitlements. 
41 Anticorruption Policy: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Anticorruption-Integrity/Policies-Strategies.pdf 
42 ADB's Integrity Office web site: http://www.adb.org/integrity/unit.asp 
53 
XI. 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
90. 
People  who  are,  or may  in the future  be,  adversely  affected  by the  project  may  submit 
complaints  to  ADB’s  Accountability  Mechanism.  The  Accountability  Mechanism  provides  an 
independent  forum  and  process  whereby  people  adversely  affected  by  ADB-assisted  projects 
can voice, and seek a resolution of their problems, as well as report alleged violations of ADB’s 
operational  policies  and  procedures.  Before  submitting  a  complaint  to  the  Accountability 
Mechanism,  affected  people  should  make  an  effort  in  good  faith  to  solve  their  problems  by 
working  with  the  concerned  ADB  operations  department. Only  after  doing  that,  and  if they  are 
still dissatisfied, should they approach the Accountability Mechanism.43 
43 Accountability Mechanism. http://www.adb.org/Accountability-Mechanism/default.asp 
54 
XII. 
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
91. 
All revisions and/or updates, as agreed between CECEP and ADB, during the course of 
the implementation are retained in this section to provide a chronological history of changes to 
implemented arrangements recorded in the PAM. 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
PAM Changes/Updates 
Initial draft 
Second draft 
Third draft 
Date 
27 April 2017 
17 August 2017 
22 September 2017 
Remarks 
Loan Pre-Fact Finding Mission  
Fact-Finding Mission 
Before Loan Negotiation 
Appendix 1 
55 
DESCRIPTION OF PROJECT FINANCIAL PRODUCTS 
1. 
Using the proceeds of the financial intermediation loan (FIL), China Energy Conservation 
and Environmental Protection Group (CECEP) through the Facility and the Funds will offer the 
following  financial  products  in  the  project  to  support  selective  air  quality  improvement 
investments  in  the  greater  Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei  (BTH)  region:  (i)  Entrusted  Loans,  (ii)  Equity 
Investments  without  a  Put,  and  (iii)  Put-protected  Equity.  The  project  will  establish  a  greater 
BTH region dedicated Emission-Reduction and Pollution-Control Facility (the Facility) to deploy 
advanced  technologies  to  reduce  air  pollution  from  industries,  urban  infrastructure,  and 
agriculture sectors. The Facility will invest both in Funds and directly in enterprises ( up to 10% 
of  the  Facility)  to  finance  Qualifying  Enterprises  to  undertake  qualifying  subprojects.  It  is 
expected  that  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  funds  will  leverage  financing  from  institutional 
investors,  local  governments  and  commercial  banks  and  be  onlent/invested  to  support  eligible 
subprojects on commercial terms. 
Entrusted  Loans.  Debt  financing  will  be  provided  through  the  Facility,  investing  ADB 
2. 
loan  proceeds  (“Relent  Proceeds”  as  defined  in  the  Loan  Agreement)  into  Qualified 
Subborrowers  for  Qualified  Subprojects  or  into  Funds  (for  further  investment  in  Qualified 
Subborrowers or Qualified Investees for Subprojects) to improve air quality in the greater BTH 
region  by  using  advanced  technologies.  The  project’s  debt  products  will  include  (i)  unsecured 
Entrusted Loans; (ii) Entrusted Loans secured by a transfer to the lender of a controlling interest 
in the borrower, where control is not to be exercised unless the loan is in default and where the 
controlling  interest  is  redeemable  by  the  borrower's  shareholder  at  a  pre-agreed  price  on 
repayment  of  the  loan;  and  (iii)  Entrusted  Loans  secured  by  third  party  guarantees  or  by 
collateral security; The Entrusted Loans will be offered at an interest rate close to the prevailing 
market rate and the actual rate will be at the Facility’s or the Fund’s discretion depending on the 
risk profile of the subprojects. Entrusted loan agreements will be signed between an Entrusted 
Bank, the Facility, or a Fund, and the Qualified Subborrower. 
3. 
Equity  Investment.  The  equity  financing  will  be  provided  through  the  Facility  either 
investing  Relent  Proceeds  into  Qualified  Investees  to  improve  air  quality  in  the  greater  BTH 
region by using advanced technologies, or by the Facility investing debt or equity into Funds (for 
further  investment  into  Qualified  Subborrowers  or  Qualified  Investees  for  Subprojects).  Equity 
investment  without  a  Put  is  important  to  enable  companies  with  advanced  low-carbon 
technologies, which are technically and commercially proven, to scale up operations (organically 
or  through  mergers  and  acquisitions)  and  enter  new  markets.  Each  Put-protected  Equity 
Investment  must  be  provided  to  a  special  purpose  vehicle  housing  a  stand-alone  capital-
intensive  subproject  where  the  sponsor  lacks  sufficient  registered  capital  to  raise  necessary 
debt  funding  or  to  an  enterprise  holding  a  capital-intensive  subproject  where  the  enterprise 
needs  equity  financing  to  match  its  risk  profile.  A  dedicated  team  with  expertise  will  be 
established  in  the  Management  Company  to  conduct  following  specific  tasks  in  considering 
Equity  Investments  without  a  Put:  (i)  assessing  the  risk  profile  of  the  target  company,  (ii) 
estimating  the  financing  demand  at  its  development  stage,  (iii)  evaluating  the  technology  and 
business  model,  (iv)  assessing  capacity  of  the  management,  (v)  proper  valuation  of  the 
company, and (vi) designing a realistic exit plan. Equity Investment without a Put of ADB Relent 
Proceeds  from  the  Facility  and  Funds  will  be  capped  to  €42.8  million.  Put-protected  Equity 
investment of ADB Relent Proceeds from the Facility and Funds will be capped at €128.4 million. 
4. 
Potential  companies  for  Equity  Investment  will  be  screened  and  selected  based  on 
eligibility criteria developed by CECEP and in compliance with ADB’s selection criteria.  Equity 
56 
Appendix 1 
will be injected into the Qualified Investee to support a Qualified Equity Subproject. Investment 
will be structured as registered capital. The investee must meet the applicable eligibility criteria 
herein and in the Loan Agreement and Project Agreement and the Subproject must be located 
in the greater BTH region. An Equity Investment Agreement will be signed between the Facility 
or the relevant Fund and the Qualified Investee, which sets out all of the project requirements to 
be achieved by the Qualified Investee and Qualified Equity Subproject. Each Equity Investment 
by  the  Facility  or  the  Funds  must  either  (i)  be  Put-protected  Equity,1 or  (ii)  have  a  viable  exit 
strategy that will enable CECEP to recover the investment in a timely manner.  
5.   Where  there  is  both  an  Entrusted  Loan  or  Equity  Investment  and  cofinancing  for  the 
same Qualified  Subborrower  and  the  same  subproject,  the  position  of  the  Facility  or  the  Fund 
may be senior, pari passu, or subordinated. The Facility’s investments into Funds may also be 
the  Funds.  
relative 
senior,  pari  passu  or  subordinated 
to  other 
investors 
in 
1   A  put  option  is  an  option  contract  in  which  the  beneficiary  of  the  put  option  obtains  the  right  to  sell  a  specified 
quantity of a security at a specified price within a fixed period of time or on the occurrence of certain events. 
Appendix 2       57 
DRAFT TERM SHEETS 
Annex 1: Discussion Draft for Regional Fund 
Investors: People’s Insurance Company of China (PICC), the ADB-provided Facility (“Facility”), 
and the General Partner (GP) 
Fund structure: Limited partnership 
Fund  manager  and GP: CECEP Huayu Fund Management Company.  Except as specified in 
“Payments” below, all Fund costs and expenses will be borne by the Fund Manager.  
Target  fund  size:  CNY3.5  billion  (max.  from  Facility  =  the  smaller  value  between  CNY1.75 
billion or 50% of fund size)  
Commitment from PICC: CNY1.75 billion 
Minimum drawdown from PICC each call: CNY300 million 
Minimum drawdown from PICC in 1st year after Fund launch: CNY500 million 
Investment  period:  5  years  from  the  launch  date  of the  Fund.  Committed money  will  be fully 
invested  or  PICC’s  remaining  commitments  will  expire  at  the  end  of  the  investment  period 
unless PICC agrees to an extension.    
Reinvestment:  Until  the  8th  anniversary  of  the  Fund’s  launch  date  repaid  principal  will  be 
reinvested  not  more  than  6  months  after  it  is  received,  or  the  portion  representing  PICC’s 
investment will be repaid to PICC on the next semi-annual Repayment Date thereafter.  
Final Repayment Date: All investments necessary to repay PICC’s principal and a fixed return 
of __% must be liquidated, and money paid to PICC as provided in “Payments,” below, by the 
10th anniversary of the Fund’s launch date unless PICC agrees to an extension. 
Investment  profile:  The Fund will invest only in debt or put-protected1 equity companies. The 
Fund may invest in companies in which CECEP or the Fund Manager has an interest provided 
that the consent of a majority in investment interest of other investors in the Fund agrees to the 
investment in each instance. 
Investment  restrictions: Investments of the Fund must be in companies and provided for the 
sole  purpose  of  undertaking  medium-  to  large-scale  air  emissions  abatement  projects  using 
advanced or best available technology. Investment restrictions will include technology standards 
and  minimum  requirements  for  emissions  reductions  per  dollar  invested.  Detailed  investment 
restrictions will be as agreed with ADB. All companies receiving investments will be required to 
comply with ADB environmental, social, integrity, and other requirements and to report on their 
compliance. 
Governance:  The  Fund  will  have  an  investment  committee  comprising  Fund  Manager  senior 
investment  personnel,  technology  experts  selected  by  the  Fund  Manager,  and  senior 
1   Put-protected  Equity  here  means  “debt  as  equity”  where  the  put  is  to  a  creditworthy  third  party  or  other  Equity 
Investments where the Fund has a put to a creditworthy third party. 
58 
Appendix 2 
management  personnel  from  CECEP.  Limited  partners  may  attend  investment  committee 
meetings as non-voting participants. The Fund will be audited annually in accordance with ADB 
requirements. 
Concentration limits: Fund investments in any one company or related group of companies, or 
for any one subproject, will be limited to 20% of total Fund size. 
Diversification  requirements: At least one investment shall be made in each of the following 
technology  fields:  (1)  agricultural  waste  utilization,  (2)  clean  heating,  (3)  micro  grid/rooftop 
electricity generation, and (4) wastewater/sludge treatment. 
Repayment Dates: 30 June and 31 December in each year. 
Payments  to  PICC:  Interest  and  other  returns  to  the  Fund  in  excess  of  principal,  returns  of 
principal received by the Fund that are not reinvested within 6 months after receipt and returns 
of principal received by the Fund after the end of the reinvestment period will be applied: 1st to 
pay  any  taxes  owing  by  the  Fund;  2nd  to  pay  the  costs  incurred  in  respect  of  any  third  party 
consultants or experts engaged by the Fund Manager; 3rd to pay Fund Manager’s Fees; 4th to 
PICC  until  it receives  a fixed  return  of  ___%  per annum  on  its  principal  investment;  5th  to  the 
Facility, the GP and any other investors until they have received a return of __% per annum on 
their principal investments; 6th to PICC until it has been repaid its principal in full; and 7th to the 
Facility,  the  GP  and  any  other  investors  other  than  PICC  until  they  have  been  repaid  their 
principal investments in full.  Amounts received by the Fund in excess of the amounts specified 
in the preceding sentence will be paid, after paying any taxes, consulting and experts’ costs and 
Fund  Manager’s  Fees,  to  the  Facility,  the  GP  and  any  other  investors  in  proportion  to  their 
respective investment amounts. 
Fund Manager Fees: PICC will pay to the Fund Manager fees of 0.5% per annum on amounts 
actually  invested  into  the  Fund,  calculated  from  the  date  of  PICC’s  provision  of  money  to  the 
Fund pursuant to a call until the date when the principal amount is returned to the investor by 
the Fund. 
Calls  on  investor  commitments: The Fund Manager may require PICC to provide money to 
the Fund, in proportion to their commitments to the Fund and in no event in excess of PICC’s 
total  commitments  to  the  Fund,  only  as  and  when  investments  have  been  approved  by  the 
investment  committee.  The  Fund  Manager  will  give  PICC  not  less  than  30  days’  notice  to 
provide money to the Fund, specifying the date by which moneys must be provided. The Fund 
Manager will not require money to be provided more than 30 business days before it reasonably 
expects to provide the money to an investee. 
Temporary  Investments:  All  money  temporarily  held  by  the  Fund  will  be  held  in  an  interest-
bearing bank account at, or money market product issued by, bank that provides entrusted bank 
services for the Fund, and interest will be paid out as describe in “Payments.” 
Appendix 2       59 
Annex 2: Discussion Draft for Local (Jinan) Fund 
Investors:  Industrial  Bank  (CIB),  Jinan  Finance  Co.  (Jinan),  the  ADB-provided  Facility 
(“Facility”), and the General Partner (GP) 
Fund structure: Limited partnership 
Fund  manager  and  GP:  CECEP  Huayu  Fund  Management  Co.  Ltd.  Except  as  specified  in 
“Payments” below, all Fund costs and expenses will be borne by the Fund Manager.  
Target fund size:  CNY1 billion  
Commitment from CIB: CNY500 million 
Commitment from Jinan: CNY250 million 
Commitment from Facility: CNY250 million 
Investment  period:  5  years  from  the  launch  date  of  the  Fund–committed  money  will  be  fully 
invested  or  Investors’  remaining  commitments  will  expire  at  the  end  of  the  investment  period 
unless all investors agree to an extension.    
Reinvestment:  Until  the  end  of  the  investment  period  repaid  principal  will  be  reinvested  not 
more than 6 months after it is received by the Fund or will be repaid to the investors as provided 
in “Payments,” below, on the next semi-annual repayment date thereafter.     
Final  Repayment  Date:  All  investments  must  be  liquidated,  and  money  paid  as  provided  in 
“Payments,” below, by the 7th anniversary of the Fund’s launch date unless all investors agree 
to an extension. 
Investment  profile:  The  Fund  will  invest  only  debt  or  put-protected  equity  (footnote  1)  in 
companies.
Investment restrictions: Investments of the Fund must be in companies, not less than 80% in 
Jinan,  and  provided  for  the  sole  purpose  of  undertaking  medium-  to  large-scale  air  emissions 
abatement  projects  using  advanced  or  best  available  technology.  The  Fund  may  not  invest  in 
companies  in  which  CECEP  or  the  Fund  Manager  has  an  interest.  Investment  restrictions  will 
include  technology  standards  and  minimum  requirements  for  emissions  reductions  per  dollar 
invested.  Detailed investment restrictions will be as agreed with ADB. All companies receiving 
investments  will  be  required  to  comply  with  ADB  environmental,  social,  integrity  and  other 
requirements and to report on their compliance.   
Governance:  The  Fund  will  have  an  investment  committee  of  five  persons:  two  appointed  by 
Fund Manager, one appointed by Jinan City government, one independent person selected by 
the investors, and one technical expert selected by the fund manager.  Decisions will require the 
affirmative  vote  of  four  participants.  Limited  partners  may  attend  investment  committee 
meetings as non-voting participants. The Fund will be audited annually in accordance with ADB 
requirements. 
Diversification requirements:______________.  
60 
Appendix 2 
Repayment dates: _________________ in each year. 
Payments:   
1.  Interest and other returns to the Fund in excess of principal will be applied: (i) 1st to pay 
any  taxes  owing  by  the  Fund;  (ii)  2nd  to  pay  the  costs  incurred  in  respect  of  any  third 
party  consultants  or  experts  engaged  by  the  Fund  Manager;  (iii)  3rd  to  pay  Fund 
Manager’s Fees; (iv) 4th to CIB until it receives a fixed return of ___% per annum on its 
principal investment; and (v) 5th to the Facility, Jinan, the GP and any other investors in 
proportion to their respective investments. 
2.  Returns  of principal received  by  the  Fund that  are  not  reinvested  within  6 months  after 
receipt  and  returns  of  principal  received  by  the  Fund  after  the  end  of  the  reinvestment 
period will be applied: 1st to CIB until it has been repaid its principal in full; and 2nd to 
the Facility, Jinan, the GP and any other investors other than CIB until they have been 
repaid their principal investments in full. 
3.  Amounts  received  by  the  Fund  in  excess  of  the  amounts  specified  in  the  preceding 
paragraphs will be paid, after paying any taxes, consulting and experts’ costs and Fund 
Manager’s  Fees,  the  Facility,  the  GP  and  any  other  investors  until  they  to  the  Facility, 
Jinan,  the  GP  and  other  investors  other  than  CIB,  in  proportion  to  their  respective 
investment amounts.          
Fund Manager Fees: CIB and Jinan will pay to the Fund Manager fees of 0.5% per annum on 
amounts they actually invest into the Fund, calculated from the date of their provision of money 
to the Fund pursuant to a call until the date when the principal amount is returned to the investor 
by the Fund.  
Calls  on  investor  commitments: The Fund Manager may require investors to provide money 
to the Fund, in proportion to their commitments to the Fund and in no event in excess of their 
respective  total  commitments,  only  as  and  when  investments  have  been  approved  by  the 
investment  committee.  The  Fund  Manager  will  give  investors  not  less  than  30  days’  notice  to 
provide  money  to  the  Fund,  specifying the  date  by  which  money  must be  provided.  The  Fund 
Manager will not require money to be provided more than 30 business days before it reasonably 
expects to provide the money to an investee.    
Temporary  Investments:  All  money  temporarily  held  by  the  Fund  will  be  held  in  an  interest-
bearing bank account at, or money market product issued by, bank that provides entrusted bank 
services for the Fund, and interest will be paid out as describe in “Payments.” 
Appendix 2       61 
Annex 3: Discussion Draft for Technology/Industry Specified (Debt) Fund 
Investors:  Shanghai  Pudong  Development  Bank  (SPDB),  Ansteel  Group,  the  ADB-provided 
Facility (“Facility”), and the General Partner (GP) 
Fund structure: Limited partnership 
Fund  manager  and  GP:  CECEP  Huayu  Fund  Management  Co.,  Ltd.  Except  as  specified  in 
“Payments” below, all Fund costs and expenses will be borne by the Fund Manager.  
Target fund size:  CNY1.6 billion  
Commitment from SPDB: CNY1.2 billion 
Commitment from Ansteel: CNY100 million 
Commitment from Facility: CNY300 million 
Investment  period:  5 years  from the launch date of the Fund–committed moneys will be fully 
invested  or  Investors’  remaining  commitments  will  expire  at  the  end  of  the  investment  period 
unless all investors agree to an extension.    
Reinvestment:  Until  the  end  of  the  investment  period  repaid  principal  will  be  reinvested  not 
more than 6 months after it is received by the Fund or will be repaid to the investors as provided 
in “Payments,” below, on the next semi-annual repayment date thereafter.     
Final  Repayment  Date:  All  investments  must  be  liquidated,  and  money  paid  as  provided  in 
“Payments,” below, by the 7th anniversary of the Fund’s launch date unless all investors agree 
to an extension. 
Investment profile:  The Fund will invest debt in (i) Ansteel ESCO company, (ii) SPV’s in which 
the Fund owns at least 50% of equity and Ansteel ESCO owns the remainder (and at minimum 
1%),  or  (iii)  in  energy  savings  project  host  companies  that  have  entered  into  energy  savings 
performance contracts with the vehicles referred to in subclauses (i) or (ii) All equity invested by 
the  Fund  will  be  put-protected  equity.  The  debt  will  be  based  on  cash-flow  based  lending  in 
reliance  on  cash  flows  from  energy  savings  performance  contracts  between  Ansteel  ESCO 
company and energy savings project host companies.  
Investment  restrictions:  Investments  of  the  Fund  must  be  provided  for  the  sole  purpose  of 
undertaking  air  emissions  abatement  projects  under  energy  savings  performance  contracts, 
using advanced or best available technology. The Fund may not invest in companies in which 
CECEP  or  the  Fund  Manager  has  an  interest.  Investment  restrictions  will  include  technology 
standards  and  minimum  requirements  for  emissions  reductions  per  dollar  invested.  Detailed 
investment restrictions will be as agreed with ADB. All companies receiving investments, and all 
energy  savings  project  host  companies,  will  be  required  to  comply  with  ADB  environmental, 
social, integrity and other requirements and to report on their compliance.   
Governance:  the  Fund  will  have  an  investment  committee  of  five  persons:  two  appointed  by 
Fund Manager, one appointed by Ansteel Group, one independent person selected by the other 
investors,  and  one  technical  expert  selected  by  the  fund  manager.  Decisions  will  require  the 
affirmative  vote  of  four  participants.  Limited  partners  may  attend  investment  committee 
62 
Appendix 2 
meetings as non-voting participants. The Fund will be audited annually in accordance with ADB 
requirements. 
Repayment dates: _________________ in each year. 
Payments:   
1.  Interest  and  other  returns  to  the  Fund  in  excess  of  principal  will  be  applied:  1st  to  pay 
any taxes owing by the Fund; 2nd to pay the costs incurred in respect of any third-party 
consultants or experts engaged by the Fund Manager; 3rd to pay Fund Manager’s Fees;   
4th  to  SPDB  until  it  receives  a  fixed  return  of  ___%  per  annum  on  its  principal 
investment;  5th  to  the  Facility,  Ansteel  Group,  the  GP  and  any  other  investors  in 
proportion to their respective investments. 
2.  Returns  of principal received  by  the  Fund that  are  not  reinvested  within  6 months  after 
receipt  and  returns  of  principal  received  by  the  Fund  after  the  end  of  the  reinvestment 
period will be applied: 1st to SPDB until it has been repaid its principal in full; and 2nd to 
the Facility, Ansteel Group, the GP and any other investors other than SPDB until they 
have been repaid their principal investments in full.   
3.  Amounts  received  by  the  Fund  in  excess  of  the  amounts  specified  in  the  preceding 
paragraphs will be paid, after paying any taxes, consulting and experts’ costs and Fund 
Manager’s  Fees, the  Facility,  the  GP,  and  any  other  investors  until  they to  the  Facility, 
Ansteel  Group,  the  GP,  and  other  investors  other  than  SPDB,  in  proportion  to  their 
respective investment amounts.          
Fund Manager Fees:  SPDB and Ansteel Group will pay to the Fund Manager fees of 0.5% per 
annum on amounts they actually invest into the Fund, calculated from the date of their provision 
of money to the Fund pursuant to a call until the date when the principal amount is returned to 
the investor by the Fund.  
Calls on investor commitments:  The Fund Manager may require investors to provide money 
to the Fund, in proportion to their commitments to the Fund and in no event in excess of their 
respective  total  commitments,  only  as  and  when  investments  have  been  approved  by  the 
investment  committee.  The  Fund  Manager  will  give  investors  not  less  than  30  days’  notice  to 
provide  money  to  the  Fund,  specifying the  date  by  which  money  must be  provided.  The  Fund 
Manager will not require money to be provided more than 30 business days before it reasonably 
expects to provide the money to an investee.    
Temporary  Investments:  All  money  temporarily  held  by  the  Fund  will  be  held  in  an  interest-
bearing bank account at, or money market product issued by, bank that provides entrusted bank 
services for the Fund, and interest will be paid out as describe in “Payments.” 
Appendix 3       63 
SUBPROJECT SELECTION CRITERIA  
A.  
Selection Criteria for All Subprojects 
The subprojects supported by the project must meet the technical, financial, economic, 
1. 
environmental,  and  social  criteria  below  as  well  as the  criteria  in  the  Loan  Agreement  and the 
Project Agreement and elsewhere in this project administration manual (PAM). The subproject 
must focus on the following sectors: energy efficiency, environmental protection, clean energy, 
resource  recycling  and  utilization,  clean  transportation  and  other  related  fields.  Selected 
subprojects  must  lead  and  demonstrate  air  quality  improvement,  low-emissions  development, 
energy  efficiency  and  emission  reduction  work  in  greater  Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei  (BTH)  region1 
and  must  involve  advanced  technology  and  provide  adequate  financial  returns  to  the  investor 
and  substantial  benefits  to  the  economy,  society,  and  environment.  The  following  criteria  will 
apply to all subprojects. 
1. 
Subproject Technical Criteria 
2. 
All subprojects must meet the following criteria: 
(i) 
All subprojects should result in net emission and in any case must not result in an 
increase  in  energy  consumption 2  and  emissions  comparing  to  the  current 
situation  where  the  subprojects  are  located,  including  carbon  dioxide  (CO2), 
sulfur  dioxide  (SO2), nitrogen  oxide  (NOx),  and  airborne  particulate  matter  (PM10 
and  PM2.5),  volatile  organic  compounds  (VOC)  or  others  may  be  approved  by 
Asian Development Bank (ADB). 
Baseline for energy consumption and emissions shall be established before the 
subprojects  are  implemented.  Energy  consumption  and  emissions  produced  by 
the subprojects after implementation shall be monitored and recorded. 
Preference  shall  be  given  to  subprojects  with  lowest  unit  emission  reductions 
cost ($/ton). 
All  subprojects  must  use  commercially  available  technologies  with  reliable, 
measurable,  and  verifiable  emission  reductions  that  will  contribute  to  the 
achievement of the Action Plan on Prevention and Control of Air Pollution (2013–
2017)  as  updated  from  time  to  time,  and  the  Thirteenth  Five-Year  Plan  of  the 
People’s Republic of China and successive Five-Year Plans. 
All subprojects must not be on the government’s overcapacity list. 
The  proposed  technologies  to  be  used  shall  be  the  best  available  technologies 
where feasible. 
All  subprojects  shall  comply  with  ADB’s  Energy  Policy  2009  and  the  industry 
policies  of  the  subproject  location.  Preference  will  be  given  to  subprojects  that 
belong 
the  national/local 
government’s  list/plan,  local  key  supported  projects  or  pilot  project  identified  by 
the national/local government. 
the  encouraged  and  prioritized  sectors  of 
to 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii)  All subprojects shall contribute to at least one of the output indicators set in the 
(ix) 
Project’s design and monitoring framework; and 
All subprojects must be located in the geographic areas listed under greater BTH 
region (footnote 1) and must address air pollution issues. 
1   The  greater  Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei  region  refers  to  Beijing  and  Tianjin  municipalities;  Hebei,  Henan,  Shandong, 
Shanxi and Liaoning provinces; and Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. 
2   Equivalent in ton of standard coal equivalent. 
64 
Appendix 3 
2. 
Subproject Financial Criteria   
(i) 
3. 
All  subprojects  must  be  financially  viable.  The  financial  analysis  should  be  prepared  in 
accordance with ADB’s Financial Management and Analysis of Projects guidelines. In particular: 
The  estimated  subproject  investment  and  operations  costs,  as  well  as  cash 
inflows, must be clearly presented and must be reasonable. 
The financial  internal rate  of return (FIRR)  calculated  on  a  real  basis consistent 
with the ADB Financial Management and Analysis of Projects guidelines shall be 
greater than the weighted average cost of capital. 
The FIRR must be robust under various sensitivity scenarios. 
(iii) 
(ii) 
3. 
Subproject Economic Criteria  
4. 
For  all  the  proposed  subprojects,  the  total  economic  benefits  must  exceed  the  total 
economic  costs  when  analyzed  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  2017  Guidelines  for  the  Economic 
Analysis of Projects. The economic internal rate of return of the subproject must be greater than 
the  discount  rate  of  9%  (6%  if  there  are  substantial  nonmarket  benefits  that  cannot  be  easily 
valued), and must be viable under adverse sensitivity scenarios. Without-project scenarios used 
for  comparison  with  project  interventions  must  reflect  realistic  assumptions  of  technological 
progress  over  time.  Changes  in  greenhouse  gas  emissions  should  be  valued  at  $36.3/ton  of 
carbon  dioxide  equivalent  (2016  values)  with  2%  real  annual  increase.  Valuation  of  pollution 
effects may include resource cost savings from health improvements, but should not attempt to 
value  mortality  directly.  If  original  air  quality  modeling  is  not  conducted  to  relate  changes  in 
emissions to ambient pollution concentrations and economic outcomes, the same unit pollution 
marginal  damage  costs  should  be  applied  as  in  economic  analysis  of  representative 
Subprojects for RRP preparation. 
4. 
Subproject Environmental and Social Safeguards Criteria 
5. 
All subprojects must meet the following criteria: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Each  subproject  shall  meet  requirements  of  the  environmental  and  social 
management system developed for the Project. 
The  subprojects  shall  not  have  significant  adverse  environmental  impacts  that 
are irreversible, diverse, or unprecedented. Environment Category A subprojects, 
within the meaning of the SPS, will be excluded from the Project. 
Initial  Poverty  and  Social  Assessment  and  Summary  Poverty  Reduction  and 
Social Strategy shall be prepared for all subprojects. 
Each subproject must acquire proper approvals from relevant national, provincial, 
and local authorities. 
The subprojects must not be located in any designated environmental protection 
zone, ecological sensitive area, or cultural heritage site. 
Each  subproject  must  be  designed,  constructed,  and  operated  in  accordance 
with  relevant  national  and  provincial  social  and  environmental  laws  and 
regulations. 
The subprojects must not involve any land acquisition or housing demolition. 3 
(vii) 
(viii)  The subprojects must not have any negative impacts on ethnic minorities.4 
3   The subproject proposal will be screened through an involuntary resettlement impact screening checklist which is 
included  as  Appendix  6  of  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  System  (ESMS)  in  accordance  with 
procedures contained in the project’s ESMS 
4   The subproject proposal will be screened through an ethnic minorities impact screening checklist. 
Appendix 3       65 
(ix) 
(x) 
The  subprojects  must  not  support  enterprises  which  have  activities  involving 
commercial  development  of  cultural  resources  of  Indigenous  Peoples  without 
their consent for the commercialization of such resources. 
The subprojects shall not result in labor retrenchment or labor redundancies. 
6.  
In the event that a potential subproject has good energy savings and emission reduction 
potential,  but  does  not  meet  one  or  more  of  these  criteria,  the  Management  Company  may 
consider  and  recommend  it  to  ADB,  in  which  case  ADB  will  review  and  may  approve  or 
disapprove in its discretion.5 
B.  
Selection Criteria for Qualified Subborrower 
7. 
All Qualified Subborrowers must meet the following criteria: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
financing, 
implementing  and  monitoring  during 
All Qualified Subborrowers must be financially creditworthy and not have a poor 
credit record, as recorded in the People’s Bank of PRC credit history database. 
The Qualified Subborrowers must be capable to, and must, contribute a minimum 
of 30% of the total subproject investment cost as counterpart financing. 
 The Qualified Subborrowers must commit to enhance their capacities in project 
planning, 
the  subproject 
preparation and implementation periods. 
The  Qualified  Subborrowers  must  have  complied  with  all  relevant  domestic 
environmental  regulations  and  must  acquire  relevant  environment  permits  with 
respect to the existing facilities where the subproject will be implemented.6 
The  Qualified  Subborrowers  must  be  in  compliance  with  relevant  domestic 
occupational health and safety standards. 
The Qualified Subborrowers’ debt service coverage ratio,7 taking into account the 
proposed  debt  investment  for  the  relevant  subproject,  calculated  as  per  the 
related  ADB  guidelines,  8 shall  be  greater  than  1.2.  Any  inconsistency  shall  get 
ADB’s prior acceptance.  
C.  
Selection Criteria for Qualified Equity Subprojects and Qualified Equity Investees 
1. 
Due  Diligence  Requirement  and 
Investment 
Investment  Criteria  for  All  Equity 
8. 
The  investment  focus  will  be  on  companies  which  need  capital  for  continuous  growth, 
scaling up, corporate acquisitions, particularly for enhancing the environmental sustainability of 
5   Process  for  changes  in  to  the  selection  criteria  for  any  subproject  should  follow  ADB’s  Project  Administration 
Instructions (PAI 5.02).   
6   Per the SPS, existing facility referred to: for projects involving facilities and/or business activities that already exist 
or  are  under  construction,  the  borrower/client  will  undertake  an  environment  and/or  social  compliance  audit, 
including  on-site  assessment,  to  identify  past  or  present  concerns  related  to  impacts  on  the  environment, 
involuntary resettlement, and Indigenous Peoples. The objective of the compliance audit is to determine whether 
actions were in accordance with ADB’s safeguard principles and requirements for borrowers/clients and to identify 
and  plan appropriate measures  to  address  outstanding compliance  issues. Where  noncompliance is identified, a 
corrective action plan agreed on by ADB and the borrower/client will be prepared. The plan will define necessary 
remedial  actions,  the  budget  for  such  actions,  and  the  time  frame  for  resolution  of  noncompliance.  If  a  project 
involves an upgrade  or expansion  of  existing  facilities  that has  potential impacts on the environment,  involuntary 
resettlement, and/or Indigenous Peoples, the requirements for environmental and social impact assessments and 
planning specified in Safeguard Requirements 1-3 will apply in addition to compliance audit. 
7   Debt  Service  Converge  Ratio  =  annual  cash  flow  from  operations  divided  by  annual  debt  service  obligations 
(interest and principal). 
8   ADB Financial Due Diligence: A Methodology Note (2009 as amended from time to time). 
(ii) 
2. 
66 
Appendix 3 
the company’s operations. Moneys from the Facility or a Fund for an Equity Investment must be 
invested  into  an  Equity  Investee  who  will  undertake  the  Qualified  Subproject  and  may  not  be 
used to purchase equity interests from existing investors. 
Minimum  Due  Diligence  Requirements.  The  due  diligence  for  all  Equity  Investment 
9. 
shall at least comprise, but not be limited to, the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
A detailed appraisal and assessment of business and financial risks of the target 
company. 
A  detailed  appraisal  and  assessment  of  key  technology  and  growth  potential  of 
the target company. 
A detailed appraisal and assessment of the target company’s management team; 
including  its  relevant  experiences,  expertise,  management  culture,  attitude  to 
risk, and psychology.  
A  detailed  review,  identification,  and  assessment  of  feasibility  of  identified  exit 
routes.  In  case  of  a  support  to  a  project  with  an  agreed  put  option,  the  facility 
should obtain a legal opinion of the possibility to execute the put.  
A  detailed  corporate  governance  assessment  and  integrity  due  diligence  of  the 
management. 
10. 
Investment criteria. All Equity Investments must be in investees that:  
(i) 
Conduct  businesses  with  environmental/social  return,  which  can  also  generate 
an enhanced financial return; and  
The investment exit horizon does not exceed 5 years.  
Selection  Criteria  for  Equity  Investment  that  Does  Not  Qualify  as  “Put-
Protected Equity” 
Equity Investments that does not qualify as Put-Protected Equity must meet the following 
11. 
requirements: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Investments  will  be  in  companies  at  growth  or  expansion  stage  which  need 
capital to enable significant and strategic expansion where “growth stage” refers 
to consistent source of income and regularly taking on new customers with profit 
improving,  and  “expansion  stage”  refers  to  rapid  growth  in  both  revenue  and 
cash flow.   
The  Qualified  Investee  must  possess  patent(s),  proprietary  technology  and/or 
technical know-how in the sectors mentioned in para. 1.  
The Qualified Investee must have good growth potential with feasible technology.  
The  Qualified  Investee  should  be  ready  for  fast  growth  or  further  scaling  up  of 
production. 
Investments  will  be  made  in  an  amount  not  greater  than  CNY500  million 
(including not more than CNY125 million of ADB funds from the Facility).  
The target Return on the Equity Investment9 will be greater than 10% annually.  
3. 
Selection Criteria for Put-Protected Equity Investment 
12. 
Put-protected Equity Investments must meet the following requirements: 
(i) 
Investments  may  be  in:  (a)  special  purpose  vehicles  for  stand-alone  Qualified 
Equity  Subprojects  to  finance  financially  viable  and  capital  intensive  Qualified 
Equity Subprojects where the sponsor lacks sufficient registered capital to raise 
9 Return on equity = net income before interest and taxes divided by the invested equity.  
Appendix 3       67 
necessary  debt  funding;  or  (b)  enterprises  which  take  on  capital  intensive 
Qualified  Equity  Subprojects  that  need  equity  financing  matching  their  risk 
profiles.  
The investment must be protected by an agreed put of the whole investment, in 
writing,  using  a  template  acceptable  to  ADB  against  a  creditworthy  third  party 
(not the issuer) and must be executable.  
Puts shall be secured, and the maximum amount of the put (acquisition price of 
the subject equity, including a return) shall not exceed 70% of the net asset value 
of the security provided by or on behalf of the Put provider.  
The  return  amount  incorporated  in  the  Put  exercise  price  must  be  greater  than 
the  average  interest  rate  charged  by  the  Facility  or  Funds  on  Entrusted  Loans 
under the same Facility or Fund.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
68 
Appendix 4 
ADB PROHIBITED INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES LIST 
The following do not qualify for Asian Development Bank financing: 
(i) 
(ii)  
production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labor1 or 
child labor;2 
production of or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under host-country 
laws  or  regulations,  or  international  conventions  and  agreements,  or  subject  to 
international  phase  outs  or  bans,  such  as  (a)  pharmaceuticals,3 pesticides,  and 
herbicides;4 (b)  ozone-depleting  substances;5 (c)  polychlorinated  biphenyls6 and 
other  hazardous  chemicals;7 (d)  wildlife  or  wildlife  products  regulated  under  the 
Convention  on  International  Trade  in  Endangered  Species  of  Wild  Fauna  and 
Flora;8 and (e) trans-boundary trade in waste or waste products;9 
production of or trade in weapons and munitions, including paramilitary materials; 
production of or trade in alcoholic beverages, excluding beer and wine;10 
production of or trade in tobacco;10 
gambling casinos and equivalent enterprises;10 
(iii)  
(iv)  
(v)  
(vi)  
(vii)   production  of  or  trade  in  radioactive  materials,11 including  nuclear  reactors  and 
their components; 
(viii)   production of, trade in, or use of unbonded asbestos fibers;12 
(ix)  
commercial  logging  operations  or  the  purchase  of  logging  equipment  for  use  in 
primary tropical moist forests or old-growth forests; and 
(x)   marine and coastal fishing practices, such as large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing 
and  fine-mesh  net  fishing,  harmful  to  vulnerable  and  protected  species  in  large 
numbers and damaging to marine biodiversity and habitats. 
1  Forced  labor  means  all  work  or  services  not  voluntarily  performed,  that  is,  work  or  services  extracted  from 
individuals under threat of force or penalty. 
2  Child  labor  means  the  employment  of  children  whose  age  is  below  the  host  country’s  statutory  minimum  age  of 
employment,  or  the  employment  of  children  in  contravention  of  International  Labor  Organization  Convention 
No. 138, “Minimum Age Convention” (www.ilo.org). 
3   A list of pharmaceutical products subject to phase outs or bans is available at http://www.who.int 
4   A list of pesticides and herbicides subject to phase outs or bans is available at http://www.pic.int 
5  The chemical compounds that react with and deplete stratospheric ozone, resulting in the widely publicized ozone 
holes,  are  listed  in  the  Montreal  Protocol,  together  with  target  reduction  and  phase  out  dates.  Information  is 
available at http://www.unep.org/ozone/montreal.shtml 
6  A group of highly toxic chemicals, polychlorinated biphenyls are likely to be found in oil-filled electrical transformers, 
capacitors, and switchgear dating from 1950 to 1985. 
7   A list of hazardous chemicals is available at http://www.pic.int 
8   A list is available at http://www.cites.org. 
9   As defined by the Basel Convention; see http://www.basel.int 
10 This  does  not  apply  to  project  sponsors  that  are  not  substantially  involved  in  these  activities.  “Not  substantially 
involved” means that the activity concerned is ancillary to a project sponsor’s primary operations. 
11 This  does  not  apply  to  the  purchase  of  medical  equipment,  quality  control  (measurement)  equipment,  and  any 
other equipment for which ADB considers the radioactive source to be trivial or adequately shielded. 
12 This does not apply to the purchase and use of bonded asbestos cement sheeting where the asbestos content is 
less than 20%. 
Appendix 5 
69 
SAMPLE STATEMENT OF UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
201x 
201x  Cumulative 
A.  Opening cash balance 
xx 
xx 
B.  Sources of funds 
1  ADB loan proceeds 
2  Reflows (repayments from SLA 1) 
3  Reflows (repayments from SLA 2) 
4  Bank's own funds (equity) 
5  Others 
Total (sum 1 to 5) 
C.  Uses of funds 
1  Subloans to qualified sub-borrowers (SLA 1) 
ADB share 
Bank share 
2  Subloans to qualified sub-borrowers (SLA 2) 
ADB share 
Bank share 
Total (sum 1 to 2) 
D.  Net cash activity (B - C) 
E.  Ending cash balance (A + D) 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
NOTES: Include basis of preparation, reporting currency, undrawn external assistance, and details of subloans such 
as amounts committed, disbursed up to the previous year, disbursed during the current reporting period, cumulative 
disbursement, undisbursed commitments, percentage of loan utilized, etc. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, SLA = subloan agreement. 
70 
Appendix 6 
A. 
Introduction 
PROCUREMENT MANUAL 
This  procurement  manual  is  prepared  to  regulate  the  procurement  activities  of  the  Air 
1. 
Quality  Improvement  in  the  Greater  Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei  (BTH)  Region—Regional  Emission-
Reduction  and  Pollution-Control  Facility,  which  will  utilize  an  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB) 
financial intermediation loan (FIL). ADB expects that for FILs, the procurement is undertaken by 
the  respective  loan  beneficiaries  in  accordance  with  established  private  sector  or  commercial 
practices, and which are acceptable to ADB. 
2. 
First objective of the manual is to draw attention to Qualified Subborrowers and Qualified 
Investees that they have the responsibility to ensure the procurement activities they undertake 
to implement their Subprojects must: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Comply with any relevant laws and regulations of the People’s Republic of China 
(PRC)  and  the  municipal  or  provincial  governments  in  the  greater  BTH  region 
where the Subprojects are located,67 and 
Adhere  to  procurement  principles 68  and  guidance  determined  by  ADB  to  be 
applicable to this FIL project. 
Second  objective  of  the  manual  is  to  offer  specific  guidance  on  how  procurement 
3. 
activities can be undertaken that will ensure compliance with ADB principles and guidelines.  
4. 
It is not appropriate for this ADB manual to offer specific advice on compliance with the 
specific  requirements  of  the  PRC  and  local  governments’  laws  and  regulations.  Such  legal 
compliance  is  the  responsibility  of  Subproject  owners  and  applies  not  just  to  procurement 
activities  but  is  an  all  embracing  responsibility  they  have  in  how  they  conduct  to  all  their 
business activities. 
5. 
Notwithstanding  the  above  statement,  all  the  guidance  provided  in  this  manual  is 
considered  to  be  compatible  with  current  applicable  PRC  law—and  specifically  the  PRC 
Tendering  and  Bidding  Law  1999  (effective  from  1  Jan  2000),  the  scope  and  applicability  of 
which  includes  all  investment  projects  that  utilize  foreign  capital  funds.  Subproject  owners 
should  therefore  ensure  that  their  procurement  staff  are  familiar  with  the  requirements  of  this 
law and its applicable regulations, in addition to being provided with this procurement manual.  
It is also not the intention of this manual to force changes in the procurement procedures 
6. 
of  subproject  owners  where  they  already  substantially  comply  with  required  ADB  procurement 
principles.  However,  it  is  expected  that  subproject  owners  will  review  their  own  procurement 
procedures using the contents of this manual as a guide and adjust their procedures to ensure 
the required substantial compliance.  
7. 
The  contents  of  this  procurement  manual  will  be  kept  under  review  during  project 
implementation  and  can  be  revised  at  any  time  according  to  the  project  requirements,  or 
changes in applicable laws and regulations. Any changes in the manual will be jointly approved 
by China Energy Conservation and Environmental Protection Group (CECEP) and ADB. 
67  The  greater  Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei  region  includes  Beijing  and  Tianjin  municipalities;  Hebei,  Henan,  Shandong, 
Shanxi and Liaoning provinces; and Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. 
68  ADB will advise the fund manager where the restriction is waived in connection with a particular fund, in which case 
the requirement can be removed from the procurement manual as it applies to that fund. 
Appendix 6 
71 
B. 
Procurement Objectives 
The aim of any procurement process is to ensure the resulting procurement provides the 
8. 
purchaser with goods, works or services that: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Are fit for the intended purpose–i.e., they meet required quality, durability and 
performance criteria; 
Provide value for money to the purchaser; and 
Are procured in a timely and efficient manner. 
9. 
These objectives are wholly compatible with best commercial practice and endorsed by 
ADB. However, the objectives are not mutually exclusive and they can conflict to a degree. For 
example,  sophisticated  procurement  procedures  may  well  be  justified  for  large  scale  or 
technically  complex  procurement  but  would  not  be  justified  on  efficiency  grounds  for  simpler 
small-scale  procurement.  ADB  procurement  guidelines  and  commercial  best  practice 
procurement  regulations  recognize  the  need for an  efficient  procurement  process  by  providing 
simpler procedures for small-scale procurement.  
10. 
Another  crosscutting  objective  of  any  procurement  process  is  to  adequately  safeguard 
Subproject  owners  against  the  risks  of  corruption  and  fraud  that  could  damage  the  level  of 
Subproject performance (as measured in financial terms and/or energy/emissions savings), and 
potentially the competitiveness of the entire business.  
C. 
ADB Procurement Principles 
11. 
ADB procurement guidelines are based on the principles of (i) competition; (ii) economy 
and  efficiency;  (iii)  transparency;  and  (iv)  fairness  and  equal  opportunity.  Each  of  these 
principles  is  briefly  explained  below,  while  specific  guidance  on  their  application  is  given  in 
Section D of this manual. 
12. 
Competition.  Open  competition  is  the  default  approach,  and  conditions  for  other 
methods  are  clearly  described.  Conditions  justifying  a  departure  from  open  competition  may 
involve  situations  when  open  competition  is  either  inappropriate  (e.g.,  due  to  proprietary 
technology) or when it hinders optimal economy and efficiency. 
13. 
Economy  and  efficiency.  The procurement processes are efficient and lead to optimal 
results  in  a  balanced  consideration  of  time,  costs,  and  quality.  This  requires  that  the 
procurement processes are not cumbersome and prone to unnecessary delays.  
Transparency.  The procurement processes are governed by clear rules that are easily 
14. 
accessible and can be consistently applied. Contract opportunities are advertised widely. 
15. 
Fairness and equal opportunity. All eligible bidders have an equal and fair opportunity. 
Procurement  processes  avoid  preferential  or  discriminatory  measures  that  might  favour  or 
adversely  affect  certain  participants,  and  are  not  prone  to  opportunities  of  collusion  and 
excessive discretion.  
It is generally accepted by procurement experts that these principles, if properly applied, 
16. 
will  ensure  the  procurement  objectives  set  out  in  Section  B  of  this  manual  are  realized  by 
Subproject  owners  and  represent  best  procurement  practice.  However,  in  setting  the 
72 
Appendix 6 
requirement  that  “FIL  procurement  is  undertaken  by  the  respective  loan  beneficiaries  in 
accordance  with  established  private  sector  or  commercial  practices,  acceptable  to  ADB,”  ADB 
recognizes that it may be in the interests of commercial borrowers of ADB funds to apply these 
principles in a more flexible manner than as stipulated in ADB’s detailed procurement guidelines 
that have been designed with public procurement primarily in mind.  
D. 
Specific Guidance on FIL Procurement 
This  section  of  the  manual  builds  on  the  earlier  content  by  providing  some  specific 
17. 
guidance  to  subproject  owners.  The  section  first  gives  guidance  on  how  generally  accepted 
procurement  objectives  might  be  best  achieved  and  then  considers  each  of  the  ADB 
procurement principles in turn and gives guidance on compliance.  
1. 
Ensuring the Procurement Results are Fit for Purpose 
18. 
For potential suppliers to provide equipment or goods or services that meet the needs of 
the purchaser, it is vital that purchasers clearly articulate their needs and expectations to those 
potential  suppliers.  Therefore,  appropriate  written  information  should  be  provided  to  potential 
suppliers. A good written specification of purchaser needs will enhance the prospects for those 
needs being successfully met and will also provide a basis for any procurement disputes to be 
adjudged and settled in a fair way.  
19. 
Feasibility  study  reports  will  need  to  be  prepared  and  approved  for  all  the  subprojects. 
These  feasibility  study  reports  will  document  the  performance  expectations  of  the  Subproject 
and  therefore,  it  is  important  that,  as  a  minimum,  these  expectations  are  included  in  relevant 
procurement specifications.  
20. 
For  the  procurement  of  key  equipment  and/or  civil  works  that  are  critical  to  the 
performance  of  the  subproject  then  the  procurement  documentation  should  include  a  more 
detailed design specification. This should be prepared by qualified technical staff in conjunction 
with procurement staff. 
For the procurement of services (such as technical support to assist the implementation 
21. 
of the subproject), it is important to ensure the potential service providers are suitably qualified, 
and  that  the  scope  of  work  and  the  required  outputs/deliverables  of  the  service  provider  are 
clearly defined.  
2. 
Achieving Value for Money 
22. 
Value for money (VFM) is normally considered to be achieved if the purchaser feels they 
have paid a fair price for what they have received. However, some would argue that VFM is only 
achieved if one pays the lowest available price. 
In  reality,  VFM  is  a  more  complex  concept  to  assess  than  simply  through  a  purchase 
23. 
price  comparison  alone.  For  example,  for  an  equipment  purchase,  the  costs  or  downtime  for 
equipment  servicing,  and  the  availability  of  spare  parts  may  be  important  factors  to  the 
purchaser. Additional length of a performance guarantee (over and above anything specified by 
the  purchaser)  might  also  legitimately  influence  the  purchaser  to  not  purchase  based  on  the 
cheapest price. If VFM is to be assessed on a scientific basis then a risk-based approach over 
the  equipment  life  cycle  should  be  used,  but  even  then  there  will  be  subjectivity  over  matters 
such  as  assessing  the  level  of  risk  and  the  value  of  maintaining  a  long-lasting  and  trusted 
purchaser-supplier relationship. 
Appendix 6 
73 
24. 
Specific guidance on making VFM judgements is as follows: 
(i) 
Consider what factors will affect the VFM judgement in advance of procurement 
and  where  possible  include  these  into  the  product  specification.  Also,  ask  all 
potential  suppliers  to  provide  supplementary  information  considered  relevant  to 
the purchase decision in addition to the basic supply price (e.g., response time to 
breakdowns, guarantee terms, service frequencies, downtime and costs, delivery 
periods and costs of spare parts).  
Establish  a  company  procurement  committee  to  evaluate  VFM  and  make 
procurement decisions as a means of reducing the individual subjectivity in VFM 
assessments.  Ensure  that  records  are  kept  of  decisions  made  and  the  reasons 
for  them,  so  that  independent  or  higher  level  reviews  can  assess  their 
reasonableness.  
Use  open  procurement  (see  below)  wherever  possible  so  that  the  lowest 
available  specification  compliant  price  is  known  thus  making  the  price  premium 
paid for non-quantifiable VFM factors readily identifiable.  
Only  use  sole  supplier  purchasing  where  either  (a)  an  existing  competitively  let 
rolling  supplier  contract  already  exist,  or  (b)  there  has  been  recent  similar 
procurement  made  via  open  procurement,  or  (c)  extenuating  circumstances 
apply  that  justify  short-cutting  normal  procedures  and  company  standing  orders 
allow for this (note: such a situation under the FIL is extremely unlikely and such 
short-cutting is normally only justified in response to an emergency). 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
3. 
Timeliness and Efficiency of Procurement 
25. 
For the procurement process to operate in a timely and efficient manner, the subproject 
will need to be planned and budgeted, so procurement activities are carefully scheduled to be 
compatible with the subproject implementation plan and that financial commitments can be met 
when due. 
It  follows  that  procurement  plans  should  (i)  be  linked  to  the  financial  plans,  (ii)  allow  a 
26. 
realistic  time  for  the  completion  of  individual  activities,  and  (iii)  as  far  as  possible  avoid  a  ”log 
jam” of activity in the procurement department. 
Efficiency  of  procurement  will  be  achieved  where  (i)  companies  develop  standardized 
27. 
procedures  and  procurement  documentation,  (ii)  the  number  of  procurement  packages  are 
minimized  without  unduly  restricting  competitiveness,  (iii)  adopting  simplified  procurement 
procedures for small low value procurement, and (iv) the use of existing rolling annual or multi-
year supplies of services and supplies for which a company has a regular demand.  
4. 
Use of Competitive Procurement 
28. 
Effective  competition  undoubtedly  reduces  prices  by  forcing  suppliers  to  innovate  and 
become more efficient. Purchasers will only be able to benefit from reductions that are available 
if they use procurement procedures based on competitive bidding or shopping. 
Competitive  procurement  is  most  commonly  achieved  in  a  project  setting  through 
29. 
advertising and an open invitation for suppliers to request tender document and submit bids. 
74 
Appendix 6 
30. 
For  some  critical  and  specialist  procurement  packages  a  multi-stage  procurement 
process  may  be  advantageous  whereby  potential  suppliers  are  first  invited  to  pre-qualify  by 
demonstrating  they  have  the  required  skills  and  experience.  Then  all  pre-qualified  suppliers 
would be invited to submit bids.  
31. 
Preparing  bids  for  some  procurement  packages  can  impose  a  heavy  workload  and 
expense  on  potential  suppliers,  and  this  can  discourage  some  good  quality  suppliers  from 
bidding  if  they  feel  their  chance  of  being  successful  is  low.  Purchasers  can  guard  against  the 
risks  this  situation  creates  restricting  the  number  of  suppliers  invited  to  bid  to  a  small  number 
(typically three to five) of those most qualified to be the supplier. 
However,  before  deciding  on  the  detailed  procurement  procedures  to  use  they  should 
32. 
ensure  subproject  owners  should  consult  any  applicable  government  laws  and  regulations  on 
the procurement methods permissible in specific circumstances. This especially applies to state-
owned  enterprise  (SOE)  subproject  owners  who  will  undoubtedly  operate  in  a  more  regulated 
procurement environment than wholly private enterprises.  
5. 
Fairness and Equal Opportunity 
All  eligible  bidders  should  have  an  equal  and  fair  opportunity.  Procurement  processes 
33. 
are  designed  and  implemented  that  avoid  preferential  or  discriminatory  measures  that  might 
favour or adversely affect certain participants.  
Fairness  and  equal  opportunity  goes  hand  in  hand  with  procurement  procedures  that 
34. 
require  open competitive  bidding.  It  also goes  hand  in  hand  with  transparency  in  procurement 
(see below). 
35. 
Further measures to promote fairness and equal opportunity include: 
(i) 
the 
the  procurement  and 
Ensuring  that  potential  suppliers  have  adequate  time  to  submit  bids  or 
expressions  of  interest  (the  actual  time  allowed  should  depend  on  the 
complexity  of 
in 
bids/expression of interest); 
The terms of purchase contracts used are equitable to both sides; 
The purchasing organization has a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) to deal 
with  cases  of  alleged  unfairness,  misprocurement,  or  other  abuses.  This 
mechanism should operate so as to be independent of the purchasing function; 
and  
Subject  only  to  issues  of  commercial  confidentiality,  unsuccessful  bidders  may 
request and receive feedback on why they were unsuccessful.  
level  of  detail 
requested 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
6. 
Transparency in Procurement 
Transparency  of  procurement  processes  are  those  governed  by  clear  rules  that  are 
36. 
easily accessible and can be consistently applied. This will show that the purchaser is fair and 
provides equal opportunity to all, as evidenced by their open and fair in procurement activity. 
Transparent  procurement  involves  contract  opportunities  (procurement  plans  and 
37. 
individual bid opportunities) being advertised widely, and results are published (or at least made 
available to the unsuccessful bidders).  
(i) 
Transparency in procurement has a number of potential benefits to purchasers. 
Appendix 6 
75 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Competition is increased. 
Suppliers can more readily identify the bids most suited to them allowing them to 
select  which  bids  to make  and  better  tailor  bids to meet the  purchaser’s needs. 
From  the  purchaser  side  this  reduces  the  number  of  poor  quality  or  unqualified 
bids and should increase bid quality. 
They  gain  a  reputation  for  openness  and  fairness  in  how  their  businesses  are 
operated  and  if  they  practise  local  procurement  policies  (where  allowed  by 
applicable regulations) for the support they provide the local community.  
Open and transparent processes are less susceptible to abuse through fraud and 
corruption and such abuse is more likely to be detected.  
E. 
Required Organizational Capacity and Arrangements 
Subproject owners need to assess whether or not they possess adequate procurement 
38. 
capacity in terms of:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
functional responsibilities; 
internal processes; 
resources and skills; 
information management; and  
experience and performance.  
39. 
For the selection of subprojects, ADB has assessed organizational capacity of proposed 
subproject  owners.  The  capacity  building  suggestions  of  these  assessments  may  be  of 
guidance  to  others  and  can  be  shared  by  contacting  the  Management  Company  for  relevant 
guidance. A procurement capacity checklist is provided in Annex 1 to this manual. 
40. 
If  subproject  owners  conclude  it  is  uneconomical  to  build  the  required  internal 
procurement capacity then they should consider recruiting the services of a procurement agent 
to fill the gap.  
76  
Appendix 6 
Annex 1: Procurement Capacity Checklist 
This checklist works systematically through the procurement cycle identifying key requirements 
at each stage.  
RESPONSE: ‘YES’ OR ‘NO’ 
WITH BRIEF COMMENTS 
RISK 
Specific Assessment and Ratings 
I. 
QUESTION 
Name of the Company 
Checklist filled by: 
Position: 
Tel/Mobile: 
Email: 
A.  ORGANIZATIONAL AND STAFF 
CAPACITY 
A.1.  Is there a permanent properly staffed 
• 
• 
• 
procurement unit in the IA? 
Number of procurement staff 
Position of the procurement unit in the 
company 
Name of the procurement unit head and years 
of working experience in procurement 
A.2.  Are the number and qualifications of 
procurement staff sufficient to undertake the 
procurement under the proposed project? 
A.3.  Does the procurement unit undertake 
procurement in accordance commercial 
practices in the sector? 
If the company is not an SOE, does the 
procurement unit have clear procurement 
rules and procedures? 
Please indicate a simplified full procurement 
procedures 
• 
• 
A.4.  Do the commercial practices comply with 
• 
• 
requirements of national and provincial 
procurement laws and regulations? 
If the company is an SOE, does the 
procurement comply with the Law on Tenders 
and Bids? 
Has the procurement unit prepared 
procurement rules and procedures 
accordingly? 
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT 
B. 
B.1.  Is there a referencing system for procurement 
• 
files in the company? 
If “yes”, please indicate how the system is 
referencing (i.e., by date, by types [civil works, 
equipment, services, etc.], amount, etc.) 
B.2.  Is there adequate equipment and personnel to 
• 
administer the procurement records 
management functions? 
Does the procurement unit or company 
Archives Department administrate the 
records? 
QUESTION 
• 
The records are kept in e-file, hard copies or 
both? 
B.3.  Does the procurement unit adhere to a 
document retention policy (i.e., for what period 
are records kept)? 
B.4.  Is there a single contract file with a copy of 
contracts and all subsequent contractual 
correspondence? 
C.  PROCUREMENT PRACTICES 
Goods and Works 
C.1  Does the procurement unit have a manual for 
C.2 
C.3 
procurement of goods and works? 
Is there a bid evaluation committee 
(permanent or ad-hoc) established within the 
IA? 
Is the decision of a bid evaluation committee 
final or subject to approval by higher 
authorities within the IA? 
C.4  Do the commercial practices applied by the IA 
comply with key procurement principles of 
open competition, economy, efficiency, 
fairness and transparency? 
D.  EFFECTIVENESS 
D.1.  Is contractual performance systematically 
monitored and reported? 
D.2.  Does the agency monitor and track its 
contractual payment obligations? 
D.3.  Is a complaints resolution mechanism 
described in national procurement 
documents? 
D.4.  Is there a formal non-judicial mechanism for 
dealing with complaints? 
E.  ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES 
E.1.  Is there a standard statement of ethics to 
which the procurement unit is required to 
formally commit? 
E.2.  Are staff of the procurement unit required to 
declare any potential integrity violations during 
the procurement process? 
E.3.  Is the performance of the procurement unit 
subject to annual audit? 
II.  General Rating 
Criterion 
Information Management 
A.  Organizational and Staff Capacity 
B. 
C.  Procurement Practices 
D.  Effectiveness 
E.  Accountability Measures 
OVERALL RISK RATING 
Appendix 6 
77 
Risk 
78 
Appendix 6 
Annex 2: National Competitive Bidding 
The  Borrower’s  Law  of  Tendering  and  Bidding  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China 
promulgated by Order No. 21 of the President of the People’s Republic of China on August 30, 
1999, are subject to the following clarifications required for compliance with the Guidelines: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
All invitations to prequalify or to bid shall be advertised in the national press, or 
official  gazette,  or  a  free  and  open  access  website  in  the  Borrower’s  country. 
Such  advertisement  shall  be  made  in  sufficient  time  for  prospective  bidders  to 
obtain  prequalification  or  bidding  documents  and  prepare  and  submit  their 
responses.  In  any  event,  a minimum  preparation  period  of  thirty  (30)  days  shall 
be given. The preparation period shall count (a) from the date of advertisement, 
or  (b)  when  the  documents  are  available  for  issue,  whichever  date  is  later. The 
advertisement  and  the  prequalification  and  bidding  documents  shall  specify  the 
deadline for such submission. 
Qualification  requirements  of  bidders  and  the  method  of  evaluating  the 
qualification of each bidder shall be specified in detail in the bidding documents, 
and  in  the  prequalification  documents  if  the  bidding  is  preceded  by  a 
prequalification process. 
If  bidding  is  preceded  by  a  prequalification  process,  all  bidders  that  meet  the 
qualification  criteria  set  out  in  the  prequalification  document  shall  be  allowed  to 
bid and there shall be no limit on the number of pre-qualified bidders. 
All  bidders  shall  be  required  to  provide  a  performance  security  in  an  amount 
sufficient to protect the Borrower/Project Executing Agency in case of breach of 
contract by the contractor, and the bidding documents shall specify the required 
form and amount of such performance security. 
Bidders shall be allowed to submit bids by mail or by hand. 
All bids shall be opened in public; all bidders shall be afforded an opportunity to 
be  present  (either  in  person  or  through  their  representatives)  at  the  time  of  bid 
opening, but bidders shall not be required to be present at the bid opening. 
All  bid  evaluation  criteria  shall  be  disclosed  in  the  bidding  documents  and 
quantified in monetary terns or expressed in the form of pass/fail requirements. 
(ix) 
(viii)  No  bid  may  be  rejected  solely  on  the  basis  that  the  bid  price  falls  outside  any 
standard contract estimate, or margin or bracket of average bids established by 
the Borrower/Project Executing Agency. 
Each  contract  shall  be  awarded  to  the  lowest  evaluated  responsive  bidder,  that 
is,  the  bidder  who  meets  the  appropriate  standards  of  capability  and  resources 
and  whose  bid  has  been  determined  (a)  to  be  substantially  responsive  to  the 
bidding documents and (b) to offer the lowest evaluated cost. The winning bidder 
shall  not  be  required,  as  a  condition  of  award,  to  undertake  responsibilities  for 
work  not  stipulated  in  the  bidding  documents  or  otherwise  to  modify  the  bid  as 
originally submitted. 
Each  contract  financed  with  the  proceeds  of  the  Loan  shall  provide  that  the 
suppliers  and  contractors  shall  permit  ADB,  at  its  request,  to  inspect  their 
accounts  and  records  relating  to  the  performance  of  the  contract  and  to  have 
said accounts and records audited by auditors appointed by ADB. 
(x) 
(xi)  Government  owned  enterprises  in  the  Borrower’s  country  may  be  permitted  to 
bid if they can establish that they (a) are legally and financially autonomous, (b) 
operate  under  commercial  law  and  (c)  are  not  a  dependent  agency  of  the 
Borrower/Project Executing Agency. 
(xii)  Re-bidding  shall  not  be  allowed  solely  because  the  number  of  bids  is  less  than 
three (3). 
Appendix 7 
79 
TEMPLATE FOR SEMI-ANNUAL PROGRESS REPORT 
报告期 
(Reporting period) 
A.  介绍及基础数据  (INTRODUCTION AND BASIC DATA) 
1. 项目基础信息 (Basic Project Information) 
项 目 号  
Number) 
项目名称 (Project Title) 
PRC: 51181/L XXXX 
(Project/Loan 
提交日期 
(Date of Submission) 
Air Quality Improvement in the Greater Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei 
Region—CECEP’s Regional Emission Reduction and Pollution 
Control Facility 
People’s Republic of PRC 
PRC  Energy  Conservation  and  Environmental  Protection 
(CECEP) 
CECEP  
(Executing 
接收人 (Recipient) 
执 行 机 构  
Agency) 
项 目 办  
Management Office) 
项目汇总费用表 (Project Summary Cost Estimates) (€ million) 
Item  
A. Base Cost  
(Project 
Amount  
1.  
2.  
3.  
Subtotal (A)  
B. Contingencies  
C. Financial Charges During Implementation  
Total Project Cost (A+B+C)  
项目融资计划 (Project Summary Financing Plan) 
Source 资金来源 
Amount (€ million) 
金额 
Share of Total (%)  
占比 
Asian Development Bank 亚行 
Ordinary Capital Resources 普通资金来源 
471.0 
Total Project Cost 
2. 项目批准、生效及关闭日 (Project Approval, Effectiveness and Closing Dates) 
批准日期 (Approval date) 
贷款协定、项目协定签字日 
(Loan signing date)  
生 效 日 期   (Loan  effective 
date) 
关帐日(原定)  (Loan  closing 
date) (original) 
项目实施期限  (原)  [Elapsed 
project period (original)] 
关 帐 日 ( 修 改 后 )  (Loan 
closing date)  (revised) 
项 目 实 施 期 限   ( 修 改 后 ) 
[Elapsed 
period 
project 
(revised)] 
亚 行 上 次 项 目 检 查 时 间 
(Date  of  last  ADB  review 
mission) 
B. 
UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
Subborrower
Total 
Investme
nt Cost
Table 1: Withdrawal Progress of Subprojects  
Withdrawal Progress
ADB Loan
Cofinancing
Cumulated Up to the 
End of Last Period
Amount this Period
Cumulative Amount
%
US$
%
US$
Euro
%
US$
CNY
US$
Euro
US$
Euro
CNY
US$
8
0
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
7
i
A. Financing Product 1
xxx
xxx
B. Financing Product 2
xxx
xxx
Total 
Table 2: Payback Progress of Subprojects  
Payback Progress
Subborrower
Total Investment Cost
ADB loan
Cumulated Up to the 
End of Last Period
Amount this Period
Cumulative Amount
%
US$
%
US$
Euro
US$
Euro
US$
Euro
US$
Euro
A. Financing Product 1
xxx
xxx
B. Financing Product 2
xxx
xxx
Total 
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
7
i
8
1
82 
Appendix 7 
C.  实施进度 (IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS) 
1. 报告期间项目实施进度情况 (Project Implementation Progress during the Reporting 
Period by Output) 
 [________________, (State the progress and achievements in implementation by output since the last 
progress report.)] 
2. 项目实施安排  (Project Implementation Arrangements)  
[________________, 
establishment, staffing, and funding of the PMO)] 
(State  assessment  of  project 
implementation  arrangements  such  as 
3. 项目进度评价 (Assessment of Project Progress)  
(Assess  progress  in  implementing  the  overall  project  to  date  in  comparison  with  the  original 
implementation  schedule—quantifiable  and  monitorable  target,  (include  simple  charts  such  as  bar  or 
milestone  to  illustrate  progress,  a  chart  showing  actual  versus  planned  expenditure,  S-curve  graph 
showing  the  relationship  between  physical  and  financial  performance,  and  actual  progress  in 
comparison  with  the  original  schedules  and  budgets,  the  reference  framework  or  guidelines  in 
calculating  the  project  progress  including  examples  are  shown  in  the  project  administration 
memorandum  [PAM])  (You  can  append  existing  chart/table/graph  showing  physical  and  financial 
progress as appendixes, if any.) 
4. 评价主要假设条件及风险的有效性 (Assessment of the Validity of Key Assumptions and 
Risks) 
[评价实现量化后的实施目标所设想的主要假设条件及风险的有效性  (Assess  the  validity  and  key 
assumptions and risks in achieving the quantifiable implementation targets)] 
5. Progress of Subborrower 
6. Effectiveness of RFA and the Facility Account 
7. Interest Differential Accumulated and Used, and effectiveness in achieving its 
targeted objectives 
8. Implementation of ESMS 
(Include  implementation  of  activities  in  the  environmental  management  plan  under  the  ESMS  for 
Subprojects) 
9. Selection of Subsequent Batches of Subprojects 
(Include progress in identifying, screening, assessing, and selection future Subprojects). 
Appendix 7       83 
D.  项目建设目标 (PROJECT PURPOSES) 
1. 建设内容/实施安排状况  (Status of Project Scope/Implementation Arrangements) 
[________________, (Assess the status of project scope/implementation arrangements compared with 
those in the project document, and whether major changes have occurred or will need to be made.)] 
2. 项目成果实现的可能性及补救措施  
(Likelihood of Achievement of the Project Outcomes and Remedial Measures) 
[________________,  (Assess  the  likelihood  that  the  immediate  development  objectives  (project 
purpose)  will  be  met  in  part  or  in  full,  and  whether  remedial  measures  are  required  based  on  the 
current project scope and implementation arrangements.)] 
3. 主要假设和风险变更 (Changes to the Key Assumption and Risks) 
[________________,  (If  applicable,  assess  changes  to  the  key  assumptions  and  risks  that  affect 
attainment of the development objectives.)] 
4. 其他建设内容 (Other Project Developments) 
[________________,  (If  applicable,  state  any  other  project  developments,  including  monitoring  and 
reporting on environmental and social requirements that might adversely affect the project's viability or 
accomplishment of immediate objectives.)] 
相关条款的遵从  (COMPLIANCE WITH COVENANTS) 
E. 
[_________  (Summarize  the  status  of  the  borrower’s  and  EA’s  compliance  with  key  financial, 
safeguards, and other covenants, particularly, for those covenants on due.)] 
主要问题与困难  (MAJOR PROJECT ISSUES AND PROBLEMS) 
F. 
[如适用，请归纳影响或有可能影响项目实施进度、符合各条款要求，及实现即期目标等的主要问题，提
出 解 决 这 些 问 题 的 建 议 （ 如 变 更 建 设 内 容 、 项 目 实 施 安 排 及 贷 款 资 金 的 再 分 配 ） (If  applicable, 
summarize  the  major  problems  and  issues  affecting  or  likely  to  affect  implementation  progress, 
compliance  with  covenants,  and  achievement  of  immediate  development  objectives.  Recommend 
actions  to  overcome  these  problems  and  issues  (e.g.,  changes  in  scope,  changes  in  implementation 
arrangements, and reallocation of loan proceeds) 
G.  下一汇报期工作计划  (WORK PLAN FOR NEXT 6 MONTHS) 
84 
Appendix 7 
Status of Compliance with Major Loan and Project Covenants 
贷款协定和项目协定中主要条款的遵守情况 
Schedule Paragraph 
Description 
Status 
Type 
No. 
