Sustainable Tourism Development Project (Phase 2) (RRP MON 51422-002) 
Project Administration Manual 
Project Number: 51422-002 
Loan Number: LXXXX 
Grant Number: GXXXX 
October 2021 
Mongolia: Sustainable Tourism Development Project 
(Phase 2) 
ABBREVIATIONS 
financial management assessment  
–   Asian Development Bank 
–  Aimag and Soum Centers Regional Development Investment Program 
–   Altai Tavan Bogd National Park 
–  Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation 
–  community-based organization 
ADB 
ASDIP 
ATBNP 
CAREC 
CBO 
COVID-19  –   coronavirus disease 
CPP 
CRF 
CSO 
DMEEIA 
DMF 
EDGE 
EMP 
FMA 
GDP 
ha 
GSTC 
HLT 
IFC 
JFPR 
KKNP 
KUNNP 
LIBOR 
MET 
MSMEs 
O&M 
PAM 
PCMA 
PIU 
PPDC 
RANCC 
SCS 
TSC 
UVSPA 
UVTC 
WWTP 
–  community participation in procurement 
–  community revolving fund 
–   civil society organization 
–  Department of Monitoring, Examination, Evaluation, and Internal Auditing 
–  design and monitoring framework 
–  Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies 
–  environmental management plan 
– 
–  gross domestic product 
–  hectare 
–  Global Sustainable Tourism Council 
–  high-level technology 
– 
International Finance Corporation 
–   Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction 
–   Khan Khukhii National Park 
–   Khar Us Nuur National Park 
–   London interbank offered rate 
–   Ministry of Environment and Tourism 
–  micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises 
–   operation and maintenance 
–   project administration manual 
–  Petroglyphic Complexes of the Mongolian Altai UNESCO World Heritage Area 
–   project implementation unit 
–  public-private dialogue council 
–   rock art and nomadic culture center 
–   stakeholder communication strategy 
–   Tsenkher Cave 
–   Uvs Nuur Strictly Protected Area 
–   Uvs tourism complex 
–  wastewater treatment plant 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
CONTENTS 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
A. 
B. 
Project Readiness Activities 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Project Organization Structure 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions 
Key Assumptions 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan and Grant Proceeds 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve 
Fund Flow Diagram 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Financial Management Assessment 
Disbursement Arrangements for ADB and ADB-administered JFPR Funds 
Disbursement Arrangements for Counterpart Fund 
Accounting 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Advance Contracting 
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services 
Procurement Plan 
SAFEGUARDS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
Environment 
Involuntary Resettlement 
Indigenous Peoples 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Public Consultation, Participation, and Stakeholder Communication 
Prohibited Investment Activities 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
A. 
B. 
Poverty Reduction and Social Development 
Gender 
IX. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND 
COMMUNICATION 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
Monitoring 
Evaluation 
Reporting 
1 
8 
8 
9 
11 
11 
15 
16 
17 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
26 
29 
30 
31 
31 
33 
33 
33 
36 
42 
42 
44 
44 
45 
45 
46 
47 
47 
47 
54 
54 
57 
59 
60 
X. 
XI. 
XII. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
APPENDIXES 
 PROJECT OUTPUTS AND COMPONENTS 
61 
61 
62 
63 
 TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE LOAN-FINANCED CONSULTING SERVICES  71 
 TERMS OF REFERENCES FOR THE GRANT-FINANCED CONSULTING SERVICE 184 
 COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN PROCUREMENT 
 CONSULTATION AND PARTICIPATION PLAN 
 STAKEHOLDER COMMUNICATION STRATEGY 
 JAPAN FUND FOR POVERTY REDUCTION: GUIDANCE NOTES 
220 
223 
225 
229 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Project Administration Manual Purpose and Process 
1.  The  project  administration  manual  (PAM)  describes  the  essential  administrative  and 
management requirements to implement the project on time, within budget, and in accordance 
with the policies and procedures of the government and Asian Development Bank (ADB). The 
PAM should include references to all available templates and instructions either through linkages 
to relevant URLs or directly incorporated in the PAM. 
2.  The Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET), as the executing agency; MET’s Department 
of Tourism Policy Coordination (for the loan) and Department of Protected Areas Management 
(for the grant) as the implementing agencies are wholly responsible for the implementation of 
ADB  financed  projects, as  agreed  jointly  between  the  borrower  and  ADB,  and  in  accordance 
with  the  policies  and  procedures  of  the  government  and  ADB.  ADB  staff  is  responsible  for 
supporting  implementation  including  compliance  by  MET,  Department  of  Tourism  Policy 
Coordination,  and  Department  of  Protected  Areas  Management  of  their  obligations  and 
responsibilities for project implementation in accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures. 
3.  At loan negotiations, the borrower and ADB shall agree to the PAM and ensure consistency with 
the loan and grant agreements for the project. Such agreement shall be reflected in the minutes 
of the loan negotiations. In the event of any discrepancy or contradiction between the PAM and 
the loan and grant agreements, the provisions of the loan and grant agreements shall prevail. 
4.  After ADB Board approval of the project's report and recommendations of the President (RRP), 
changes in implementation arrangements are subject to agreement and approval pursuant to 
relevant government and ADB administrative procedures (including the Project Administration 
Instructions) and upon such approval, they will be subsequently incorporated in the PAM. 
I. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
The project will support the development of tourism in three aimags (provinces) of western 
1. 
Mongolia―a region of national priority for economic development―focused on inclusive benefits 
for  communities,  nature-based  solutions  to  protect  wilderness  and  heritage  values,  and  post 
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) recovery and resilience.1 The project will build the capacity of 
residents  and  a  small  but  growing  private  sector  for  community-based  tourism,  create  jobs 
through  the  establishment  of  tourist  streets  and  visitor  complexes,  and  strengthen  the 
management of five globally important protected areas and heritage sites through improved visitor 
and sanitation facilities. The designs are based on post-COVID-19 tourism recovery projections, 
sanitation measures aligned with health and border procedures, and building standards for green 
and  climate-resilient  infrastructure.  About  16,296  residents  are  expected  to  benefit  from  the 
project through tourism related skills and income. 
A.  Rationale 
Prior to the outbreak of COVID-19, tourism was the largest and fastest-growing sector of 
2. 
the global economy. Ecotourism, a major subsector, has comprised up to 20% of global tourism 
and is a key contributor to rural incomes and the financing of protected areas in many countries.2 
Mongolia  has  a  small  but  emerging  tourism  sector.  In  2019,  tourism  accounted  for  7.2%  of 
Mongolia’s gross domestic product (GDP) generating $989.2 million, 7.6% of total employment, 
and 88,700 jobs. International visitor arrivals in 2019 (577,300) increased by 6.4% compared with 
2018, and the tourism sector’s annual GDP growth (11.9%) significantly exceeded national GDP 
growth  (5.6%).3 By  2030,  tourism  was  forecast  to  comprise  11%  ($1.5  billion)  of  GDP,  provide 
95,000 jobs, and attract 1 million international arrivals annually. The global spread of COVID-19 in 
2020 resulted in national border closures in Mongolia, the decline–to almost zero–of international 
arrivals, and estimated losses in tourism revenue of more than $421 million.4 Long-term projections 
of  the  impact  of  COVID-19  on  Mongolia’s  tourism  sector  are  not  yet  available,  but  recovery 
scenarios  for  Asia  and  the  Pacific  suggest  that  a  return  to  pre-COVID-19  international  visitor 
numbers will only occur by about 2023 (footnote 4). 
3. 
Developing Mongolia’s tourism sector is a high national priority to diversify the economy and 
create jobs. As short-term emergency efforts to address the immediate impacts of COVID-19 are 
completed,  there  is  a  need  for  longer-term  projects  which  contribute  to  economic  revitalization 
combined  with  strengthening  resilience  to  the  risk  of  future  disease  outbreaks.  Mongolia  ranks 
moderately in the Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index (in 2019, Mongolia was ranked 93rd 
out of 140 countries evaluated).5 Existing challenges include low service standards, inadequate 
infrastructure,  and  a  short  tourism  season  due to  harsh  winters.  Government  plans  to  develop 
tourism focus on nature- and heritage-based tourism in protected areas, yet most of these sites are 
underfunded and located in remote regions of high poverty. Tourism, if inadequately managed, 
may result in negative ecological and cultural impacts, and provide few local benefits. Domestic 
tourism,  although  largely  undocumented,  is  increasing  rapidly  in  Mongolia  and  will  also  be  an 
important  component  of  post-COVID-19  economic  recovery. 6  To  address  these  issues,  the 
1   The  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  provided  technical  assistance  to  design  the  project.  ADB.  2021.  Technical 
Assistance to Mongolia for the Sustainable Tourism Development Project (Phase 2). Manila. 
2  Ecotourism is defined as “responsible travel to natural areas that conserves the environment, sustains the well-being 
of local people, and involves interpretation and education.” The International Ecotourism Society. 2015. 
3  World Travel and Tourism Council. 2020. Travel and Tourism Economic Impact 2020 Mongolia. London. 
4  United Nations World Tourism Organization. 2021. UNWTO Tourism Data Dashboard. 
5  World Economic Forum. 2019. The Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Report 2019. Geneva. 
6  M. Helble and A. Fink. 2020. Reviving Tourism amid the COVID-19 Pandemic. ADB Briefs No. 150: 1–13. Manila. 
2 
government is implementing the National Program on Tourism Development, 2016–2025, which 
aims to establish Mongolia as a global destination for nomadic culture.7 The program outlines a 
phased  approach  that  prioritizes  investments  in  visitor  facilities,  transport  and  sanitation 
infrastructure,  and  community-based  products  and  services.  Following  projects  initiated  in 
northern and central Mongolia, including support from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) (para. 
9), western Mongolia is prioritized by the government for tourism development 
Western  Mongolia  comprises  the  three  aimags  of  Bayan-Ulgii,  Khovd,  and  Uvs,  and 
4. 
borders  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  and  the  Russian  Federation.  Much  of  the  area  is 
characterized  by  extreme  remoteness  and  limited  economic  development.  It  also  supports  a 
unique cultural heritage―the richest and most well-preserved rock art (ancient images on rock) 
in northern Asia, the highest number of ethnic groups in Mongolia, and a network of protected 
areas  which  includes  two  World  Heritage  sites  and  four  Wetlands  of  International  Importance. 
Each aimag supports small but operational domestic airports, new roads linking with the national 
capital  (Ulaanbaatar),  and  international  border  crossings.  Poverty  rates  are  high  and  rural 
populations  depend  largely  on  subsistence  agriculture.  Visitor  numbers  are  small,  but  prior  to 
COVID-19 were increasing rapidly.8 Growing attractions include five locations with road access 
from the aimag centers and border crossings: Altai Tavan Bogd National Park (Bayan-Ulgii), Khar 
Us Nuur National Park (KUNNP) and Tsenkher Cave (TSC) (Khovd), and Khan Khukhii National 
Park (KKNP) and Uvs Nuur Basin Strictly Protected Area (UVSPA) (Uvs). These sites encompass 
over 2.1 million hectares (ha) of wilderness, biodiversity, and rock art.9 The early stage of tourism 
development  in  western  Mongolia  provides  a  timely  opportunity  to  support  sector  planning, 
livelihoods, and conservation. To achieve this will require a focus on four key areas, as follows. 
Limited  inclusive  planning  and  community  benefits.  Few  residents  in  western 
5. 
Mongolia are currently able to derive income from tourism.10 This is due to several linked factors. 
At the institutional level, a regional planning approach is required to promote priority destinations; 
develop travel routes that maximize benefits to communities; and define minimum standards for 
accommodation,  goods,  and  services.  Aimag  tourism  plans,  prepared  during  2015–2019, 
prioritize  community-based  tourism;  support  for  micro,  small,  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
(MSMEs); and capacity building but lack specific actions to support these. Tour camps present a 
potential  source  of  local  jobs,  yet  the  issuance  of  tour  camp  concessions  is  not  based  on 
7   Government of Mongolia. 2015. National Program on Tourism Development, 2016–2030. Ulaanbaatar. 
8  In 2020, the population of western Mongolia was 279,121. Youth (15–34 years old) comprised 32.9% (91,831) of the 
population versus a national mean of 30.0%, and households headed by women comprised 10.4% (29,029) versus 
a  national mean  of  7.7%.  The  poverty  rate  was  24.3%  (Bayan-Ulgii),  40.1%  (Khovd), and  29.6%  (Uvs)  versus  a 
national  mean  of  28.4%.  GDP  per  capita  was  $1,305  (Bayan-Ulgii),  $1,579  (Khovd),  and  $1,688  (Uvs)  versus a 
national  mean  of  $3,696.  During  2015–2019,  annual  tourist  numbers  to  western  Mongolia  increased  from  about 
21,595  to  101,825:  3,800  to  12,000  (Bayan-Ulgii),  11,000  to  52,522  (Khovd)  and  6,795  to  37,303  (Uvs).  Visitors 
comprised domestic (81%) and international (19%) tourists, the latter largely from Kazakhstan, the People’s Republic 
of China, and Russian Federation, via overland travel. National Statistical Office. 2021. www.1212.mn. Ulaanbaatar. 
9  Altai Tavan Bogd National Park (630,000 ha, designated in 1996) includes one World Heritage site, the Petroglyphic 
Complexes of the Mongolian Altai (11,300 ha, 2011). The KUNNP (850,272 ha, 1997) and  UVSPA (424,298 ha, 
1993)  are  Wetlands  of  International  Importance;  the  UVSPA  is  part  of  the  Uvs  Nuur  Basin  World  Heritage  Site 
(898,064 ha, 2003). The KKNP (221,598 ha, 2000) includes Khyargas Lake, a popular tourism destination. The TSC 
is an unprotected cave system with the oldest rock paintings in Mongolia. These sites are located in 13 soums, which 
in  2020 supported  113,106  residents  (40.5%  of  the  population  of  western  Mongolia)  and in  2019  received  about 
36,339 visitors (about 35.7% of total visitor numbers to western Mongolia). 
10  Tourism-related income includes guiding services, handicraft sales, food supply chains, and tour camp employment. 
3 
systematic  procedures  or  social  and  environmental  standards.11 Elsewhere  in  Mongolia,  these 
issues  have  favored  external  operators  (who  have  greater  access  to  finance  and  external 
markets),  provided  few  benefits  to  local  communities,  and  caused  environmental  damage. 
Communities also have inadequate access to credit and training to produce quality goods (e.g., 
handicrafts) or services (e.g., food supplies, guiding). These limitations are greater for women, 
who have fewer job and leadership opportunities despite higher educational standards, and have 
worsened because of COVID-19, which has disproportionately impacted rural communities.12 
Insufficient enabling infrastructure. There are few public facilities in western Mongolia 
6. 
to catalyze tourism. The aimag centers of Khovd and Uvs are the gateways by land and air for 
most visitors to the region, yet there are no visitor centers or other facilities to provide information, 
promote  local  goods  and  services,  and  highlight  the  region’s  tourism  values.  Protected  areas 
close  to  urban  and  rural  centers  (para.  4)  support  rising  visitor  numbers,  yet  public  access  is 
uncontrolled and there are few barrier gates, signs or car parks. This is contributing to seasonal 
congestion and damage to sensitive habitats and is impacting the visitor experience. 
Inadequate  sanitation  and  waste management.  There  are  no  organized  systems  for 
7. 
solid  waste  collection  and  sewage  treatment  for  protected  areas,  and  tour  camp  sanitation 
standards  are  low.  Public  toilets  are  mostly  unlined  pits,  and  sewage  seeps  into  the  soil  and 
waterbodies. The KKNP, KUNNP, and UVSPA support unique lake systems within closed river 
basins,  rendering  them  especially  vulnerable  to  disturbance,  and  some  lakes  already  exhibit 
seasonal eutrophication (algal blooms) due to nutrient inputs from unmanaged sewage and other 
land use. Poor sanitation poses health risks and is also a key factor in low visitor satisfaction. 
Tourists can be high-risk vectors for disease spread, especially to remote communities, and there 
is a need to establish health and sanitation standards for key tourism sites. Improved sanitation 
is a critical component for post-COVID-19 tourism recovery and strengthening the resilience of 
rural areas to the risk of future disease outbreaks.13 Solutions to address these issues need to 
include small, decentralized sanitation systems at tourism sites, tailored to local conditions and 
visitor numbers, and health and safety measures established at tour camps and public campsites. 
8. 
Inadequate management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas. The rock art 
of western Mongolia is a unique resource that, if managed sustainably, can provide jobs through 
guiding and the preservation of cultural heritage. Yet most sites are unmanaged and subject to 
increasing damage. The TSC is a key stop on visitor itineraries yet is unprotected, and some cave 
paintings  have  been  damaged  by  vandalism  or  theft.14 There  is  also  no  centralized  facility  in 
Mongolia to document and promote rock art. For protected areas, visitors are an important source 
of potential revenue, yet most sites lack ticket collection stations, campsites are poorly managed, 
and  staff  do  not  have  the  training  to  plan  for  and  manage  tourism  growth.  Government 
management  plans  exist  for  most  sites,  yet  they  focus  on  biodiversity  conservation  and  lack 
guidelines or targets for livelihoods, tourism, and sanitation. Site management also requires the 
assessment of natural hazards and climate change since western Mongolia is experiencing rising 
11 Western Mongolia  has  a small  and  undeveloped  private sector,  focused mainly  on  agriculture.  In  2020, (i)  4,803 
registered MSMEs were located in western Mongolia (5.5% of the national total), yet only 184 (7.8%) were involved 
in accommodation and/or food services; (ii) only 1.1%–2.4% of employed residents (1,486 women and 101 men) 
worked in accommodation and food services; and (iii) 45 tour camps (Bayan-Ulgii–15, Khovd–11, Uvs–19) with a 
total of 117 employees) were operating, compared with some locations elsewhere in Mongolia which support more 
than 80 tour camps in a single park. National Statistical Office. 2021. www.1212.mn. Ulaanbaatar. 
12 In 2020 over 58% of rural households in Mongolia were unable to generate income  due to lockdowns followed by 
rising food prices. World Bank. 2021. Monitoring COVID-19 Impacts on Households in Mongolia. Washington, DC. 
13 Goretti et al. 2021. Tourism in the Post-Pandemic World. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. 
14 E. Jacobson-Tepfer. 2006. The Rock Art of Mongolia. The Silk Road. 4 (1). pp. 5–13. 
4 
temperatures and increasing frequency and severity of storms and drought, which may threaten 
visitor safety and the integrity of tourism infrastructure.  
9. 
Government and donor efforts are addressing some of these issues. Cross-border tourism 
agreements have been established with neighboring countries to facilitate regional travel, and in 
2019  under  a  national  skills  program,  about  970  residents  in  western  Mongolia  received  free 
tourism training. Support for protected area management is being provided, especially by two civil 
society organizations (CSOs), The Nature Conservancy and World Wide Fund for Nature, and 
two development agencies, GIZ and KfW. For rock art, a digital inventory of archaeological values 
in  Bayan-Ulgii  aimag  has  been  developed,15 and  a  management  plan  for  the  TSC  has  been 
prepared. Support by ADB for western Mongolia that has benefited tourism includes the upgrade 
of  roads,  border  crossings,  health  facilities,  urban  infrastructure,  agriculture  value  chains,  and 
private sector development.16 At the national level, tourism feasibility studies, training in service 
standards,  and  small  grant  support  have  been  provided  by  the  United  Nations,  CSOs,  and 
development agencies. During 2015–2019, ADB led the development of the first grant and lending 
projects for tourism in two national parks in northern Mongolia. These projects, termed phase 1, 
resulted in new models for community-based tourism and established a basis to scale up ADB 
support for tourism in Mongolia.17 
10. 
Strategic  fit.  The  project  is  aligned  with  Mongolia’s  National  Program  on  Tourism 
Development, 2016–2025 (footnote 7) which prioritizes the development of western Mongolia. It 
supports  ADB’s  draft  country  partnership  strategy  for  Mongolia,  2021–2024  for  green 
development; is listed in the country operations business plan, 2021; and supports ADB’s Strategy 
2030 seven operational priorities for addressing poverty, gender equality, climate resilience and 
environmental  sustainability,  livable  cities,  rural  development,  governance,  and  regional 
cooperation and integration.18 The project has been designed in parallel with preparation of the 
ADB-supported Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation (CAREC) Tourism Strategy 2030, 
and its associated regional tourism investment framework, 2020–2025. Western Mongolia is part 
of the Altai priority cluster group, one of seven regions identified in the strategy for tourism support. 
The project is among the first tourism projects to be developed since approval of the strategy and 
responds to the need for improved visitor sanitation facilities in the Altai priority cluster group.19 
Lessons.  The  project  incorporates lessons from  ADB  support  under  phase 1 (footnote 
11. 
17)  and  projects  by  other  agencies.  These  experiences  highlight  the  need  for  a  multisector 
approach  that  addresses  the  linked  issues  of  tourism,  livelihoods,  waste,  and  conservation 
tailored  to  local  conditions;  green  and  climate-resilient  infrastructure  designs  that  incorporate 
growth projections and cost efficiency; decentralized sanitation solutions for remote sites; capacity 
building,  focused  especially  on  the  role  of  women  and  youth;  and  measures  that  address  the 
crosscutting issues of climate change and resilience to COVID-19. 
15 University of Oregon. 2009. Archaeology and Landscape in the Altai Mountains of Mongolia. 
16 ADB. 2021. Technical Assistance to Mongolia for Preparing the Aimags and Soums Green Regional Development 
Investment Program. Manila; ADB. 2019. Additional Financing: Regional Improvement of Border Services Project in 
Mongolia. Manila; ADB. 2019. Completion Report: Fostering Value-Added Activities in Western Mongolia.  Manila; 
and ADB. 2020. Western Regional Road Corridor Investment Program-Tranche 2. Manila. 
17 ADB. 2015. Integrated Livelihoods Improvement and Sustainable Tourism in Khuvsgul Lake National Park Project. 
Manila; and ADB. 2019. Mongolia: Sustainable Tourism Development Project. Manila. Outputs included the design 
of community revolving funds (CRFs), decentralized toilet systems, and improved park zoning. 
18 ADB. Forthcoming. Country Partnership  Strategy: Mongolia, 2021–2024. Manila; ADB. 2019.  Country Operations 
Business Plan: Mongolia, 2021. Manila; and ADB. 2018. Strategy 2030: Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient, 
and Sustainable Asia and the Pacific. Manila. 
19 ADB. 2020. CAREC Tourism Strategy 2030. Manila. CAREC is a partnership of 11 countries working to promote 
regional development. The strategy aims to promote sustainable, safe, and inclusive tourism development. 
5 
B. 
Impact and Outcome 
12. 
The  project  is  aligned  with  the  following  impact:  sustainable  tourism  development  in 
Mongolia  improved  and  diversified  (footnote  7).  The  project  will  have  the  following  outcome: 
sustainability and inclusiveness of tourism in western Mongolia increased.20 
C.  Outputs 
Output 1: Inclusive planning and capacity for community-based tourism enhanced. 
13. 
This output will strengthen the institutional framework for tourism and increase the number of local 
beneficiaries from tourism. The project will (i) prepare the first tourism master plan for western 
Mongolia, which will define limits for tourism development based on stakeholder consensus and 
growth projections, travel routes which maximize benefits for communities, and actions to support 
post-COVID-19 sector recovery; (ii) strengthen the three aimag tourism plans to establish targets 
for  livelihoods,  conservation,  and  sanitation  aligned  with  parallel  ADB  projects  on  health  and 
border procedures; (iii) establish the first tour camp concession manual and certification program 
for  western  Mongolia  to  embed  social  and  gender  targets  and  environmental  standards  in 
commercial  operations,  strengthen  links  with  local  goods  and  services,  and  provide  a  stable 
business framework for about 45 tour camps with 117 employees; (iv) construct two tourist streets 
in the Khovd and Uvs Aimag centers and nine women-led markets, to showcase and sell local 
products; and (v) implement a pilot tourism development program for communities and MSMEs, 
comprising  vocational  training,  a  community  revolving  fund  (CRF),  youth  incubator,  and  the 
establishment of about 13 community-based organizations (CBOs).21 About 8,162 residents (50% 
women and 30% youth) will benefit from tourism related businesses and value chains. 
14. 
Output  2:  Enabling  infrastructure  constructed.  This  output  will  (i)  construct  the  first 
tourism center in western Mongolia—the Uvs tourism complex (UVTC) in Uvs Aimag; (ii) establish 
supporting infrastructure for the UVTC, including car parking and extension of the aimag power 
line  to  the  site;  (iii)  establish  traffic  management  plans,  safety  signs,  and  barrier  gates,  and 
upgrade 12 small car parks for a total capacity of 240 vehicles at five protected areas and cultural 
heritage  sites  to  control  public  access  and  halt  off-road  vehicle  damage;  and  (iv)  develop 
institutional  arrangements  for  operation  and  maintenance  (O&M)  of  the  project  facilities.  The 
UVTC will help catalyze tourism development for western Mongolia and will have an operational 
mandate  focused  on  education,  heritage,  and  nature.  It  will  prioritize  local  employment  and 
community goods and services and work closely with the community beneficiaries and MSMEs 
under output 1 for tourism planning. The designs apply a best practice green standard for water 
and energy efficiency, low-carbon emissions, and the use of cost-effective local materials.22  
15. 
Output 3: Sanitation and waste management improved. This output will (i) facilitate the 
installation of about 60 low-cost and gender-sensitive toilet systems at tour  camps, campsites, 
and project-funded car parks at five protected areas and cultural heritage sites. The project will 
replicate  successful  JFPR-funded toilet  designs  and O&M  procedures  from  phase  1,  including 
20 The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1. 
21 The pilot tourism development program will focus initially on rural communities in five protected areas and cultural 
heritage sites (para. 4) and be developed in partnership with aimag youth employment centers, regional universities, 
and tour camp operators. The revolving fund will apply a successful design piloted with previous JFPR support and 
will be the first such fund for community-based tourism in western Mongolia. The youth incubator will comprise (i) 
training venues for youth in two tourism complexes (outputs 2 and 4) as safe learning spaces to foster innovation 
and entrepreneurship, and (ii) tourism-related training and links with local enterprises to develop tourism goods and 
services. The CBOs will help implement the program and coordinate community participation. 
22 The infrastructure designs apply the Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies standard. 
6 
CBO-led management of the campsites and toilets, and sustainable financing from campsite fees; 
(ii)  establish  waste  disposal  procedures  for  the  project  facilities,  including  safe  transport  and 
treatment  at  rural  and  urban  wastewater  treatment  plants  and  landfills  to  be  upgraded  under 
ADB’s Aimags and Soums Green Regional Investment Development Program (ASDIP) (footnote 
16);  and  (iii)  implement  a  water,  sanitation,  and  hygiene  (WASH)  program.  This  will  establish 
sanitation, health, and safety standards and procedures for the project communities and facilities 
as  well  as  for  tour  camps.  The  WASH  program  will  be  planned  with  aimag  health  and  border 
agencies and will be integrated in the aimag tourism plans (output 1) and aligned with guidelines 
of  the  World  Health  Organization  for  infection  prevention  and  control.23 These  measures  will 
strengthen  post-COVID-19  resilience for  over  16,296 residents  and  36,000  visitors  per  year to 
these protected areas. 
Output 4: Management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened. 
16. 
This output will (i) construct the first rock art and nomadic culture center in Mongolia, including a 
digital museum, and will be in Khovd aimag. It will include high-quality two- and three-dimensional 
virtual displays of the rock art of the TSC and other sites, establish a digital inventory for rock art, 
and  develop  an  online  platform  to  promote  digital  tourism  for  cultural  heritage.24 The  center, 
museum, and access to the TSC will be managed under an integrated approach including O&M, 
entry  fees,  and  guided  visits  to  and  protection  of  the  TSC;  (ii)  establish  at  least  35  small 
management  facilities  at  five  protected  areas  and  cultural  heritage  sites,  comprising  public 
campsites, information centers, public cooking cabins, bird watching towers, ranger stations, and 
fee collection stations to protect habitats and improve facilities in locations subject to high visitor 
use; (iii) strengthen site management plans to integrate O&M procedures for the project facilities; 
and (iv) train about 120 residents and 12 local agencies to implement the revised site plans. The 
project facilities will be operated and maintained by about 13 CBOs in coordination with the park 
administrations, generating about 176 jobs (40% of these for women). Overall, these measures 
will help strengthen the management of five globally important protected areas. 
Key  features  and  innovation.  ADB  has  become  a  lead  development  partner  for 
17. 
Mongolia’s emerging tourism sector. The project is the first tourism project to be developed since 
the COVID-19 pandemic and only the second loan-funded tourism project for Mongolia, with both 
funded by ADB. The multisector approach developed under phase 1 has been applied and scaled 
up  to  include  three  aimags,  rock  art  heritage,  and  a  focus  on  post-COVID-19  recovery  and 
resilience. Project features include (i) replication of selected components from phase 1, benefiting 
from tested methods and lessons learned;25 (ii) initiatives led by women and youth; (iii) private 
sector participation; (iv) application of a green building standard for energy and water efficiency; 
(v) use of high-level technology to establish a digital museum; and (vi) synergy with other projects 
by  ADB,  CSOs,  and  development  partners.26 The  designs  support  the  strategic  pillars  of  the 
CAREC  Tourism  Strategy  2030  (footnote  19)  for  improving  tourism  infrastructure;  sanitation; 
23 World Health Organization. 2020. Infection prevention and control guidance (COVID-19). 
24 To supplement the loan financing and scale up the design and benefits of the digital museum, additional funding of 
$0.65 million is being sought from the High-Level Technology Fund (financing partner: the Government of Japan). 
25 The components on revolving funds, CBOs, and toilet designs (outputs 1 and 3) are applied from phase 1. Lessons 
from phase 1 are described in M. R. Bezuijen. 2019. Blue skies and green steppe – developing sustainable tourism 
in Mongolia. ADB Blog; and ADB. 2020. Building the Climate Change Resilience of Mongolia’s Blue Pearl. Manila. 
26 Design synergy with the ASDIP (footnote 16) comprises: integration of the CRF, youth incubator, and training (output 
1) with an ASDIP agribusiness fund and training centers; and waste collection for the project facilities linked with  -
ASDIP-supported landfills. Development coordination was established during project preparation with GIZ, KfW, The 
Nature Conservancy, United Nations Development Programme, and WWF, who are implementing projects in western 
Mongolia, and project components were refined to maximize synergy. Dialogue will continue for implementation. 
7 
environmental  protection;  skills  development;  and  crosscutting  support  for  health,  safety,  and 
digital technology, and are consistent with best practice principles for sustainable tourism.27 
Knowledge sharing. The project will contribute lessons on the integration of livelihoods, 
18. 
tourism, and conservation in the cold conditions of central Asia, and will build on ADB lessons 
from  phase  1  (footnote  17).  Measures  to  disseminate  project  lessons  are  described  in  the 
stakeholder communication strategy in the project administration manual (PAM) and will include 
project presentations at the annual meetings of the CAREC tourism working group.28 
The  project  components  by  output  and  aimag  are  summarized  in  Table  1.  The  project 
19. 
location map is presented in Figure 1. The details of each output and components are summarized 
in Appendix 1. 
Table 1: Project Components by Outputs and Aimags 
No. 
Output / Component 
Regional  Bayan-
Ulgii 
Khovd Uvs  Loan / Grant 
Output 1: Inclusive planning and capacity for community-based tourism enhanced 
1.1 
1.1.1 Regional tourism master plan – western Mongolia 
Institutional framework 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
(Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, Uvs Aimags) 
1.1.2 Aimag tourism plans (Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, Uvs)  
1.1.3 Tourism concession manual 
1.1.4 Eco-certification program for tour camps 
1.2 Destination management and promotion 
1.2.1 Community-based organizations 
1.2.2 Tourist streets in two Aimag centers 
1.3 Pilot tourism development program 
1.3.1 Community revolving fund 
1.3.2 Women-led tourist markets 
1.3.3 Youth-led initiatives 
1.3.4 Vocational training 
Output 2: Enabling infrastructure constructed 
2.1 Tourism complex and supporting infrastructure 
2.1.1 Uvs tourism complex 
2.2 Traffic management and safety at key tourism sites 
2.2.1 Establish access roads and car parks for 2 
tourism complexes; and improve traffic 
management at 5 protected areas 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Loan – UVTC, 
RANCC; Grant – 
protected areas 
Output 3: Sanitation and waste management improved 
3.1 Sanitation and wastewater management 
3.1  Water, sanitation, and hygiene program 
3.2  Sanitation systems for tourist camps  
3.3  Sanitation systems for public places 
3.4  Wastewater collection and treatment 
Output 4: Management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened 
4.1  Rock art and nomadic culture center 
4.2  Rock  art  Digital  Museum  –  to  be  housed  at 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
RANCC 
4.3  Site protection and public access 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Grant 
27 World Tourism Organization. 2004. Indicators of Sustainable Development for Tourism Destinations. Madrid; Leung 
et al. 2018. Tourism and visitor management in protected areas. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN; and International Council 
on Monuments and Sites. 1999. International Cultural Tourism Charter. Mexico. 
28 Project Administration Manual (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
Loan 
Loan 
Loan 
Loan 
Loan 
Loan 
Grant 
Loan 
Grant 
Grant 
Loan 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
Loan 
Loan 
Loan 
8 
No. 
Output / Component 
Regional  Bayan-
Ulgii 
√ 
4.4  Site management plans 
4.5  Capacity building 
√ 
RANCC = rock art and nomadic culture center, UVTC = Uvs tourism complex. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Khovd Uvs  Loan / Grant 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Grant 
Loan and Grant  
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
A. 
Project Readiness Activities 
Indicative Activities 
Advance contracting actions 
Loan and grant negotiations 
ADB Board approval 
Loan and grant signing 
Government legal opinion provided 
Establishment of project 
implementation arrangements 
Loan and grant effectiveness 
2021 
Q1 
Q4 
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11 
Q3 
Q2 
Responsibility 
12 
ADB, MOF, MET 
ADB, MOF, MET 
ADB 
ADB, MOF 
MOJ, MOF 
MET, DPAM, DTPC 
ADB, MOF, MOJ 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  DPAM  =  Department  of  Protected  Areas  Management,  DTPC  =  Department  of 
Tourism Policy Coordination, MET = Ministry of Environment and Tourism, MOF = Ministry of Finance, MOJ = Ministry 
of Justice, Q = quarter. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
B. 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
9 
Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q21.1.1Recruit ecotourism firm by Q1 20231.1.2Prepare regional tourism master plan by Q4 20231.1.3Reviseaimagtourismplanswithtargetsforlivelihoods,conservation,sanitation,riskmanagementmeasures,and project mechanisms by Q2 20241.1.4Preparetourismconcessionmanualsandeco-certification program by Q4 20231.1.5Ensuretourcampsatprojectsitescomplywithtourismconcession manuals by Q4 20261.2.1Establishcommunity-basedorganizationsineachproject site by Q4 20231.2.2Recruit detailed engineering and construction supervision firmsfortourismfacilitiesinKhovdandUvsaimagsbyQ1 20231.2.3CompletedetailedEIAanddetaileddesignsandawardthe contracts by Q1 20241.2.4Completeworksfortouriststreetsandwomen-ledmarkets by Q3 20261.3.1Establishthreecommunityrevolvingfundcommittees(one per aimag) by Q2 20221.3.2DesignandimplementcommunityrevolvingfundsbyQ420271.3.3Design,implement,andmonitorpilottourismdevelopment program by Q4 20272.1.1CompletedetailedEIAanddetaileddesignsandawardthe contracts by Q1 20242.1.2Prepare business management plan and institutional arrangements for O&M of UVTC by Q4 20252.1.3UVTC constructed (including supporting facilities) by Q3 20262.1.4Make assets operational by Q4 20262.2.1 For carparks and traffic management plans in 5 sites (ATBNP, KKNP, KUNNP, TSC, UVSPA), complete detailed designs and construction by Q4 20252.2.2Make assets operational by Q4 20261.3 Pilot tourism development program – improve local competitiveness to benefit from tourism2.1 Tourism complex and supporting infrastructure2.2 Traffic management and safety at key tourism sitesOutput 2: Enabling infrastructure  constructed1.1 Institutional framework1.2 Destination management and promotion202620272028Output 1: Inclusive planning and capacity for local tourism businesses enhancedActivity2022202320242025 
10 
EIA = environmental impact assessment, O&M = operation and maintenance, PIU = project implementation unit, Q = quarter, RANCC = rock art and nomadic culture center, 
UVTC = Uvs Tourism Complex. 
Source: Asian Development Bank.
Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q23.1Design and implement water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) program by Q4 20273.2Recruit detailed engineering and construction supervision firmforsmallfacilitiesinBayan-Ulgii,KhovdandUvsaimags by Q2 20233.3Complete detailed engineering designs and award the contracts for small facilities in each project site by Q1 20243.4Complete sanitation systems for public places by Q3 20263.5Complete waste collection and treatment systems and O&M procedures by Q3 20264.1Recruit detailed IT system design and establishment supervision for Digital Museum in RANCC by Q2 20244.2CompletedetailedEIAanddetaileddesignsandawardthe contracts by Q1 20254.3Rock art digital museum established by Q4 20254.4Rock art and nomadic culture center (RANCC) constructed by Q3 20264.5Establish business management plan and institutional arrangements for O&M of RANCC by Q4 20254.6Conduct assessment of protected area management capacity for 5 sites (ATBNP, KKNP, KUNNP, TSC, UVSPA) using METT by Q1 2023.4.7Complete revision of 2 site management plans (ATBNP, TSC) by Q4 20254.8Conduct training training for O&M of the project facilities by Q4 20271Recruit PIU staff and establish PIU office2Prepare annual work plans3Quarterly project progress reports 4Semi-annual enviromental monitoring reports5Semi-annual social monitoring reports6Inception / Annual / Midterm / Final Review Missions7Project annual financial audit reports8Project completion reportLoan effectivenessWinter seasonMid-term reviewProject completion Loan closing Management activities - reporting and monitoringOutput 3: Sanitation and waste management improvedOutput 4: Management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened202620272028Activity2022202320242025 
11 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A. 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
The Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET) is the executing agency responsible for 
20. 
overall project implementation. MET’s Department of Tourism Policy Coordination (DTPC) will be 
the implementing agency for the loan project. MET’s Department of Protected Areas Management 
(DPAM) will be the implementing agency for the grant project. Guidance and sector coordination 
will be through a national project steering committee (PSC). The PSC will be chaired by the State 
Secretary of MET and will meet at least twice a year during project implementation. The PSC will 
be represented at the daily level by a technical working group (TWG) of technical officers from 
each  PSC  agency.  The  TWG  will  assist  the  implementing  agencies  for  regular  coordination 
between line agencies. 
21. 
A project implementation unit (PIU) will be established, with one central office at MET in 
Ulaanbaatar  and  three  field  offices  (one  per  aimag).  The  field  offices  will  be  within  the  aimag 
government offices of Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, and Uvs aimags, for effective project implementation. 
The  PIU  will  be  responsible  for  daily  project  management,  including  accounting,  procurement, 
training, monitoring, and reporting. The PIU will be co-chaired by the Director General of DTPC 
and the Director General of DPAM. The executing and implementing agencies lack the personnel 
and resources needed to fully implement the project, and the PIU staff will comprise consultants 
recruited for the administrative and technical tasks. The PIU positions and terms of reference are 
in Appendix 2. 
Once the PIU structure is approved by Ministry of Finance (MOF), MET will finalize and 
22. 
acquire  no-objection  from  ADB  on  the  terms  of  reference  (TOR)  of  the  PIU  staff,  and  publicly 
announce the vacancies through local newspapers as well MET website. Project implementation 
arrangements,  including  the  establishment  of  the  PSC,  selection,  and  hiring  of  the  PIU  staff, 
reporting by the PIU, and other relevant arrangements, will comply with Mongolia’s Regulation on 
Utilization  of  Proceeds  of  Foreign  Loans  of  the  Government;  Implementation,  Administration, 
Financing,  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  of  Projects  and  Programs  Funded  by  Such  Proceeds, 
approved under Resolution No. 4 (dated 11 January 2021) of the Minister of Finance and other 
relevant regulations approved and amended from time to time, provided they do not conflict with 
the  provisions  of  the  loan  and  grant  agreements,  this  project  administration  manual  or  ADB 
policies. The executing agency will establish and supervise the PIU in consultation with MOF. The 
PIU  will  be  under  the  MET,  supervised  by  the  project  director.  Project  implementation 
arrangement, reporting, and recruitment processes will be in line with the MOF Regulation No. 4. 
23. 
The  MET  will  assume  overall  responsibility  for  the  project  implementation,  including 
authorization  of  the  PIU  staff  contracts;  with  contracting  of  the  PIU  procurement  and  financial 
specialists to be undertaken by MOF upon request by MET. The Director Generals of DPAM and 
DTPC will together be responsible for the annual review of PIU staff performance, overall project 
reporting,  and/or  other  management  issues,  and  will  coordinate  closely  throughout  project 
implementation. Roles and responsibilities of the project agencies are summarized in Table 2. 
12 
Organization 
Executing agency 
Ministry of 
Environment and 
Tourism (MET) 
Table 2: Project Implementation Organizations 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
➢  Provide the main contact point for ADB 
➢  Provide  overall  guidance,  coordination,  supervision,  and  management  for 
project preparation, and implementation 
➢  Responsible for coordinating project implementation activities 
➢  Guidance on strategic issues and interagency coordination 
➢  Assist  MOF  to  open  and  co-manage  the  project  advance  accounts,  and 
liquidation, and replenishment of advances made 
➢  Review,  approve,  co-sign  (with  MOF)  and  submit  loan  and  grant  withdrawal 
applications to ADB 
➢  Release loan proceeds 
➢  Prepare and monitor repayment plan of ADB loan and repayment works 
➢  Responsible for recruitment and coordination of PIU 
➢  Ensure all PIU tasks are completed in a timely and efficient manner 
➢  Review PIU progress reports 
➢  Submit progress reports to ADB and MOF 
➢  Ensure PIU uploads project financial statements and progress reports to MOF’s 
ODA MIS 
➢  Ensure  procurement,  including  advance  procurement  actions  related  to  PIU 
recruitment is undertaken in accordance with government laws and regulations 
and ADB policies 
➢  Develop and submit annual project budget to MOF in line with the Budget Law 
of Mongolia, including relevant cofinancing needed during implementation 
➢  Facilitate auditing of project accounts 
➢  Chair the PSC (chair: MET State Secretary) 
➢  Conduct all tasks in compliance with MOF Resolution No. 4 and other domestic 
laws and regulations that are approved and amended from time to time, provided 
they do not conflict with the provisions of the  loan and grant agreements, this 
project administration manual or ADB policies 
➢  Closely coordinate with other government agencies and ADB to timely resolve 
any issues, expedite the procurement process, ensure adequate budgetary and 
staff resources are allocated as needed, and complete the project in the target 
date 
➢  Designate  staff  to  work  closely  with  the  PIU,  the  PSC,  and  bid  evaluation 
committees and consultant selection committees to be established 
Project Steering 
Committee (PSC): 
Chaired by State 
Secretary of MET. 
Members include 
MOF, MET DTPC, 
and MET DPAM, 
Aimag Governments 
of Khovd, Uvs and 
Bayan-Ulgii, MCUD, 
MRT, and National 
Center of Cultural 
Heritage, 
nongovernment 
CSOs e.g., TNC, 
WWF 
Implementing 
agency for the loan 
project: MET 
Department of 
➢  Provide policy guidance and advice on project implementation 
➢  Provide oversight and monitoring of project activities to ensure compliance with 
ADB  requirements  and  national 
for 
anticorruption,  including  the  risk  mitigation  measures  listed  in  the  financial 
management action plan in this PAM, and the measures listed in the project Risk 
Assessment and Risk Management Plan 
laws  and  regulations,  especially 
➢  Facilitate interagency coordination and coordinate with other involved parties 
➢  Appoint technical working group 
➢  Resolve institutional problems affecting project preparation and implementation 
at the concerned level 
➢  Review project progress 
➢  Endorse procurement and implementation plans 
➢  Ensure timely inter-ministerial coordination and support for the project, including 
information  exchange,  and  facilitation  of  meetings  and  approvals,  as  needed; 
and 
➢  Meet at least semiannually 
➢  On  behalf  of  MET,  responsible  for:  (i)  co-signing  (with  MOF)  of  withdrawal 
applications to ADB; (ii) co-signing (with PIU coordinator) of withdrawals from 
the advance accounts to the local currency accounts, and, for expenditures from 
(iii)  overall  project  planning  and 
the 
local  currency  accounts;  and 
13 
Tourism Policy 
Coordination (DTPC) 
implementation; (iv) consolidation of the technical and financial project progress 
reports  from  both  implementing  agencies  and  timely  submission  to  the  MET 
Minister’s Office, MOF, and ADB; and (v) facilitation of project auditing 
➢  Joint responsibility with DPAM for coordination of PIU 
➢  Closely work together with DPAM in the joint project tasks, including: review of 
technical  and  financial  progress  reports  prepared  by  PIU;  implementation  of 
project EMP, SDAP, and GAP, CPP, and SCS; coordination of PIU 
➢  Provide  tourism  policy  guidance  for  Aimag  governments  (Khovd,  Uvs,  and 
Bayan-Ulgii)  and  project  related  protected  areas,  including  ATBNP,  KUNNP, 
TSC, UVSPA, KKNP 
➢  Ensure  the  implementation  of  relevant  regulation  of  Resolution  No.  4  of  the 
MOF, and relevant regulations that are approved and amended from time to time 
➢  Designate  staff  to  work  closely  with  the  PIU,  the  PSC,  and  bid  evaluation 
committees and consultant selection committees to be established 
➢  Joint responsibility with DTPC for coordination of PIU 
➢  Closely work together with DTPC in the joint project tasks, including: review of 
technical and financial progress reports prepared by PIU 
➢  Responsible for the implementation of JFPR grant project 
➢  Provide guidance to PAAOs, to work with the PIU, facilitate project stakeholder 
activities  e.g.,  meetings,  and  trainings  with  soum  governments,  communities, 
and tour operators 
➢  Conduct all tasks in close consultation, and joint agreement, with DTPC 
➢  Ensure  the  implementation  of  relevant  regulation  of  Resolution  No.  4  of  the 
MOF, and relevant regulations that are approved and amended from time to time 
➢  Designate  staff  to  work  closely  with  the  PIU,  the  PSC,  and  bid  evaluation 
Implementing 
agency for the grant 
project: MET 
Department of 
Protected Areas 
Management 
(DPAM) 
Technical Working 
Group 
committees and consultant selection committees to be established 
➢  Comprises  MET,  DPAM,  and  DTPC  Director  Generals, 
representatives from each ministry within the PSC and CSOs 
technical 
Project 
Implementation 
Unit (PIU) 
➢  Represents  the  PSC  to  assist  the  executing  and  implementing  agencies  with 
regular technical support,  as needed (e.g. for information  exchange and/or to 
facilitate meetings) 
➢  Meets regularly 
➢  All  positions  will  be  based  at  the  PIU  office  in  Ulaanbaatar  and  most  will  be 
subject to regular field travel; except for the 3 PIU supervision officers, which will 
be based in each aimag. On behalf of implementing agencies, the PIU will be 
responsible for overall coordination and supervision of project implementation, 
including the following tasks: 
(i)  Perform direct project management and implementation activities; 
(ii)  Utilize  MOF’s  ODA  MIS  for  financial  and  project  management  and 
requests/approvals of value added taxes and duties exemptions; 
(iii)  Ensure  the  implementation  of  MOF  Resolution  No.  4,  and  relevant 
regulations  that  are  approved  and  amended  from  time  to  time,  provided 
they do not conflict with the provisions of the loan and grant agreements, 
this project administration manual or ADB policies; 
(iv)   Prepare annual work programs and budgets; 
(v)  Guide procurement activities, including the preparation, and submission of 
bidding  documents,  bid  evaluation  reports,  and  other  necessary 
documents to ADB for necessary approval; 
(vi)  Consolidate  and  submit  withdrawal  applications  to  ADB  through  the 
executing agency; 
(vii)  Prepare annual contract award and disbursement projections; 
(viii)  Consolidate and submit the updated procurement plan to ADB for approval 
during project implementation; 
(ix)  Organize  training  and  monitoring  and  evaluation,  including  project 
performance management system; 
14 
(x) 
Implement  the  project  EMP,  in  compliance  with  domestic  laws  and 
regulations and ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009); 
Implement the social development action plan and gender action plan; 
(xi) 
(xii)  Monitor project progress and impact; and 
(xiii)  Prepare and submit (a) semiannual progress reports, midterm report, and 
project  completion  report;  (b)  semiannual  environmental  and  social 
monitoring reports; (c) annual statement of utilization of project funds; and 
(d) audited project financial statements to ADB and the government. 
Bayan-Ulgii, 
Khovd, and Uvs 
Aimag 
governments 
➢  Governors will enter into an annual contract with the executing agency and take 
necessary actions within their rights to implement the necessary clauses set out 
in the annual contract, including timely approval of their budget/activities by their 
citizen representative khural 
➢  Facilitate aimag- and soum level project support, including project workshops 
➢  Assign at least one soum officer per soum in each project site to attend meetings 
and trainings 
➢  Soum officers to ensure soum and aimag governments are updated on project 
progress 
➢  The aimag governors are co-chairs of the technical working group that will guide 
project implementation 
➢  Undertake regular coordination with the PIU 
➢  Participate in central- and aimag level meetings to define O&M arrangements 
and  financing  for  the  project  facilities,  including  the  allocation  of  government 
funds for O&M 
➢  Provides  timely  information  and  clarification  on  any  local  land  issues  and 
permits, as needed 
➢  Participates as members of the PSC 
➢  Reviews PIU progress reports 
➢  Aimag and soum environment, health, and safety inspectors will inspect project 
facilities and issue completion certificates 
➢  Coordinate with existing donor efforts in western Mongolia, including programs 
of the GIZ, KfW, TNC, and WWF 
➢  Collaborate with other relevant tourism and conservation programs in Mongolia 
Asian Development 
Bank (ADB) 
including by UNDP 
➢  Oversee  project  administration  and  timely  execution  of  the  loan  and  grant 
agreements by the executing and implementing agencies 
➢  Support MOF and MET to provide training related to ADB’s policies, including 
procurement guidelines, financial management, loan disbursement, safeguards, 
and preparation of progress reports 
➢  Review  and/or  approve  procurement  actions  for  ADB  financed  procurement 
packages 
➢  Process withdrawal applications and release loan and grant funds 
➢  Review project compliance and targets against the DMF, EMP, SDAP, and GAP 
➢  Monitor project progress and conducts review missions 
➢  Serve as observer to the Project Steering Committee 
➢  Review annual audit reports and follow up on audit recommendations 
➢  Regularly update the project performance review reports with the assistance of 
the executing and implementing agencies 
➢  Regularly update the project information documents for public disclosure at ADB 
website, including safeguard documents 
➢  Monitor implementation of ADB’s anticorruption policies 
Other Domestic Agencies 
General Agency for 
Specialized 
Inspection –
environment, health, 
and safety 
inspectors 
Development 
partners, CSOs, and 
other donors 
15 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ATBNP = Altai Tavan Bogd National Park, CSO = civil society organization, DPAM 
=  Department  of  Protected  Areas Management,  CPP  =  consultation  and  participation plan,  DTPC  =  Department  of 
Tourism Policy Coordination, EMP = environmental management plan, GAP = gender action plan, GIZ = Gesellschaft 
für Internationale Zusammenarbeit, JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction, KfW = Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau, 
KKNP = Khan Khukhii National Park, KUNNP = Khar Us Nuur National Park, MCUD = Ministry of Construction and 
Urban Development, MET = Ministry of Environment and Tourism, MOF = Ministry of Finance, MRT = Ministry of Road 
and  Transport  Development,  O&M  =  operation  and  maintenance,  ODA  MIS  =  official  development  assistance 
management information system, PAAO = protected area administration office, PCMA = Petroglyphic Complexes of 
the  Mongolian  Altai  UNESCO  World  Heritage  Area,  PIU  =  project  implementation  unit,  PSC  =  Project  Steering 
Committee, SCS = stakeholder communication strategy, SDAP = social development gender action plan, TNC = The 
Nature Conservancy, TSC = Tsenkher Cave, UNDP = United Nations Development Programme, UVSPA = Uvs Nuur 
Strictly Protected Area, WWF = World Wildlife Fund. 
a In compliance with Regulation No. 4 of Mongolia’s Ministry of Finance, the project procurement will be coordinated by 
a qualified PIU procurement specialist. Mongolia’s Department for Procurement will not be involved in the project 
procurement as the department’s mandate is for state-financed (not donor-funded) projects. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
B. 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Implementing Agency 1 
MET Department of Tourism 
Policy Coordination (DTPC) 
Implementing Agency 2 
MET Department of 
Protected Areas 
Management (DPAM) 
Asian Development Bank 
Environment, Natural 
Resources, and Agriculture 
Division of the East Asia 
Department 
Mission Leader 
Ms. Bayasgalan S. 
Director General 
Telephone (W): +976-51-263385 
Telephone (M): +976-89111189 
E-mail address: bayasgalan.saranjav@gmail.com 
Ms. Oyunshur Z. 
Officer 
Telephone (W): +976-51-264848 
Telephone (M): +976-99278558 
E-mail: oyunshur.tourism@gmail.com 
Mr. Batmunkh, D 
Director General 
Telephone (W): +976-91119568 
E-mail: batmunkh4498@gmail.com 
Mr. Boldbaatar 
Senior Officer 
Telephone (W): +976-51-267283 
E-mail: boldbaatar.tr@gmail.com 
Mr. Thomas Panella 
Director, EAER 
Telephone (W): +63-2-6326769 
Fax (W): +63-2-6362444 
E-mail address: tpanella@adb.org 
Mr. Mark R. Bezuijen 
Principal Environment Specialist / Mission Leader, EAER 
Telephone (W): +63-2-6321519 
Fax (W): +63-2-6362444 
E-mail address: mbezuijen@adb.org 
16 
C. 
Project Organization Structure 
*including Aimag coordinators. 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  CSO  =  civil  society  organizations,  DPAM  =  Department  of  Protected  Areas 
Management, DTPC = Department of Tourism Policy Coordination, JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction, MCUD 
= Ministry of Construction and Urban Development, MET = Ministry of Environment and Tourism, MOF = Ministry of 
Finance, MRT = Ministry of Road and Transport Development, PIU = project implementation unit, TNC = The Nature 
Conservancy, WWF = World Wildlife Fund Mongolia. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Asian Development BankSoum GovernmentsSoum government staff and/or working groupsProject Implementation Unit*(Co-chaired by DTPC and DPAM)Ministry of Finance (MOF)Aimag Governments of Khovd, Uvs and Bayan-Ulgii Project Steering Committee1. Chair: State Secretary, MET2. Members: MOF, Aimag Governments of Khovd, Uvs And Bayan-Ulgii, MCUD, MRT, National Center Of Cultural Heritage, DTPC, DPAM, Non-government CSOs E.g., TNC, WWF  Secretary: PIU Project CoordinatorObservers: ADB, Embassy of Japan, CSOsExecuting AgencyMinistry of Environment and Tourism (MET)Implementing AgenciesDepartment of Tourism Policy Coordination (Loan)Department of Protected Areas Management (JFPR Grant) Project Implementation Consultants Coordination and/or administrationReportingLoan Agreement and Grant AgreementTechnical Working GroupConsultationPolicy guidanceAimag Protected Area Management Offices 
17 
IV. 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
24. 
The project is estimated to cost $32.30 million, including taxes and duties of $2.8 million. 
The major expenditure item is works, including two tourism complexes, two tourist streets, and 
small facilities within, and near five protected areas. 
25. 
The government has requested a regular loan of $30.0 million from ADB’s ordinary capital 
resources to help finance the project. The regular loan will have a 25-year term, including a grace 
period  of  six  years;  an  annual  interest  rate  determined  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  London 
interbank  offered rate (LIBOR)-based  lending facility;  a  commitment charge  of  0.15%  per  year 
(the  interest  and  other  charges  during  implementation  to  be  capitalized  in  the  loan);  and  such 
other  terms  and  conditions  set  forth  in  the  draft  loan  agreement.  Based  on  the  straight-line 
method, the average maturity is 15.75 years, and the maturity premium payable to ADB is 0.10% 
per  year.  The  government  has  also  requested  a  grant  of  $2  million  from  the  Japan  Fund  for 
Poverty Reduction (JFPR). 
The ADB loan will finance 92.9% of the total project costs through a regular loan ($30.0 
26. 
million),  including  expenditures  relating  to  works,  goods,  and  services.  A  cofinanced  grant  will 
finance  6.2%  of  the  total  project  costs,  including  expenditures  relating  to  small  facilities  and 
capacity building. 
Central  and  aimag  governments  will  contribute  0.9%  of  the  total  project  costs  through 
27. 
counterpart staff and exemption of value added taxes and duties for works and goods. The value 
added tax and custom duties exemptions will be accounted and recorded by the PIU, to properly 
account for the government counterpart financing for the project. The amounts exempted will be 
recorded  as  part  of  the  cost  of  the  assets  purchased  and/or  services  contracted.  No  land 
acquisition  costs  apply.  All  PIU  staff  and  national  consultant  salaries  are  inclusive  of  personal 
income taxes; such personnel are responsible for fulfilling their Mongolian tax obligations. The 
government has assured ADB that it will provide additional funding for any shortfall of funds or 
cost overruns to ensure the success of the project. 
28. 
Climate  change.  Climate  mitigation  is  estimated  to  cost  $4.89  million  and  climate 
adaptation  is  estimated  to  cost  $0.5 million.  ADB  will  finance  100%  of mitigation  and  100%  of 
adaptation costs. Details are in the climate change assessment.29 
A. 
Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions 
29. 
Preparation. The cost estimates were prepared jointly by the implementing agencies and 
ADB with assistance from the transaction technical assistance (TA) consultants. The sources and 
basis of cost estimates were reviewed during project preparation and confirmed by related parties. 
The  process  was  facilitated  by  a  model  in  Excel©  software  which  enabled  easy  updating  or 
revision, if necessary. The model is maintained by both the PIU and ADB. 
30. 
Revision. Revision of cost estimates will be conducted when deemed necessary during 
implementation (including during detailed design). The PIU will be responsible for proposing and 
drafting the revisions which will be subject to ADB’s approval. 
29  Climate Change Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 12 of the Report and 
Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors).  
18 
B. 
Key Assumptions 
31. 
The following key assumptions underpin the cost estimates and financing plan: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Exchange rate: MNT2,849.79 = $1.00 (as of 12 March 2021). 
Price  contingencies  based  on  expected  cumulative 
implementation period are as follows: 
inflation  over 
the 
Table 3: Escalation Rates for Price Contingency Calculation 
Item 
Foreign rate of price inflation 
Domestic rate of price inflation 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
2022 
1.7% 
6.0% 
2023 
1.7% 
6.0% 
2024 
1.8% 
6.0% 
2025 
1.8% 
6.0% 
2026 
1.8% 
6.0% 
2027 
1.8% 
6.0% 
Average 
1.8% 
6.0% 
C. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
Table 4: Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
MNT million 
$ million 
Foreign 
Exchange 
Local 
Currency 
Total 
Foreign 
Exchange 
Local 
Currency 
Total 
24,210.50  24,210.50  48,421.00 
1,110.60  11,106.00 
496.76 
0.00 
6,032.26 
5,467.22 
0.00 
37,818.44  33,704.82  71,523.25 
9,995.40 
49.68 
0.00 
3,016.13 
546.72 
0.00 
447.09 
0.00 
3,016.13 
4,920.50 
0.00 
1,012.54 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
619.79 
0.00 
0.00 
1,632.32 
2,025.08 
1,012.54 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1,139.92 
1,139.92 
1,239.57 
619.79 
0.00 
0.00 
461.67 
461.67 
4,866.23 
3,233.91 
39,450.76  36,938.72  76,389.49 
1,890.19 
4,757.05 
6,647.24 
3,574.78 
1,684.59 
4,239.61 
8,996.67 
5,924.20  12,571.45 
82.08 
206.57 
288.65 
6,935.89 
162.61 
409.25 
571.86 
244.69 
615.82 
860.51 
6,496.07  13,431.96 
8.50 
3.51 
0.02 
0.00 
1.06 
0.19 
0.00 
13.27 
0.35 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.22 
0.00 
0.00 
0.57 
13.84 
0.66 
1.67 
2.33 
0.03 
0.07 
0.10 
2.43 
8.50 
0.39 
0.16 
0.00 
1.06 
1.73 
0.00 
11.83 
0.35 
0.00 
0.00 
0.40 
0.22 
0.00 
0.16 
1.13 
12.96 
0.59 
1.49 
2.08 
0.06 
0.14 
0.20 
2.28 
17.00 
3.90 
0.17 
0.00 
2.12 
1.92 
0.00 
25.11 
0.70 
0.00 
0.00 
0.40 
0.43 
0.00 
0.16 
1.70 
26.81 
1.25 
3.16 
4.41 
0.09 
0.22 
0.30 
4.71 
Item 
A. Investment Costs 
A.1 ADB Loan 
1 Works 
2 Goods 
3 Workshops, training, seminars 
4 Community revolving fund 
5 Consulting services 
6 Project management  
7 Community participation 
Subtotal (A.1) 
A.2 JFPR Grant 
1 Works 
2 Goods 
3 Workshops, training, seminars 
4 Community revolving fund 
5 Consulting services 
6 Project management  
7 Community participation 
Subtotal (A.2) 
Subtotal (A) 
B. Contingencies 
B.1 ADB Loan 
a. Physical Contingency 
b. Price Contingency 
Subtotal (B.1) 
B.2 JFPR Grant 
a. Physical Contingency 
b. Price Contingency 
Subtotal (B.2) 
Subtotal (B) 
C.  Financing  Charges  During 
Implementation 
a. Interest During Construction 
b. Commitment Charges 
Subtotal (C) 
981.14 
168.86 
1,150.00 
1,899.81 
918.67 
326.97 
158.11 
2,226.78 
1,076.77 
45,615.68  40,705.80  86,321.48 
5,726.74 
3,805.77 
47,536.65  44,511.57  92,048.22 
100.00 
48.36 
51.64 
0.34 
0.06 
0.40 
16.01 
0.67 
16.68 
51.64 
0.67 
0.32 
0.11 
0.06 
0.78 
0.38 
30.30 
14.28 
2.00 
1.34 
15.62 
32.30 
48.36  100.00 
Subtotal ADB Loan (A.1+B.1+C) 
Subtotal JFPR Grant (A.2+B.2) 
Total Project Cost (A+B+C) 
% Total Project Cost 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction, MNT = Mongolian tugrik, USD = United States 
dollars. 
Notes: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding. 
Source: ADB estimates. 
1,920.97 
19 
% of 
Base 
Cost 
63.40 
14.54 
0.65 
0.00 
7.90 
7.16 
0.00 
93.66 
2.62 
0.00 
0.00 
1.49 
1.62 
0.00 
0.60 
6.34 
100.00 
4.68 
11.78 
16.46 
0.32 
0.81 
1.13 
17.58 
2.49 
0.43 
2.92 
113.00 
7.50 
120.50 
20 
D. 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan and Grant Proceeds 
Table 5: Allocation and Withdrawal of ADB Ordinary Capital Resources Loan Proceeds 
ADB Financing 
Item 
1.  Works and Goods 
2.  Consulting Services, Workshops, Project 
Management 
Interest and Commitment Charges 
3. 
4.  Unallocated 
Total 
Amount 
Allocated 
($) 
Category 
20,597,738 
Percentage and Basis for Withdrawal from 
the Loan Account 
100% of total expenditure claimed* 
4,209,520 
100% of total expenditure claimed 
781,382 
4,411,360 
30,000,000 
100% of total amounts due 
* Exclusive of value added taxes and duties for Works and Goods within the territory of the Borrower. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, PIU = project implementation unit. 
Table 6: Allocation and Withdrawal of JFPR Grant Proceeds 
ADB-administrated Financing -JFPR Grant 
Item 
1.  Works 
2.  Consulting Services, Community 
Revolving Fund, Community Contracts, 
Unallocated** 
Total 
Amount 
Allocated 
($) 
Category 
700,000 
1,300,000 
2,000,000 
Percentage and Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account 
100% of total expenditure 
claimed* 
100% of total expenditure 
claimed 
* Exclusive of value added taxes and duties for works in the territory of the borrower.  
** The unallocated amount also serves as a reserve for (a) currency fluctuations; and (b) payment of ADB’s 
administration fees and bank charges or other charges pursuant to the applicable provisions of JFPR. 
JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction. 
E. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
21 
Table 7: Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
($ million) 
JFPR 
ADB 
Government 
Item 
A. Investment Costs 
A.1 ADB Loan 
1 Works 
2 Goods 
3 Workshops, training, 
seminars 
4 Community revolving fund 
5 Consulting services 
6 Project management  
7 Community participation 
Subtotal (A.1) 
A.2 JFPR Grant 
1 Works 
2 Goods 
3 Workshops, training, 
seminars 
4 Community revolving fund 
5 Consulting services 
6 Project management  
7 Community participation 
Subtotal (A.2) 
Subtotal (A) 
B. Contingencies 
B.1 ADB Loan 
a. Physical Contingency 
b. Price Contingency 
Subtotal (B.1) 
B.2 JFPR Grant 
a. Physical Contingency 
b. Price Contingency 
Subtotal (B.2) 
Subtotal (B) 
C. Financing Charges 
During Implementation 
a. Interest During 
Construction 
b. Commitment Charges 
Subtotal (C) 
Amount 
% of 
Cost 
Category 
Amount 
% of 
Cost 
Category 
Amount 
Taxes 
and 
Dutiesa 
Total 
% of 
Cost 
Category 
Total 
Cost 
16.76 
3.83 
0.17 
0.00 
2.12 
1.92 
0.00 
24.81 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
24.81 
1.25 
3.16 
4.41 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
4.41 
0.67 
0.11 
0.78 
98.60 
98.39 
100.00 
0.00 
100.00 
100.00 
0.00 
98.81 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
92.55 
100.00 
100.00 
100.00 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
93.59 
100.0 
100.0 
100.0 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.70 
0.00 
0.00 
0.40 
0.43 
0.00 
0.16 
1.70 
1.70 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.09 
0.22 
0.30 
0.30 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
100.00 
0.00 
0.00 
100.00 
100.00 
0.00 
100.00 
100.00 
6.33 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
100.00 
100.00 
100.00 
6.41 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.24 
0.06 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.30 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.30 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.24 
0.06 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.30 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.30 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.40 
1.61 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.19 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.12 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
17.00 
3.90 
0.17 
0.00 
2.12 
1.92 
0.00 
25.11 
0.70 
0.00 
0.00 
0.40 
0.43 
0.00 
0.16 
1.70 
26.81 
1.25 
3.16 
4.41 
0.09 
0.22 
0.30 
4.71 
0.67 
0.11 
0.78 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
99.01 
30.00 
Subtotal ADB Loan 
(A.1+B.1+C) 
Subtotal JFPR Grant 
(A.2+B.2) 
Total Project Cost 
30.00 
(A+B+C) 
% Total Project Cost 
92.88 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction. 
Notes: Numbers may not sum up precisely because of rounding. Works and goods are exempted from value added tax and duties in 
the territory of the borrower. 
a Government’s contribution on value added taxes and duties on works and goods will be provided through exemption. The estimated 
amount of exemption for works financed under the grant is not included in the government’s contribution. 
Source: ADB estimates. 
2.00 
6.19 
0.30 
0.93 
100.00 
92.88 
0.00 
0.00 
2.00 
0.00 
0.30 
0.30 
0.00 
0.00 
6.19 
0.30 
0.99 
0.00 
0.93 
0.0 
30.30 
2.00 
32.30 
100.00 
22 
F. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs 
Table 8: Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs ($ million) 
Output 2 
Output 3 
Output 1 
Output 4 
Item 
A. Investment Costs 
A.1 ADB Loan 
1 Works 
2 Goods 
3 Workshops, training, seminars 
4 Community revolving fund 
5 Consulting services 
6 Project management  
7 Community participation 
Subtotal (A.1) 
A.2 JFPR Grant 
1 Works 
2 Goods 
3 Workshops, training, seminars 
4 Community revolving fund 
5 Consulting services 
6 Project management  
7 Community participation 
Subtotal (A.2) 
Subtotal (A) 
B. Contingencies 
B.1 ADB Loan 
a. Physical Contingency 
b. Price Contingency 
Subtotal (B.1) 
B.2 JFPR Grant 
a. Physical Contingency 
b. Price Contingency 
Subtotal (B.2) 
Subtotal (B) 
C. Financing Charges During 
Implementation 
a. Interest During Construction 
b. Commitment Charges 
Subtotal (C) 
Subtotal ADB Loan (A.1+B.1+C) 
Subtotal JFPR Grant (A.2+B.2) 
Total Project Cost (A+B+C) 
Amount 
% of Cost 
Category 
Amount 
% of Cost 
Category 
Amount 
% of Cost 
Category 
Amount 
% of Cost 
Category 
2.89 
0.59 
0.00 
0.00 
0.42 
0.00 
0.00 
3.90 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.40 
0.13 
0.00 
0.16 
0.69 
4.59 
0.19 
0.49 
0.68 
0.04 
0.09 
0.12 
0.81 
0.11 
0.01 
0.12 
4.70 
0.82 
5.52 
16.97 
15.03 
0.00 
0.00 
20.07 
0.00 
0.00 
15.52 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
100.00 
30.52 
0.00 
100.00 
40.91 
17.13 
15.50 
15.50 
15.50 
40.91 
40.91 
40.91 
17.13 
16.16 
11.13 
15.42 
15.51 
40.91 
17.09 
7.32 
1.42 
0.00 
0.00 
0.43 
0.00 
0.00 
9.17 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
9.17 
0.46 
1.15 
1.61 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.61 
0.22 
0.02 
0.24 
11.01 
0.00 
11.01 
43.07 
36.33 
0.00 
0.00 
20.17 
0.00 
0.00 
36.51 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
34.19 
36.44 
36.44 
36.44 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
34.11 
33.18 
16.67 
30.76 
36.35 
0.00 
34.10 
0.00 
0.19 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.19 
0.08 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.06 
0.00 
0.00 
0.14 
0.33 
0.01 
0.02 
0.03 
0.01 
0.02 
0.02 
0.06 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.23 
0.16 
0.39 
0.00 
4.95 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.77 
11.70 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
13.22 
0.00 
0.00 
8.22 
1.24 
0.76 
0.76 
0.76 
8.22 
8.22 
8.22 
1.24 
0.32 
0.04 
0.28 
0.75 
8.22 
1.22 
6.79 
1.70 
0.17 
0.00 
1.26 
1.92 
0.00 
11.85 
0.62 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.24 
0.00 
0.00 
0.86 
12.72 
0.59 
1.49 
2.09 
0.04 
0.11 
0.15 
2.24 
0.34 
0.08 
0.42 
14.36 
1.02 
15.37 
39.95 
43.70 
100.00 
0.00 
59.76 
100.00 
0.00 
47.21 
88.30 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
56.26 
0.00 
0.00 
50.87 
47.44 
47.29 
47.29 
47.29 
50.87 
50.87 
50.87 
47.52 
50.34 
72.15 
53.54 
47.38 
50.87 
47.60 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction 
Note: Numbers may not sum up precisely because of rounding. Works and goods are exempted from value added 
tax and duties in the territory of the borrower. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
Total 
Cost 
17.00 
3.90 
0.17 
0.00 
2.12 
1.92 
0.00 
25.11 
0.70 
0.00 
0.00 
0.40 
0.43 
0.00 
0.16 
1.70 
26.81 
1.25 
3.16 
4.41 
0.09 
0.22 
0.30 
4.71 
0.67 
0.11 
0.78 
30.30 
2.00 
32.30 
G. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Table 9: Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
($ million) 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
Item 
A. Investment Costs 
A.1 ADB Loan 
1 Works 
2 Goods 
3 Workshops, training, seminars 
4 Community revolving fund 
5 Consulting services 
6 Project management  
7 Community participation 
Subtotal (A.1) 
A.2 JFPR Grant 
1 Works 
2 Goods 
3 Workshops, training, seminars 
4 Community revolving fund 
5 Consulting services 
6 Project management  
7 Community participation 
Subtotal (A.2) 
Subtotal (A) 
B. Contingencies 
B.1 ADB Loan 
a. Physical Contingency 
b. Price Contingency 
Subtotal (B.1) 
B.2 JFPR Grant 
a. Physical Contingency 
b. Price Contingency 
Subtotal (B.2) 
Subtotal (B) 
C. Financing Charges During Implementation 
a. Interest During Construction 
b. Commitment Charges 
Subtotal (C) 
Subtotal ADB Loan (A.1+B.1+C) 
Subtotal JFPR Grant (A.2+B.2) 
Total Project Cost (A+B+C) 
% Total Project Cost 
0.00 
0.14 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.19 
0.00 
0.33 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.33 
0.02 
0.00 
0.02 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.02 
0.00 
0.04 
0.04 
0.39 
0.00 
0.39 
1.20 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.36 
0.29 
0.00 
0.65 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.08 
0.12 
0.00 
0.00 
0.20 
0.85 
0.04 
0.04 
0.08 
0.00 
0.00 
0.01 
0.08 
0.01 
0.04 
0.04 
0.77 
0.20 
0.97 
3.00 
6.01 
0.00 
0.04 
0.00 
0.48 
0.29 
0.00 
6.83 
0.18 
0.00 
0.00 
0.08 
0.11 
0.00 
0.00 
0.37 
7.20 
0.34 
0.57 
0.91 
0.02 
0.04 
0.06 
0.97 
7.53 
0.00 
0.04 
0.00 
0.44 
0.38 
0.00 
8.40 
0.32 
0.00 
0.00 
0.08 
0.11 
0.00 
0.00 
0.51 
8.91 
0.42 
1.09 
1.50 
0.03 
0.07 
0.10 
1.61 
3.46 
2.11 
0.04 
0.00 
0.56 
0.38 
0.00 
6.55 
0.18 
0.00 
0.00 
0.08 
0.07 
0.00 
0.08 
0.41 
6.96 
0.33 
1.02 
1.35 
0.02 
0.07 
0.09 
1.44 
0.00 
1.64 
0.04 
0.00 
0.27 
0.38 
0.00 
2.34 
0.02 
0.00 
0.00 
0.08 
0.03 
0.00 
0.08 
0.21 
2.55 
0.12 
0.44 
0.56 
0.01 
0.03 
0.04 
0.60 
0.05 
0.03 
0.07 
7.81 
0.43 
8.24 
25.51 
0.13 
0.01 
0.15 
10.05 
0.63 
10.68 
33.05 
0.21 
0.00 
0.22 
8.12 
0.50 
8.62 
26.70 
0.26 
0.00 
0.26 
3.16 
0.25 
3.40 
0.67 
0.11 
0.78 
30.30 
2.00 
32.30 
10.54  100.00 
23 
Total 
Cost 
17.00 
3.90 
0.17 
0.00 
2.12 
1.92 
0.00 
25.11 
0.70 
0.00 
0.00 
0.40 
0.43 
0.00 
0.16 
1.70 
26.81 
1.25 
3.16 
4.41 
0.09 
0.22 
0.30 
4.71 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction 
Note: Numbers may not sum up precisely because of rounding. Works and goods are exempted from value added tax 
and duties in the territory of the borrower. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
24 
H. 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve 
ADB Loan (Regular OCR) ($ million)a 
Q1 
Q4 
Total 
Contract Award 
Q3 
 0.88    0.30  
 0.19    0.07  
Year 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
Total 
Q2 
   0.45 
   1.11 
 19.79    0.99    0.22  
 0.28  
 0.29    0.22  
 0.28  
 0.39  
 0.43  
 8.37  
 10.00  
 8.05  
 2.76  
30.00 
aContract awards exclude financing charges in the amount of $0.78 million. Disbursements include financing charges. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
 1.63  
 1.37  
 21.00  
 0.28  
 4.66  
 0.28  
29.22 
Q2 
 0.02  
 0.11  
 2.10  
 2.50  
 1.98  
 0.69  
Q1 
 0.01  
 0.10  
 2.05  
 2.50  
 1.98  
 0.69  
 0.18  
 0.11  
 2.11  
 2.50  
 2.10  
 0.69  
Disbursement 
Q3 
 0.18  
 0.11  
 2.11  
 2.50  
 1.99  
 0.69  
 4.15  
Total 
Q4 
Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction Grant ($ million) 
Year 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
Total 
Q1 
0.83 
Contract Award 
Q3 
Q4 
Q2 
0.51 
0.47 
0.19 
Total 
- 
1.17 
0.83 
0.83 
0.51 
0.47 
0.19 
2.00 
Q1 
0.10 
0.17 
0.12 
0.05 
0.44 
Disbursement 
Q3 
Q4 
Q2 
0.03 
0.10 
0.17 
0.12 
0.05 
0.47 
0.06 
0.11 
0.17 
0.13 
0.06 
0.53 
0.09 
0.11 
0.17 
0.13 
0.06 
0.56 
Total 
0.18 
0.42 
0.68 
0.50 
0.22 
2.00 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
25 
D
i
r
e
c
t
P
a
y
m
e
n
t
I. 
Fund Flow Diagram 
Asian Development Bank 
(ADB) 
Pass-through Advance Accounts at the State 
Bank (commercial bank) 
Ministry of Finance  
(Borrower)  
Opens Advance and Sub-Accounts, approves payments and withdrawal 
applications 
Advance Account USD (OCR-Regular) a 
Advance Account USD (JFPR Grant) a 
Four MNT Sub-Accounts b 
Ministry of Environment and Tourism  
(Executing Agency)  
Department of Tourism Policy and Coordination  
(Implementing Agency) 
Department of Protected Area Management  
(Implementing Agency) 
Manage and maintain sub-accounts, co-signatory, process withdrawal applications 
Project Implementation Unit 
Consultants, contractors, suppliers and other service providers 
Legend:  
Loan disbursement, fund flow   
Loan repayment  
Flow of invoices or withdrawal applications and reimbursement requests 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction, OCR = ordinary capital resources. 
a  Advance Accounts at the Treasury Single Account 
b  MNT Sub-Accounts at the Treasury Single Account 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
26 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A. 
Financial Management Assessment 
The  financial  management  assessment  (FMA)  was  prepared  in  accordance  with  the 
32. 
Financial Management Technical Guidance Note in line with SBA Operations Manual section OM 
G2.30,31 The  FMA  was  undertaken  in October  2020 by  the  TA financial  management  specialist 
and  was  updated  from  January  to  March  2021.  The  assessment  based  on  ADB’s  Financial 
Management  Assessment  Questionnaire  (FMAQ)  and  interviews  were  conducted  with  officers 
and financial management specialist of the Finance, Investment, and Production Division (FIPD), 
Department  of  Tourism  Policy  Coordination  (DTPC),  Department  of  Protected  Areas 
Management (DPAM), Department of Monitoring, Examination, Evaluation, and Internal Auditing 
(DMEEIA) of MET in Ulaanbaatar, in October 2020. The assessment and interview with aimag 
officials was held sin January 2021 by online video meeting. The online interview with officers and 
financial management specialist of the Finance and State Treasury Fund Department (FSTFD), 
Investment, Development Policy Planning Department (IDPPD),  DMEEIA of Aimag Governor’s 
Office and Financial Control and Auditing Agency of aimag was conducted.32 
33. 
The overall pre-mitigation financial management risk of the executing and implementing 
agencies  is  moderate  (defined  as  “likely  to  occur,  will  have  low  impact  if  occurs”).  The  FMA 
indicated the following risks: (i) limited knowledge on ADB’s rules and procedures and insufficient 
capacity of MET internal auditing staff, (ii) uncertainty of the ownership of assets, financed, and 
purchased  during  project  implementation,  and  (iii)  financial  information  software  fails  to  meet 
requirements from ADB, resulting in overload and mismanagement of financial staff (Table 10). 
To mitigate the identified risks, a time-bound FM action plan (Table 11) has been agreed with the 
MET. With a moderate pre-mitigation FM risk assessment and timely implementation of the FM 
risk assessment, the FMA establishes the capacity of the Borrower (the Ministry of Finance) along 
with MET, to administer the advance accounts and Statement of Expenditures (SOE) procedures. 
 The financial management risk assessment, and project risk mitigation and management 
34. 
measures, are summarized in Table 10. 
Risk Description 
Inherent Risk  
Table 10: Risk Description and Rating 
Risk 
Assessment 
Mitigation Measures or Risk 
Management Plan 
Country Specific - Mongolia’s capital expenditures 
are high, and a major weakness of the budget is 
the  low  percentage  of  funds  allocated  to  capital 
maintenance, which lead to decreased impact of 
the  projects.  Line  ministries  continue  to  give 
priority to new projects over adequate funding for 
operations  and  maintenance  of  existing  capital 
assets. 
Substantial  Covenant 
to 
adequate 
allocation for O&M of project assets to 
be included in the legal agreements 
ensure 
Entity specific risks - The MET and its FIPD have  Moderate  Contracting 
out 
key 
financial 
30 ADB.  2014.  Financial  Management,  Cost  Estimates,  Financial  Analysis,  and  Financial  Performance  Indicators. 
Operations Manual, G2. Manila. 
31 ADB. 2015. Financial Management Technical Guidance Note, Financial Management Assessment. Manila.  
32  Detailed Financial Management Assessment is accessible the list of supplementary documents in Appendix 2 of the 
Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors). 
Risk Description 
Risk 
Assessment 
Mitigation Measures or Risk 
Management Plan 
27 
experienced and qualified personnel in the field of 
financial  management.  Although  the  ministry 
implemented  a  numerous  donor-supported 
projects, it provided only professional supervision 
and was not involved in financial management or 
project transactions. It will be important to train the 
EA staff in ADB rules and guidelines 
Overall Inherent Risk  
Moderate 
Project Risk 
Implementing  entity  -  IAs  are  responsible  for 
monitoring  and  review  PIU  documents,  Director 
Generals  of  IAs  is  co-signatory  authority  for  all 
transactions and withdrawal applications. The IAs 
financial  professional 
staff  do  not  have 
background  and  are  less  familiar  with  ADB 
financial  management 
and 
procedures.  
requirements 
Fund  Flow  -  Applications  for  withdrawals  from 
advance  and  investment  sub-accounts  must  be 
submitted  and  printed  electronically  in  TSA  and 
signed by both the MET and MOF within 3 working 
days.  Incorrectness  in  the  documentation  of 
expenditures  and  contractor’s  payments,  or 
appointment with ministries may lead to payment 
delays. 
High 
Low 
management  through  PIU  consultants 
and training funded through the project 
Training  on  ADB’s  disbursement 
procedures and financial management 
to  be  provided 
loan 
to 
effectiveness  or  if  Director  General  of 
IAs replaced  
IAs  upon 
financial 
follows 
PIU 
Regulation  of TSA operation in proper 
time planning  
specialist 
Staffing  -  MET’s  FIPD  does  not  assigned  to  the 
management of foreign funded projects and is not 
involved in the financial management of PIU.  
Moderate  Recruit PIU staff with English language 
skill  and  experience  in  ADB  financed 
projects 
Accounting policies and procedures - After project 
completion, it is not clear to whom the ownership 
of  the  assets,  financed  and  purchased  during 
project implementation, will be transferred, either 
state, aimag, or private sector. 
Internal  Auditing  –  Due  to  a  staff  shortage,  the 
internal  audits  of  externally  funded  projects  are 
not  performed  each  fiscal  year  but  every  two 
years or after completion.  
External  Auditing  -  Due  to  lack  of  staff  in  the 
Mongolia  National  Audit  Office,  there  could  be 
delays in the submission of external audit reports 
to ADB within 6 months from the end of the fiscal 
year  resulting  in  non-compliance  to  a  loan 
covenant. 
Reporting  and  Monitoring  -  The  project  outputs 
and its performance is not integrated into the EA 
overall plan and performance report. Additionally, 
EA  and  IA  staff  are  not  adequately  trained  in 
Moderate 
Accurate  and  clear  statements  of 
ownership  to  be  defined  in  the  project 
documents  and  agreements  between 
parties involved in the project 
Moderate  Monitoring and evaluation specialist of 
PIU will develop an internal audit work 
program  with  cooperation  of  DMEEIA 
of MET, DMEEIA of Aimag Governor’s 
Office to enhance internal controls  
Low 
Appoint  an 
auditor acceptable to ADB and GOM 
independent  external 
Low 
EA to integrate project outcomes into 
the MET working plan, and establish 
working group to monitor progress 
reports of PIU 
28 
Risk Description 
procedures  of  ADB 
monitoring & reporting against project goals. 
funded  project,  and 
Information system - Existing financial information 
software  fit  to  Mongolian  accounting  standards 
and provide general financial statements, but not 
project management oriented and not suitable for 
ADB requirements, thus financial specialist does 
double work, which leads to overload and errors.  
Risk 
Assessment 
Mitigation Measures or Risk 
Management Plan 
Moderate 
Procure and use a project tailored 
financial software to develop a unified 
financial management system and 
integrate budgeting, accounting, 
reporting, and project activities 
Overall Project Risk  
Overall (Combined) Risk 
Moderate  
Moderate 
ADB = Asian Development Bank; DMEEIA = Department of Monitoring Examination, Evaluation, and Internal Auditing; 
EA = executing agency; FIPD = Finance, Investment, and Production Division; GOM = Government of Mongolia; IA = 
implementing  agency;  MET  =  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Tourism;  MOF  =  Ministry  of  Finance;  PIU  =  project 
implementation unit; L = Low; M = Moderate; S = Substantial; H = High. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
The identified financial management risks will be mitigated by the action plan shown in 
35. 
Table 11 and will be closely monitored during project implementation. 
Table 11: Financial Management Action Plan 
Risk 
Action 
MET’s FIPD is not assigned to the 
management of foreign funded projects 
and its staff are not involved in the 
financial management of PIU.  
After project completion, it is not clear 
who will operate and manage the 
assets financed and purchased during 
project implementation.  
Due to a staff shortage, the internal 
audits of externally funded projects are 
not performed each fiscal year but 
every two years or after completion. 
EA and IAs staff are not adequately 
trained in procedures of ADB funded 
project, and monitoring, and reporting 
against project goals.  
Existing financial information software 
fit to Mongolian accounting standards 
and provide general financial 
statements, but not project 
management oriented and not suitable 
for ADB requirements, thus financial 
specialist does double work, which 
leads to overload and errors.  
Recruit and assign PIU 
financial Management staff 
with English language skill and 
experience in ADB financed 
projects. 
Statements and agreements 
signed between parties 
involved in the project on 
management and maintenance 
of facilities. 
Monitoring and evaluation 
specialist of PIU will develop 
an internal audit work program 
with the cooperation with 
DMEEIA of MET, DMEEIA of 
Aimag Governor’s Office to 
enhance internal controls. 
Training on ADB’s 
disbursement procedures and 
financial management to be 
provided to EA, IA and PIU 
upon loan effectiveness. 
Procure and use a project 
tailored financial software to 
develop a unified financial 
management system and 
integrate budgeting, 
accounting, reporting, and 
project activities. 
Responsibility 
ADB, MET DTPC  Immediately 
Timing 
after loan 
effectiveness, 
Q3 2022 
MET, PIU 
MET DTPC and 
DPAM 
Q2 2024, 
after detailed 
design of 
facilities 
completed 
Quarterly and 
annually, 
consistent 
with the 
project 
annual 
working plan 
ADB, MET DTPC  In Q4 2022, 
MET, PIU 
after 
recruiting the 
PIU Financial 
specialist 
In Q4 2022, 
after 
recruiting the 
PIU Financial 
specialist 
29 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank;  EA  =  executing  agency;  IA  =  implementing  agency;  DMEEIA  =  Department  of 
Monitoring,  Examination,  Evaluation,  and  Internal  Auditing;  DPAM  =  Department  of  Protected  Areas  Management; 
DTPC = Department of Tourism Policy and Coordination; FIPD = Finance, Investment, and Production Division; MET 
= Ministry of Environment and Tourism; PIU = project implementation unit. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
B. 
Disbursement Arrangements for ADB and ADB-administered JFPR Funds 
The  loan  and  JFPR  grant  proceeds  will  be  disbursed  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Loan 
36. 
Disbursement  Handbook  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),33 and  detailed  arrangements 
agreed  upon  between  the  government  and  ADB.  MOF  will  maintain  separate  accounts  and 
records  for  the  loan  and  JFPR  grant.  The  PIU  will  be  responsible  for  project  implementation, 
including daily management, accounting, procurement, training, monitoring, and reporting. It will 
prepare (i) disbursement projections, (ii) supporting documents, and (iii) withdrawal applications. 
Online  training for  project  staff  on  disbursement  policies  and  procedures  is  available.34 Project 
staff are encouraged to avail of this training to help ensure efficient disbursement and fiduciary 
control. 
37. 
Advance  fund  procedure.  After  loan  effectiveness,  the  GOM  will  establish  two  USD 
advance accounts under the Treasury Single Account (TSA) of the MOF, one for each financing 
source (ADB loan and JFPR grant). The currency of the advance account is the US dollar. The 
respective advance accounts will be used exclusively for ADB’s and JFPR’s share of the eligible 
expenditures and will be operated by MOF. To receive funding to TSA, the MOF will establish two 
pass through accounts in US dollar currency at a commercial State Bank. At the same day of the 
replenishment, the fund through the State Bank account will be transferred to the advance accounts 
at the TSA. The MOF, who administers the advance accounts, is accountable and responsible for 
proper use of advances to the advance account including advances to any sub-accounts. 
38. 
Project sub-account. MET with support of PIU will submit request to MOF for approval to 
open sub-accounts, after which four sub-accounts in local currency (one investment sub-account 
and one operational sub-account under each USD advance account) will  be established. These 
sub-accounts  will  be  held  under  the  TSA  at  MOF,  but  MET,  with  support  of  the  PIU,  will  be 
responsible  for  the  management,  monitoring,  and  reconciliation  of  them.  While  investment  sub-
account will be exclusively for payment to contractors, the operational sub-account will be used 
exclusively for ADB’s and JFPR’s share of eligible expenditures to finance office management, 
vehicle operation, PIU salary costs, and workshop, and training activities. Every liquidation and 
replenishment of the sub-accounts shall be supported by sufficient documentation in accordance 
with Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time). 
39. 
The  total  outstanding  advance  to  the  respective  advance  account  should  not  exceed  the 
estimate  of  ADB’s  and  JFPR’s  share  of  expenditures  to  be  paid  through  the  respective  advance 
account for the forthcoming 6 months. MOF may request for initial and additional advances to the 
respective advance account based on an Estimate of Expenditure Sheet setting out the estimated 
expenditures  to  be  financed  through  the  respective  accounts  for  the  forthcoming  6  months. 35 
Supporting documents should be submitted to ADB or retained by MOF in accordance with ADB’s 
33 The handbook is available electronically from the ADB website ADB Loan Disbursement Handbook. 
34  Disbursement eLearning. https://wpqr4.adb.org/disbursement_elearning  
35 The estimate of expenditure sheet is available in Appendix 8A of ADB’s  Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as 
amended from time to time). 
30 
Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time), 36  and  other  detailed 
arrangements agreed by ADB and the government. 
Statement of expenditure procedure.37 The statement of expenditure procedure may be 
40. 
used for reimbursement of eligible expenditures or liquidation of advances to the advance accounts. 
The ceiling of the SOE procedure is the equivalent of $200,000 per individual payment. Supporting 
documents and records for the expenditures claimed under the statement of expenditure procedure 
should  be  maintained  and  made  readily  available  for  review  by  ADB’s  disbursement  and  review 
missions, upon ADB’s request for submission of supporting documents on a sampling basis, and for 
independent audit. Reimbursement and liquidation of individual payments in excess of the SOE 
ceiling should be supported by full documentation when submitting the withdrawal application to 
ADB. 
41.  Withdrawal  application.  Before  the  submission  of  the  first  withdrawal  application,  the 
government should submit to ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person(s) who will 
sign  the  withdrawal  applications  on  behalf  of  the  government,  together  with  the  authenticated 
specimen  signatures  of  each  authorized  person.  Co-signing  responsibilities  are  as  follows:  (i) 
withdrawal applications submitted to ADB will be co-signed by MOF and MET, (ii) disbursements 
from  the  advance  and  investment  sub-accounts  will  be  co-signed  by  MET  and  MOF,  (iii) 
disbursement  from  operational  sub-accounts  will  be  co-signed  by  PIU  project  coordinator  and 
project Finance specialist. 
The minimum value per withdrawal application is stipulated in ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
42. 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time). Individual payments below such amount should 
be paid (i) by MET, and subsequently claimed to ADB through reimbursement; or (ii) through the 
advance  fund  procedure,  unless  otherwise  accepted  by  ADB.  MOF  should  ensure  sufficient 
category and contract balances before requesting disbursements. Use of ADB’s Client Portal for 
Disbursements system is encouraged for submission of withdrawal applications to ADB.38 
C. 
Disbursement Arrangements for Counterpart Fund 
43. 
Government counterpart contributions to the project are in-kind only in terms of financing 
of value added taxes and custom duties on goods in the form of tax exemption estimated at MNT 
854.94 million ($0.3 million equivalent). The exemption from value added tax will be regulated by 
MOF Decree #4639 while custom duties exemptions will be regulated by sMOF Decree #317.40 
The PIU shall obtain the registration number from the state administrative organization in charge 
of customs and tax matters, and submit requests for tax exemption to MOF each quarter. MOF 
approves  the  list  of  project  implementers  receiving  tax  exemptions.  The  value  added  tax  and 
custom duties exemptions will be accounted for and recorded by the PIU, to properly account for 
36 The Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time), describes which supporting documents 
should be submitted to ADB and which should be retained by the government for liquidation and replenishment of 
the advance account. 
37 The statement of expenditure forms are available in Appendixes 7B and 7D of ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook 
(2017, as amended from time to time). 
38 The Client Portal for Disbursement system facilitates online submission of withdrawal applications to ADB, resulting 
in faster disbursement. The forms to be completed by the borrower are available online at Guide to the Client Portal 
for Disbursements | Asian Development Bank (adb.org) 
39 MOF Decree #46. 5 February 2016. Regulation on Exemption from Value Added Tax on Goods, Works and Services 
Purchased from the Domestic Market with Humanitarian and Grant Assistance and Concessional Loans provided to 
Mongolia by International Organizations and Donor Countries through the Government. 
40 MOF Decree #317. 20 Nov 2015. Procedure for exemption from value added tax and customs duty on humanitarian 
and grant aid goods received from foreign governments and international organizations. 
31 
the government counterpart financing for the project. The amounts exempted will be recorded as 
part of the cost of the assets purchased and/or services contracted. 
D. 
Accounting 
44.  MET  will  maintain,  or  cause  to  be  maintained,  separate  books  and  records  by  funding 
source  for  all  expenditures  incurred  on  the  project  following  accrual  based  International  Public 
Sector Accounting Standards. MET will prepare project financial statements in accordance with 
the  government's  accounting  laws  and  regulations  which  are  consistent  with  international 
accounting principles and practices. 
E. 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
45.  MET will cause the detailed project financial statements to be audited in accordance with 
International Standards on Auditing by an independent acceptable to ADB. The audited project 
financial statements together with the auditor’s opinion will be presented in the English language 
to ADB by MET within 6 months from the end of the fiscal year. 
46. 
The audit report for the project financial statements will include a management letter and 
auditor’s opinions, which cover (i) whether the project financial statements present an accurate 
and fair view or are presented fairly, in all material respects, in accordance with the applicable 
financial reporting standards; and (ii) whether the proceeds of the loan and grant were used only 
for the purposes of the project. 
Compliance with financial reporting and auditing requirements will be monitored by review 
47. 
missions and during normal program supervision, and followed up regularly with all concerned, 
including the external auditor. 
The government, MET, DTPC and DPAM have been made aware of ADB’s approach to 
48. 
delayed  submission,  and  the requirements  for  satisfactory  and  acceptable quality  of the  audited 
project financial statements.41 ADB reserves the right to require a change in the auditor (in a manner 
consistent  with  the  constitution  of  the  borrower),  or  for  additional  support  to  be  provided  to  the 
auditor, if the audits required are not conducted in a manner satisfactory to ADB, or if the audits are 
substantially delayed. ADB reserves the right to verify the project's financial accounts to confirm that 
the share of ADB’s financing is used in accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures. 
Public disclosure of the audited project financial statements, including the auditor’s opinion 
49. 
on the project financial statements, will be guided by ADB’s Access to Information Policy 2018.42 
After the review, ADB will disclose the audited project financial statements and the opinion of the 
41 ADB’s approach and procedures regarding delayed submission of audited project financial statements:  
(i)  When audited project financial statements are not received by the due date, ADB will write to the executing 
agency advising that (a) the audit documents are overdue; and (b) if they are not received within the next 6 
months, requests for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment of advance accounts, 
processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters will not be processed. 
(ii)  When  audited  project  financial  statements  are  not  received  within  6  months  after  the  due  date,  ADB  will 
withhold processing of requests for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment of 
advance accounts, processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters. ADB will (a) 
inform the executing agency of ADB’s actions; and (b) advise that the loan may be suspended if the audit 
documents are not received within the next 6 months. 
(iii)  When audited project financial statements are not received within 12 months after the due date, ADB may 
suspend the loan. 
42 ADB’s Access to Information Policy 2018: https://www.adb.org/documents/access-information-policy 
32 
auditors on the project financial statements no later than 14 days of ADB’s confirmation of their 
acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website. The management letter and additional auditor’s 
opinions will not be disclosed. 
33 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
Advance Contracting 
All  advance  contracting  will  be  undertaken  in  conformity  with  ADB  Procurement  Policy 
50. 
(2017, as amended from time to time) and Procurement Regulations for ADB Borrowers (2017, 
as amended from time to time).43,44 The issuance of invitations for bids under advance contracting 
will be subject to ADB’s approval. The MET and MET’s DTPC and DPAM have been advised that 
approval of advance contracting does not commit ADB to finance the project. Advance contracting 
will  apply  to  the  recruitment  of  PIU  staff.  Advance  actions  under  the  advance  contracting  will 
include advertisements and selection for the PIU core staff and endorsement of proposed PIU 
core staff by ADB. However, the contracts can be signed only after the loan effectiveness. 
B. 
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services 
51. 
Procurement of all works and goods to be financed from the ADB loan and JFPR grant and 
recruitment of all consultants to be financed from the ADB loan and JFPR grant will be undertaken 
in accordance with the Procurement Policy (2017, as amended from time to time) and Procurement 
Regulations for ADB Borrowers (2017, as amended from time to time) (footnotes 48 and 49). 
The project has a total of 34 contracts to be financed from the ADB loan or JFPR grant; 
52. 
including  five  for  works,  nine  for  goods,  seven  for  consulting  services,  and  13  for  community 
participation in procurement; excluding 12 for PIU staff. 
All invitations for bids under open competitive bidding (OCB) with national advertisement 
53. 
and  request  for  quotations  (RFQ)  for  works  and  goods  will  be  advertised  on  the  national  e-
procurement system (tender.gov.mn), in addition to daily national newspapers and MET website.45 
The PIU with ADB’s support will try to use the national e-procurement system (tender.gov.mn) for 
bidding of OCB with national advertisement and RFQ for works and goods on pilot basis. 
1.  Open Competitive Bidding 
OCB with international advertisement will be used for a total of four contracts with high 
54. 
value which will attract foreign bidders: one contract each under works package W1 and W2, and 
two contracts under goods package G3. OCB with national advertisement will be used for a total 
of seven contracts, for which adequate number of qualified national bidders are expected based 
on the market assessment under the project procurement risk assessment: three contracts under 
works  package  W3,  one  contract  under  goods  package  G4,  and  three  contracts  under  goods 
package G5. 
For  procurement  under  OCB  with  national  advertisement:  (i)  an  advertisement  in 
55. 
Mongolian language will be published on the national e-procurement system (tender.gov.mn), in 
addition  to  daily  national  newspapers  and  MET  website;  (ii)  the  standard  bidding  documents 
developed  by  MOF  and  approved  by  ADB  will  be  used  unless  otherwise  agreed  between  the 
MOF, MET, and ADB; and (iii) documents for bidding and contracting will be only in Mongolian 
43 Available at: https://www.adb.org/documents/adb-procurement-policy 
44 Available at: https://www.adb.org/documents/procurement-regulations-adb-borrowers 
45 ADB  and  Mongolia  Government  Procurement  Agency,  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  support,  agreed  to  use  the 
national e-procurement system (tender.gov.mn) to publish all invitations for bids under national competitive bidding, 
OCB with national advertisement, shopping, and RFQ methods for procurement of goods and works funded by ADB 
from 19 April 2021, to encourage the development of domestic contracting and manufacturing industries in Mongolia. 
34 
language (except for documents which require ADB’s review and approval), and the currency for 
bidding and payments will be in Mongolian tugrik, unless otherwise agreed between the MOF, 
MET,  and  ADB.  Procurement  under  OCB  will  use  single  stage:  one  envelope  procedure.  The 
relevant  sections  of  ADB’s  Anticorruption  Policy  (1998,  as  amended  from  time  to  time)  will  be 
included in all procurement documents and contracts.46 
2. 
Request for Quotation 
RFQ will be used for three goods contracts under two goods packages, G1 and G2, with 
56. 
an estimated value of $100,000 or below. For procurement under RFQ: (i) price quotations will be 
collected from at least three suppliers, and (ii) the supplier which submitted the lowest price will 
be selected. 
3. 
Community Participation in Procurement 
57. 
To ensure sustainability and achieve social objectives of the project, the project will apply 
community  participation  in  procurement  (CPP)  method  to  involve  communities  and  procure 
community-led works and services. The CPP method will follow national procedures and sample 
bidding  documents  for  community  participation  methods  and  comply  with  ADB  Procurement 
Regulations for ADB Borrowers (2017, as amended from time to time) (footnote 48). For the CPP 
method, (i) a contract will be concluded with a community group established on the basis of a 
cooperation agreement which meets requirements of the Civil Law, and (ii) works and services to 
be procured do not require professional contractors. The community group through community-
based organizations (CBOs) will operate and maintain small facilities in protected areas (under 
project output 4), purchasing materials and mobilizing labors required to undertake the tasks when 
necessary, provided that adequate expertise exists. The CBOs will purchase materials such as 
cement,  wood,  stone  aggregate,  and  sand  in  bulk,  preferably  from  local  suppliers  (for  each 
purchase,  at  least  three  price  quotations  will  be  collected  and  a  supplier  which  submitted  the 
lowest price will be selected) All tasks by the CBOs will comply with domestic laws and regulations 
and ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement. 
4. 
Consulting Services 
58. 
Individual  consultant  selection  method  will  be  applied  to  recruitments  of  12  PIU  staff 
members.  Quality-  and  cost-based  selection  method  with  a  quality-cost  ratio  of  90:10  will  be 
applied to the recruitment of six firms. Consultants’ qualifications selection method will be applied 
to the recruitment of an external environmental monitoring firm. Appendix 2 contains indicative 
TORs for firms to be financed from ADB loan and for  PIU staff. Appendix 3 contains indicative 
TORs for firms to be financed from JFPR grant. 
5. 
ADB Review 
59. 
ADB prior review will be applied to OCB contracts for works and goods and all contracts 
for  consulting  services  and  PIU  staff  to  be  financed  from  ADB  loan  or  JFPR  grant.  For  OCB 
contracts for works and goods for ADB prior review, ADB’s prior review and approval is needed 
for  each  bidding  step  (i.e.,  preparation  of  invitation  for  bids  and  bidding  documents,  and  bid 
evaluation) and for contract variations. For all contracts for consulting services and PIU staff for 
ADB prior review, ADB’s prior review and approval is necessary for each recruitment step (e.g., 
evaluation of expressions of interest, preparation of a request for proposal, evaluation of technical 
46  Available at: https://www.adb.org/documents/anticorruption-policy 
proposals, evaluation of financial proposals, final ranking, and finalization of the contract) and for 
contract variations. For CPP contracts, post review (sampling) will be conducted as soon as the 
first  few  contracts  have  been  awarded  so  that  lessons  learned  can  be  taken  into  account  for 
subsequent contracts. For RFQ contracts, the contracts will be for post review. 
35 
36 
C. 
Procurement Plan 
60. 
The procurement plan shall be updated as needed throughout the duration of the project. 
1. 
Basic Data 
Project Name: Sustainable Tourism Development Project (Phase 2) 
Project Number: 51422-002 
Country: Mongolia 
Project Procurement Classification: B 
Procurement Risk: Low 
Approval Number: 
Executing Agency: Ministry of Environment and Tourism 
Implementing Agency: Department of Tourism Policy 
Coordination for the loan, Department of Protected Areas 
Management for the grant 
$30.00 million 
$2.30 million 
Project Financing Amount: 
ADB Financing: 
Non-ADB Financing: 
Japan Fund for Poverty 
Reduction 
Government 
Date of First Procurement Plan: April 2021 
Procurement Plan Duration: 18 months 
eGP =electronic government procurement. 
$2.00 million 
$0.3 million 
Project Closing Date: 30 June 2028 
Date of this Procurement Plan: April 2021 
Advance contracting: yes  
eGP: yes 
2.  Methods, Review, and Procurement Plan 
Except  as  ADB  may  otherwise  agree,  the  following  process  thresholds  shall  apply  to 
61. 
procurement of goods, works, nonconsulting services, and consulting services: 
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Nonconsulting Services 
Method 
OCB for goods and 
works  
Request for Quotation 
for Goods and Works 
Community participation 
in procurement for small 
works 
Comments 
OCB  method  will  be  used  for  contracts  with  estimated  value  of  above 
$100,000. Based on the project procurement risk assessment, four contracts 
(under two works and one goods package) will be internationally advertised. 
All 11 OCB contracts are subject to prior review.  
For small contracts (e.g., estimated value is $100,000 or below), RFQ method 
will be used. All three RFQ contracts are subject to post review. 
Up to equivalent of $30,000; all contracts will be subject to post review. 
OCB = open competitive bidding, RFQ = request for quotation. 
Consulting Services 
Method 
Quality and Cost-Based Selection, with a quality-cost ratio of 90:10 
Consultant’s Qualification Selection 
Individual Consultant Selection 
3. 
Lists of Active Procurement Packages (Contracts) 
Comments 
Prior review 
Prior review 
Prior review 
62. 
The  following  table  lists  goods,  works,  nonconsulting  services,  and  consulting  services 
contracts for which the procurement activity is either ongoing or expected to commence within 
the procurement plan duration. 
Package 
Number 
G1 
General 
Description 
PIU Office 
Establishment 
Goods, Works, and Nonconsulting Services 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
49,196 
Procurement 
Method 
RFQ 
ADB 
Review 
Post 
Bidding 
Procedure 
N/A 
Advertisement 
Date (quarter, 
year) 
Q1 2022 
Lot 1: Equipment 
Lot 2: Furniture 
24,598 
24,598 
G2 
PIU car 
88,555 
RFQ 
Post 
N/A 
Q1 2022 
W1 
Works for UVTC 
and Uvs tourist 
street 
8,424,960 
OCB (IA) 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q2 2023 
W2 
Works for 
RANCC and 
Khovd tourist 
street 
8,338,240 
OCB (IA) 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q2 2023 
37 
Comments 
Advertising: 
National 
Number of 
Contracts: 2 
Bidding 
Document: 
Goods 
Advertising: 
National 
Number of 
Contracts: 1 
Bidding 
Document: 
Goods 
Advertising: 
International 
Number of 
Contracts: 1 
Bidding 
Document: 
Small works 
Advertising: 
International 
Bidding 
Documents: 
Large works 
Number of 
Contracts: 1 
Bidding 
Document: 
Small works 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, 1S1E = one stage-one envelope, N/A = not available, OCB (IA) = open competitive bidding 
(international advertisement), PIU = project implementation unit, Q = Quarter, RANCC = rock art and nomadic culture center, 
RFQ = Request for Quotation, UVTC = Uvs Tourism Complex. 
Package 
Number 
CS1 
General 
Description 
Ecotourism 
planning and 
protected area 
management 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
256,940 
Consulting Services 
Selection 
Method 
QCBS 
ADB 
Review 
Prior 
Type of 
Proposal 
BTP 
Advertisement 
Date 
Q2 2022 
CS2 
Detailed 
engineering 
474,900 
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
Q2 2022 
Comments 
Type: Firm 
Assignment: 
National 
Quality-Cost 
Ratio: 90:10 
Type: Firm 
38 
Package 
Number 
CS3 
CS5 
General 
Description 
design and 
construction 
supervision for 
UVTC and Uvs 
tourist street 
Detailed 
engineering 
design and 
construction 
supervision for 
RANCC and 
Khovd tourist 
street 
External 
environmental 
monitoring firm 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Consulting Services 
Selection 
Method 
ADB 
Review 
Type of 
Proposal 
Advertisement 
Date 
474,900 
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
Q2 2022 
Comments 
Assignment: 
National 
Quality-Cost 
Ratio: 90:10 
Type: Firm 
Assignment: 
National 
Quality-Cost 
Ratio: 90:10 
60,000 
CQS 
Prior 
BTP 
Q1 2023 
Type: Firm 
Assignment: 
National 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, BTP = biodata technical proposal, CQS = consultants’ qualifications selection, Q = 
quarter, QCBS = Quality and Cost-Based Selection, RANCC = rock art and nomadic culture center, UVTC = Uvs tourism 
complex. 
4. 
List of Indicative Packages (Contracts) Required Under the Project 
63. 
The  following  table  lists  goods,  works,  nonconsulting  services,  and  consulting  services 
contracts for which procurement activity is expected to commence beyond the procurement plan 
duration  and  over  the  life  of  the  project  (i.e.,  those  expected  beyond  the  current  procurement 
plan’s duration). 
Goods, Works and Nonconsulting Services 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
3,162,754 
Procurement 
Method 
OCB (IA) 
ADB 
Review 
Prior 
Bidding 
Procedure 
1S1E 
Package 
Number 
G3 
General 
Description 
Equipment and 
Furniture for 
RANCC, UVTC 
and 2 tourist 
streets 
Lot 1: UVTC and 
Uvs Tourist Street; 
1,708,814 
Lot 2: RANCC and 
Khovd Tourist 
Street 
Equipment for 
Digital Museum 
G4 
1,453,940 
344,379 
OCB (NA) 
Prior 
1S1E 
Comments 
Advertisement 
Date: Q2 2025 
Advertising: 
International 
Number of 
Contracts: 2 
Bidding 
Document: 
Goods 
Advertisement 
Date: Q2 2025 
Advertising: 
National 
Number of 
Contracts: 1 
Bidding 
Document: 
Goods 
G5 
Procurement of 
waste trucks and 
portable toilets 
Lot 1: Uvs Aimag 
Lot 2: Khovd 
Aimag 
Lot 3: Bayan-ulgii 
Aimag 
189,655 
OCB (NA) 
Prior 
1S1E 
59,627 
70,401 
59,627 
39 
Advertisement 
Date: Q1 2026 
Advertising: 
National 
Number of 
Contracts: 3 
Bidding 
Document: 
Goods 
ADB = Asian Development Bank,  1S1E = one stage-one envelope, OCB (NA) = open competitive bidding (national 
advertisement), Q = quarter, RANCC = rock art and nomadic culture center, UVTC = Uvs tourism complex. 
Package 
Number 
CS4 
General 
Description 
Detailed IT 
system design 
and 
establishment of 
supervision for 
Digital Museum in 
RANCC 
Consulting Services 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
850,000 
Selection 
Method 
QCBS 
ADB 
Review 
Prior 
Type of 
Proposal 
STP 
Advertisement 
Date (quarter, 
year) 
Q3 2023 
Comments 
Type: Firm 
Assignment: 
International 
Quality-Cost 
Ratio: 90:10 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IT = information technology, Q = quarter, QCBS = quality and cost-based selection, 
RANCC = rock art and nomadic culture center, STP = simplified technical proposal. 
5. 
List of Awarded and Completed Contracts 
The  following  table  lists  the  awarded  and  completed  contracts  for  goods,  works, 
64. 
nonconsulting and consulting services. 
Package 
Number 
[None] 
General 
Description 
Goods, Works, and Nonconsulting Services 
Contract 
Value 
Date of ADB Approval of 
Contract Award 
Date of 
Completion 
Comments 
ADB = Asian Development Bank. 
Package 
Number 
[None] 
General 
Description 
Contract 
Value 
ADB = Asian Development Bank. 
6. 
Non-ADB Financing 
Consulting Services 
Date of ADB Approval of 
Contract Award 
Date of 
Completion 
Comments 
The  following  table  lists  the  works,  goods,  nonconsulting,  and  consulting  services 
65. 
contracts over the life of the project, financed by non-ADB sources. 
Goods, Works, and Nonconsulting Services 
Estimated 
Value 
(cumulative, $) 
701,075 
Estimated 
Number of 
Contracts 
3 
Procurement 
Method 
OCB (NA) 
Comments 
Package Number: W3 
General Description 
Small works for 
protected areas (toilets, 
Goods, Works, and Nonconsulting Services 
Estimated 
Value 
(cumulative, $) 
Estimated 
Number of 
Contracts 
Procurement 
Method 
40 
General Description 
campsites, public 
cooking cabins, bird 
watching towers, ranger 
stations, fee collection 
stations) 
Lot 1: Uvs Aimag 
Lot 2: Khovd Aimag 
Lot 3: Bayan-ulgii Aimag 
Community participation 
works at 5 protected 
areas 
268,315 
249,380 
183,380 
162,000 
13 
(for 13 
CBOs) 
Comments 
Financing Source: JFPR grant 
Advertisement Date: Q2 2023 
ADB Review: Prior 
Bidding Document: small works 
CPP 
Package Number: CPP1 
Financing Source: JFPR grant 
Advertisement Date: Q3 2023 
ADB Review: Post 
Bidding Document: Mongolian CPP 
sample bidding documents  
ADB = Asian Development Bank, 1S1E = oner stage-one envelope, CBO = community- based organization, CPP = 
community participation in procurement; JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction, N/A = not applicable, OCB (NA) = 
open competitive bidding (national advertisement), PA = protected area, Q = Quarter. 
Consulting Services 
Estimated 
Value 
(cumulative, $) 
265,000 
Estimated 
Number of 
Contracts 
1 
Recruitment 
Method 
QCBS 
General Description 
Sustainable livelihoods, 
tourism business development, 
and capacity building 
Detailed engineering design 
and construction supervision 
for small works at 5 protected 
areas 
169,970 
1 
QCBS 
Comments 
Package Number: CS6 
Financing Source: JFPR grant 
Type: Firm 
Assignment: National 
Quality-Cost Ratio: 90:10 
Type of Proposal: BTP 
Advertisement Date: Q3 2022 
ADB Review: Prior review 
Package Number: CS7 
Financing Source: JFPR grant 
Type: Firm 
Assignment: National 
Quality-Cost Ratio: 90:10 
Type of Proposal: BTP 
Advertisement Date: Q3 2022 
ADB Review: Prior 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, BTP = biodata technical proposal, JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction, QCBS 
= quality- and cost- based selection. 
D. 
Consultant’s Terms of Reference 
66. 
Appendix 2 contains indicative TORs for firms to be financed from the ADB loan and for 
the  PIU  staff  positions. Appendix  3  contains indicative  TORs  for  firms to  be  financed from  the 
JFPR grant.
41 
42 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
67. 
Prohibited investment activities. Pursuant to ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS, 
2009), ADB funds may not be applied to the activities described on the ADB Prohibited Investment 
Activities List set forth at Appendix 5 of the Safeguard Policy Statement (2009). 
A. 
Environment 
Institutional  arrangements.  The  project  is  classified  by  ADB  as  Category  B  for 
68. 
environment.  The  project  environmental  safeguard  assessments  and  documents  comprise  an 
initial environmental examination (IEE) including an environmental management plan (EMP). The 
IEE and EMP have been disclosed on ADB’s website (www.adb.org). The EMP is in Appendix 1 
of the IEE. The EMP covers all project components. The IEE, and EMP have been prepared in 
compliance  with  ADB’s  SPS.  For  all  project  matters  relating  to  environmental  safeguards,  the 
EMP forms the basis of the official loan agreement between ADB and the executing agency. For 
domestic  requirements,  in  accordance  with  Mongolia’s  Law  on  EIA  (2012),  an  environmental 
baseline  assessment  has  been  prepared  and  a  General  EIA  (GEIA)  Letter  for  the  project  has 
been issued by the EIA Division of the Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET). The GEIA 
Letter issued by MET indicated that domestic detailed EIAs (a requirement under national law for 
projects assessed to have potentially significant environmental safeguard risks) will be required 
for the project-funded tourism facilities: these are scheduled to be completed by Q2 2023 (for the 
Uvs tourism complex) and Q2 2024 (for the rock art and nomadic cultural center) (under Activities 
2.1.1 and 4.2 in Section II.B [overall project implementation schedule]). Public consultation will 
continue during project implementation, and additional due diligence will occur if warranted by the 
finalized  project  investment  designs  including  additional  EBAs  and  preparation  of  GEIA 
applications for the MET to meet national EIA requirements. 
69. 
Content  of  the  EMP.  The  EMP  describes  (i)  the  project  environmental  safeguard 
objectives;  (ii)  roles  and  responsibilities  for  EMP  implementation;  (iii)  mitigation  measures;  (iv) 
inspection, monitoring, and reporting arrangements; (v) training and institutional strengthening; 
(vi)  a  project-specific  grievance  redress  mechanism;  (vii)  public  consultation  during  project 
implementation;  (viii)  a  COVID-19  risk  management  plan;  and  (ix)  a  feedback  and  adjustment 
mechanism.  The  EMP  identifies  specific  roles  and  responsibilities  for  all  agencies  that  will  be 
involved in EMP implementation. The scope and content of the EMP complies with ADB’s SPS 
for  environmental  safeguards  and  Mongolia’s  environmental  laws  and  regulations.  All  project 
agencies are required to comply with the EMP. In the event of any proposed changes in scope or 
project site locations, the IEE and EMP will be updated as needed, specifically to ensure that: (i) 
any new risks which are not covered by the IEE and EMP, are identified; and (ii) the mitigation, 
monitoring, and reporting measures in the EMP adequately address the environmental safeguard 
management for all sites. In such event, no site works will proceed until the IEE and EMP has 
been  updated  as  needed  and  re-disclosed  on  the  ADB  website.  All  project  locations  were 
confirmed  during  project  preparation,  especially  within  the  protected  areas.  Due  to  the  high 
ecological and/or cultural values of these protected areas, any changes in project location for any 
of the facilities, however small, will first be subject to review and endorsement by MET and ADB. 
70. 
EMP implementation. The EMP will be implemented in all phases of the project: design, 
pre-construction, construction, and operation. The PIU will be responsible for ensuring that the 
project will be designed, constructed, decommissioned, and operated in accordance with (i) the 
national and local government environmental, health, and safety laws, regulations, procedures, 
and guidelines; (ii) ADB’s SPS; and (iii) the IEE including the EMP. The executing agency, through 
the PIU, holds final responsibility for implementation of and compliance with the EMP. 
43 
For preparation of the detailed engineering designs for the project, the PIU will forward the 
71. 
EMP to the design firms that will be recruited for each package. The PIU environment safeguard 
specialist and other PIU staff will work with these firms to ensure that safeguard risks identified in 
the EMP are considered in the detailed designs and avoided, minimized, or mitigated. The EMP 
will  be  further  updated  at  the  end  of  the  detailed  design,  as  needed.  To  ensure  that  bidders 
respond  to  the  EMP  provisions,  the  PIU  will  prepare  and  provide  the  following  specification 
clauses  for  incorporation  into  the  bidding  documents:  (i)  a  list  of  environmental  management 
requirements  to  be  budgeted  by  the  bidders  in  their  proposals;  (ii)  environmental  clauses  for 
contractual terms and conditions; and (iii) the EMP, and domestic environmental assessments, 
for compliance. All tenders involving works will be required to include and fully address the EMP 
requirements, especially the mitigation and monitoring measures. 
Personnel.  The  EMP  will  be  under  the  responsibility  and  coordination  of  the  following 
72. 
agencies: (i) MET, the executing agency, is responsible for the overall implementation of the EMP; 
(ii)  MET’s  Department  of  Tourism  Policy  Coordination  and  Department  of  Protected  Areas 
Management, the implementing agencies, will jointly oversee EMP implementation; (iii) the PIU 
environmental safeguard specialist (national; part-time over 6 years) will be responsible for overall 
coordination of EMP implementation; (iv) the three PIU supervision officers – based in each aimag 
– will support the day-to-day implementation of the EMP; (v) as part of the counterpart support, 
each  aimag  government  will  assign  one  environment  safeguard  focal  officer  (from  the  aimag 
Department of Environment and Natural Resources), who will work with the PIU team to ensure 
effective  implementation  of  the  EMP  at  the  aimag,  soum,  and  site  levels,  (vi)  each  detailed 
engineering design and construction supervision firm, and each works contractor, will be required 
to have at least one on site environment, health, and safety officer, to monitor compliance of works 
with  the  EMP;  and  (vii)  one  external  environment  monitoring  firm  will  be  engaged,  to 
independently  assess  compliance  with  the  EMP.  At  the  end  of  the  first  year  of  project 
implementation, the EA and ADB will assess whether the number of person-months allocated for 
the  position  of  PIU  environment  safeguard  specialist  position  is  sufficient  to  ensure  effective 
implementation of the project EMP. Pending the results of this assessment, a portion of the loan 
budget will be allocated toward supporting additional person-months for the position, as needed. 
73. 
Capacity building. MET has previous experience in implementing ADB projects, but the 
aimag and soum governments have limited experience. To ensure effective implementation of the 
EMP, a capacity building program is included in the EMP for training of project agencies in EMP 
implementation,  mitigation  measures,  supervision,  monitoring,  reporting,  and  the  grievance 
redress  mechanism.  Training  will  be  provided  by  the  PIU  environment  safeguard  specialist. 
Trainees will include staff of the implementing agency, PIUs, contractors, construction supervision 
companies, and aimag and soum staff. 
74. 
Procedures for feedback and adjustment of the EMP, including in the event of non-
compliance.  Based  on  site  inspections  and  monitoring  reports,  the  PIU  shall  decide,  in 
consultation  with  the  implementing  agencies,  construction  supervision  firms,  and  external 
environment monitoring, firm whether (i) further mitigation measures are required as corrective 
actions,  or  (ii)  improvements  are  required  for  environmental  management  practices.  The 
effectiveness  of  mitigation  measures  and  monitoring  plans  will  be  evaluated  by  a  feedback 
reporting  system.  Adjustment  to  the  EMP  will  be  made,  if  necessary,  after  any  proposed 
adjustments are reviewed and endorsed by the executing agency and ADB. The PIU environment 
safeguard specialist and PIU Social, gender, and civil society specialist will play important roles 
in the feedback and adjustment mechanism. If during inspection and monitoring, non-compliance 
with the EMP is observed, or any changes are made to the project that may cause substantial 
adverse  environmental  impacts  or  increase  the  number  of  affected  people,  then  the  PIU  will 
44 
immediately  report  to  the  implementing  agency,  who  will  consult  with  ADB  and  form  an 
environmental assessment team to implement a corrective action plan and/or conduct additional 
environmental assessment. If necessary, further public consultation will be undertaken. A new or 
updated domestic environmental assessment(s) and IEE (including EMP) will be prepared and 
submitted to ADB for review, appraisal, and public disclosure. The revised EMP will be passed to 
the contractors, construction supervision consultants, and operators of the project facilities, for 
implementation. 
75.  Monitoring and reporting for environmental safeguard. See Chapter IX of this PAM. 
76. 
Climate  change.  Climate  mitigation  is  estimated  to  cost  $4.9  million  and  climate 
adaptation  is  estimated  to  cost  $0.5 million.  ADB  will  finance  100%  of mitigation  and  100%  of 
adaptation costs.47 
B. 
Involuntary Resettlement 
The project is categorized as C for involuntary resettlement. The project is not expected 
77. 
to  involve  involuntary  land  acquisition,  economic  or  physical  displacement,  or  involuntary 
restrictions  on  land  use  or  on  access  to  protected  areas.  All  works  and  activities  will  be 
implemented within the existing sites or on state-owned lands. A due diligence report confirming 
the category C on involuntary resettlement was prepared during the project preparation phase. 
The PIU will update the due diligence report during detailed design of relevant project components 
reconfirming that the following principles are met. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Land for civil works is located on land owned by aimag or soum governments. No 
encroachers or users are present on the land where works are planned. 
No physical displacement will result from civil works. 
No economic displacement/ structures affected or livelihood or source of income 
of structure owners affected from civil works. 
No vulnerable groups will be adversely affected in the proposed location of civil 
works. 
The land was not previously assigned to any entities. 
 No past or present concerns related to land acquisition is present on this land. 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii)  No restriction on land use or on access to protected areas from civil works. 
(viii)  The  updated  due  diligence  report  will  be  submitted  to  ADB  for  review  and 
clearance prior to award of civil works contracts. 
C. 
Indigenous Peoples 
78. 
The  project  is  categorized  as  “C”  on  indigenous  peoples  as  defined  under  the  ADB’s 
Safeguard Policy Statement (2009). The project is not expected to impact distinct and vulnerable 
communities  of  indigenous  peoples.  A  due  diligence  report  confirming  the  category  C  on 
indigenous peoples was prepared during the project preparation phase. The PIU will update the 
due diligence report during detailed design of relevant project components reconfirming that the 
project remains category C. The updated report will be submitted to ADB for review and clearance 
prior to award of civil works contracts. 
47  Climate Change Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2 of the ADB Report and 
Recommendations of the President to the Board of Directors). 
45 
D. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
79. 
A project grievance redress mechanism (GRM) has been developed in compliance with 
ADB’s SPS requirement to address environmental, health, safety, and social concerns associated 
with  project.  The  GRM  is  described  within  the  EMP  (Appendix  1  within the  IEE).  The  GRM  is 
designed  to  achieve  the  following  objectives:  (i)  provide  channels  of  communication  for  local 
communities to raise concerns about environmental and social-related grievances which might 
result  from  the  project,  (ii)  prevent  and  mitigate  adverse  environmental  and  social  impacts  to 
communities  caused  by  project  construction  and  operation,  and  (iii)  contribute  to  cooperation 
between  the  project  agencies  and  communities.  Public  grievances  related  to  the  project 
components to be addressed by the GRM may include damage to public roads, interruption of 
public services, dust emissions, noise, soil erosion, inappropriate disposal of waste materials, and 
safety for the general public and construction workers. The GRM is accessible to all members of 
the communities, including women, elderly, disabled youth, ethnic groups, and poverty-stricken 
residents.  Multiple  points  of  entry  are  available,  including  face-to-face  meetings,  written 
complaints, telephone conversations, e-mail, and social media. The details of the GRM, including 
a time-bound flow chart of procedures, are included in the project EMP (Appendix 1 in the IEE). 
The PIU will maintain an integrated reporting system to document, follow up, and report all cases. 
The PIU environment safeguard specialist and PIU Social, gender, and civil society specialist will 
train all relevant staff in the GRM. All project agencies will appoint GRM focal points and actively 
support implementation of the GRM. 
E. 
Public Consultation, Participation, and Stakeholder Communication 
Public  consultation  and  participation  during  project  implementation  are  particularly 
80. 
important for this project, as some of the project locations are within or near areas of high cultural 
heritage and/or biodiversity conservation values. During project preparation, consultations were 
held with communities at the proposed project sites, as well as national and international CSOs, 
development agencies, and aimag and soum government agencies, to discuss the designs and 
safeguards. To ensure continued consultation and participation during project implementation, a 
consultation and participation plan (CPP) (Appendix 5) and stakeholder communication strategy 
(SCS) (Appendix 6) have been prepared. 
81. 
The  CPP  and  SCS  emphasize  consultation,  and  dissemination  of  project  progress, 
throughout  implementation.  The  implementing  agencies  and  PIU  will  facilitate  and  implement 
consultations with communities in the project areas, and other key stakeholders such as CSOs, 
during preparation of the detailed designs, before and during construction, and operation of the 
project  facilities.  The  CPP  is  based  on  the  principles  of  meaningful  consultation,  including 
inclusive- and culturally-respectful approaches, prioritizing the involvement of women, vulnerable 
groups,  unemployed  people,  single-parent  households,  disabled  persons,  and  the  poor. 
Whenever  needed,  consultation methods  will  be tailored to the  specific  situations  of the target 
groups  e.g.  interviews  with  beneficiary  households,  meetings  with  women’s  groups  and  youth 
representatives, household visits to disabled persons, focused group discussions, and collective 
planning workshops. Concerns and suggestions raised by stakeholders and measures to address 
these  will  be  documented  in  the  project  reports  and  incorporated  as  part  of  the  appropriate 
measures.  Documentary  proof  of  consultations  (e.g.,  attendance  sheets,  minutes  of  meetings, 
experts' records, photographs) shall be included in the documentation. The CPP also includes 
introduction and use of the project GRM, and procedures to document the project consultations. 
The SCS focuses on the timely and effective dissemination of project activities, findings, 
82. 
and results, to stakeholders within and outside the project sites, including decision makers and 
46 
other donors and protected area managers. 
83. 
The PIU is responsible for ensuring that all consultation and disclosure documentation is 
properly  and  systematically  kept  as  part  of  the  project  records.  The  PIU  shall  make  relevant 
project disclosure documents available in a form, language, and at a location in which they can 
be  easily  accessed  by  all  stakeholders  including  residents.  The  results  of  environmental  and 
social monitoring reports will be included in the project semiannual progress reports to ADB, which 
will be posted on ADB’s website. 
F. 
Prohibited Investment Activities 
Pursuant to ADB’s SPS (2009), ADB funds may not be applied to the activities described 
84. 
on the ADB Prohibited Investment Activities List set forth at Appendix 5 of the SPS. 
47 
VIII. 
GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
A. 
Poverty Reduction and Social Development 
85. 
A key project objective is to maximize local benefits from the tourism sector, through the 
creation of diversified opportunities for stable income generation, prioritizing the local population, 
particularly women, youth, the poor, and other vulnerable groups (herders, disabled persons, and 
single-parent headed households); as well as through the environmentally-friendly infrastructure 
improvements that will benefit both the local communities and the tourism sector. 
86. 
The  project  has  been  designed  for  inclusive  and  sustainable  tourism  development, 
concentrating on the creation and distribution of equitable benefits to residents. The project will 
enhance tourism benefits for communities in the soums in and around project protected areas 
and  national  parks  by:  developing  the  first  western  Mongolia  regional  tourism  master  plan; 
upgrading  project  aimag  tourism  plans  (Bayan-Ulgii,  Khovd  and  Uvs);  promoting  favorable 
conditions  for  establishing  and  strengthening  local  tourism  products  and services;  establishing 
tourism  concession  manuals  for  project  protected  areas;  establishing  site  CBOs;  establishing 
tourism complexes and tourism streets; establishing youth incubators, providing focused training 
for specific products and services and skills, building on the JFPR-supported trainings; prioritizing 
links between the communities and tour operators; and strengthening and expanding the existing 
local  value  chains  for  tourism  goods  and  services,  to  expand  markets  and  employment 
opportunities. The project designs for social benefits build upon and utilize the JFPR-supported 
initiatives,  especially  the  CBOs,  and  community revolving  funds  established  under  the  project, 
and training for income diversification. 
87. 
Poverty  and  social  analyses  were  conducted  during  project  preparation.  The  project 
designs incorporate measures that target women, youth, the poor, and vulnerable groups. A social 
development  action  plan  (SDAP)  has  been  prepared  (Table  12)  and  comprises  measurable 
actions and indicators under each output to ensure that residents participate in and benefit from 
the  project.  The  PIU  Social,  Gender  and  Civil  Society  specialist  will  facilitate  and  coordinate 
implementation of the SDAP. 
B. 
Gender 
88. 
The  project  is  classified  “effective  gender  mainstreaming”  under  ADB’s  project  gender 
classification  system.  The  project  designs  emphasize  establishing  and/or  expanding  livelihood 
opportunities for women, and greater participation in decision-making, leadership, and business 
creation. A gender action plan (GAP) has been prepared (Table 13). The GAP provides design 
targets  to  ensure  that  women  benefit  from  the  project  through  women-led  tourism  markets, 
capacity building, tourism related opportunities, and direct roles in the community-based tourism 
planning and management. 
48 
Table 12: Social Development Action Plan 
Main Tasks/ Actions 
Key Objectives 
Output 1: Inclusive planning and capacity for community-based tourism enhanced 
Disseminate project information 
Inform community, 
including poor and 
vulnerable, and other 
stakeholders on the 
objectives and 
activities of the project  
a)  Conduct information campaign on project 
objectives and activities among residents 
at soum level 
b)  Ensure poor and vulnerable are targeted 
and reached by the information campaign 
c)  Youth will also be specifically targeted 
a)  Representatives from 3,710 HHs (including at 
least 30% youth and 30% poor and vulnerable) 
attended information campaign 
b)  All poor HHs received leaflet 
c)  Accessible information material on project 
Targets/Indicators 
activities distributed 
Baselines 2021: 0 
Responsible 
Schedule  Funding 
MET, PIU 
2022–2027 
Project 
budget  
Conduct consultations for regional tourism master plan, aimags tourism plans, tourism concession manuals, and eco-certification for tour camps in 
protected areas 
Empowerment of 
local community 
including poor and 
vulnerable 
a)  18 local CSOs representatives (6 per aimag), 
participated in stakeholder consultations, 
including 33% local youth organizations 
a)  Engage CSOs in developing tourism 
b)  Universal access principles adopted in tourism 
2022–2027 
MET, PIU 
b) 
Project 
budget  
plans, tourism concession manuals, and 
eco-certification 
Include perspectives of disabled persons 
and their specific needs in plans and 
manuals 
Include provisions in manuals, 
ecotourism standards, and tourism plans 
that local residents are given priority job 
placement in tour camps/businesses 
c) 
plan and manuals 
c)  New concession manuals and eco-certification 
program incorporated requirement of tour 
camps /businesses to employ majority staff 
from local communities, including poor and 
vulnerable people 
Baselines 2021: 0 
Establish CBOs for five sites: ATBNP, including PCMA (Bayan-Ulgii); KUNNP and TSC (Khovd); KKNP and UVSPA (Uvs) 
Empowerment 
of 
community,  including 
poor and vulnerable 
a)  Establish CBOs for respective sites; 
b)  Provide training and capacity building to 
members, including at least 30% members 
being youth and 30% poor and vulnerable 
a)  13 CBOs established with 39 executive 
CBOs 
MET, PIU 
2022–2027 
Project 
budget  
Establish 2 tourism streets in Khovd and Uvs Aimags centers 
Increase income from 
tourism for local 
vendors including 
poor and vulnerable  
Involve residents in the design of the 
tourist streets through consultation 
workshops in each aimag center 
Install market stalls for local vendors in 
each of the 2 tourist streets 
a) 
b) 
c)  Promote local community goods and 
services 
b)  All members of CBOs are trained on 
leadership skills and management capacity 
Baselines 2021: 0 
a)  Representatives of 719 HHs in Jargalant soum 
and 657 HHs in Ulaangom soum including 30% 
of youth and 30% poor and vulnerable involved 
in consultations for design of tourist streets 
b)  87 market stalls (Ulaangom: 27; Jargalant: 60) 
allocated  to  local  vendors  including  30%  for 
poor and vulnerable 
MET, PIU 
2022–2027 
Project 
budget  
Key Objectives 
Main Tasks/ Actions 
Targets/Indicators 
Responsible 
Schedule  Funding 
d)  Promote local traditions 
c)  Regular local traditional events are organized 
Baselines 2021: 0 
49 
a)  Establish Community Revolving Funds 
Establish community revolving funds for 5 sites (ATBNP, KUNNP, KKNP, UVSPA and TSC) 
Improve the 
livelihoods of local 
communities 
including poor and 
vulnerable through 
access to micro credit 
b)  Establish CRF committees 
c)  Public announcement in each soum 
about process of loan application and 
CRF criteria 
a)  230 HHs representatives obtained CRF 
including 30% youth and 30% poor and 
vulnerable 
b)  CRF committees established including 33% 
youth and 33% poor and vulnerable members; 
($400,000) 
d)  Provide training (i.e. financial 
management, leadership etc.) to CRF 
committees members 
e)  Prepare CRF handbooks 
c)  CRF information including loan applications 
forms are publicly available in each soum 
d)  All CRF committee members received relevant 
training 
e)  CRF handbooks are prepared 
Baselines 2021: 0 
a)  Organize vocational training for residents 
Strengthen local competitiveness and capacity to obtain tourism jobs 
Providing residents 
with technical and 
financial skills to 
improve livelihood 
and productivity 
on production of tourist goods/services, 
marketing and finance 
b)  Provide counseling on job placement for 
residents to get tourism related job 
c)  Facilitate trainee application to CRF 
a)  1,855 HHs representatives including 30% youth 
and 30% poor and vulnerable are trained in 
tourism goods and services 
b)  All trainees received counseling on job 
placement and for CRF application 
Baselines 2021: 0 
Establish youth incubators to provide advice and assistance to small and medium businesses in the tourism sector 
Creation of youth 
incubators for 
creating an enabling 
environment for youth 
entrepreneurs 
a)  Engage local youth organizations and 
economic actors in developing youth 
incubators 
b)  Provide technical support, mentoring 
and advice for youth-led initiatives 
b)  30 workspaces in the incubators are provided to 
a)  2 youth incubators (one in RANCC and one in 
c)  30 youth entrepreneurs received training, 
UVTC) are established 
youth entrepreneurs 
MET, PIU 
2022–2027 
MET, PIU 
2022–2027 
Project 
budget  
MET, PIU 
2022–2027 
Project 
budget  
c)  Facilitate use of the Community 
mentoring, and advice on youth-led initiatives 
Revolving Fund for youth-led-initiatives 
Baselines 2021: 0 
Output 2: Enabling infrastructure constructed  
Provide employment opportunities for residents, during construction and O&M of UVTC and tourism street in Ulaangom 
Creating  employment 
opportunities for local 
residents 
including 
poor and vulnerable  
567 (31 skilled, 536 unskilled) jobs during 
construction and operation are provided to 
residents, including 30% poor and vulnerable 
Baselines 2021: 0 
Provide priority employment to residents 
during construction and maintenance of 
UVTC and tourist street 
MET, PIU 
2022–2027 
Project 
budget  
Conduct awareness campaign on safety, HIV/AIDS/STIs prevention and domestic violence at tourism sites (this covers other outputs also) 
Prevention of 
accidents, domestic 
violence HIV/AIDS, 
a)  2,000  residents  attended  awareness  raising 
events including 30% youth and 30% poor and 
vulnerable. 
a)  Conduct awareness raising for residents 
on domestic violence, safety issues, and 
MET, PIU, 
Soum Health 
Center 
2022–2027 
Project 
budget 
Targets/Indicators 
b)  All  construction  workers  attended  training  on 
Responsible 
Schedule  Funding 
50 
Key Objectives 
STIs, for workers and 
residents  
Main Tasks/ Actions 
HIV/AIDS/STIs prevention during 
construction and operation 
HIV/AIDS/STI 
Baselines 2021: 0 
b)  Provide construction workers under the 
project training on HIV/AIDS/STI 
Output 3: Sanitation and waste management improved 
Improve sanitation and waste water at tourist camps and public places at ATBNP, KUNNP, KKNP, UVSPA, and TSC 
Improve sanitation at 
tourism sites to meet 
MET standards 
a)  3,710  residents  trained  on  public  sanitation, 
including  30%  youth  and  30%  poor  and 
vulnerable 
a)  Provide training to residents on use of 
public sanitation, including toilets, and 
wastewater collection 
b)  Ensure that toilet design features meet 
b)  At least 1 toilet in each tourism site meets needs 
needs of people with disabilities 
of disabled people 
Improve solid waste 
management in tour 
camps 
a)  Conduct awareness raising for residents 
on solid waste management 
b)  Establish and distribute solid waste 
management procedures to tourists and 
local residents 
Baselines 2021: 0 
a)  3,710 persons attended awareness raising on 
solid waste management, including at least 
30% youth and 30% poor and vulnerable 
people 
b)  Leaflets on solid waste management 
procedures are prepared and distributed 
MET, PIU 
2022–2027 
Project 
budget  
MET, PIU 
2022–2027 
Project 
budget  
Provide priority employment to residents 
during construction and maintenance of small 
facilities for tourism development  
Provide employment 
opportunities for local 
residents including 
poor and vulnerable 
Output 4: Management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened 
Provide employment opportunities for residents during construction and O&M of RANCC and tourist street in Jargalant 
Provide employment 
opportunities for local 
residents including 
poor and vulnerable 
a)  614 jobs (32 skilled and 582 unskilled) during 
construction and operation are provided to 
residents, including at least 30% to poor and 
vulnerable 
Baselines 2021: 0 
176 jobs (36 skilled and 140 unskilled) during 
construction and operation are provided to 
residents, including 30% to poor and vulnerable 
Baselines 2021: 0 
a)  Provide priority employment to residents 
during construction and maintenance of 
RANCC and tourist street in Jargalant 
b)  Employ CBOs to manage the project-
supported small facilities at each site 
(campsites, toilets, bird towers, litter) 
MET, PIU 
MET, PIU 
2022–2027 
Project 
budget  
2022–2027 
Project 
budget  
b)  39 personnel from CBOs employed to manage 
the small facilities including 30% poor and 
vulnerable 
Baseline 2021: 0 
90 staff of relevant agencies and organizations are 
trained on park management 
Baseline: 0 
MET, PIU 
2022–2027 
Project 
budget  
Build capacity of stakeholders 
Provide stakeholders 
with park 
management skills 
Provide training to staff of government 
agencies, operators of project facilities, 
management councils, CSOs, youth 
organizations, and other stakeholders on 
aspects of revised park management 
Involve stakeholders in revision of management plans 
Key Objectives 
Empowerment of 
local CSOs 
Main Tasks/ Actions 
Engage CSO representatives in revising park 
management plans 
Targets/Indicators 
6  CSOs  in  each  site  consulted  in  preparation  and 
revision of park management plan 
Baseline: 0 
Responsible 
MET, PIU 
Schedule  Funding 
Project 
2022–2027 
budget  
AIDS = acquired immune deficiency syndrome, ATBNP = Altai Tavan Bogd National Park, CBO = community-based organizations, CRF = community revolving fund, CSO = 
civil society organization, km = kilometer, HH = households, HIV = human immunodeficiency virus, KKNP = Khan Khukhii National Park, KUNNP = Khar Us Nuur National Park, 
MET = Ministry of Environment and Tourism, O&M = operation and maintenance, PCMA = Petroglyphic Complexes of the Mongolian Altai, PIU = project implementation unit, 
RANCC = rock art and nomadic culture center, STI = sexually transmitted infection, TSC = Tsenkher Cave, UVSPA = Uvs Nuur Strictly Protected Area, UVTC = Uvs tourism 
complex, WWTP = waste water treatment plant. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
51 
52 
Table 13: Gender Action Plan 
Actions 
Output 1: Inclusive planning and capacity for community-based tourism enhanced 
Disseminate project information 
Conduct gender-focused information campaign on project 
objectives, scope, and activities 
least 50% women are informed 
Performance Indicators/Targets 
a)  3,710 representatives of beneficiary households including at 
Responsible  Schedule  Funding 
MET, PIU 
2022–2027  Project 
budget  
b)  Gender-targeted information materials on project sites, women-
led market, CBOs, revolving funds, etc. prepared and distributed 
Baselines 2021: 0 
Conduct consultations for regional tourism master plan, aimag tourism plans, tourism concession manuals, and eco-certification for tour camps  
a)  Engage CSOs including women-led CSOs in developing 
tourism plans, tourism concession manuals and eco-
certification to promote local employment 
Include perspectives of women and their specific needs in 
the tourism plans and concession manuals 
b)  New tourism plans and concession manuals include priority 
employment for local residents, including a target for women 
a)  18 CSOs including 33% women-led CSOs participate in 
relevant consultation activities 
Baselines 2021: 0 
b) 
MET, PIU   2022–2027  Project 
budget  
Establish CBOs for at least five sites: ATBNP including the PCMA (Bayan-Ulgii); KUNNP and TSC (Khovd); KKNP and UVSPA (Uvs) 
a)  Establish CBOs for respective sites 
b) 
Include women representatives in CBOs 
c)  Encourage women leadership in CBOs  
a)  13  CBOs  established  with  total  39  executive  members 
including at least 50% of women 
b)  33% CBOs are led by women 
c)  All  women  members  of  CBOs  are trained  on  leadership  skills 
MET, PIU   2022–2027  Project 
budget  
and management capacity 
Baselines 2021: 0 
Establish women-led markets at two tourism streets in Khovd and Uvs aimags centers and five protected areas: ATBNP, KUNNP, KKNP, UVSPA, TSC 
a)  Establish women-led markets and allocate market stalls to 
women in respective sites to increase income opportunities 
and empowerment of women 
a)  Nine women-led markets established, and 60% of market stalls 
MET, PIU   2022–2027  Project 
budget  
are allocated to women 
b)  Nine cooperatives established for women-led markets 
Baselines 2021: 0 
b)  Establish cooperatives for women-led markets 
Establish community revolving funds for five sites (ATBNP, KUNNP, KKNP, UVSPA, and TSC) 
a) 
b)  Facilitate women to prepare application forms for CRF to 
Include women in CRF committees 
a)  40% CRF committee members are women 
b)  33% CRF committees are led by women 
c)  230 HH representatives obtained CRF support, including 60% 
support their businesses 
c)  Provide specialized training to CRF committee members, 
women 
including women 
d)  All CRF committee members, including women are given 
training on financial, management, leadership etc. 
Baselines 2021: 0 
Strengthen local competitiveness and capacity to obtain tourism jobs 
d)  Organize vocational training for residents on production of 
tourist goods/services and on marketing and finance 
e)  Provide counseling on job placement for residents to get 
tourism related jobs 
placement 
Baselines 2021: 0 
products and services. 
a)  1,855 residents including 50% women are trained on tourism 
b)  All trainees, including 50% women, received counseling on job 
MET, PIU   2022–2027  Project 
budget  
MET, PIU   2022–2027  Project 
budget  
Actions 
Output 2: Enabling infrastructure constructed 
Provide employment opportunities for residents, during construction and O&M of UVTC and tourist street in Ulaangom 
a)  Provide priority employment to residents, including women, 
a)  567 (31 skilled and 536 unskilled) jobs are provided to 
Performance Indicators/Targets 
during construction and maintenance of UVTC and tourist 
street in Ulaangom 
residents, including at least 40% women 
b)  All construction sites have separate toilets for women 
Baselines 2021: 0 
b)  Provide equal job opportunities to men and women 
c)  Provide separate toilets for women at construction sites 
Conduct awareness campaign on safety, HIV/AIDS/STI prevention and domestic violence at tourism sites 
a)  Conduct awareness raising for residents on HIV/AIDS/STI 
a)  2,000  residents  including  50%  women  attended  awareness 
for  HIV/AIDS/STI  prevention  and  domestic 
prevention and domestic violence 
b)  Provide all construction workers training on HIV/AIDS/STI 
raising  events 
violence 
b)  All construction workers attended training on HIV/AIDS/STI 
Baselines 2021: 0 
Output 3: Sanitation and waste management improved 
Improve sanitation and wastewater at tourist camps and public places at ATBNP, PCMA, KUNNP, KKNP, UVSPA, and TSC 
c)  Provide training to residents on sanitation 
d)  Design toilet design features meeting needs of women 
e)  Provide priority employment to residents during 
a)  WASH training program implemented for about 3,710 residents 
b)  About 60 gender-sensitive toilets (at least 50% for women) 
including about 50% women 
construction and maintenance of relevant facilities  
constructed at public campsites and car parks 
c)  176 jobs (36 skilled and 140 unskilled) provided to residents, 
including 40% women 
Baselines: 0 
Output 4: Management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened 
Provide employment opportunities for residents during construction and O&M of RANCC and tourist street in Jargalant 
a)  614 jobs (32 skilled and 582 unskilled) provided to residents, 
c)  Provide priority employment to residents, including women, 
during construction and maintenance of RANCC and tourist 
street in Jargalant 
including 40% women 
b)  All construction sites have separate toilets for women and men 
c)  The small management facilities are managed by CBOs and 
d)  Provide equal job opportunities to men and women 
e) 
f)  Engage CBO including women to manage small facilities at 
Install separate toilets for women and men at construction sites 
employ about 176 residents (40% women) 
53 
Responsible  Schedule  Funding 
MET, PIU   2022–2027  Project 
budget  
MET, PIU, 
soum health 
center 
2022–2027  Project 
budget 
MET, PIU   2022–2027  Project 
budget  
MET, PIU   2022–2027  Project 
budget  
each protected area (campsites, toilets, bird towers, litter) 
Baselines 2021: 0 
Build capacity of stakeholders 
a)  Provide training to staff of government agencies, operators 
of project facilities, CSOs, and other stakeholders on 
relevant management aspects 
a)  At least 120 people (40% women and 30% youth) of CBOs, tour 
camps, park administrations, and soum agencies trained and report 
improved skills in O&M of project facilities 
MET, PIU   2022–2027  Project 
budget  
b)  Engage CSOs in revising park management plans 
b)  Six CSOs including two women-led CSOs consulted in 
preparation and revision of each park management plan 
Baselines: 0 
AIDS = acquired immune deficiency syndrome, ATBNP = Altai Tavan Bogd National Park, CRF = community revolving fund, CBO = community-based organization, CSO = civil society 
organization, HIV = human immunodeficiency virus, KKNP = Khan Khukhii National Park, KUNNP = Khar Us Nuur National Park, MET = Ministry of Environment and Tourism, O&M = 
operation and maintenance, PCMA = Petroglyphic Complexes of the Mongolian Altai, PIU = project implementation unit, RANCC = rock art and nomadic culture center, STI = sexually 
transmitted infection, TSC = Tsenkher Cave, UVSPA = Uvs Nuur Strictly Protected Area, UVTC = Uvs tourism complex. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
54 
IX.  PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND COMMUNICATION 
A. 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
Impact the Project is Aligned with 
Sustainable tourism development in Mongolia improved and diversified (National Program on Tourism Development, 
2016–2025)a 
Data Sources and 
Reporting 
Mechanisms 
Risks and 
Critical 
Assumptions 
a.–d. Protected area 
and aimag and soum 
annual reports; and 
project technical and 
progress reports 
R: Tourism 
declines again 
due to COVID-
19, other 
pandemics, or 
slow economy 
R: Changes in 
political 
leadership 
and/or 
development 
priorities disrupt 
project 
implementation 
1a.–f. Protected area 
and soum annual 
reports; project 
technical and progress 
reports; workshop 
and/or training 
attendance forms; and 
reports on participant 
surveys 
R: Decreased 
support from 
commercial 
operators to 
involve 
communities in 
tourism 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
Sustainability 
and 
inclusiveness of 
tourism in 
western 
Mongolia 
increased 
1.   
Performance Indicators 
By 2028 
a. Governments of Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd and Uvs 
aimags meet specific targets for livelihoods, 
conservation, and waste management in the 
approved regional tourism master plan (2020 
baseline: not applicable) (OP 4.2.1) 
b. About 1,349 jobs (40% women, 60% men) 
generated, of which at least 30% filled by youth and 
30% poor (2020 baseline: 0) (OP 1.2, OP 2.1, OP 
5.1) 
c. At least 90% of tour camp operations in about 5 
sites (ATBNP, KKNP, KUNNP, TSC, UVSPA) 
comply with tour camp concession manual, 
including targets for local employment and 
sanitation (2020 baseline: not applicable) (OP 3.3.4) 
d.  ATBNP,  KUNNP,  KKNP,  and  UVSPA  meet  the 
social,  environmental,  and  sustainability  criteria  of 
the IUCN Green List of Protected Conserved Areasb
(2020 baseline: 0) 
Outputs 
1. Inclusive 
planning and 
capacity for 
community-
based tourism 
enhanced 
By 2027: 
1a. One regional tourism master plan developed, 
and three aimag tourism plans revised to include 
targets for tourism, livelihoods, gender, sanitation, 
and conservation, and also support cross-border 
tourism arrangements (2020 baseline: 0) (OP 2.3.2, 
OP4.2.1, OP 7.2.2) 
1b. Tour camp concession manual and certification 
program produced, implemented by MET, and 
piloted for at least five sites (ATBNP, KKNP, 
KUNNP, TSC, UVSPA) (2020 baseline: not 
developed) (OP 3.3.4) 
1c. Two tourist streets and nine women-led tourist 
marketsc
 constructed (2020 baseline: 0) (OP 2.1.4, 
OP 5.1.1) 
With JFPR support 
1d. Pilot tourism development program established 
and at least 1,855 residents (50% women and 30% 
youth), 13 CBOs, and 80 MSME trained and report 
improved skills in tourism business planning, goods, 
and services (e.g., food supply, accommodation, 
tour camp services, guiding) (2019 baseline: 970 
residents)d (OP 2.2) 
1e. At least 230 loans issued under the pilot tourism 
development program to households, CBOs, and 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators 
55 
Data Sources and 
Reporting 
Mechanisms 
Risks and 
Critical 
Assumptions 
2. Enabling 
infrastructure 
constructed 
3. Sanitation 
and waste 
management 
improved 
4. Management 
of cultural 
heritage sites 
and protected 
areas 
strengthened 
MSME of which at least 60% of loan applications 
are by woman and 30% by youth (2020 baseline: 0) 
(OP 2.1.3) 
1f. About 13 CBOs established, of which at least 50% 
of members are women (2020 baseline: 0) (OP 2.3) 
2a.  UVTC  constructed  and  meets  EDGE  green 
building standarde (2020 baseline: 0) (OP 3.2.5) 
2b. 1.2 circuit-km of new transmission line to UVTC 
are installed (2020 baseline: 0) 
2c.  12  car  parks  with capacity  for  240 vehicles  are 
constructed  at  ATBNP,  KKNP,  KUNNP,  TSC, 
UVSPA,  with  associated  gates,  signs,  and  speed 
humps (2020 baseline: eight carparks) (OP 3.3.4) 
With JFPR support 
3a. About 60 gender-sensitive toilets (at least 50% for 
women, 10% with wheelchair access) constructed at 
public campsites and car parks in five sites (ATBNP, 
KKNP, KUNNP, TSC, UVSPA) (2020 baseline: 0) (OP 
2.4.1, OP 3.3.1, OP 3.3.4, OP 5.1.1) 
3b. WASH training program implemented for about 
3,710 residents including about 50% women, 30% 
youth, and 30% poor, in 22 soums (2020 baseline: 
not implemented) (OP 3.3.4) 
3c.  At  least  95%  of  beneficiaries  under  the  pilot 
tourism development program (output 1) and 95% of 
22  soum  governments  in  the  project  sites  report 
adoption  of  new  WASH  hygiene  and  sanitation 
protocols (2021 baseline: not applicable) (OP 3.3) 
4a. RANCC is constructed and meets EDGE green 
building standarde (2020 baseline: not constructed) 
4b. Digital Museum is established, operational, and 
promotes rock art, education, and tourism (2020 
baseline: not established) (OP 3.2.5) 
With JFPR support 
4c. At least 35 small management facilities 
constructed in five sites (ATBNP, KKNP, KUNNP, 
TSC, UVSPA), including about six campsites, three 
information centers, 11 information points, two 
birdwatching towers, two cooking cabins, three 
ranger stations, six fee collection stations, and 
upgrade of two existing public trails (2020 baseline: 
not established) (OP 5.1.1) 
4d. The small management facilities are managed 
by CBOs and employ about 176 residents (40% 
women, 30% youth, and 30% poor) (2020 baseline: 
0) (OP 1.2, OP 2.1) 
4e. At least 120 people (40% women and 30% youth) 
of CBOs, tour camps, park administrations, and soum 
agencies trained and report improved skills in O&M of 
project facilities (2020 baseline: 0) (OP 2.2, OP 6.1.1) 
2a.–c. Protected area 
annual reports; Local 
Authorization for State 
Inspection reports; 
engineering company 
reports; and project 
technical and progress 
reports 
3a.–c. Protected area 
annual reports; Local 
Authorization for State 
Inspection reports; 
engineering company 
reports; and project 
technical and progress 
reports 
4a.–g. Protected area 
annual reports; Local 
Authorization for State 
Inspection reports; 
engineering company 
reports; project 
technical and progress 
reports; workshop 
and/or training 
attendance forms; and 
reports on participant 
surveys 
56 
Results Chain 
Data Sources and 
Reporting 
Mechanisms 
Risks and 
Critical 
Assumptions 
Performance Indicators 
4f.  At  least  two  sites  (ATBNP,  TSC)  with  revised 
management plans (2020 baseline: 0) (OP 3.3.3) 
4g. Management effectiveness score of at least two 
sites (ATBNP, TSC) rated as >70% (2021 baseline: 
not applicable)f (OP 3.3.4, OP 6.1) 
Key Activities with Milestones 
1. 
1.1.  Recruit ecotourism firm by Q1 2023. 
1.2.  Recruit design firm for the tourist streets and women-led markets by Q1 2023, complete detailed designs and 
Inclusive planning and capacity for community-based tourism enhanced 
award the contract by Q1 2024, and complete works by Q3 2026. 
1.3.  Establish CBOs by Q4 2023. 
1.4.  Prepare tourism concession manual and eco-certification program by Q4 2023. 
1.5.  Establish, implement, and monitor pilot tourism development program: Q1 2023–Q4 2027. 
1.6.  Prepare regional tourism plan by Q4 2023 and revise aimag tourism master plans by Q2 2024. 
Enabling infrastructure constructed 
2. 
2.1.  For UVTC, complete detailed designs and award contract by Q1 2024, and complete construction by Q3 
2026. Prepare business management and O&M plan by Q4 2025. 
2.2.  For carparks and traffic management plans in 5 sites (ATBNP, KKNP, KUNNP, TSC, UVSPA), complete 
detailed designs and construction by Q4 2025. 
2.3.  Make assets operational by Q4 2026. 
Sanitation and waste management improved 
3. 
3.1.  Design water, sanitation, and hygiene program by Q3 2023 and implement from Q4 2023–Q4 2027. 
3.2.  For toilet systems in 5 sites (ATBNP, KKNP, KUNNP, TSC, UVSPA), recruit design firm by Q2 2023, complete 
detailed designs and award contract by Q2 2024, and complete construction by Q3 2026. 
Management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened 
4. 
4.1.  For RANCC, complete detailed designs and award contract by Q2 2024, and complete construction by Q3 
2026. Prepare business management and O&M plan by Q4 2025. 
4.2.  For Digital Museum, recruit IT design firm by Q2 2024 and make Digital Museum operational by Q4 2025. 
4.3.  Conduct assessment of protected area management capacity for 5 sites (ATBNP, KKNP, KUNNP, TSC, 
UVSPA) using METT by Q1 2023. 
4.4.  For the small facilities in 5 sites (ATBNP, KKNP, KUNNP, TSC, UVSPA), recruit design firm by Q2 2023, 
complete detailed designs and award contract by Q1 2024, and complete construction by Q3 2026. 
4.5.  Complete revision of 2 site management plans (ATBNP, TSC) by Q4 2025. 
4.6.  Conduct training for O&M of the project facilities: Q3 2024–Q4 2027. 
Project Management Activities 
Establish project implementation unit by Q1 2022. 
Prepare annual work plans. Meet targets in the design and monitoring framework, social development action plan, 
gender action plan, consultation and participation plan, stakeholder communication strategy, and project 
administration manual (2022–2027). 
Monitor and evaluate the project outcome and outputs using sex-disaggregated project performance monitoring 
system, and submit semiannual progress reports and inception, midterm, and final reports (2022–2027). 
Implement the environmental management plan and submit semiannual reports (2022–2027). 
Conduct inception, annual, midterm and final review missions (2022–2027). 
Submit project annual financial audit reports (2022–2027). 
Submit the project completion report by 2028. 
Inputs 
ADB: $30.0 million (loan) 
JFPR Grant: $2.0 million (grant) 
Government: $0.3 million 
Beneficiaries: in-kind: (i) residents’ time to implement CBOs; and (ii) private sector costs – time and costs by MSMEs 
and tour camp companies to attend project trainings and adopt standards for eligibility in the eco-certification program 
and sanitation standards. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ATBNP = Altai Tavan Bogd National Park, CBO = community-based organization, 
COVID-19 = coronavirus disease, EDGE = excellence in design for greater efficiencies, IUCN = International Union for 
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, IT = information technology, JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction, 
KKNP = Khan Khukhii National Park, km = kilometer, KUNNP = Khar Us Nuur National Park, MET = Ministry of Tourism, 
57 
METT  =  management  effectiveness  tracking  tool,  MSMEs  =  micro,  small,  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  O&M  = 
operation and maintenance, OP = operational priority, Q = quarter, RANCC = rock art research and tourism center, R 
= risk, TSC = Tsenkher Cave, UVTC = Uvs tourism complex, UVSPA = Uvs Nuur Strictly Protected Area, WASH = 
water, sanitation and hygiene. 
a  Government of Mongolia. 2015. National Program on Tourism Development, 2016–2030. Ulaanbaatar. 
b  IUCN. 2016. IUCN Green List of Protected and Conserved Areas: Standard, Version 1.0. Gland. 
c  The markets will be managed by local women’s groups and will allocate a majority of stalls to women vendors. Two 
will be funded under the loan and seven will be funded under the grant. 
d The beneficiary target of 1,855 residents represents 1,855 households in the project area with a total 2020 population 
of 8,162 residents. No training was conducted in 2020 due to the COVID pandemic. 
e  Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies standard. 
f  Baseline values will be measured using the management effectiveness tracking tool. S. Stolton and N. Dudley. 2016. 
METT Handbook: A Guide to Using the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool. London: WWF-UK. 
Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities 
The expected values and methodological details for all OP indicators to which this operation will contribute results are 
detailed in Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 
two  of  the  report  and  recommendation of  the  President). In  addition  to  the  OP  indicators  tagged  in  the  design  and 
monitoring framework, this operation will contribute results for: 
OP 1.3 Poor and vulnerable people with improved standards of living (number) 
OP 2.1.1 Women enrolled in technical and vocational education and training and other job training (number) 
OP 3.1 Total annual greenhouse gas emissions reduction in tons of carbon dioxide equivalent per year (tCO2e/year) 
OP 6.2 Entities with improved service delivery (number) 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
B. 
Monitoring 
89. 
Project performance monitoring. To monitor the progress of the project in achieving the 
planned outcome and outputs, the PIU is responsible for the establishment and maintenance of 
the project performance management system (PPMS)—equivalent to a management information 
system—which will permit adequate flexibility to adopt remedial action regarding project design, 
schedules, activities, and development impacts. In addition, risk management for the project shall 
be  incorporated  in  the  PPMS.  The  monitoring  will  cover  all  indicators  listed  in  the  design  and 
monitoring  framework  (DMF)  as  well  as  the  indicators  reflecting  the  development  results 
contributed  by  the  project.  The  PPMS  will  cover  the  following  aspects  of  the  project 
implementation: (i) project physical and financial progress; (ii) progress and results of capacity 
development; (iii) implementation of the EMP; (iv) implementation of the SDAP and GAP; and (v) 
compliance with loan covenants (policy, financial, economic, sector, and others). 
90. 
At the beginning of project implementation, the PIU will finalize the comprehensive PPMS 
procedures  to  systematically  generate  data  in  the  above  areas.  The  PIU  will  refine  the  PPMS 
framework,  confirm  achievable  targets  and  the  monitoring  and  recording  arrangements,  and 
establish relevant systems and procedures not later than 6 months after project implementation 
begins.  The  PIU  will  assign  staff  or  consultants  to  collect  baseline  and  progress  data  at  the 
requisite time intervals, including progress report on the implementation of the EMP, SDAP, and 
GAP. The PIU will be responsible for analyzing and consolidating reported data through its PPMS, 
and reporting outcomes to ADB through semiannual progress reports. 
91. 
A project progress report, monitoring the project inputs and activities, will be submitted to 
ADB  on  a  semiannually  basis,  starting  from  project  effectiveness.  The  semiannual  progress 
reports will provide information necessary to update ADB’s PPMS. 
92. 
Promptly after physical completion of the project, but not later than 6 months thereafter or 
such later date as ADB may agree for this purpose, MET will prepare and submit to ADB a project 
completion report (PCR), in such form and in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request, on the 
implementation and evaluation of the project, including project description, evaluation of design 
58 
and implementation, evaluation of performance, and overall assessment and recommendations. 
93. 
Compliance  monitoring.  During  project  implementation,  ADB  and  MET  will  closely 
monitor the compliance of all the covenants under the project; and will take necessary remedy 
actions  for  any  non-compliance.  The  compliance  status  will  be  reported  in  the  semiannual 
progress  report  by  MET  and  will  be  reviewed  during  project  review  missions.  Compliance 
monitoring will also be undertaken by (i) the PIU environment safeguard specialist, supported by 
the  other  PIU  specialists,  construction  supervision  companies,  and  external  environment 
monitoring  firm,  to  ensure  compliance  of  all  relevant  agencies  with  the  EMP;  and  (ii)  the  PIU 
Social, gender, and civil society specialist, to ensure overall compliance with the relevant social 
and gender targets and requirements. Semiannual environmental monitoring reports and social 
monitoring reports will be prepared by the PIU on behalf of MET, and submitted to ADB. 
94. 
Environmental safeguards monitoring. The EMP includes a monitoring plan for the pre-
construction, construction, and operation phases of the project. Three types of monitoring will be 
conducted:  (i)  environmental  impact  monitoring,  to  be  conducted  by  the  contractors,  and 
supervised by detailed engineering design and construction supervision companies, with overall 
coordination by the PIU environment safeguard specialist; (ii) overall compliance monitoring, to 
ensure  the  EMP  requirements  –  including  the  impact  monitoring  as  well  as  mitigation  and 
reporting requirements – are being implemented. The compliance monitoring will be conducted 
by the PIU environment safeguard specialist. The monitoring will in particular assess compliance 
with  project  measures  to  manage  water  use  and  waste  management;  and  (iii)  external 
environmental  monitoring,  to  be  conducted  by  a  qualified  independent  firm  that  will  conduct 
periodic  site  visits  to  assess  overall  project  compliance  with  the  EMP.  ADB  will  review  project 
compliance with the EMP on the basis of semiannual environmental monitoring reports provided 
by the PIU and review missions. The monitoring plan will determine how well prescribed mitigation 
measures  of  EMP  are  working  and  will  document  any  unexpected  impacts  of  the  project 
investments on the environment. 
95. 
Environment safeguard reporting and disclosure. The PIU will submit environmental 
monitoring reports to ADB, semiannually during construction and annually during operation. The 
reports will include: (i) progress made for EMP implementation; (ii) overall effectiveness of the 
EMP  implementation  (including  public  and  occupational  health  and  safety,  COVID-19  risk 
management plan); (iii) environmental monitoring and compliance; (iv) institutional strengthening 
and training; (v) public consultation (including GRM); and (vi) any problems encountered during 
construction  and  operation,  and  the  relevant  corrective  actions  undertaken.  The  external 
environment monitoring agency will submit inception, progress, and final reports to the PIU, MET 
and ADB, at a frequency and schedule that will be tailored to fit the project construction progress 
and maximize the effectiveness of the site visits by the agency. The reporting frequency will be 
agreed  with  the  PIU  and  described  in  the  agency’s  inception  report  (see  terms  of  reference, 
Appendix  2).  The  PIU  will  also  include  updates  on  the  progress  of  the  external  environment 
monitoring agency within the PIU semiannual environment monitoring reports to ADB. ADB will 
review and disclose the reports on the ADB website. 
Environmental completion auditing. Following national regulations, upon completion of 
96. 
the  project  facilities,  environmental  completion  audits  will  be  issued  by  the  relevant  national 
agencies e.g., General Agency for Specialized Inspection. These audits will be included in the 
semiannual EMP monitoring reports to ADB. 
97. 
Involuntary  resettlement  and  indigenous  peoples  monitoring.  No  involuntary 
resettlement impacts are expected under the project. The project is also not expected to impact 
59 
indigenous peoples that would trigger ADB SPS requirements. The PIU will monitor and further 
confirm the project’s social safeguard categories and due diligence assessment after the detailed 
design.  Findings  of  further  due  diligence  and  monitoring  will  be  included  in  the  project’s 
semiannual progress reports. 
Gender  and  social  dimensions  monitoring. 48  Monitoring  of  the  SDAP  and  GAP 
98. 
implementation will be conducted and the targets are specified in the respective plans, and some 
indicators are also included in the DMF. To implement social and gender measures properly, PIU 
and project aimags will appoint social and gender focal points for implementation and monitoring. 
A national social, gender, and civil society specialist will be engaged under the PIU. The specialist 
will monitor and record implementation of the SDAP and GAP, including sex-disaggregated data 
and information on achievements against the targets on social, gender, and participatory aspects 
of  the  project  implementation.  Monitoring  and  evaluation  results  of the  SDAP  and  GAP  will  be 
reported through regular progress reports. The PIU specialist will work closely with the project 
stakeholders during the monitoring. 
C. 
Evaluation 
99. 
Project  performance  will  be  regularly  monitored  and  rated  through  ADB’s  e-Operations 
project implementation module. ADB’s overall loan implementation rating will be made based on 
five  performance  indicators: technical,  procurement,  disbursement, financial  management,  and 
safeguards (Section IX.B). Such rating will be updated semiannually based on MET’s semiannual 
project progress reports and/or ADB review missions. 
100.  ADB will conduct an inception mission when the project becomes effective. ADB and the 
government will jointly field review missions of the project at least once a year. The missions will: 
(i)  review  overall  implementation  of  the  project  and  update,  in  consultation  with  the  executing 
agency, the project implementation schedule; (ii) examine existing and potential implementation 
problems, and find out measures with the executing agency to resolve them; (iii) review progress 
in procurement and disbursement; (iv) review the loan recipient's compliance with loan covenants 
and, where there is any non-compliance or delay, discuss proposed remedial measures; and (v) 
assess the likelihood of attaining the project’s outcome. 
101.  ADB  and  the  government  will  undertake  a midterm  review  at  the  beginning  of the  third 
year  of  project  implementation,  to  assess  implementation  status,  and  take  appropriate 
measures—including modification of scope and implementation arrangements, and reallocation 
of loan proceeds, as appropriate—to achieve the project’s outcomes and impact. 
102.  A final ADB review mission will take place within 6 months after physical completion of the 
project.  This  mission  will:  (i)  assess  project  performance  against  targets  and  benchmarks 
including  any  revision(s)  as  agreed  during  the  midterm  review;  (ii)  identify  any  incomplete 
activities,  or  unused  project  funds;  and  (iii)  determine  the  project  satisfactory  rating.  A  project 
completion  report  will  be  prepared,  in  cooperation  with  the  government.  In  case  the  project  is 
selected  as  a  sample  for  performance  evaluation  reporting, the  project will  be  subject to more 
detailed performance evaluation and impact assessment about 3 or more years after completion. 
48 ADB's Handbook on Social Analysis: A Working Document, Participation and Empowerment in ADB Projects, and 
CSO Sourcebook: A Staff Guide to Cooperation with Civil Society Organizations. 
60 
D. 
Reporting 
103.  MET  will  provide  ADB  with  (i)  semiannual  progress  reports  in  a  format  consistent  with 
ADB's  project  performance  reporting  system;  (ii)  consolidated  annual  reports  including  (a) 
progress achieved by output as measured through the indicator's performance targets, (b) key 
implementation  issues  and  solutions,  (c)  updated  procurement  plan,  and  (d)  updated 
implementation plan for the next 12 months; and (iii) a project completion report within 6 months 
of physical completion of the project. To ensure that projects will continue to be both viable and 
sustainable,  project  accounts  and  the  audited  project  financial  statements  together  with  the 
associated auditor's report, should be adequately reviewed. 
104.  MET has agreed on the following reporting commitments: 
Report 
Semiannual project progress 
reports 
Audited financial statements  
Social monitoring report 
(appended to the progress 
reports) comprising: 
SDAP and GAP implementation 
progress and results 
Environmental safeguards 
➢  Construction phase 
➢  Operational phase 
Project completion report 
Timing 
Semiannual, within 1 month after the 
end of each reporting period  
Not later than 6 months after the closure 
of fiscal year  
Semiannual, within 1 month after the 
end of each reporting period 
Reference 
Loan and grant 
agreements, schedule 
Loan and grant 
agreements, schedule 
Loan and grant 
agreements, schedule 
Semiannually, within 1 month after each 
reporting period (i.e., January and July) 
Annually, within 1 month after the end of 
each year (February), until the project 
completion report 
Not later than 6 months after the 
physical completion of the project 
Loan and grant 
agreements, schedule 
Loan and grant 
agreements, schedule 
GAP = gender action plan, SDAP = social development action plan. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
61 
X. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
105.  ADB reserves the right to investigate, directly or through its agents, any violations of the 
Anticorruption  Policy  relating  to  the  project. 49  All  contracts  financed  by  ADB  shall  include 
provisions  specifying  the  right  of  ADB  to  audit  and  examine  the  records  and  accounts  of  the 
executing agency and all project contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers. 
Individuals and/or entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment list are ineligible to participate in 
ADB financed, administered, or supported activities and may not be awarded any contract under 
the project.50 
106.  To support these efforts, relevant provisions are included in the loan and grant agreements 
and the bidding documents for the project. 
107.  Country- and project- specific context. The legal and regulatory frameworks required 
for a well-functioning public sector by and large are in place in Mongolia, but that there are gaps 
in applied practices and in the enforcement of rules. Corruption is perceived to be endemic, and 
the anticorruption institutional system lacks independence and is subject to political pressure.51 
International  ratings  that  measure  corruption  levels  indicate  that  corruption  appears  to  be 
increasing in Mongolia: (i) between 2015 and 2020, the Corruption Perception Index for Mongolia 
by Transparency International declined from a score of 39 to 35; and (ii) between 2017 and 2019, 
the Worldwide Governance Indicators of The World Bank assessed the Control of Corruption in 
Mongolia to decline from a score of 42 to 37.5.52 For the project, corrupt practices could affect the 
project design, procurement, and implementation. Measures to mitigate these risks are described 
in this project administration manual and the project risk assessment and risk management plan 
and include the following. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
An  inter-ministerial  project  steering  committee  will  be  established  to  oversee, 
monitor,  and  ensure  the  integrity  of  project  operations,  especially  for  financial 
management, procurement, and anticorruption. The roles and responsibilities for 
the committee are described in Section III.A. 
Release of project funds will require co-signing by the director generals of each 
implementing agency and the PIU manager. 
Implementation  of  the  project-specific  financial  risk  management  action  plan 
described in Section V.A. 
Implementation of the project auditing requirements described in Section V.E. 
Spot reviews of procurement and financial procedures will be undertaken. 
Assurances for governance and anticorruption are included in the loan and grant 
agreements. 
ADB under its technical assistance will conduct integrity knowledge management 
sessions for MET and other project stakeholders to increase their awareness and 
compliance with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy. 
XI. 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
108.  People  who  are,  or may  in the  future  be,  adversely  affected  by the  project  may  submit 
complaints  to  ADB’s  Accountability  Mechanism.  The  Accountability  Mechanism  provides  an 
49 Anticorruption Policy: Anticorruption Policy | Asian Development Bank (adb.org) 
50  ADB’s Office of Anticorruption and Integrity website is: https://www.adb.org/site/integrity/main 
51 ADB. 2020. Country Governance Risk Assessment: Mongolia. Manila. 
52 Transparency International. 2021. Corruption Perceptions Index (accessed 20 May 2021); and World Bank. 2021. 
Worldwide Governance Indicators (accessed 4 May 2021). 
62 
independent forum and process whereby people adversely affected by ADB-assisted projects can 
voice,  and  seek  a  resolution  of  their  problems,  as  well  as  report  alleged  violations  of  ADB’s 
operational  policies  and  procedures.  Before  submitting  a  complaint  to  the  Accountability 
Mechanism, affected people should make efforts in good faith to solve their problems by working 
with  the  concerned  ADB  operations  department.  Only  after  doing  that,  and  if  they  are  still 
dissatisfied, should they approach the Accountability Mechanism.53 
XII. 
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
109.  All revisions and/or updates during the course of implementation should be retained in this 
section to provide a chronological history of changes to implemented arrangements recorded in 
the PAM, including revision to contract awards and disbursement s-curves. 
No. 
1. 
2. 
Description of Revision 
Discussed during loan fact-finding mission 
Discussed and agreed during loan negotiations 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Date 
29 March 2021 
53 Accountability Mechanism. https://www.adb.org/site/accountability-mechanism/main.  
Appendix 1 
63 
Loan / 
Grant 
Loan 
No.  Output / Component 
Activity / Quantity 
Benefits 
APPENDIX 1: PROJECT OUTPUTS AND COMPONENTS 
Institutional framework 
Output 1: Inclusive planning and capacity for local tourism businesses enhanced 
1.1 
1.1.1 Regional tourism 
master plan – 
western Mongolia 
(Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, 
Uvs Aimags) 
•  Best practice  principles  for  inclusive  and sustainable tourism, 
including  for  waste,  water,  energy,  and  management  of 
heritage sites and protected areas 
•  Prepare first tourism master plan for western Mongolia 
Design features: 
•  Based on visitor and population growth projections, consensus 
on  limits  of  acceptable  change,  and  carrying  capacity  of  key 
sites 
•  Establish measures  to  promote  sector  recovery  from  COVID-
19 and resilience to future disease outbreaks e.g., waiving of 
entry fees, license fees for tour operators, and border fees for 
regional  visitors;  information  campaign  about  domestic status 
of COVID-19 and control measures; increased online marketing 
for operators 
•  Promotional  strategy  linked  with  health  management  that 
reassures travelers of health and sanitation protocols 
•  Alignment with Aimag tourism plans 
•  Multi-stakeholder  consultative  process,  including  key  local 
agencies e.g. Bayan-Ulgii Tourism Association 
•  To include assessment of procedures for issuance of tour camp 
licenses 
licenses  – 
“speculative” registrations which create uncertainty/risk of low 
standards) 
in  protected  areas  (>400 
inactive 
•  Revise the 3 existing plans to integrate targets for livelihoods, 
conservation, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management, and 
risk  management  procedures  (e.g.,  assessment,  insurance, 
to 
emergency  planning,  communications) 
unforeseen crises e.g., COVID-19 
Integrate Aimag tourism plans into Aimag development plans 
Design features: As above 
respond 
to 
• 
•  Establish and pilot a manual covering at least 5 sites: ATBNP 
including  PCMA  (Bayan-Ulgii);  KUNNP  and  TSC  (Khovd); 
KKNP and UVSPA (Uvs) 
•  Establish a baseline of the  45 tour camps  present  in western 
Mongolia in 2020 and the skills and jobs of the ~117 employees, 
and measure how these  jobs and number of workers change 
following the tourism concession manual and project trainings 
Design features: 
•  Apply lessons learned from MON-9183 Grant and MON-Loan 
3787/3788 Loan and other donor projects 
•  Apply best practice UNDP guidelines developed for Mongolia 
•  Coordination with CSOs e.g., WWF Mongolia in KUNNP 
•  Expand program being developed under MON-Loan 3787/3788 
to  at  least  5  sites:  ATBNP  including  PCMA  (Bayan-Ulgii); 
KUNNP and TSC (Khovd); KKNP and UVSPA (Uvs) 
Design features: 
•  Certifications to include social and environmental targets 
•  Apply  international  ecotourism  standards  of  GSTC  (which  is 
supporting MET to prepare national tourism standards) 
•  Draw upon extensive available international best  practice e.g. 
here 
1.1.2 Aimag tourism plans 
(Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, 
Uvs)  
1.1.3 Tourism concession 
manual 
1.1.4 Eco-certification 
program for tour 
camps 
• Consistent regional brand 
for western Mongolia 
• Consistency between 
regional- and Aimag level 
tourism plans and other 
Aimag development plans 
• Consistent and improved 
regional tourism standards 
• Social and environmental 
standards and targets for 
community-based tourism, 
poverty alleviation, and 
tour operations in cultural 
heritage sites and 
protected areas 
• Strengthen the Aimag 
Loan 
tourism plans 
• Ensure their integration 
into development planning 
• Strengthen MET 
Loan 
concessions management 
• Social, environmental 
targets embedded in 
procedures 
• Build on lessons learned 
from MON-3787/3788 
Loan 
• Recognition of operators 
• Promotion of western 
Loan 
brand 
• Build on experience from 
MON-3787/3788 Loan 
1.2 Destination management and promotion 
1.2.1 Community-based 
organizations 
•  Establish  and/or  train  about  13  CBOs  for  at  least  5  sites: 
ATBNP  including  PCMA  (Bayan-Ulgii);  KUNNP  and  TSC 
(Khovd); KKNP and UVSPA (Uvs) 
•  The  CBOs  will  (i)  be  responsible for  O&M of  the  small  public 
facilities to be constructed in the protected areas and heritage 
sites (component 4.3), (ii)  lead the community participation in 
procurement  package  described  in  PAM  Sections  VI.B.3  and 
VI.C.6 (total of 13 contracts: 1 contract per CBO) to coordinate 
Grant 
• Inclusive tourism planning 
co-led by communities, 
with focus on local goods 
and services 
• Alignment with site 
management plans 
64    Appendix 1 
and  lead  additional  community-led  tourism  activities  in  these 
sites and procure materials and mobilize labor as needed, (iii) 
mobilize and  coordinate  the  communities  to  participate  in  the 
project  trainings  (to  be  provided  by  the  PIU  and  livelihood 
consulting services) to achieve these tasks 
•  Operational  arrangements, 
roles  and 
responsibilities, 
community-led selection of the CBO committee and members, 
and financing of the CBOs, including CBO salaries, will be (i) 
developed in consultation between the PIU, local government, 
protected  area  administration,  and  CBO  upon  CBO 
establishment, 
tripartite  contracts 
between  the  CBO,  protected  area  administrations,  and  local 
governments, (ii) funded by the project for the first 4 years of 
CBO  operation,  (iii)  funded  by  domestic  sources  (e.g.  visitor 
entry fees) for the remaining years of project operation and after 
the project 
(ii)  established  within 
1.2.2 Tourist streets in 2 
Aimag centers 
•  These  tasks  will  be  coordinated  by  the  PIU  and  livelihoods 
consulting services (PAM Appendix 2 – TORs for the PIU and 
consulting service package CS6) 
Design features: 
•  Collaborative approach to manage tourism at key sites 
•  Replicate MON-9183 Grant 
•  Establish 2 tourist streets in Khovd and Uvs Aimag centers 
•  To  include  women-led  market  stalls,  seating,  sidewalks, 
• 
information services, Wi-Fi stands, shops 
Install power, water, sanitation, and solid waste management 
Design features: 
•  Catalyze aimag capitals as gateways for visitor arrivals, venues 
for events, and links to cultural heritage sites, protected areas 
•  Tourism  promotion  to  link  with  online  sources  e.g.,  CAREC 
tourism  portal  (under  preparation);  MET  online  platform; 
“Discover Bayan-Ulgii” (https://discover-bayanolgii.com/) 
• Promotion of community 
Loan 
goods and services 
• Strengthen links between 
Aimag centers, tourist 
sites, and protected areas 
• Enrich visitor experience 
1.3 Pilot tourism development program – improve local competitiveness to benefit from tourism 
Increase competitiveness and capacity of MSMEs and communities, including youth, to benefit from tourism 
• 
•  Design features: Holistic plan including business, training, microfinancing and to ensure synergy between the livelihood activites 
under the loan and grant. This will be within a quality jobs and livelihoods strategy and will include the following components. 
• Sustainable financing for 
Grant 
community-based tourism 
• MON-9183 Grant well-
received by stakeholders 
• Gender-inclusive 
community-based tourism 
• Youth-inclusive 
community-based tourism 
Loan 
(for 2 
tourist 
streets), 
Grant 
(other 
sites) 
Grant 
1.3.1 Community revolving 
fund 
1.3.2 Women-led tourist 
markets 
1.3.3 Youth-led initiatives 
•  Establish  fund  for  communities  for  5  sites:  ATBNP  including 
PCMA  (Bayan-Ulgii);  KUNNP,  TSC  (Khovd);  KKNP,  UVSPA 
(Uvs) 
•  Link loans to protection of cultural heritage and nature 
Design features: Replicate MON-9183 Grant 
•  Establish 9 women-led markets: at 2 tourist streets (output 1.2) 
and  about  5  sites:  ATBNP  (Bayan-Ulgii),  KUNNP  and  TSC 
(Khovd), KKNP, and UVSPA (Uvs) 
Design features: Replicate MON-9183 Grant 
•  Management of women-led markets at the 2 tourist streets to 
prioritize stalls for communities from the project protected areas 
•  Replicate MON-9183 Grant 
•  Tourism  business  incubator,  focusing  on  supporting  and 
mobilizing the initiative, innovation, and participation of youth 
•  Two  incubators  will  be  established  by  the  project.  These  will 
comprise  learning  spaces  within  the 2  project-funded  tourism 
complexes (components 2.1.1 and 4.1). Room spaces for each 
incubator are already included in the preliminary architectural 
designs for each complex 
•  An additional 5 youth incubator learning spaces for the project 
are tentatively also to be included in 5 agribusiness centers to 
be  constructed  in  western  Mongolia  under  the  ADB  ASDIP. 
These centers will be located in rural soum centers and aimag 
urban centers of Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, and Uvs aimags 
•  Establishment of the youth incubators and youth training will be 
designed  and  coordinated  with  the  aimag  youth  employment 
centers and build upon previous short-term government training 
in tourism conducted in western Mongolia in 2019  
1.3.4 Local 
competitiveness and 
capacity to obtain 
tourism jobs 
•  Vocational  training  for  residents,  MSMEs  to  develop  tourism 
goods,  services,  jobs  at  tour  camps,  and  apply  for  revolving 
funds 
Design features: 
‘Quality  jobs  and  livelihoods  strategy’  incorporating  the  tasks 
above  and  specific  livelihood  targets  in  the  DMF,  GAP,  and 
SDAP  and  for  synergy  between  the  loan-  and  grant-funded 
activities 
• 
•  Link with social, environmental targets, standards (output 1.1) 
•  Collaboration with Khovd University tourism course 
Output 2: Enabling infrastructure constructed 
2.1 Tourism complex and supporting infrastructure 
2.1.1 UVTC (to be located 
Construct 1 tourism center. Including: 
outside Uvs Aimag 
capital) 
1. Water supply: 2 wells, with total daily capacity of 55.4m3/day. To 
meet 100% of projected demand 
2. Sanitation: (i) 28 toilets within the complex, (ii) 22 portable toilets 
(to meet extra demand for large events and festivals), (iii) 1 on 
site  Biofilm  wastewater  treatment  system-WSB®  clean  of  60 
m3  capacity.  Sludge  from  the  plant  will  be  transported  to 
Ulaangom treatment plant (to be upgraded by ADB ASDIP) 
3.  Solid  waste  management: 
litter  bins,  waste  collection 
containers; and transport to Ulaangom landfill (to be upgraded 
by ADB ASDIP) 
4. Power and heating. For power: (i) 1.2 km transmission line with 
10  kV  capacity  and  800  kW  substation  (to  provide  71%  of 
projected  demand,  of  which  20%  will  be  for  operation  of  the 
GSHP)  and  (ii)  solar  panels  (9%)  (to  provide  3%  of  power 
supply  for  the  main  building  and  100%  of  power  supply  for 
outdoor lighting). For heating: (i) GSHP with 680 kW capacity 
(92%) and (ii) solar for hot water (8%) 
5. Interior furnishing 
6.  O&M, 
including  sales,  marketing,  promote  heritage, 
conservation 
Design features: 
•  Mandate on promoting local goods, services, cultural heritage 
•  Visitor capacity based on tourism and growth projections 
•  Eligibility for IFC EDGE certification (https://edgebuildings.com) 
for green building designs 
•  WWTP  and  solid  waste  collection  based  on  projected  waste 
volumes,  water  efficiency,  proven  designs  elsewhere  in 
Mongolia 
•  Reuse  treated  wastewater  (per  MNS 6734-2018)  for:  (i)  toilet 
flushing (20% of total required water) and (ii) watering of site 
plantings  (13%  of  total  required  water):  significant  water 
savings 
•  Sludge,  solid  waste  disposal  at  Aimag  facilities  upgraded  by 
ASDIP 
•  Work with PPDCs established under MON TA-9066 
2.2 Traffic management and safety at key tourism sites 
2.2.1 Establish access 
roads and car parks 
for 2 tourism 
complexes; and 
improve traffic 
management at 5 
protected areas 
•  UVTC: construct 1 access road (0.3 km); and 1 car park with 
area of 6,656 m2 and capacity for 10 buses and 145 cars 
•  RANCC:  upgrade 1  access  road  (3  km);  and  1  car  park  with 
area of 5,951 m2 and capacity for 12 buses and 148 cars 
•  At 5 protected areas: upgrade 12 car parks, for total capacity 
of 240 vehicles.  ATBNP–4 carparks (100 cars),  KKNP–2 (30 
cars),  KUNNP–2  (30  cars),  TSC–1  (20  cars),  UVSPA–3  (60 
cars) 
Design features: 
•  Regulate visitor flows, site access, and safety; protect cultural 
heritage sites and protected areas; improve visitor experience 
•  Climate-resilient road and car park designs 
•  Safety–pedestrian crossings, speed humps, barrier gates 
•  Designs based on traffic projections 
Output 3: Sanitation and waste management improved 
Appendix 1 
65 
Grant 
• Tourism goods, services, 
and staff sourced locally 
• Improved reliability, quality 
of goods, and services 
• Sale of local products 
Loan 
• Iconic tourism landmark – 
catalyst for local tourism 
• Inclusive planning with 
communities 
• Multiple objectives – 
tourism, events, education 
• Showcase for green 
design 
• In situ protection of on site 
cultural heritage values 
• Linked with protection of at 
least 2 protected areas, 
KKNP, and UVSPA 
• Synergy with ADB ASDIP 
project including for solid 
waste and sewage 
treatment 
Loan  – 
UVTC, 
RANCC 
Grant  – 
5 sites 
• Vehicle parking regulated 
• Improved visitor 
satisfaction 
• Sites linked with women’s 
tourist markets (output 1) 
• Off-road impacts reduced 
• Dust pollution reduced 
• All-weather vehicle access 
• Vehicle parking regulated 
• Improved safety 
66    Appendix 1 
3.1  Water, sanitation, 
and hygiene 
(WASH) program 
•  To include: sanitation standards for tour camps and 
• Tour camps comply with 
Grant 
community-led tourism service providers, awareness raising 
for hygiene measures, integration with local and national 
measures for disease risk management, border health 
screening, emergency response 
Design features: 
•  Apply best practice measures for WASH 
•  Alignment with national measures for disease risk 
management 
•  Alignment with aimag level measures e.g., border health 
MET sanitation standards 
• Improved protection of 
water quality of lakes and 
rivers 
• Visitor satisfaction 
improved 
• Resilience to future 
disease outbreaks is 
strengthened 
screening 
3.2  Sanitation systems 
for tourist camps  
•  Sanitation systems designed under MON-9183 Grant adopted 
by about 12 tour camps (Khovd Aimag–4; Uvs Aimag–7)a 
• 100% coverage of camps 
• Visitor satisfaction 
Grant 
•  Facilitate tour camps to install improved toilet designs 
•  Designs integrated in concession manuals (output 1.1.3) 
Design features: 
•  Dry toilets and/or minimum flush toilets 
•  Comply with national standards 
•  Replicate toilet designs piloted under MON-9183 Grant 
•  Complement measures planned by MET and KfW 
improved 
• Tour camps comply with 
MET sanitation standards 
• Improved water quality 
protection of wetlands e.g., 
Uvs, and Khar Us lakes 
• Resilience to future 
disease outbreaks is 
strengthened 
3.3  Sanitation  systems 
for public places 
• 
Install about 60 public toilets at the 5 protected areas: 
•  Bayan-Ulgii Aimag: 22 toilets (ATBNP including PCMA–22) 
•  Khovd Aimag: 18 toilets (KUNNP–14, TSC–4) 
•  Uvs Aimag: 20 toilets (KKNP–8, UVSPA–12) 
• 100% coverage of public 
places in the five selected 
protected areas 
Grant 
• As above 
3.4  Wastewater 
collection and 
treatment 
Design features: 
•  Dry toilets (non-flushing for water-saving, low-cost) 
•  O&M by CBOs 
•  Sustainability–CBO salaries paid from campsite fees 
•  Establish wastewater and solid waste management 
procedures for project-funded facilities 
•  Procure 6 suction pump trucks to transport sewage and solid 
waste from project sites to landfill and wastewater treatment 
plants 
Design features: 
•  Treatment methods and capacity based on assessment of 
existing and projected waste volumes, cost, capacity, local 
materials 
•  Designs comply with national standards 
•  O&M to be linked with ASDIP-funded WWTPs and landfills 
• Efficient waste 
Loan 
management for all key 
public access locations in 
5 protected areas 
• Improved protection of 
lakes and rivers 
• Improved visitor 
satisfaction 
• Resilience to future 
disease outbreaks is 
strengthened 
Output 4: Management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened 
4.1  Rock art and 
Construct 1 tourism center. Including: 
• First national center for 
Loan 
nomadic culture 
center (RANCC) 
rock art heritage including 
Digital Museum 
(component 4.2) 
• Regional tourism identity 
• O&M linked with protection 
of 2 cultural heritage sites: 
TSC and Manchu fortress 
• Linked with women-led 
tourist markets (output 1) 
• Showcase for green 
design 
1. Water supply: 2 wells, with total daily capacity of 44 m3. To meet 
100% of projected demand 
2. Onsite sanitation: (i) 20 toilets within the complex, (ii) 1 on site 
Biofilm  wastewater  treatment  system-WSB®  clean  of  45  m3 
capacity.  Sludge  from  the  plant  will  be  transported  to  Khovd 
treatment plant (to be upgraded by ADB ASDIP) 
3.  Solid  waste  management: 
litter  bins,  waste  collection 
containers; and transport to Khovd landfill 
4. Power and heating supply: (i) 5.4 km transmission line with 10 
kV  capacity  and  800 kW  substation  for  electricity  (to  provide 
73% of projected demand, of which 19% will be for operation 
of the GSHP) and (ii) solar panels (5%) (to provide 3% of power 
supply  for  the  main  building  and  100%  of  power  supply  for 
outdoor lighting. For heating: (i) GSHP with 610 kW capacity 
(91%) and solar for hot water (9%) 
5. Interior furnishing 
6.  O&M, 
including  sales,  marketing,  promote  heritage, 
conservation 
Design features: 
•  Mandate on promoting local goods, services, cultural heritage 
•  Specific  focus  on  financing  protection  of  TSC  and  Manchu 
fortress 
Appendix 1 
67 
Loan 
• First Digital Museum in 
Mongolia for rock art 
• Management integrated 
with protection of TSC 
• Platform for tourism, local 
jobs, and entrepreneurship 
• Public access regulated 
• Natural values protected 
• Reduced damage of rock 
Grant 
art 
• Improved visitor 
experience 
• Improved collection of site 
entrance fees and revenue 
• Job creation for local 
communities 
• Sustainability – campsite 
fees pay for CBO salaries 
•  Visitor capacity based on tourism and growth projections 
•  Eligibility for IFC EDGE certification for green building designs 
•  WWTP  and  solid  waste  collection  based  on  projected  waste 
volumes,  water  efficiency,  proven  designs  elsewhere  in 
Mongolia 
•  Reuse  treated  wastewater  (per  MNS 6734-2018)  for:  (i)  toilet 
flushing (29% of total required water) and (ii) watering  of site 
plantings  (18%  of  total  required  water):  significant  water 
savings 
•  Sludge,  solid  waste  disposal  at  Aimag  facilities  upgraded  by 
ASDIP 
4.2  Rock art Digital 
Museum – to be 
housed at RANCC 
•  Work with PPDCs established under MON TA-9066 
•  2- and 3-D digital displays, virtual tours, photographic collection 
of Mongolian rock art sites, replicas of key sites 
Design features: 
4.3  Site protection and 
public access 
• 
– 
Bayan-Ulgii 
•  Application of high-level technology 
•  Complement  existing  resources  e.g.,  University  of  Oregon 
art 
website 
(https://mongolianaltai.uoregon.edu/) 
Install  about  35  small  management  facilities  at  5  protected 
areas  and  cultural  heritage  sites  (ATBNP,  KKNP,  KUNNP, 
TSC, UVSPA): comprising 6 campsites, 3 information centers, 
11 information points, 2 birdwatching towers, 2 public cooking 
cabins, 3 ranger stations, 6 fee collection stations, and upgrade 
of 2 existing public trails 
Aimag 
rock 
•  O&M arrangements: (i) the protected area administrations will 
manage the fee collection stations and ranger stations, (ii) the 
CBOs  established  with  project  support  will  manage  the  other 
project-funded facilities. O&M procedures will be developed for 
each  site  and  included  in  the  tripartite  contracts  to  be 
established between the CBOs, protected area administrations, 
and local government (see component 1.2.1) 
•  See next Table in this Appendix for list of these facilities 
Design features: 
•  Strategic  selection  of  sites  and  locations  to  address  existing 
and projected increases in visitor numbers 
•  Facilities tailored to site-specific needs 
•  Materials  selected 
for  cost,  durability, 
aesthetics 
local  availability, 
•  Facilities  to  be  managed  by  CBOs  (component  1.2.1),  with 
training, and personal protective equipment provided 
•  Complement support by WWF, The Nature Conservancy, KfW, 
and GIZ at KKNP, KUNNP, and/or UVSPA 
•  Aligned with landscape-level “cluster approach” of KfW BACCP 
Phase  II/III:  holistic  land  management  within  and  outside 
protected  areas.  Project  sites  consistent  with  KfW  project 
areas,  which  were  selected  based  on  TNC 
regional 
classification 
4.4  Site management 
plans  
•  Facilitate  revision  of  management  plans  for  2  sites:  ATBNP 
including PCMA (Bayan-Ulgii Aimag); TSC (Khovd Aimag) 
•  Contribute to KfW-led revision of management plans for 3 sites: 
• Integrated management of 
tourism, livelihoods, waste, 
conservation 
Grant 
KUNNP (Khovd Aimag); KKNP and UVSPA (Uvs Aimag) 
Design features: 
Incorporate–for  the  first  time–site-specific  actions and  targets 
for tourism, traffic, and waste in the site management plans 
• 
•  O&M procedures and costs for project facilities 
•  Financing sources for project facilities 
•  4-year action plan and budget for each site 
•  Revised internal site zoning (if needed) 
• 
•  Train  government  personnel,  operators  of  project  facilities, 
CBOs,  and  other  stakeholders  to  implement  the  revised  site 
management plans and for O&M of project facilities 
Design features: 
Integration with soum development plans 
•  Collaborative approaches; CSO participation 
• Complement and build on 
planned support by KfW to 
revise protected area 
management plans 
• Revised plans are a model 
for protected area 
management 
• Staff trained 
• Project facilities 
maintained 
Loan 
and 
Grant 
• Management effectiveness 
increased 
4.5  Capacity building 
68    Appendix 1 
a In 2020, 45 tour camps were present in western Mongolia  (Bayan-Ulgii–15, Khovd–11, Uvs–19) but only 25 were located in or near 
protected  areas,  of  which  11  were  in  the  project  protected  areas:  Khovd–4  (KUNNP–3,  TSC–1)  and  Uvs  (KKNP–7).  During  project 
implementation all tour camps will be invited to participate in the project activities. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ASDIP = Aimag and Soum Centers Green and Resilient Regional Development Investment Program, 
ATBNP  =  Altai  Tavan  Bogd  National  Park,  CAREC  =  Central  Asia  Regional  Economic  Cooperation,  CBO  =  community-based 
organization, CSO = civil society organization, HLT = high-level technology, GSTC = Global Sustainable Tourism Council, km = kilometer, 
KKNP = Khan Khukhii National Park, KUNNP = Khar Us Nuur National Park, m2 = square meter, m3 = cubic meter, MET = Ministry of 
Environment and Tourism, O&M = operation and maintenance, PCMA = Petroglyphic Complexes of the Mongolian Altai UNESCO World 
Heritage Area, PIU = project implementation unit, PPDC = public-private dialogue council, RANCC = rock art and nomadic culture center, 
TSC = Tsenkher Cave, TOR = terms of reference, UVSPA = Uvs Nuur Strictly Protected Area, UVTC = Uvs tourism complex, WWTP = 
wastewater treatment plant. 
Aimag = province, soum = county. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
TABLE: CONFIRMED LIST OF SMALL FACILITIES IN PROJECT FIELD SITES 
NOTE: GIVEN THE LOCATION OF THESE FACILITIES WITHIN AND NEAR PROTECTED AREAS AND POTENTIAL FOR ENVIRONMENTAL 
AND/OR HERITAGE IMPACTS, ANY PROPOSED CHANGE IN THE SCOPE OR LOCATIONS OF THESE FACILITIES WILL BE SUBJECT TO 
NEW  ENVIRONMENTAL 
IMPACT  ASSESSMENT  AND  REQUIRE  PRIOR  ENDORSEMENT  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT  AND  ASIAN 
DEVELOPMENT BANK. 
NAME 
LOCATION  
(Coordinates, Soum) 
Fee 
collection 
station 
Camp 
site 
Ranger 
Station 
Info. 
Center 
Info. 
Point 
No  Capacity 
Toilets 
(seats) 
Bird 
watching 
tower 
PROPOSED PROJECT FACILITY (number) 
Car park 
Women-
led market 
place 
(each with 
4-6 stalls) 
Other 
Appendix 1 
69 
1 
1 
1 
Oigor Entrance point 
(8809’54,477” E, 4908’58,093”N), 
Ulaankhus soum 
Shiveet Khairkhan Entrance (Tsagaan 
Gol Post)  
(89018’8,642” E,4906’46,604”N) 
Tsengel soum 
Main petroglyph site 
(49°19'12.49"N, 88°22'22.43"E) 
Basecamp#1 (for tourists) 
(49°8'38.31"N, 87°59'20.25"E), 
Ulaankhus soum 
Basecamp#2 (for professional 
mountaineers) 
(49°8'51.08"N, 87°56'52.00"E), 
Ulaankhus soum 
At the entance gate of the Khar Us 
Nuur protected area, the entry point to 
the park: 47°49'39.4, 91°54'10.2 
(Tsagaanburgas Bagh, Buyant Soum)  
Durgun Lake, Agvash, Yumiin Hooloi 
(48°19'20.40"N, 92°33'38.29"E), 
Durgun soum 
Durgun Lake, Argalant, Khar Lake 
Shanaa (48° 9'46.52"N, 93° 
6'49.65"E), Durgun soum 
 47°21'15.11"N, 91°57'39.74"E, 
Mankhan soum 
Altai Tavan 
Bogd National 
Park (ATBNP) 
and 
Petroglyphic 
Complexes of 
the Mongolia 
Altai (PCMA) 
Khar Us Nuur 
National Park 
(KUNNP) 
Tsenkher 
Cave (TSC) 
1 
1 
20 
1 
1 
20 
1 
1 
20 
40 
1 
1 
1 
10 
1 
1 
20 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
(HUB) 
1 
1 
1 
20 
4 
4 
4 
6 
4 
4 
6 
4 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Trail 
Cooking 
Cabin, trail 
Cooking 
Cabin 
70    Appendix 1 
NAME 
LOCATION  
(Coordinates, Soum) 
Fee 
collection 
station 
Camp 
site 
Ranger 
Station 
Info. 
Center 
Info. 
Point 
No  Capacity 
Toilets 
(seats) 
Bird 
watching 
tower 
PROPOSED PROJECT FACILITY (number) 
Car park 
(1) At cave entrance, (2) Intersection 
between main trail and cave ascent 
trail, Mankhan soum 
Khar Termes  
(49°19'24.09" N, 93° 9'49.32"E), 
Malchin soum 
Sogoo Lake  
(49˚22'53.511''N, 95˚8'38.481''E), 
Zuunkhangai soum 
Close to Uureg Lake restroom 
(50°12’8.91N, 91° 8’1.00E), Sagil 
soum 
Renovate existing entrance point and 
Information 50° 6'32.28, 92°21'41.20 
Tes, Salt Lake (50°23'1.23"N 
93°18'57.69"E) 
Khan Khukhii 
National Park 
(KKNP) 
Uvs Nuur 
Strictly 
Protected 
Area 
(USVSPA) 
TOTAL 
1 
1 
1 
6 
2 
1 
1 
10 
1 
1 
20 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20 
30 
10 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
1 
1 
1 
(HUB) 
1 
1 
4 
3 
3 
11 
12 
240 
60 
2 
Women-
led market 
place 
(each with 
4-6 stalls) 
Other 
Upgrade 
trail, 
lighting 
1 
1 
1 
7 
5 (2 
cabins, 2 
trails, 1 
lighting) 
Appendix 2 
71 
APPENDIX 2: INDICATIVE TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE LOAN-FINANCED 
CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
OVERVIEW 
1. 
The consulting services to be financed by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) loan are 
indicated  below. The estimated time of each package is included in Table 1 and detailed in the 
individual terms of reference. 
Table 1: Summary of Consulting Services 
Package Name 
Summary Details 
No. 
CS1 
CS2 
CS3 
CS4 
Ecotourism planning and protected 
area management 
Detailed Engineering Design and 
Construction Supervision for UVTC 
and Uvs Tourist Street 
Detailed Engineering Design and 
Construction Supervision for 
RANCC, Khovd Tourist Street, and 
Tsenkher Cave Information Center 
Detailed IT System Design and 
Establishment Supervision for Digital 
Museum in RANCC 
CS5 
External Environmental Monitoring 
Firm 
ICS1  PIU Project Coordinator 
ICS2  PIU Finance Specialist 
ICS3  PIU Procurement specialist 
ICS4 
ICS5 
PIU Deputy Team Leader and 
Monitoring and Evaluation specialist 
PIU Sustainable Tourism and 
Protected Areas specialist 
ICS6  PIU Civil Engineer  
ICS7 
ICS8 
PIU Environment Safeguards 
specialist 
PIU Social, Gender, and Civil 
Society specialist 
ICS9  Uvs Aimag Supervision officer 
ICS10  Khovd Aimag Supervision officer 
ICS11  Bayan-Ulgii Aimag Supervision 
officer 
QCBS (90:10), a 
national firm with 
national experts 
QCBS (90:10), a 
national consultant firm 
with international and 
national experts 
QCBS (90:10), a 
national consultant firm 
with international and 
national experts 
QCBS (90:10), an 
international consultant 
firm with international 
and national experts 
CQS, a consultant firm 
with national experts 
Individual, national, 72 
person-months 
Individual, national, 72 
person-months 
Individual, national, 30 
person-months 
Individual, national, 72 
person-months 
Individual, national, 50 
person-months 
Individual, national, 50 
person-months 
Individual, national, 36 
person-months 
Individual, national, 48 
person-months 
Individual, national, 36 
person-months 
Individual, national, 36 
person-months 
Individual, national, 36 
person-months 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Advertisement 
Date 
256,940 
Q2, 2022 
474,900 
Q2, 2022 
474,900 
Q2, 2022 
850,000 
Q3, 2023 
60,000 
Q1, 2023 
129,600 
Q4, 2021 
100,800 
Q4, 2021 
42,000 
Q4, 2021 
115,200 
Q4, 2021 
70,000 
Q2, 2022 
90,000 
Q2, 2022 
58,800 
Q2, 2022 
67,200 
Q2, 2022 
25,200 
Q2, 2022 
25,200 
Q2, 2022 
25,200 
Q2, 2022 
72 
Appendix 2 
No. 
Package Name 
Summary Details 
ICS12  PIU Information Technology 
specialist  
Individual, national, 36 
person-months 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Advertisement 
Date 
67,200 
Q2, 2022 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  CS  =  consulting  service,  ICS  =  individual  consulting  service,  IT  =  information 
technology,  PIU  =  project  implementation  unit,  QCBS  =  quality-  and  cost-based  selection,  RANCC  =  rock  art  and 
nomadic culture center, UVTC = Uvs tourism complex. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
2. 
1. 
The scope and tasks of the consulting services financed by the grant are described below. 
CS1: Ecotourism Planning and Protected Area Management 
A.  BACKGROUND 
3. 
Mongolia has a small but emerging tourism sector, and developing the tourism sector is a 
high national priority to diversify the economy and create jobs. Government plans to develop tourism 
focus  on  nature-  and  heritage-based  tourism  in  protected  areas,  yet  most  of  these  sites  are 
underfunded and located in remote regions of high poverty. Tourism, if unmanaged, may result in 
ecological and cultural impacts and provide few local benefits. Western Mongolia comprises the 
three Aimags of Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, and Uvs. Much of the region is characterized by extreme 
remoteness and limited economic development. It also supports a unique cultural heritage – the 
richest and most well-preserved rock art (ancient images on rock) in northern Asia, the highest 
number of ethnic groups in Mongolia, and a network of protected areas which include two World 
Heritage Sites and four Wetlands of International Importance. Visitor numbers are small but prior 
to COVID-19 were increasing rapidly. Growing attractions include four large, protected areas, and 
one heritage site – Altai Tavan Bogd National Park (ATBNP) including the overlapping UNESCO 
Petroglyphic Complexes of the Mongolian Altai World Heritage Area (PCMA) (Bayan-Ulgii), Khar 
Us Nuur National Park (KUNNP) and Tsenkher Cave (TSC) (Khovd), and Khan Khukhii National 
Park (KKNP) and Uvs Nuur Basin Strictly Protected Area (UVSPA) (Uvs) – as well as other many 
other sites of conservation and heritage value. The early stage of tourism development in western 
Mongolia  provides  a  timely  opportunity  to  help  plan  and  manage  tourism  sustainably,  support 
livelihoods, and protect key heritage sites. 
4. 
Few residents in western Mongolia are currently able to derive income from tourism. This 
is due to several linked factors. At the institutional level, a regional planning approach is required 
for  destination  promotion,  travel  routes  that  maximize  benefits  to  communities,  and  minimum 
standards  for  accommodation,  goods,  and  services.  Aimag  tourism  plans,  prepared  between 
2015  and  2019,  prioritize  community-based  tourism,  support  for  micro,  small,  and  medium 
enterprises  (MSME),  and  capacity  building,  but  lack  specific measures to  address  these.  Tour 
camps present a potential source of jobs and the use of locally sourced goods and services, yet 
the  issuance  of  tour  camp  concessions  is  not  based  on  systematic  procedures  or  social  and 
environmental standards. Elsewhere in Mongolia, these issues have favored external operators 
(who  have  greater  access  to  finance  and  external  markets),  provided  few  benefits  to  local 
communities, and caused environmental damage. Communities have inadequate access to credit 
and training to produce quality goods (e.g., handicrafts) or services (e.g., food supplies, guiding). 
These issues have worsened due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has 
disproportionately impacted rural communities. 
5. 
Following  previous  ADB  funded  tourism  projects  in  northern  Mongolia,  the  Sustainable 
Tourism Development Project (Phase 2) will be implemented in western Mongolia over 6 years with 
an estimated cost of $32.3 million, to be supported by a loan from ADB of $30.0 million and a grant 
Appendix 2 
73 
of  $2.0  million  from  the  Japan  Fund  for  Poverty  Reduction.  The  Ministry  of  Environment  and 
Tourism  (MET)  seeks  consultant  services  to  be  delivered  under  contract  “Consulting  package 
CS1 Ecotourism planning and protected area management,” funded by the loan. 
During loan processing stage, The TA consultant had developed the various reports which 
6. 
meets  the  technical,  economic,  financial,  social,  environmental,  and  other  due  diligence 
requirements of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Government of Mongolia to design 
the  Project.  These  reports  include  the  following  but  not  limited  to: 
the  Report  and 
Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors; Project Administration Manual; Social 
Development  Action  Plan;  Gender  Action  Plan;  Initial  Environmental  Examination;  Risk 
Assessment  and  Risk  Management  Plan;  Feasibility  Study  Report;  and  Climate  Risk  and 
Vulnerability Assessment. The firm shall ensure that their deliverables follow the approved project 
targets and preliminary designs prepared during the processing and described in these reports. 
7. 
Synergy with overall project. The consultant deliverables need to reflect a holistic design 
approach that ensures synergy and integration, where relevant, with the other project components 
and deliverables prepared by other consulting teams. Examples include, but are not limited to: (i) 
ensuring that the revised aimag tourism plans integrate the project components and operation and 
maintenance (O&M) plans for the project facilities, (ii) poverty, gender, and livelihood targets will be 
integrated within the regional tourism master plan, revised aimag tourism plans, and improved tour 
camp standards, and (iii) O&M of the loan-funded tourism complexes will include promotion of the 
grant-supported community goods, services, and protected areas. The firm is therefore required to 
have  a  good  understanding  of  the  overall  project  design  and  targets  in  addition  to  the  specific 
deliverables under the consultancy. 
B. 
OBJECTIVE OF THE ASSIGNMENT 
8. 
The  objective  of  the  assignment  is  to  develop  the  following  deliverables,  focused  on 
inclusive  and  sustainable  tourism  development  in  Bayan-Ulgii,  Khovd,  and  Uvs  Aimags  (also 
referred to as “western Mongolia”). The preparation of these deliverables will include participatory 
approaches and build on previous and existing Government and donor efforts, be compatible with 
the  conservation  of  natural  and  cultural  values,  and  support  measures  which  increase  the 
socioeconomic benefits of tourism to local residents, including through community-based tourism. 
1.  Prepare a Regional Tourism Master Plan for western Mongolia. 
2.  Strengthen the three existing Aimag Tourism Development Plans. 
3.  Establish  and  pilot  a  Tourism  concession  manual  for  five  sites:  ATBNP  (including  the 
PCMA),  KUNNP,  TSC,  KKNP,  and  UVSPA.  The  manual  will  comprise  one  overall 
manual, with additional requirements (or sub-manuals) added as needed for site-specific 
conditions of each site. The deliverable will include successful establishment, piloting, and 
application of the manual at these sites. 
4.  Preparation, establishment, and piloting of an eco-certification program for tour camps in 
key protected areas. 
5.  Establishment  and  training  of  community-based  organizations  (CBOs)  for  the  project 
facilities in protected areas and heritage sites. 
9. 
The main results of these instruments will be to: 
•  Limit the effect of potential negative tourism impacts on local communities while maximizing 
socioeconomic benefits and empowerment, especially among women and youth. 
74 
Appendix 2 
•  Ensure  that  tourism  development  is  sustainable  and  encompasses  the  protection  and 
conservation  of  the  highly  relevant  regional’s  natural  and  cultural  resources,  values,  and 
traditions. 
Increase  the  destination´s  competitiveness  thought  the  tourism  related  infrastructure, 
human capital, financing, and product improvement. 
• 
•  Contribute  to  and  support  the  cross-border  tourism  arrangements  with  the  People’s 
Republic of China and the Russian Federation. 
•  Promote  a  comprehensive  brand  strategy  that  contributes  to  positioning  the  destination, 
reducing seasonality, and maximizing tourism expenditure. 
•  Facilitate integration of climate change adaptation, resilience to disease outbreaks, and 
natural hazards management into regional tourism development. 
C. 
SCOPE OF SERVICES, TASKS (COMPONENTS) AND DELIVERABLES 
10. 
The firm will achieve the following general tasks inter alia: 
• 
• 
Identify and review in-depth all existing documents (e.g., plans, strategies, studies) of key 
stakeholders  in  tourism  management  and  planning  of  western  Mongolia  at  national, 
regional, aimag and soum level (including the Ministry of Environment and Tourism, aimag 
governments,  international  donors)  in  a  way  the  expected  results  consider  all  previous 
efforts carried out. 
Identify  key  stakeholders  and  use  a  participatory  approach  to  ensure  buy-in  of  tourism 
sector,  community  stakeholders,  and  protected  areas.  The  consultation  process  is 
considered  equally  as  important  as  the  result  within  this  consultancy  so  ongoing 
discussion, feedback, and engagement are essential throughout the entire process. 
•  Develop participatory activities (workshops, interviews, focus group discussions, etc.) with 
private sector, government, protected areas, and civil society (including CSOs, CBOs) to 
ensure wide understanding and ownership of the results. Include women, youth, poor, and 
vulnerable groups in these discussions. 
•  Facilitate at least 3 rounds of consultations for the draft and final draft regional tourism 
master plan with relevant stakeholders, and at least 2 rounds for the rest of components. 
11. 
The  scope  of  the  services  will  include  the  following  outputs  of  the  Sustainable  Tourism 
Development Project (Phase 2), contained in its master table of components in Appendix 1 of the 
project  administration  manual:  Output  1.1.1  Regional  Tourism  Master  Plan  –  western  Mongolia, 
Output 1.1.2. Aimag tourism plans, Output 1.1.3. Eco-certification program for tour camps, Output 
1.2.1 Community-based organizations. 
DELIVERABLE 1: REGIONAL TOURISM MASTER PLAN (project output 1.1.1) 
12. 
The output to be obtained is an eight-year action-oriented plan, implementable within the 
scope of available public resources and considering the COVID-19 impacts on the regional tourism 
sector. This first Regional Tourism Master Plan in Mongolia will contain a detailed implementation 
framework for its development, monitoring and evaluation, led by the tourism key players in western 
Mongolia. It will be consistent with tourism policies, plans, and projects developed by Government 
of Mongolia, ADB and other donors at the national and regional level. 
13. 
The Plan will be implemented in two phases which will assess the current and potential 
role  of  tourism  in  the  socioeconomic  regional  development  and  will  design  the  road  map  to 
achieve the consensual western Mongolia´s vision as a sustainable and inclusive destination. The 
scope of the work for consultancy services for Regional Tourism Master Plan shall include but no 
limited to the following activities: 
Appendix 2 
75 
Phase 1: Baseline Analysis 
(1)  Sector assessment 
14. 
Conduct  a  rapid  tourism  sector  assessment  to  document  the  region’s  current  position. 
Consider previous efforts regarding sector assessment in western Mongolia, avoiding repetition. 
Carry out desk review, field survey, in-depth interviews with experts, and at least one workshop 
per  Aimag.  The  sector  assessment  will  include  supply  and  demand  analysis  including  the 
following components. 
•  Policy  and  regulatory  framework.  Review the key regulatory mechanisms  impacting the 
regional tourism sector including but not limited to taxation, environmental safeguards, land 
use, construction permits, licensing and public concessions (tour camps in protected areas, 
etc.).  Identify  any  gaps  or  areas  in  need  of  updating  particularly  related  to  tourism 
development  in  protected  sites  and  inclusion  of  vulnerable  groups.  A  rapid  review  of 
applicable tourism programs, plans, and strategies to western Mongolia, including results and 
lessons learned. Aimag tourism plans and the impact of synergic Government and donors’ 
projects on regional tourism context should be focused. 
Institutional  framework.  This  includes  briefly  assessing  the  organizational  structure  and 
analyzing  the  roles,  capacity,  effectiveness,  and  coordination  between  key  stakeholders 
involved  in  the  tourism  development  of  western  Mongolia:  Governmental  authorities, 
professional associations, developing agencies, Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), NGOs. 
Special  focus  should  be  put  identifying  capacity  gaps  in  areas  such  as  human  capital, 
marketing,  statistics,  quality  control,  and  budget.  In  addition,  the  consultancy  will  provide 
insights  into  the  potential  functionality  of  a  Regional  Tourism  Governance  Structure  and 
scenarios for success in their establishment and administration. 
• 
•  Cultural  and  natural  assets.  The  baseline  will  include  a  detailed  inventory  of  the  main 
regional  tourist  assets,  evaluating  at  least  the  following  components:  significance/values, 
zoning,  conservation,  carrying  capacity,  public  management,  accessibility,  safety, 
infrastructure,  and  tourist  facilities,  linked  tourist  products/services  and  benefits  for  local 
communities. Key cultural heritage sites and protected areas should be prioritized in terms of 
tourism development potential within the destination.1 
•  Tourism demand and further growth projections. Conduct a full review of domestic and 
foreign visitor arrival statistics by the MET, National Statistics Office of Mongolia, and other 
sources. Current market demand assessment should be carried out with particular focus on 
domestic/inbound/cross-border markets, volume,  seasonality,  socioeconomic  profile, travel 
patterns,  visitors  flow,  and  other  related  characteristics.  Identify  main  national  and 
international  demand  trends,  visitor  growth  projections,  and  key  segments  for  future 
development  matched  to  potential  key  products.  Summarize  gaps  between  what  regions 
offers and what target markets require. The consultant is expected to factor the impacts of 
COVID-19 pandemic on tourism market. 
1  Altai Tavan Bogd National Park (630,000 ha; designated in 1996) includes one World Heritage Site, the Petroglyphic 
Complexes of the Mongolian Altai (11,300 ha; 2011). KUNNP (850,272 ha; 1997) and the UVSPA (424,298 ha; 1993) 
are Wetlands of International Importance; the latter is part of the Uvs Nuur Basin World Heritage Site (898,064 ha; 
2003). Khan Khukhii National Park (221,598 ha; 2000) includes Khyargas Lake, a popular tourism destination. The 
TSC is an unprotected cave system with the oldest rock paintings in Mongolia. 
76 
Appendix 2 
•  Public infrastructure and supporting services. Analysis of public infrastructure that is part 
of tourist´s experience in western Mongolia, such as visitor´s centers, museums, cross-border 
and transport infrastructure, telecommunications, health facilities, security resources. In the 
case of tourist facilities, the consultant should assess staff capacity building, Universal access 
(for disabled, elderly and children), environmental management (e.g., waste), financing and 
supply system (e.g., water, electricity). Identify connectivity and transport challenges. 
•  Tourism  supply.  The  consultant  will  assess  the  local  tourism  enterprises  (formal  and 
informal) that directly cater to visitors, including accommodations (e.g., tour camps, hotels, 
motels), restaurants, and other tourism related services. This analysis should include at least 
the number and classification based on type, size, location, number of employees (gender 
segregation), revenues, as well as community-based products/services being offered by the 
identified enterprises, application of environmental and quality standards, and staff capacity. 
The consultant shall evaluate whether and how the tourism supply is equipped to meet the 
current and potential demand. Analysis of the current status of tourism cooperatives in the 
region. Finally, the consulting firm should identify the main challenges derived from COVID-
19 impact on the regional tourism sector. 
•  Product  development  and  marketing.  Evaluate  tourist  products,  circuits,  events,  and 
routes in western Mongolia by type, location, visitors’ patterns, and flow, as well as destination 
marketing and promotion efforts made so far at national or Aimag level. 
•  Environmental, economic, and social impacts of tourism development. Based on wide 
discussions  with  public  and  private  stakeholders,  the  consultant  will  describe  the  current 
situation  and  outlook regarding  social,  economic,  and  environmental  impacts  of  tourism  in 
western Mongolia. Tourism impacts on protected areas and cultural sites conservation and 
community  benefits  should  be  particularly  analyzed.  Impediments  to  local  community 
involvement  (with  special  attention  to  women,  youth,  and  vulnerable  groups)  into  tourism 
businesses and governance will be assessed. 
•  Resilience to disease outbreaks, natural hazards, and climate change. Conduct a rapid 
assessment to regional level on current measures in preparedness to mitigate the impact of 
crisis, management to effectively address the crisis and responsiveness to ensure a speedy 
recovery. Coordinate closely with the grant-financed consulting services and incorporate the 
results of the grant-financed WASH program and sanitation standards into all deliverables. 
•  Regional  tourism  agreements.  Review  (i)  the  existing  tourism  agreements  between 
Mongolia, the People’s Republic of China, and the Russian Federation, and (ii) existing cross-
border  tourism  arrangements  in  western  Mongolia  with  these  countries  including  border 
health  screening.  Identify  opportunities  to  improve  cross-border  arrangements  to  facilitate 
visitor flows and contribute to national health and COVID-19 screening. 
•  Strategic  environmental  assessment  (SEA).  An  SEA  will  be  prepared  as  part  of  the 
regional tourism master plan. This will comprise an essential strategic planning aspect of the 
master plan. The SEA will comprise a road map with specific actions required to ensure that 
the  cumulative  impacts  of  new  planned  tourism  developments  are  assessed  in  a  holistic 
manner  considering  other  planned  development;  and  are  aligned  with  the  principals  and 
priorities  of  the  master  plan.  The  sector  assessment  phase  of  preparation  will  include  (i) 
compilation of existing SEA (if any) for Mongolia, and (ii) next steps for SEA preparation. 
15. 
As a conclusion and summary of the knowledge gathered through research, analysis, and 
consultation in this section, the midterm challenges in each component as above will be identified 
and a SWOT analysis of the destination will be elaborated. In addition, a set of recommendations 
for tourism policy improvement and mapping of sources of funding for the subsequent execution 
of master plan actions will be elaborated. 
Appendix 2 
77 
(2)  Benchmarking analysis 
16. 
As a conclusion and summary of the knowledge gathered through research, analysis, and 
consultation  in  this  section,  identify  the  midterm  challenges  in  each  component  as  above  and 
elaborate a SWOT analysis of the destination. In addition, elaborate a set of recommendations 
for tourism policy improvement and mapping of sources of funding for the subsequent execution 
of master plan actions. 
Phase 2: Formulation of the Strategy 
(1)  Strategic vision 
17. 
Based on the previous situational analysis, this activity will define the tourism development 
vision for western Mongolia, setting out where it should be by the end of the life of the strategy 
and, through the identification of strategic objectives, the ways in which the vision will be achieved. 
These objectives should be achievable within the timespan to be covered by the Strategy, as well 
as realistic within the potential sources of funding. 
18. 
The destination vision and action plan shall be in line with population and visitor growth 
projections,  existing  tourism  policy  and  planning,  prioritized  geographic  areas  for  tourism 
development, acceptable limits for tourism development, carrying capacity of key sites, and based 
on stakeholder consensus. 
The tourism development vision for western Mongolia, to be determined by the Regional 
19. 
Master Plan, should be based on 3 main targets: (i) To become a first-order Mongolian destination 
in  terms  of  brand  and  visitors’  number;  (ii)  To  be  recognized  as  a  sustainable  and  inclusive 
destination; (iii) To became tourism as a relevant sector for regional poverty reduction thought 
income and employment generation. 
20. 
Strategic  environmental  assessment  (SEA).  The  overall  vision  and  objectives  of  the 
master  plan  will  embed  the  principals  of  sustainable  development.  Best  practice  safeguard 
assessment  will  be  a  fundamental  part  of  this  process,  and  the  SEA  will  be  embedded  in  the 
master plan objectives. 
21.  Monitoring of the plan's effectiveness, and, of visitor preferences. The plan will include a 
self-monitoring  component to  be  led  by  MET  and the  Aimag Governments  at  defined  intervals 
after final endorsement of the plan by the government, to assess progress for implementation of 
the plan. The plan will also include the need for monitoring of visitor feedback and preferences 
for the existing and project-supported facilities. This monitoring will include (i) surveys of visitors 
to western Mongolia, including to the project-supported facilities and protected areas, and (ii) data 
and  information  compiled  from  the  operators  of  the  project  facilities,  community-based 
organizations, MET, the protected area administrations, aimag government agencies, and other 
donor agencies. 
22. 
(2)  Eight-year action plan 
The  consulting  firm  will  design  an  eight-year  action  plan  for  western  Mongolia  with 
23. 
activities to reach the vision. These actions will include a clear implementation framework with 
detailed budget, funding sources, responsible entity, and support entities. The plans’ objectives 
78 
Appendix 2 
and targets will be based on the sector diagnostic and grounded in the realistic and sustainable 
utilization of the region’s tourism assets. This action plan will be complementary to the existing 
Aimag tourism plans. 
The below are some but not an exhaustive list of the suggested areas of importance to 
24. 
prepare the strategy under the project: 
•  Destination  governance  and  management.  Designing  a  clear  regional  governance 
structure with defined and appropriate roles of aimag government entities, private sector, and 
civil  society  organizations,  if  required.  Strengthening  the  transboundary  cooperation  with 
PRC  and  Russian  Federation  for  a  synergic  tourism  development  in  common  areas. 
Cooperation with other Mongolian government institutions (Academy, etc.). 
•  Tourism related human capital development. Supporting aimag level government capacity 
to establishing and maintaining a competitive sector; targeting improvements to management 
capacities  of  public  officials  responsible  for  tourism  management  in  protected  areas; 
identification of any direct and indirect financial or non-financial assistance measures that the 
public  sector  can  adopt  to  support  the  private  sector  in  the  human  capital  development 
(vocational training, tourism business incubator, etc.). 
•  Managing social and environmental impacts. Strengthening local residents’ stewardship 
of tourism assets (protected areas, cultural heritage sites, etc.); strengthening of park visitor 
management  system;  ensuring  community  involvement  in  operations  and  maintenance  of 
key  tourism  infrastructure,  cultural  heritage  sites,  and  natural  assets;  information  and 
education  campaigns  to  promote  sustainable  tourism  and  appropriate  behavior  targeting 
tourists  and hosts;  increasing  the  participation  of  women, youth,  and  vulnerable groups in 
tourism planning and decision-making institutions; improving the management of solid waste, 
wastewater, pollutants, and carbon emissions generated by the tourism industry. 
•  Commercializing the natural and cultural assets in a sustainable way. Connecting the 
natural and cultural assets better to the tourism market, providing opportunities for tourism 
income  generation  for  the  local  communities,  while  ensuring  the  preservation  and 
sustainability of the assets for future generations. 
•  Product  development  and  marketing  for  realizing  key  target  market  opportunities. 
Creation  of  guidelines  for  preparing a  concise  marketing  action  plan  for western  Mongolia 
with recommendations for a consistent branding strategy linked with health management that 
reassures travelers of health and sanitation protocols, measures to enhance demand from 
appropriate  high  yield  markets,  expand  the  tourism  season,  mechanisms  to  sustainably 
finance  marketing and promotion  efforts,  and monitor  the  effectiveness  of  the  action  plan. 
Creation of events and tourism products (auto route, horse, and camel route, etc.) connecting 
three aimags. Creation of tourism complexes and tourism streets. 
•  Private sector investment promotion and public-private partnerships. Improving access 
to finance community-based MSMEs (particularly led by women and youth); expanding eco-
certification programs in tourist services; strengthening MET concessions management for 
developing  strategic  and  inclusive  business  models;  targeting  priority  areas  for  green 
investments  in  public  tourism  facilities,  accommodation,  transportation,  and  tour  services, 
particularly  tourism  enterprises  that  can  directly  and  indirectly  support  payments  for 
environmental  services  and  heritage  management;  promoting  tourism  cooperatives  and 
public-private partnerships to boost destination marketing and promotion. 
•  Cross-border  and  internal  travel  facilitation.  Improving  arrangements  for  cross-border 
travel; streamlining visa procedures for high-priority markets and improved efficiency of visa 
processing;  improving  connectivity  and  transport  challenges  (air  and  land)  and  identifying 
solutions that could be implemented within western Mongolia. 
Appendix 2 
79 
•  Tourism  related 
infrastructure.  Prioritizing  climate 
friendly  and  climate-resilient 
infrastructure to improve access to tourist destinations and attractions in developing areas 
and  catalyze  private  investment;  improve  public  services  such  as  water  supply  and 
wastewater  treatment,  electricity,  sanitation,  and  solid  waste  management;  facilitate 
movement of tourists at border crossings. 
•  Policy-level COVID-19 mitigation and recovery measures for the destination in the short-
term, considering international and national recommendations. 
•  Risk management. Improving resilience to disease outbreaks, natural hazards and climate 
change  through  actions  aimed  at  strengthening  the  crisis  readiness  in  the  destination 
(Emergency Action plans, Education programs, etc.). 
•  Support  for  implementation  of  existing  tourism  agreements  between  Mongolia,  the 
People’s Republic of China, and the Russian Federation. Integrate measurable actions 
in  the  regional  master  plan  to  support  and  strengthen  existing  cross-border  tourism 
arrangements  in  western  Mongolia  with  these  countries,  especially  for  (i)  border  health 
screening, (ii) facilitation and monitoring of visitor flows, and (iii) cross-border visitor itineraries 
that maximize exposure to the project-funded tourism facilities and other locations in western 
Mongolia. 
•  Monitoring of the plan’s effectiveness, and, of visitor preferences. The plan will include 
a  self-monitoring  component  to  be  led  by  MET  and  the  Aimag  Governments  at  defined 
intervals  after  final  endorsement  of  the  plan  by  the  government,  to  assess  progress  for 
implementation  of  the  plan.  The  plan  will  also  include  the  need  for  monitoring  of  visitor 
feedback  and  preferences for  the  existing  and  project-supported  facilities.  This  monitoring 
will  include  (i)  surveys  of  visitors  to  western  Mongolia,  including  to  the  project-supported 
facilities and protected areas, and (ii) data and information compiled from the operators of 
the  project 
the  protected  area 
administrations, aimag government agencies, and other donor agencies. 
facilities,  community-based  organizations,  MET, 
•  Strategic  environmental  assessment  (SEA).  Implementation  of  the  SEA  and  specific 
procedures to integrate the SEA into regional and aimag level planning will be developed and 
included at all relevant stages and sections of the master plan. 
25. 
The Action plan shall integrate the impact of all the planned activities of the Sustainable 
Tourism Development Project (Phase 2), contained in its master table of components, focused 
on  inclusive benefits for communities, the  protection  of  nature  and  cultural  heritage,  and post-
COVID-19 recovery, and resilience. 
(3)  Implementation framework 
26. 
The  master  plan  will  contain  a  detailed  implementation  framework  for  its  development, 
monitoring,  and  evaluation,  led  by  the  tourism  key  players  (e.g.,  aimag  government,  private 
sector,  CSOs)  in  western  Mongolia.  It  should  include  a  road  map  summary,  financing 
requirements,  monitoring  and  evaluation  plan,  as  well  as  an  institutional  framework  for  its 
implementation  (roles  and  responsibilities,  recommendations  for  institutional  capacity  building 
requirements). The monitoring plan should contain international standardized indicators on the 
social,  environmental,  and  economic  impacts  with  measurable  annual  and  8-year  targets. 
Implementation  of  the  SEA  will  be  integrated  in  all  relevant  steps  and  procedures  of  the 
framework. 
(4)  Potential replicability in Mongolia: recommendations and lessons learned 
80 
Appendix 2 
As  innovative  experience  in  Mongolia,  include  recommendations  and  lessons  learned 
27. 
about the regional planning process with the aim of guiding further elaboration of Tourism Master 
Plans in other Mongolian regions. 
The Regional Tourism Master Plan shall ensure that the following measures are complied 
28. 
with: (i) Strict prohibition of sale or consumption of protected flora and fauna, and (ii) Inclusion of 
wildlife  trade  in  the  awareness  materials  and  training  for  the  beneficiaries,  especially  on  the 
prohibition of selling protected flora and fauna and/or their products and parts, to tourists. 
29. 
Output deliverables: 
• 
Inception report (common for all outputs). 
•  Draft Baseline Analysis and Diagnostic report. 
•  Draft Strategic Vision, Eight-year action plan, and implementation framework report. 
•  Draft final Regional Tourism Master Plan report. 
•  Final  Regional  Tourism  Master  Plan,  including  Dissemination  program,  and  Executive 
summary, that has been reviewed and endorsed by the Project Steering Committee, MET, 
and the Governments of Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, and Uvs Aimags. 
DELIVERABLE  2:  STRENGTHENING  THE  AIMAG  TOURISM  DEVELOPMENT  PLANS 
(Output 1.1.2) 
30. 
This  action  is  aimed  at  strengthening  tourism  planning  in  Bayan-Ulgii,  Khovd,  and  Uvs 
Aimags through the inclusion of missing targets related to livelihoods, conservation, sanitation, 
hygiene, waste management, and risk management for disease outbreaks and natural hazards, 
as well as ensure the integration of the tourism plans into Aimags development planning. 
The  scope  of  the  work  for  consultancy  services  for  strengthening  the  Aimag  tourism 
31. 
development plans shall include but not limited to the following activities: 
•  Elaborate  a  baseline  situation  and  SWOT  analysis  of  Aimags  tourism  development 
regarding  three  key  areas:  (i)  Supporting  livelihoods;  (ii)  Conservation,  sanitation, 
hygiene,  and  waste  management;  (ii)  Preparedness  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  crisis 
(disease  outbreaks,  natural  hazards,  and  climate  change),  management  to  effectively 
address the crisis and responsiveness to ensure a speedy recovery. 
•  Conduct  a  rapid  assessment  related  to  objectives/actions/targets  in  current  Aimag 
tourism  plans  aimed  at addressing the  previous  issues,  as  well  as  strategic  alignment 
with Aimags development planning. 
•  Conduct stakeholder consultations to discuss the assessment findings and collect ideas 
for update the plans. 
•  Elaboration of specific measures and steps to: (i) Achieve the timely integration of project 
targets into tourism planning, tailored to the conditions of each Aimag, and aligned with 
parallel ADB projects on disaster risk management, border control, and health screening; 
(ii) Improve the integration of Aimags tourism Plans into Aimags development plans. 
•  Prepare an updating proposal for each Aimag tourism plan/sub-program. 
•  The revision of the Sub-Program of Uvs and Khovd Aimags must support the operations 
of UVTC and RANCC under the sustainable tourism approach and integrate the relevant 
components of these complexes into plan. 
The Aimag tourism plans shall ensure that the following measures are complied with: (i) 
32. 
Strict prohibition of sale or consumption of protected flora and fauna, and (ii) Inclusion of wildlife 
Appendix 2 
81 
trade in the awareness materials and training for the beneficiaries, especially on the prohibition 
of selling protected flora and fauna and/or their products and parts, to tourists. 
33. 
Output deliverables: 
•  Baseline situation and SWOT analysis report 
•  Stakeholder consultations report 
•  Draft review and recommendations, which will include specific proposed revisions to the 
3 aimag tourism plans, especially, to (i) incorporate project targets for livelihoods, poverty, 
gender,  sanitation,  protected  area  management,  and  O&M  of  the  project  facilities,  (ii) 
strengthen  consistency,  alignment,  and  integration  of  the  aimag  tourism  plans,  aimag 
master plans and other relevant development plans, and the site management plans for 
the ATBNP, KKNP, KUNNP, TSC, and UVSPA 
•  Three  5-year  financing  plans  to  support  implementation  of  the  revised  tourism  plans, 
including financing sources 
•  Three draft revised aimag tourism plans, annotated with specific proposed revisions, to 
incorporate the measures above. The draft plans will have been reviewed and endorsed 
by the Project Steering Committee, MET and the Governments of Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, 
and Uvs aimags 
DELIVERABLE  3:  TOURISM  CONCESSION  MANUALS  FOR  PILOT  PROTECTED  AREAS 
(Output 1.1.3) 
34. 
The consultant will (i) establish a tourism concession manual template for five project sites, 
(ii) prepare site-specific manuals based on the template, and (iii) pilot these for each site: ATBNP, 
including  the  PCMA  (Bayan-Ulgii);  KUNNP  and  TSC  (Khovd);  KKNP  and  UVSPA  (Uvs).  The 
manuals will apply UNDP Guidelines for tourism concessions in Mongolia’s protected areas; as 
well  as  the  draft  tourism  concession  manual  and  lessons  learned  from  MON-3787/3788  Loan 
(Sustainable Tourism  Development  Project,  Phase 1 and other  relevant projects  supported  by 
ADB and/or other donors, including MON-9183 Grant Integrated Livelihoods Improvement and 
Sustainable Tourism in Khuvsgul Lake National Park). Coordination with previous efforts of CSOs 
in selected sites will be essential (e.g., WWF Mongolia in KUNNP). 
35. 
The key components of the tourism concession manuals will inter alia be to: 
•  Processing and allocation of tourism concessions will be tailored to the specific requirements 
• 
of selected sites. 
Issues  addressed  in  concession  agreement  will  be  suitability  (skills  and  qualifications  of 
applicant), operational details and performance standards (range of services, etc.), fees and 
monitoring and enforcement (to meet agreed standards). 
•  Establishment of clear objectives of concession management system to staff, applicants and 
other  government  agencies;  reflected  in  clear  Terms  and  conditions  of  the  concession 
agreement. 
•  Both proactive (government led) and reactive (private/NFP/NGO led) approaches will be used 
to achieve objectives and invite and control investment. 
•  A  range  of  tenures  and  fees  available  for  use  will  reflect  nature  of  the  use  and  level  of 
investment. 
•  Simple  procedures  and  performance  standards  available  for  staff  and  stakeholders  for 
assessing and awarding concessions. 
•  Enforcement, compliance, and mechanism for termination will be included. 
82 
Appendix 2 
Establish  a  baseline  of  the  employment  status  for  existing  registered  tour  camp 
36. 
operations in western Mongolia. In 2021, only about 45 registered tour camps with about 117 
employees  were  operating  in  western  Mongolia,  mostly  within  or  near  protected  areas  and/or 
heritage sites. Document and summarize the skill levels and jobs of employees in the registered 
tour  camps  of  western  Mongolia.  This  will  provide  a  baseline  from  which  to  help  measure  the 
effectiveness  of  the  tour  camp  concession  manual,  eco-certification  program,  and  project 
trainings. Identify potential project targets to measure changes in the number, composition, and 
skillsets of tour camp employees pre- and post-project. 
Output deliverables: 
37. 
•  Baseline  status  of  registered  tour  camps  in  western  Mongolia  including  employees  and 
skillsets of each tour camp 
•  Draft Tourism concession manuals 
•  Final Tourism concession manuals 
DELIVERABLE  4:  PILOT  ECO-CERTIFICATION  PROGRAM  FOR  TOUR  CAMPS  (Output 
1.1.4) 
38. 
Introduce an eco-certification program for tour camps in ATBNP and PCMA (Bayan-Ulgii); 
KUNNP  and  TSC  (Khovd);  KKNP  and  UVSPA  (Uvs).  It  is  expected  that  the  Eco-certification 
program  for  western  Mongolia  will  expand  the  program  previously  developed  under  MON-
3787/3788 Loan (Sustainable Tourism Development Project, Phase 1) to these selected areas. 
GSTC has already made progress for their introduction in Mongolia, as well as have developed 
standards potentially applicable to the tour camps and protected areas, in cooperation with MET. 
It is expected that ecotourism certification program will be based on this international standard. In 
addition to this, it should be aligned with the two national standards set forth as regulations for 
accommodation operators in the countryside (National Standards MNS:4934:2002 on “Tourist ger 
camp quality and general requirements” and MNS 6043:2009 for “Resorts, tourist camp and ger 
camps”). 
Output deliverables: 
39. 
•  Draft Eco-certification program for tour camps 
•  Final Eco-certification program for tour camps 
DELIVERABLE  5:  DESIGN  AND  IMPLEMENT  PROJECT  TRAININGS  FOR  ECOTOURISM 
SKILLS FOR THE PROJECT AGENCIES AND COMMUNITIES (Output 1.2.1) 
40. 
Identify the ecotourism skills most relevant to support agencies and communities in the 
project sites. Establish a measurable baseline of pre- and post-project ecotourism skills. Develop 
and implement a training program to strengthen the skills of (i) local government and protected 
area administrations for tourism planning and management within the project protected areas and 
heritage  sites,  and  (ii)  the  local  communities  in  the  project  sites,  focused  especially  on  the 
community-based organizations (CBOs) to be supported under the project. Work closely with the 
consulting services package CS6: Livelihoods and Tourism Business Development and Capacity 
Building  to  ensure  the  training  program  is  closely  integrated,  designs,  organized,  and 
implemented, within the training of the consulting services package CS6. 
41. 
Output deliverables: 
•  Training program in ecotourism for local agencies and communities. 
• 
Implementation of the training program. 
Appendix 2 
83 
•  Pre- and post- measurement of the training outcomes. 
FINAL DELIVERABLES 
42. 
The firm will provide the following. 
•  Regional Tourism Master Plan for western Mongolia. 
•  Updating proposal of the three Aimag tourism development plans (Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd 
and Uvs Aimags). 
•  Tourism  concession  manuals  for  key  protected  areas:  ATBNP  and  PCMA  (Bayan-
Ulgii); KUNNP and TSC (Khovd); KKNP and UVSPA (Uvs). 
•  Eco-certification program for tour camps in key protected areas: ATBNP and PCMA 
(Bayan-Ulgii); KUNNP and TSC (Khovd); KKNP and UVSPA (Uvs). 
•  Ecotourism training program in key protected areas: ATBNP and PCMA (Bayan-Ulgii); 
KUNNP and TSC (Khovd); KKNP and UVSPA (Uvs). 
•  The  final  report  will  include  (i)  a  summary  of  lessons  during  implementation  and 
measures  or  corrective  actions  taken  to  address  challenges  encountered,  and  (ii) 
recommendation  on  the  potential  for,  and  steps  to,  replicate  or  scale  up  relevant 
deliverables to other regions of Mongolia. 
D. 
TEAM COMPOSITION & QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR THE KEY EXPERTS 
General requirements for the Consultant are below. These shall equally apply for the sub-
43. 
consultants’ qualifications. 
(i) 
The Consultant could be either a single firm or a joint venture of companies that have at 
least 7 years of extensive experience in respective fields. 
(ii)  At least 5 years of proven experience with the contracts of similar size and nature. 
(iii)  The  consultant  should  provide  the  reference  letters  from  previous  three  (3)  Clients 
specifically  to  the  similar  projects  to  prove  that  the  Consultant  had  had  successfully 
completed with the relevant projects. 
In the financial proposal, prove the experts are the consultant’s full time staff by providing 
at least 2 years of the payment records of the social insurance to claim overhead costs for 
the proposed experts. 
(iv) 
Subcontractors, if any, shall be approved by the MET and ADB based on complying to the 
44. 
below minimum requirements. 
(i) 
At least 7 years of extensive experience in required fields. Must be a licensed company 
for the required fields if required by Mongolian Law and Standards and Norms. 
(ii)  Must prove financially sound status. 
(iii)  Available personnel qualified to do required works. 
(iv)  Experts must have at least 7 years’ professional experience. 
(v)  Must provide the CV of the experts for the MET review and approval. 
45. 
The assignment will be carried out by a consulting firm. Proposing entities will determine 
the number and the specific expertise along with their inputs of the specialists they will require to 
achieve  the  objectives  of  the  contract,  in  accordance  with  their  proposed  approach  and 
methodology. However, MET requires a minimum of six key experts (see below), one of which 
will be expected to act as team leader. The firm will be recruited through the MET, and work under 
the coordination of the project implementation unit (PIU). The specialists will liaise with aimag and 
soum governments and other stakeholders as needed to develop and implement the program. 
84 
Appendix 2 
In addition to the above required key experts, the proposing entities should also identify 
46. 
“non-key  experts”  required  to  achieve  the terms of reference.  For  example,  specialists  in  solid 
waste  management,  sanitation,  archaeological  heritage,  climate  change,  tourism  business 
development, and health risk management. The firm will mobilize such specialists as needed. 
47. 
The services of the consulting firm will be required over a period not exceeding 12 months 
to undertake the various needed activities outlined in the Term of Reference. The total level of 
effort for the assignment is estimated in 57 people/month of expert´s input. 
48. 
Qualification requirements and responsibilities for the key experts are detailed below. 
1. 
International Tourism Planning Specialist (international, intermittent, 2 person/month). 
The  specialist  will  have:  (i)  at  least  10  years’  experience  in  the  creation  and/or 
implementation of tourism plans, strategies, or policies at regional or national level; (ii) a 
master’s degree in Tourism Management, Tourism Policy, Tourism Planning, Sustainable 
Tourism  Development,  or  related  fields;  (iii)  knowledge  and  experience  in  Tourism 
development  in  Central  Asia  would  be  an  asset;  (iv)  excellent  written  and  oral 
communication  in  English.  Specific  tasks  and  responsibilities  will  include,  but  are  not 
limited to the following: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
For all the outputs, provide advise based on international best practice principles and 
standards for ecotourism and green development within and near protected areas and 
cultural heritage sites, when requested by the team leader. 
Identify main international demand trends, visitor growth projections, and potential key 
segments matched to regional key tourism products. 
Conduct a benchmarking analysis of similar destinations, regarding best practices in 
inclusive and sustainable tourism development. 
Contribute to define the tourism development vision for western Mongolia. 
Co-elaborate  Policy-level  COVID-19  mitigation  and  recovery  measures  for  the 
destination in the short-term, considering international and national recommendations, 
as well as measures to improve resilience to disease outbreaks, natural hazards, and 
climate change. 
In  collaboration  with  the  national  Tourism  Planning  Specialist,  design  a  Regional 
Tourism Governance Structure for western Mongolia and a detailed implementation 
framework  for  the  Regional  Tourism  Master  Plan,  in  line  with  international  best 
practice. 
Provide inputs to integrate project targets into the aimag tourism plans. 
Guide the elaboration process of the tourism concessions manuals, eco-certification 
program for tour camps, and CBO development program, providing expertise on 
2.  Team Leader/Tourism Planning Specialist (national, intermittent, 7 person/month). The 
specialist  will  have:  (i)  at  least  ten  (10)  years’  experience  in  the  creation  and/or 
implementation of tourism plans, strategies, or policies at regional or national level; (ii) at 
least three (3) similar assignments handled, and experience with Government and/ or ADB 
policies and procedures; (iii) at least a master’s degree in Tourism Management, Tourism 
Policy,  Tourism  Planning,  Sustainable  Tourism  Development,  or  related  fields;  (iv) 
outstanding  analytical  skills;  (v)  outstanding  organizational,  project  management  and 
leadership  skills;  (vi)  proven 
in  managing  ensuring  good  client 
communication; (vii) excellent written and oral communication in English and Mongolian. 
Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
track  record 
Appendix 2 
85 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 
j) 
k) 
l) 
m) 
n) 
Lead preparation of outputs in coordination with international and national consultants, 
keeping track of, and structuring various tasks. 
Ensure timely achievement and smooth implementation of contract activities, covering 
all client´s requirements. 
Apply international best practice and standards for inclusive and sustainable tourism, 
ensuring that outputs are tailored to the specific conditions, needs, and resources of 
western Mongolia. 
Apply lessons learned from previous ADB and other donor projects in Mongolia. 
Lead role to deliver a holistic and integrated tourism planning design at regional and 
aimag level. 
As Tourism Planning Specialist, contribute to all output deliverables. 
Design and coordinate domestic studies as needed. 
Conduct sites visits as required. 
Participate in and present findings at consultations and workshops. 
Ensure  outputs  are  properly  validated  by  key  stakeholders  as  per  the  approved 
elaboration process. 
Ensure  that  all  outputs  are  reviewed  and  checked  by  the  International  Tourism 
Planning Specialist. 
Undertake quality assurance checking of reports produced by self and that of other 
team members. 
Maintain  open  and  effective  communication  with  the  PIU,  reporting  on  progress, 
activities, and results of activities regularly. 
Any other tasks reasonably requested by the PIU to successfully complete the project. 
3.  Protected  Area  Management  Specialist  (national,  intermittent,  4  person/month).  The 
specialist  will  have:  (i)  at  least  10  years  of  experience  in  biodiversity  conservation, 
protected areas, or natural ecosystems management in Mongolia, (ii) advanced degree in 
the area of biology, ecology, wildlife or forest conservation/management, or closely related 
field with appropriate background, (iii) experience in tourism planning and management in 
protected areas is a plus, (iv) experience with GIS is a plus, (v) excellent written and oral 
communication in English and Mongolian. Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, 
but are not limited to the following: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 
j) 
Review  of  planning  and  regulatory  mechanism  impacting  tourism  development  in 
protected areas. 
Evaluation of existing conditions and tourism development potential of natural assets. 
Co-elaborate an analysis of tourism impacts and benefits on protected areas. 
Co-elaborate measures to improve resilience to disease outbreaks, natural hazards, 
and climate change. 
Contribute to develop sustainable tourism business models in protected areas: tourism 
concession manuals, eco-certification program for tour camps, and Community-based 
organizations. 
Ensure that outputs are aligned with protected areas management plans. 
Conduct sites visits as required. 
Participate in and present findings at consultations and workshops. 
Assess the management effectiveness status of each of the 5 project protected areas, 
using an international methodology e.g. METT. The assessment will be conducted in 
year  1  of  project  implementation  to  provide  a  baseline  for  the  project  design  and 
monitoring framework. 
For the ATBNP, KUNNP, KKNP, and UVSPA, assess progress toward the following 
project  outcome  indicator:  ATBNP,  KUNNP,  KKNP,  and  UVSPA  meet  the  social, 
86 
Appendix 2 
environmental,  and  sustainability  criteria  of  the  IUCN  Green  List  of  Protected 
Conserved  Areas.  Facilitate  consultation  meetings  with  local  agencies,  CSOs,  and 
development agencies to identify challenges and issues to be addressed by the project 
and other donors to help achieve this outcome target 
(national, 
4.  Business  Development  and  Marketing  Specialist 
intermittent,  8 
person/month).  The  specialist  will  have:  (i)  at  least  ten  (10)  years  of  experience  in 
marketing, branding, or promotion in national and regional destinations, tourism business 
development in national and regional destinations. Experience in protected areas is a plus, 
(ii)  Bachelor´s  Degree  in  Business  Development,  Economics,  Marketing,  Destination 
branding,  Marketing  branding,  image  positioning,  product  development,  economics,  or 
related field or similar. (iii) work experience in cultural-based and nature-based products 
and  Ecotourism  will  be  an  asset,  (iv)  Master  of  Business  Administration  Degree  (MBA) 
preferred, (v) excellent written and oral communication in English and Mongolian. Specific 
tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Provide inputs to the Baseline situation, Diagnosis, and Action plan of the Regional 
Tourism Master Plan in terms of tourism supply, product development, and marketing. 
Prepare  guidelines  for  preparing  a marketing  action  plan  for  western Mongolia with 
recommendations for a consistent branding strategy. 
Creation of events and tourism products connecting three aimags. 
Lead role to develop sustainable tourism business models in protected areas: tourism 
concession manuals for protected areas, eco-certification program for tour camps, and 
Community-based organizations. 
Ensure preservation and sustainability of the assets, while providing opportunities for 
tourism income generation for the local communities. 
5.  Stakeholder  Consultation  Specialist  (national,  intermittent,  8  person/month).  The 
specialist will have: (i) a bachelor’s degree or higher degree in sociology or related fields; 
(ii) 10 years working experience as a social and gender specialist; (iii) working experience 
in preparation or implementation of World Bank/ADB funded projects; (iv) good knowledge 
on the ADB’s social, gender and safeguards policies; and (v) proficiency in spoken and 
written English. He/she will be responsible to provide social and gender aspect support for 
ecotourism planning and protected area management in compliance of ADB social policies 
and procedures, and covenants on social aspects. The specific tasks include, but are not 
limited to: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Ensure  that  social  perspective  is  included  in  the  preparation  of  tourism  plans  and 
tourism  concession  manuals  and  eco-certification;  in  particular  ensure  priority  of 
employment  for  local  residents  (including  women,  poor  and  vulnerable  and  youth) 
based on the indicators set-up in the SDAP and GAP. 
Ensure  the  perspective of  women  and  of  disabled  persons  and their  specific  needs 
are included in plans & manuals. 
Support the establishment of women-led-market in protected areas; prepare a plan for 
the  establishment  of  women-led-market.  This  plan  should  include:  i)  identification 
women willing to be part a woman-led market; ii) organization of women in cooperative 
to manage the women-led markets; iii) integration of women-led market in campsites 
and in fee  collection stations;  iv)  ensure  women receive necessary  training;  v) time 
line for establishment of women-led market and vi) costs. 
Submit this plan for review to PIU and ADB. 
Implement this plan with the support of the PIU and other team members. 
Appendix 2 
87 
f) 
Ensure  local  people  (including  women  and  poor  and  vulnerable  persons)  are 
employed during construction and O&M of small tourism facilities in selected sites as 
per indicators set-up in the SDAP and GAP. 
6.  Historian and Cultural Heritage Specialist (national, intermittent, 2 person/month). The 
specialist  will  have:  (i)  at  least  ten  (10)  years  of  working  experience  in  preservation, 
management, promotion, development, reporting, and monitoring of cultural heritage. (ii) 
at least a master’s degree in cultural heritage management or related area, (iii) excellent 
written  and  oral  communication  in  English  and  Mongolian.  Specific  tasks  and 
responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Conduct sites visits as required. 
Undertaking  desk  review  of  the  brief  history  of  the  sites  and  identifying  historical 
documentation whenever possible. 
Evaluation of existing conditions and tourism development potential of cultural assets. 
Provide inputs to the Baseline situation, Diagnosis, and Action plan of the Regional 
Tourism Master Plan in terms of cultural heritage. 
Co-elaborate an analysis of tourism impacts and benefits on protected areas. 
7.  Non-key Specialists. The firm will propose additional non-key specialists as needed to 
achieve  the  deliverables.  These  might  include,  but  not  be  limited  to:  tourism  product 
specialist, local stakeholder consultation specialist, legal specialist. 
E. 
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS AND TIME SCHEDULE FOR DELIVERABLES 
49. 
The consulting firm will be hired by and report to the PIU. The PIU (through the project 
coordinator)  will  act  as  liaison  between  the  consulting  firm  and  the  implementing  agency, 
executing  agency,  ADB  and  other  relevant  national  and  regional  stakeholders  for  the  project 
implementation. The PIU will facilitate the workflow and ensure that all relevant activities, all the 
reports, all the documents and relevant data as well as the entire assignment will be completed 
effectively and successfully by the consulting firm within the allocated time based on the agreed 
workplan. Validation/comments on deliverables will be provided within 7 days from receipt of the 
report. 
50. 
All communications and reports will be submitted both in English and Mongolian, using a 
standard report format required by the PIU. The Consultant shall submit three hard copies and 
one electronic copy of each deliverable. Besides, each deliverable will be accompanied with a 
summary  in  Power  point  format.  Final reports  shall  be  delivered  in  CD  ROM  in  addition to the 
specified number of hard copies. 
51. 
Inception report, within 1 month of mobilization. 
Overall reporting deliverables. 
(i) 
(ii)  Progress reports. 
(iii)  Draft final report; and final draft report. 
(iv)  Draft  and  final  draft  of  one  knowledge  product  that  summarizes  the  results, 
challenges, impacts, and lessons learned of the consultancy. The knowledge product 
will be of high-quality and focus on disseminating valuable lessons and opportunity 
for replication, innovation, and scaling up for other regions. 
(v)  All deliverables will include (i) a summary of lessons learned during the process of 
preparation, and (ii) recommendation on the potential for, and steps to, replicate or 
scale up each deliverable to other regions of Mongolia 
88 
Appendix 2 
52. 
Deliverables and dates of submission are listed below. 
Deliverable 
Due date 
M1  M2  M3  M4  M5  M6  M7  M8  M9  M10  M11  M12 
X 
  X 
  X 
Week 
2 
Regional Tourism Master Plan 
Inception report*. Including Methodology, 
management plan, communication plan, 
Stakeholder’s involvement strategy, List of 
documentary sources to be reviewed 
Draft Baseline Analysis and Diagnostic 
Draft Strategic Vision, Eight-year action plan, 
and implementation framework 
Draft Regional Tourism Master Plan  
Final Regional Tourism Master Plan, including 
Dissemination program and Executive summary 
Public presentation* 
Strengthening the Aimag Tourism Development Sub-programs 
Baseline situation and SWOT analysis 
Stakeholder consultations report 
Update Aimag tourism plan/sub-program 
  X 
Elaboration of Tourism concession manuals for key protected areas 
Draft Tourism concession manuals 
Final Tourism concession manuals 
Introduction of an Eco-certification program for tour camps in key protected areas 
Draft Eco-certification program 
Final Eco-certification program 
Establish and train CBOs in key protected areas 
Draft CBOs development program 
Final CBOs development program 
* This deliverable is common for all six products. 
X 
  X 
  X 
  X 
  X 
  X 
  X 
X 
X 
X 
F. 
CLIENT’S INPUT AND COUNTERPART PERSONNEL 
53. 
Services,  facilities,  and  property  to  be  made  available  to  the  Consultant  by  the  Client: 
facilitate  interaction  between  the  consultant  and  stakeholders  in  the  tourism  sector  and  other 
Government Ministries and Agencies and ensure that the consultant has access to all relevant 
documentation necessary that may be legally allowed for the performance of his or her duties. 
Appendix 2 
89 
2. 
CS2: Detailed Engineering Design and Construction Supervision of UVTC and Uvs 
Tourist Street in Uvs Aimag 
A.  BACKGROUND 
1. 
The Sustainable Tourism Development Project (Phase 2) will support the development of 
sustainable tourism within the three Aimags of western Mongolia, Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, and Uvs 
through four outputs: (i) inclusive planning and capacity for community-based tourism enhanced, 
(ii) enabling infrastructure constructed, (iii) sanitation and waste management improved, and (iv) 
management  of  cultural  heritage  sites  and  protected  areas  strengthened.  The  Ministry  of 
Environment  and  Tourism  (MET)  is  the  executing  agency  to  implement  the  project.  MET’s 
Department of Tourism Policy Coordination (DTPC) is the implementing agency (IA) for the loan 
and the Department of Protected Areas Management (DPAM) will be the implementing agency 
(IA)  for  the  Japanese  Fund  for  Poverty  Reduction  (JFPR)  grant:  Strengthening  Community 
Livelihoods  in  Buffer  Zones  of  Protected  Areas.  The  MET  has  established  Project  Steering 
Committee (PSC) for the project to facilitate the technical and administrative implementation of 
the  project.  The  PSC  is  the  main  body  of  the  project  implementation  related  consultation  and 
decision-making. 
2. 
During loan processing stage, The TA consultant had developed the various reports which 
meets  the  technical,  economic,  financial,  social,  environmental,  and  other  due  diligence 
requirements of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Government of Mongolia to design 
the  Project.  These  reports  include  the  following  but  not  limited  to: 
the  Report  and 
Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors; Project Administration Manual; Social 
Development  Action  Plan;  Gender  Action  Plan;  Initial  Environmental  Examination;  Risk 
Assessment  and  Risk  Management  Plan;  Feasibility  Study  Report;  and  Climate  Risk  and 
Vulnerability Assessment. The firm shall ensure that their deliverables follow the approved project 
targets and preliminary designs prepared during the processing and described in these reports. 
3. 
The consultant deliverables need to reflect a holistic design approach that ensures synergy 
and integration, where relevant, with the other project components and deliverables prepared by 
other consulting teams. Examples include, but are not limited to: (i) ensuring that the revised aimag 
tourism plans integrate the project components and operation and maintenance (O&M) plans for 
the project facilities, (ii) poverty, gender, and livelihood targets will be integrated within the regional 
tourism master plan, revised aimag tourism plans, and improved tour camp standards, and (iii) O&M 
of  the  loan-funded  tourism  complexes  will  include  promotion  of  the  grant-supported  community 
goods, services, and protected areas. The firm is therefore required to have a good understanding 
of  the  overall  project  design  and  targets  in  addition  to  the  specific  deliverables  under  the 
consultancy. 
B.  OBJECTIVE OF THE CONSULTING SERVICE 
4. 
The  objectives  of  this  consultancy  are  to  produce  detail  design  and  deliver  construction 
documents including appropriate budget estimates for Uvs Tourism Complex and Uvs Tourist street 
(Uvs  Tourism  Facilities),  to  support  the  MET  in  reviewing  bidding  documents,  and  to  supervise 
construction works until its completion. 
5. 
The following design characteristics should be reflected to all design activities. 
-  Rationality and proper capacity: Uvs Tourism Facilities will be aimed to (i) enabling 
infrastructure for tourism, (ii) enhancing the capacity for tourism businesses, and (iii) 
promoting  community-led  tourism  based  on  heritage,  education.  The  proposed 
90 
Appendix 2 
design  should  be  prepared  based  on  sound  evidence-based  data  and  an 
assessment  of  the  relevant  needs  to  the  functionality  of  the  tourism  facility  in 
Mongolia. The design must be generated to consider the future expansion of the site. 
-  Model  and  accreditation:  The  Uvs  Tourism  Facilities  will  follow  international  best 
practices in sustainable design specifically complying with the EDGE standard. The 
design of Tourism Facilities will be used as a model to be inspired in other regions 
of Mongolia. 
-  Modernization:  Investments  will  cover  (i)  modern  infrastructure  facilities  and 
equipment  which  shall  be  in  adequate  capacity;  (ii)  integrated  business  and 
operational  management;  (iii)  proper  waste  management;  and  (iv)  quality 
management. 
The  assignment  is  expected  to  be  commenced  in  Q1  2023  and  be  completed  within  4 
6. 
years after signing on the contract. The MET is targeting to commence the construction works of 
the Uvs Tourism Facilities in Q2, 2025. 
Table 1: Indicative Duration for the Assignment 
2023 
Q
Q
3 
2 
Q
1 
2024 
Q
Q
3 
2 
Q
4 
Q
1 
Q
4 
Q
1 
2025 
Q
Q
3 
2 
Q
4 
Q
1 
2026 
Q
Q
3 
2 
Q
4 
№ 
Tasks 
1 
Design  development  including 
bid documents 
2  Bidding process 
3 
Construction  and  supervision 
contract administration 
C.  SCOPE OF THE CONSULTING SERVICES AND EXPECTED DELIVERABLES 
(v)  developing  mechanical,  electric,  and  plumbing  design, 
7. 
The Consultant will perform professionally and undertake activities necessary to achieve 
the objectives as defined above by (i) coordinating design, and contract administration activities, 
and prepare construction documents in professional standards, (ii) carrying out site survey and 
geotechnical survey, (iii) developing final architectural detail design, (iv) developing the structural 
design, 
(vi)  developing 
telecommunication  and automation  design,  (vii)  providing  for  construction  cost  estimates,  (viii) 
developing the bidding documents for construction, (ix) providing technical support to the MET in 
evaluation  of  bidding  documents  and  provide  expert’s  comments  and  recommendation,  (x) 
providing  monitoring  and  reports  on;  structural  inspection,  mechanical  inspection,  electrical 
inspection,  plumbing  inspection  including  all  external  engineering  works,  landscape  design, 
record  drawings,  and  certification  of  the  progress,  and  (xi)  providing  a  deficiency  assessment, 
total inspection. 
8. 
The scope of services includes the following. 
(i) 
The Consultant will develop Detailed Engineering Designs of Uvs Tourism Complex and 
Uvs Tourist street: 
a.  All  detailed  engineering  designs  shall  be  prepared  based  on  the  approved 
conceptual  design  pursuant  to  relevant  laws  and  regulations  of  Mongolia.  All  the 
design  should  be  in  conformity  with  the  highest  engineering  standards  adopted 
internationally and locally specifically complying to the EDGE standard. 
b.  Project related data, maps, and other information shall be obtained from the MET 
DTPC and DPAM, Border Projection Agency, National Center for Cultural Heritage, 
Appendix 2 
91 
Land  Authority  of  Uvs  Aimag,  the  project  implementation  unit  (PIU)  and  other 
relevant agencies, organizations as required. The Consultant needs to review the 
previous data prior to preparation of detailed engineering design. 
c.  The  detailed  designs  will,  as  a  minimum,  include  construction  drawings,  detailed 
cost  estimates,  necessary  calculations  to  determine,  and  justify  the  engineering 
details, detailed specifications of equipment, architectural/engineering drawings, bill 
of quantities (BOQ), implementation schedule, detailed criteria for the procurement 
of contractors etc. The technical specifications should be in accordance with the best 
national and international practices and should be prepared to achieve the highest 
standard  of  quality.  For  adopting  market  rates  for  the  detailed  cost  estimates,  a 
proper  rate  analysis  should  be  carried  out.  Construction  drawings  should  be 
prepared with sufficient details to permit contractors to carry out construction work 
effectively, unambiguously and with the highest standards of quality. 
d.  The  final  design  drawings,  along  with relevant  documentations,  technical  reports, 
and  working  drawings  comprising  of  the  following,  shall  be  submitted  to  and 
accepted by the Client, but not limited to: (i) Architectural drawings; (ii) Construction 
drawings;  (iii)  HVAC  drawings;  (iv)  Technology  drawing;  (v)  Sewerage  and 
Plumbing;  (vi)  Electricity  supply;  (vii)  Communication/IT  wiring;  (viii)  Fire  and 
Security alarm systems; (ix) Site plan and exterior civil site work, including parking, 
landscaping, signage, etc. (x) Other drawings necessary to describe the work to be 
done; (xi) Requirements for construction works; (xii) equipment and furniture delivery 
schedule; and (xiii) Permissions from the environmental, sanitary, and fire controlling 
authorities. 
e.  The  designs  shall  be  at  the  necessary  level  of  detail  to  finalize  the  bidding 
documents  for  the  relevant  construction  works,  which  shall  be  reviewed  and 
approved by the Client, comprising of the following, but not limited to: (i) A site plan 
at 1/500 scale and 1/1000 scale; (ii) Plans for each level on a scale of 1/100, with 
details at 1/50 and 1/20; (iii) Sections and elevations on a scale of 1/100, with details 
at 1/50 and 1/20; (iv) Structural details (columns, beams, slabs, etc.); (v) Foundation 
details;  (vi)  Site  plan  and  engineering  utilities,  including  parking,  landscaping, 
signage, etc. (vii) Equipment Specification, (viii) BOQ; (ix) Cost estimate; (x) Other 
documents,  as  needed;  The  original  design  assignment  will  be  provided  in 
Mongolian with its English translation for the service purpose. 
f.  All the drawings, reports and manuals, to be furnished in both soft and hard copies, 
duly attested. The Consultant shall be fully responsible for accuracy of all the data, 
rate analyses for items of work used in the preparation, cost estimates and design 
irrespective of the fact whether the same has been examined and approved by the 
PIU or not. 
g.  The  design  shall  be  prepared  in  close  consultation  with,  and  to  meet  the 
requirements of the PIU/IA/EA and will be incorporated into a detailed engineering 
design  report  to  be  submitted  for  approval  of  respective  professional  expertise 
institutions as per the Law on Construction. Therefore, the consultant may cooperate 
with the certified companies to obtain such approval, and the fees involved for review 
and  approval  of  the  detailed  design  drawings  by  the  state  expertise  should  be 
budgeted by the Consultant. 
h.  The design of green areas should comply with traffic engineering design and road 
safety issues. 
i.  Carry  out  all  engineering  surveys  and  investigations  such  as  geodetic  and 
topographical  surveys,  geotechnical  and  soil  survey,  etc.,  required  for  the 
development  of  UVTC  and  UTS.  All  surveys  and  investigations  shall  be  accurate 
92 
Appendix 2 
and  submitted  for  review  or  approval  of  the  PIU/IA/EA,  endorsing  professional 
institutions; Consultant shall budget all survey expenses in its financial proposal. 
(ii)  The Consultant will develop detailed engineering design for access road, car parking 
of Uvs Tourism Complex and Uvs Tourist street as below but not limited to: 
a.  Design (i) road structure, (ii) provide production of design drawings showing plan 
in 1:500 scale, Longitudinal profile in 500H to 100V scale, cross-sections, if any, 
at 20 m interval in 1:100 scale, (f) design of footpaths, bus stops, roadside parking 
facilities as appropriate. 
b.  Use  the  data  collected  during  the  hydrological  survey  and  determine  the 
following: (i) type of the cross drainage structure if any; (ii) structural design of 
slab  and  box  culverts;  (iii)  size  and  location  of  roadside  drainage  and  cross 
drainage  structures  (appropriate  side  drains  and cross  drainages  such  as  pipe 
culverts); (iv) design of the water conduit/rain water inlets/manholes to take storm 
water safely to the nearby natural stream. 
c.  The  traffic  engineering  and  traffic  management  plan  in  detailed  engineering 
design includes: (i) traffic engineering, ii) pedestrian paths and car parking and 
crossings,  iii)  bus  station  areas,  and  iv)  intersection  design  including  turning 
movement lane allocations, traffic signal phasing and times if any. 
d.  Produce traffic management measures during the construction period, and 
e.  Any other road tasks required for the successful project implementation by the 
IA/PIU. 
(iii)  The  Consultant  will  develop  an  Operational  and  Management  Plan  for  the  Uvs 
Tourism Facilities as below but no limited to: 
a.  The  Operational  and  Management  Plan  will  detail  implementation  strategies 
within the Regional Tourism Master Plan and Uvs Aimag Tourism Sub-Program, 
and  will  compose  the  detailed  institutional  structure  and  operational  and 
management procedure for the Tourism Facilities. 
b.  Develop  Institutional  model/structure  for  management  of  the  UVTC  and  UTS 
through a local-owned enterprise (LOE). The local-owned enterprise will function 
as  a  dedicated  management  unit  with  highly  qualified  staff  and  operational 
independence that oversees operating contracts for the UVTC and UTS. High-
priority operating entities will be the tourism business entities, young and women-
led business, the businesses supported under Credit revolving funds. 
c.  Prepare detailed staffing and financial plans for the LOE. The Consultant also will 
describe  the  division  of  responsibilities  between  the  LOE,  other  government 
departments,  and  private  sector  participants  in operations  and  ownership.  The 
plan should include a time line for set-up of the LOE. 
(iv)  The consultant shall prepare quantity estimates, rate analysis, detailed cost estimates 
and bidding documents but not limited to: 
a.  Ensure market rate for basic materials. 
b.  Prepare  BOQ  based  on  the  various  items  of  work  in  line  with  the  detailed 
drawings. 
c.  A Confidential Detailed Cost Estimate shall be developed, based on the BOQ for 
each work item and work category. Prices shall be broken down into direct costs 
(labor, materials, transportation and equipment), indirect costs (mobilization, on 
site and general overheads, contractor’s contingencies and profit) and taxes; A 
detailed cost estimate is subject to review by the Client and if necessary by an 
independent estimator. 
Appendix 2 
93 
d.  Government approved norms will be applied wherever applicable; and where the 
government approved norms are poor or not available, improve, develop and get 
necessary approval on norms with PIU’s support. 
e.  There should not be any lump sum items for work related items in the BOQ. For 
items  not  covered  under  schedule  of  rates,  market  rates  to  be  assessed. 
(Necessary documents on quotations received should be made for assessment 
of market rates. This will be subject to scrutiny and approval of PIU); and 
f.  Finalize Bidding Documents (The Procurement Document for Prequalification of 
Bidders,  if  required)  using master  bidding  documents  and  specific  qualification 
requirements  of  each  project  component,  with  due  consideration  to  Open 
competitive bidding for international advertising and National advertising. 
g.  Provide  advice  and  inputs  on  the  EA’s  procurement  submissions  which  will 
include  bidding  documents,  bid  evaluation  reports  and  contract  administration 
queries. The timeframe and format in which Consultant’s advice and assistance 
to  be  provided  shall  be  strictly  in  line  with  project  implementation  schedule  for 
2022-2026 approved by the Project Steering Committee. 
h.  Prepare  compliance  checklists  of  Evaluation  and  Qualification  Criteria  of  the 
issued bidding documents, based on the submitted bids. 
(v)  EDGE  rating.  The  Consultant  will  ensure  the  detailed  engineering  designs  are 
compliant  with,  and meet,  the  minimum  EDGE  certification  rating:  “EDGE  Certified 
/20%”.  This  rating  level  is  to  ensure  the  designs  achieve  20%  reduction  in  energy 
consumption,  water  consumption  and  building  materials.  Note:  the  preliminary 
engineering designs prepared for the tourist street and tourism complex during project 
preparation already meet this EDGE rating target and may exceed it. 
(vi)  Specific tasks and responsibilities of the detailed engineering design and construction 
supervision company (DED/CSC) for DEIA will include the following. 
a.  Ensure familiarity of the design engineers with the EBA, General EIA Letter, IEE, 
and EMP. 
b.  Ensure  that  all  required  environment  management,  monitoring,  and  reporting 
measures are included in the site tasks of the DED/CSC’s personnel. 
c.  Subcontract, and work closely with, the firm that will prepare the  Detailed EIA 
(DEIA) to: (i) provide all needed support, and (ii) ensure that the design engineers 
incorporate the DEIA findings to avoid impacts and mitigate remaining risks. 
d.  Assign at least one qualified environment, health, and safety (EHS) specialist to 
oversee  all  onsite  activities.  Ensure  that  on  site  meetings  are  made  with  the 
contractor, local government, and PIU before any works are initiated. Clarify and 
confirm pre-works readiness for all safeguard measures. 
e.  Prepare  the  detailed  site  EMP,  based  on  the  project  EMP  and  findings  of  the 
DEIA. 
f.  Confirm the conditions and details provided by the Contractor for work clearance 
g. 
(the work go-ahead – that it is correct and appropriate). 
Identify appropriate locations and perspectives at each work site to support time-
(“same-frame”  photographs), 
series  photography  at 
immediately before, during, and immediately after construction works. Implement 
this photo-monitoring program. 
intervals 
regular 
h.  Undertake  regular  site  visits  and  review  the  environmental  monitoring  reports 
provided by the Contractor, for EMP compliance, correctness/rigor, design and 
implementation effectiveness of corrective actions; recommend work stoppages, 
if needed. 
94 
Appendix 2 
i.  Undertake environmental compliance monitoring (independent of the contractor) 
according to the environmental monitoring parameters, location, and frequency 
noted  in  the  IEE  and  EMP  (to  allow  comparisons  with  contractor  monitoring 
data). 
j.  Maintain  regular  communication  with  the  Contractor  and  PIU  environment 
safeguard specialist. 
k.  Confirm the site conditions (at completion of construction works) for hand-over 
to the local authorities. 
l.  Document  and  report  on  EMP  implementation  and  environmental  monitoring 
activities, as required in the overall contract. 
m.  TOR for Domestic DEIA is attached to this TOR as Appendix C. 
(vii) The  Consultant  will  carry  out  following  tasks  for  project  management,  construction 
supervision and quality assurance but not limited to: 
a.  Develop detailed work plan, implementation schedule. The detailed work plan will 
be approved by the project director and will serve as basis for contract monitoring. 
b.  Prepare narrative and photographic progress reports every month and at the end 
of every three months showing the current situation of works on site to ensure 
effective monitoring and timely project outputs, and regularly update the PIU. 
c.  Prepare  project  completion  report  including  submission  of  approved  as-built 
drawings  prepared  by  contractor  wherever  necessary,  on  the  completion  of 
works. 
d.  Prepare  Quality  Assurance  and  Quality  Control  (QA  &  QC)  Plans,  Risk 
Assessment and Safety Manuals to be followed on the respective construction 
sites so as to enforce adequate QA and QC, and safety of construction workers, 
engineers, and citizens. 
for 
e.  Assist the IA/EA in preparing guidelines for contract administration for the use of 
PIU, 
their  day-to-day  contract  administration  requirements  such  as 
measurement of works; approval of variation, contract extension and contractor's 
claim,  issue  of  completion  certificate,  financial  closure  of  contract,  and 
management during the Defects Liability Period (DLP). 
f.  Prepare  the  standard  construction  management  system  to  be  followed  by 
contractors  at  construction  sites  comprising  important  components  such  as 
planning  of  activities  (work  plan),  procurement  of  construction  material,  and 
equipment;  construction  methodology:  deployment  of  construction  machinery, 
deployment of workers, disbursement of funds, etc.; and implement the same. 
g.  Provide services as necessary during the Defects Liability Period, issue a Defects 
Liability Certificate and certify any final payment that is due to the contractor. 
h.  Provide  all  necessary  support  to  the  PIU  and  the  IA/EA  regarding  on 
communication  and  reporting  to  all  relevant  authorities  such  as  the  Asian 
Development Bank (ADB), line ministries and government bodies, and all other 
stakeholders as and when needed. 
i.  Consultant  shall  comply  indicated  baseline  of  the  Gender  Action  Plan  of  the 
Project in every surveys and design stages. 
j.  The  consultant  may  be  called  upon  to  deliver  customized  training  on  specific 
topics such as FIDIC contracts and issues related to subject matter. 
k.  During  the  Detailed  Engineering  Design  of  the  Project,  the  Consultant  shall 
closely  work  with  the  PIU/IA/EA  and  perform  additional  works  which  are  not 
specified in TOR when necessary. 
Appendix 2 
95 
(viii) Each  staff  of  the  Consultant  shall  provide  the  training  to  PIU/IA/EA  staff  on  their 
expertise according to agreed schedule with PIU/IA/E but not limited to as follows: 
a.  Ensure  implementation  of  the  Gender  Action  Plan  during  the  preparation  of 
curriculum of each training/workshop/seminar. 
b.  Consider  the  technology  transfer  as  an  important  aspect  in  design  and 
supervision stages of the service. The Consultant shall provide the opportunity to 
the PIU/IA/EA officers and staffs to be involved in the working team of consultants 
during the design, contract administration and supervision works for their capacity 
development  wherever  possible.  If  requested  by  the  PIU,  the  Consultant  shall 
brief  and  demonstrate  the  survey  and  design  procedure,  the  construction 
supervision and contract management process and procedures. The consultant 
shall  assist  the  PIU  and  its  staff  to  build  their  capacity  as  a  part  of  on-the-job 
training under this project. 
C.1 Expected Design Deliverables 
The  design  developments  for  Uvs  tourism  facilities  have  to  be  according  to  Client’s 
9. 
Concept  Designs  and  Architectural  Specifications.  The  structural,  mechanical,  electrical,  and 
plumbing  design  have  to  be  according  to  Client’s  Outline  of  Construction  and  Engineering 
Specifications. Following is the work program and the deliverables. 
1.  Project Management 
2.  Site Survey and Geological report 
3.  Architectural Design 
4.  Structural Design 
5.  Interior Design 
6.  Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing design 
7.  Internet, Telecommunication, Automation, and Fire safety 
8.  Construction and Supervision contract administration 
Project Management 
Document Type/Scale 
Table 2: Project Management 
Phase 1 
Design 
development 
Phase 2 
Construction 
documents 
Phase 3 
Bidding 
documents 
Diagram//Schematic 
Document/Narrative Text  ✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Program of Requirements  Document/Narrative Text  ✔ 
Project Initiation Document  Document/Narrative Text  ✔ 
Project Organization 
✔ 
Structure 
Communication Strategy 
Issues Log & Risk Register  MS Excel Table 
MS Excel Table 
Design Deviations & 
Derogations List 
Program Timetable 
Responsibility Matrix 
Interface Agreements 
Project Communication 
Portal 
Licensing & Contracting 
Issues 
Commissioning procedures  Document/Narrative Text  ✔ 
MS Project Table 
MS Excel Table 
Narrative Text 
SharePoint website 
Government Approvals & 
Certification 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Revision/Record 
Revision/Record 
96 
Appendix 2 
Site Survey 
Table 3: Site Survey 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Phase 1 
Design development 
Phase 2 
Construction 
documents 
Phase 3 
Bidding 
documents 
Geotechnical soil survey 
including drainage, water 
courses 
Site hazardous 
material/substances 
investigation 
Topography map and 
analysis of city utility 
services available to site 
Master Plan 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
To  be  done  before 
detailed design begins.  
Record 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Record 
✔ 
✔ 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
CAD version 
Document Type/Scale  Phase 1 
To  be  done  before 
detailed design begins.  
Revision  ✔ 
Design development 
Master plan 
Access road/Pedestrian 
path/Parking design 
Grading/cartogram 
Landscape design  
Distance Plan 
Urban planning & 
Integration 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
1:500 
1:500 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
1:100/200 
✔ 
Phase 3 
Bidding 
documents 
Phase 2 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
Revision  ✔ 
Revision  ✔ 
1:500 
✔ 
Revision  ✔ 
1:300/500 
Revision  ✔ 
10. 
The  architectural  design  comprises  all  documents  for  approvals  and  permits  from  the 
appropriate local authorities. Following drawing list are minimum requirements, but is not limited 
to the following documents. 
Architectural 
Design 
Building 
engineering 
physics report 
Design 
Description  and 
technical data 
Layouts 
basement, 
ground, 
and 
upper floor levels 
Section/Cross 
section 
Elevations  
of 
Reflected  ceiling 
plan 
Furniture Plans 
and 
Entrance 
canopy details 
Façade details  
Table 4: Architectural Design 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Design 
development 
✔ 
✔ 
Construction 
documents (scale) 
Revision 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
Revision 
Detailed drawing 
1:50/100 
Revision 
Detailed drawing 
1:50/100 
Revision 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Revision 
Revision 
1:50/100 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Ramp details 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Toilet 
Plans/Section/El
evations 
Floor finish plan   Detailed drawing 
Floor details 
finish 
Roof 
details 
Door and window 
schedules 
Door head, jamb, 
and sill 
Door handle 
details 
Handrail details 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Tactile Paving 
details 
Universally 
accessible 
equipment 
details  
Narrative 
Architectural 
Specifications 
Diagrams/Table 
Bill of Quantities   MS Excel Table 
Text, 
✔ 
✔ 
1:10/25 
1:25/50 
1:25/50 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
Appendix 2 
97 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
The  structural  Design  comprises  all  documents  for  approvals  and  permits  from  the 
11. 
appropriate local authorities. This comprises, but is not limited to the following documents. 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Table 5: Structural Design 
Design 
developm
ent 
✔ 
Structural Design 
Drawing list, explanation note 
Foundation settling drawing 
Foundation layout 
Foundation  section,  details,  quantity 
estimation 
Plan  of  trenches  in  foundation,  section, 
and details 
Layout,  section,  reinforcement,  quantity 
estimation of 1st floor slab, outside ramp  
Internal  ramp,  plan,  section,  detail,  and 
quantity estimation 
RC frame layout and quantity estimation 
RC  column  reinforcement  plan,  section, 
detail, quantity 
Narrative 
Text, 
Diagrams/T
able 
Detailed 
drawing 
Detailed 
drawing 
Detailed 
drawing 
Detailed 
drawing 
Detailed 
drawing 
Detailed 
drawing 
Detailed 
drawing 
Detailed 
drawing 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
Bidding 
document
s 
✔ 
1:100 
1:50/100 
✔ 
✔ 
1:10/20/25/50  ✔ 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
1:10/20/25/50  ✔ 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
1:10/20/25/50  ✔ 
98 
Appendix 2 
RC  beam  reinforcement  plan,  section, 
detail, quantity 
RC  slab  layout,  reinforcement,  section 
and quantity estimation 
Masonry  wall  mesh  and  fixing  layout, 
details, and quantity estimation 
RC 
lintel 
estimation 
Steel  frame  layout,  section,  details,  and 
quantity estimation 
layout,  section,  quantity 
Detailed 
drawing 
Detailed 
drawing 
Detailed 
drawing 
Detailed 
drawing 
Detailed 
drawing 
1:10/20/25/50  ✔ 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
NOTE: *The seismic and soil condition differ to each site. Additional drawings are required for structural designs. 
Interior Design 
Interior Design Colors, Finishes, 
Materials & Specifications 
Reception counters/desk and fixed 
cabinetry 
Interior Design Bill of Quantities 
Interior Design Sample Boards 
Special Sanitary Equipment 
Children Sanitary Equipment 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
Revision 
Table 6: Interior Design 
Design 
development 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Drawing/Schematic  1:50/100 / 1:5  Revision 
Text, 
✔ 
MS Excel Table  ✔ 
Color, Finishes & 
✔ 
Material Samples 
Color, Finishes & 
Material Samples 
Color, Finishes & 
Material Samples 
✔ 
✔ 
Revision 
Revision 
Revision 
Revision 
Heating,  Ventilation,  and  Air-
conditioning design 
Table 7: Heating, Ventilation, and Air-conditioning design 
Document Type/Scale  Design 
Room Environmental Design 
Narrative 
Calculations 
Diagrams/Table 
Drawing/Schematic 
HVAC System Schematics 
HVAC Control System Schematics Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
HVAC Duct Riser Diagrams 
Drawing/Schematic 
Specialist Air Handling & 
Ventilation Systems 
Main Ducts/Pipe Routing 
Schematics & Sleeved 
Penetration Drawings 
Schedules of Equipment 
Drawing/Schematic 
Mechanical Systems 
Specifications 
Mechanical Systems Bill of 
Quantities 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
MS Excel Table 
Text, 
development 
✔ 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
✔ 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Appendix 2 
99 
Electrical Design 
Table 8: Electrical Design 
Document Type/Scale Design 
development 
✔ 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
✔ 
Text, 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Drawing/Schematic 
Room to Room Electrical 
Service Requirements 
Main Electrical Power 
Distribution Systems 3Ø, LV & 
ELV 
Drawing/Schematic 
Earthing Systems 
Essential Electrical Services 
Drawing/Schematic 
Non-essential Electrical Services Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
Emergency Power Supply 
Systems 
Distribution Board/Panel Layouts Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
Motor Control Schematics 
Drawing/Schematic 
Main Cable Ducts/Trays Routing 
Schematics & Sleeved 
Penetration Drawings 
Internal Lighting Systems & 
Layouts 
Catering & Laundry Systems 
Schematics 
Lightning Protection Systems 
Electrical Systems 
Specifications 
Electrical Systems Bill of 
Quantities 
Drawing/Schematic 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
MS Excel Table 
Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:100/201 
1:50/100 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Water 
Supply 
Plumbing design  
and 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
Table 9: Water Supply and Plumbing design 
Chilled Water Riser 
Diagrams 
Fire Strategy & Safety 
Systems Schematics 
Fire Service Dry Riser 
Diagram 
Internal Sewage Systems 
Internal Drainage System 
Schematics 
Hot & Cold Water 
Distribution System 
Schematic 
Treated Water Supply & 
Distribution System 
Schematics 
Plant Room Layouts 
Main Ducts/Pipe Routing 
Schematics & Sleeved 
Penetration Drawings 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
1:50/100 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
100 
Appendix 2 
Supply 
Water 
Plumbing design  
and 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
Schedules of Equipment 
Specifications 
Bill of Quantities 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
MS Excel Table 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Table 10: Internet and Telecommunication, Automation, and Fire safety 
Mechanical Design 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
Bidding 
documents 
IT and security 
BMS 
Fire Strategy & Safety 
Systems & Layouts 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table/Sche
matic drawing 
Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
✔ 
✔ 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Table 11: External Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing engineering work 
Mechanical Design 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
Permission  for  connection 
to power grid 
Permission  for  connection 
to Sewage grid 
Permission  for  connection 
to Water grid 
Permission  for  connection 
to heating grid 
External  electrical  design 
and details  
External  water  supply  and 
sewage system, connection 
details 
External heating design 
External 
telecommunication  design 
and details 
Technical  specification  for 
MEP works 
Bill of quantities 
Estimating 
MEP Construction work 
for  External 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Text, 
Text, 
Text, 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
NOTE: *The grading of the building differs to each site. The connectivity of external MEP differs to the distance of the 
sources. Additional and design adjustments are required. 
Table 12: Construction and Supervision Contract Administration 
Construction contract administration 
Construction Inspection and Review 
Progress Reports/Evaluation 
Document Type/Scale 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Appendix 2 
101 
Construction contract administration 
Process Certificates for Payment 
Review of Shop Drawing Product Data/Sample 
Change Orders 
Substantial Performance Report and Certification 
Client Consultation 
Interior Construction Inspection 
Full time Project Representation 
Administration of Separate Contracts 
Structural Inspection/Reports 
Mechanical Inspection/Reports 
Electrical Inspection/Reports 
Record Drawings 
Pre-installation F&E Inspection 
Civil Construction Inspection 
Landscape Inspection 
Detailed Cost Accounting 
Commissioning procedures 
Document Type/Scale 
Certificates 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Change Orders 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Recordings 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
D.  TEAM COMPOSITION AND QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR KEY EXPERTS 
12. 
consultants’ qualifications. 
General requirements for the Consultant are below. These shall equally apply for the sub-
(i).  The Consultant could be either a single firm or a joint venture of companies that have 
at least 10 years of extensive experience in respective fields. 
(ii).  At  least  7  years  of  proven  experience  in  detailed  architectural  and  engineering 
designs and supervision of contracts with the contracts of similar size and nature. 
(iii). Available  personnel  qualified  in  architecture,  engineering,  cost  estimating/  BOQ, 
equipment  specification  and  reporting  software  programs  (CAD  applications)  to 
produce deliverables and supervise construction works. 
(iv). The consultant should provide  the reference letters  from  previous three (3)  Clients 
specifically to the similar projects to prove that the Consultant had had successfully 
completed with the relevant projects. 
(v).  In  the  financial  proposal,  prove  the  experts  are  the  consultant’s  full  time  staff  by 
providing  at  least  3  years  of  the  payment  records  of  the  social  insurance  to  claim 
overhead costs for the proposed experts. 
Subcontractors shall be approved by the MET and ADB based on complying to the below 
13. 
minimum requirements: 
(i).  At  least  10  years  of  extensive  experience  in  required  fields.  Must  be  a  licensed 
company for in the required fields if required by Mongolian Law and Standards and 
Norms. 
(ii).  Must prove financially sound status. 
(iii). Available personnel qualified to do required works. 
(iv). Experts must have at least 7 years’ professional experience. 
(v).  Must provide the CV of the experts for the MET review and approval. 
14. 
The total person-months estimated for Detailed Engineering Design team are 132 person-
months (for international experts - 4PMs and for national experts - 128PMs). The person-months 
(PM) estimation is given in the Table 13. 
102 
Appendix 2 
No  Key Experts 
Table 13: Estimated Person-Months for Key Experts 
International key experts 
I 
1 
International Architect 
II  National key experts 
2  Team Leader/National Architect 
3  Deputy Team Leader/Structural Engineer 
4  CAD Drafters (at least 4 persons) 
5  Heating, Ventilation, and Air-Conditioning (HVAC) Engineer 
6  Water Supply and Wastewater Engineer  
7  Electrical Engineer  
8  Automatic and Communication Engineer  
9  Quantity Surveyor/Budget Estimator 
10  Green Design Specialist  
11  Road Engineer 
12  Resident Engineers (2 persons for construction supervision) 
TOTAL 
Number 
of 
Experts 
Person/month 
input 
Home 
Field 
Total 
1 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
15 
3.00 
1.00 
4.00 
6.00 
6.00 
12.00 
8.00 
8.00 
8.00 
8.00 
3.00 
3.00 
6.00 
0.00 
71.00 
2.00 
8.00 
2.00 
8.00 
2.00 
14.00 
2.00 
10.00 
2.00 
10.00 
2.00 
10.00 
2.00 
10.00 
0.00 
3.00 
2.00 
5.00 
2.00 
8.00 
42.00 
42.00 
61.00  132.00 
15.  The  Consultant  may  propose  other  supporting  staff  required  to  accomplish  the  tasks 
outlined  in  the  TOR.  It  is  the  Consultant's  responsibility  to  select  the  optimum  team  and  to 
propose the professionals, which he or she believes best meets the needs of the IA/EA. 
16.  The qualifications and experience required for key team members are below: 
17. 
Team Leader/National Architect (national, 8 person-months). The specialist should have 
(i) graduate degree and/or higher in architecture; (ii) 10 years of professional experiences in the 
field of architectural design, preferably completed the design of 5 public buildings; (iii) at least 7 
years team leadership experience, including demonstrated ability to lead a large team, prepare 
reports, and work with the government and private sector, communities, and CSOs; (iv) excellent 
facilitation  skills  for  meetings  and  negotiations  for  a  wide  range  of  stakeholders,  especially 
governments,  private  sector,  and  communities;  (v)  Excellent  computer  skills,  including  CAD 
applications (AutoCAD, Photoshop etc.); (vi) Proven knowledge in construction law, construction 
processes, and preparing and reviewing cost estimates; (vii) Previous experience of working with 
IFI’s is an important asset; and (viii) a good command of English. 
18.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Lead  preparation  of  detailed  and  architectural  design  for  the  Uvs  Tourism 
Facilities. 
Identification, assessment and finalization of the various project requirements and 
parameters on the basis of the required functions of tourism facilities design in 
consultation with the client. 
For these facilities, apply international best practice and standards, ensuring that 
environmental  risks  are  avoided  or  minimized,  and  that  designs  are  culturally 
appropriate and sensitive to landscape and aesthetic values. 
Design and coordinate domestic studies as needed to support preparation of the 
detailed designs. 
Ensure that the detailed designs are prepared to a level of detail that will enable 
finalization  of  the  architectural  designs  and  preparation  of  the  detailed 
engineering designs during project implementation. 
(vi)  Make amendments to the design as required. 
(vii)  Undertake  detailed  design  work  on  projects  as  required,  and  fully  check  and 
ensure designs are properly validated as per the approved design process. 
Appendix 2 
103 
(viii)  Undertake site visits as required. 
(ix) 
Undertake quality assurance checking of drawings and calculations produced by 
self and that of other team members as directed by International project Architect. 
Ensure  that  all  drawings  are  reviewed  and  checked  by  International  project 
Architect to external issue. 
Produce  architectural  design  briefs,  documents,  reports,  and  specifications  as 
required. 
Produce architectural drawings utilizing Revit and/or AutoCAD as appropriate for 
the project. 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
(xiii)  EDGE rating and certification. Confirm the detailed engineering designs meet 
–  at  minimum  –  the  “EDGE  Certified/20%”  rating  achieved  for  the  preliminary 
engineering design during project preparation. Assess the cost / benefit tradeoff 
between aiming for a higher EDGE rating versus the increased cost to do so – for 
both construction and operation of the facilities – and the available project budget. 
Follow  up  with  EDGE  team  to  coordinate  and  achieve  an  updated  EDGE 
assessment and certification for the project facility. 
(xiv)  Ensure  timely  achievement  of  outputs  and  smooth  implementation  of  contract 
activities  in  close  coordination  with  the  Deputy  Team  leader,  and  Residents 
Engineers. 
(xv)  Conduct visits to the sites and supervise progress and the quality of construction 
works;  identify  design  and  construction  defects  and  recommend  corrective 
actions. 
(xvi)  ny other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU to successfully complete the 
project. 
 Deputy Team Leader/Structural Engineer (national, 8 person-months). The specialist 
19. 
should  have  (i)  Graduate  degree  qualified  in  Structural  or  Civil  Engineering,  (ii)  Be  a  licensed 
Structural Engineer or Civil Engineering, (iii) Professional experience in engineering design and 
construction supervision, particularly in preparation of structural drawings, structural calculations 
according to Mongolian and international standards and legislation, quality assurance and quality 
control, building and site layout surveys, on site material testing, concrete mix design, planning, 
and scheduling, safety engineering, and cost engineering and budgeting (iv) Intermediate time 
management and organizational skills with the ability to self-manage billable hours and ability to 
undertake own work with a high degree of efficiency and accuracy, (v) Advanced knowledge of 
Structural Engineering Analysis & Design software packages (preferably SAP 2000) as well as 
CAD and general office software packages. (vi) Intermediate knowledge of International Building 
Codes and Design standards, (vii) Intermediate leadership skills with the ability to manage teams 
with a strong results-orientation, (viii) Intermediate written and spoken communication skills with 
a minimum basic understanding of English and (ix) Previous experience within design teams and 
on Author’s Supervision duties. 
20.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Co-lead the consultant team with the national architect and lead the engineering 
staff to ensure the infrastructure and engineering components are complied with 
international and domestic law and requirements. 
Careful consideration of seismic and geological conditions for each location. 
Undertake  structural  calculations  and  analysis  and  produce  economic  and 
efficient buildable designs. 
104 
Appendix 2 
(iv) 
(v) 
Oversee the building and site layout surveys, on site material testing, concrete 
mix  design,  planning  and scheduling,  safety  engineering, cost  engineering and 
budgeting in consideration of the earthquake and seismic resistant requirements. 
Liaise with the project architects, other engineering disciplines, sub-consultants 
and clients are required. 
Undertake site visits as required. 
(vi) 
(vii)  Carry out detailed structural design and preparation work for foundation. 
(viii)  Undertake quality assurance checking of drawings and calculations produced by 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
self and that of other team members as directed by Team Leader. 
Coordination of the works of structural design engineers for timely completion of 
the structural design. 
Ensure  that  all  drawings  are  reviewed  and  checked  by  Team  Leader  prior  to 
external issue. 
Produce structural design briefs, documents, reports and material specifications 
as required for civil construction. 
Supervise all civil construction works. 
(xii) 
(xiii)  Assist Resident Engineer during the design, construction and post construction 
phases. 
(xiv)  Monitor post construction activities as and when required. 
(xv)  Prepare and update construction supervision plan and quality check tools. 
(xvi)  Supervise the implementation and reporting of environmental, health and safety 
management plans by works contractors. 
(xvii)  Review works contractors’ reports, claims, proposed changes and variations, and 
recommend approval, revision, or rejection to MET and PIU. 
(xviii)  Any other tasks reasonably requested by the PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
21. 
International Architect (international, 4 person-months) The specialist should have (i) a 
graduate or post-graduate degree in architecture, engineering and design, or related area., (ii) at 
least  10  years  of  experience  in  architectural  and  engineering  design,  relevant  international 
architectural certifications, and (iii) a track record in innovative designs tailored to local culture 
and landscapes, (iv) Professional experience in preparation of community-based facilities, multi-
purpose use space such as well as office building design and drawings. 
22.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Identification, assessment and finalization of the various project requirements and 
parameters  on  the  basis  of  the  required  functions  of  universal  design  in 
consultation with the client. 
Leading the planning and design team in design of the physical facilities. 
Advise  and  support  the  team  leader/national  architect  to  prepare  detailed  and 
architectural design for Uvs Tourism Facilities 
For  these  facilities,  ensure  applying  international  best  practice  and  standards, 
ensuring that environmental risks are avoided or minimized, and that designs are 
culturally appropriate and sensitive to landscape and aesthetic values. 
Advise  to  design  and  coordinate  domestic  studies  as  needed  to  support 
preparation of the detailed designs. 
Advise the team in preparation of architectural and engineering designs including 
space  planning  keeping  in  view  the  equipment  and  future  layouts  and  other 
requirements of the client to achieve an efficient interrelationship of functions. 
(vii)  Guide the architectural team in interior decoration and design of furniture. 
(viii)  Guide  the  project  team  in  identifying  special  equipment  in  discussion  with  the 
Appendix 2 
105 
(ix) 
(x) 
client. 
Guide management of supervision specially to ensure attainment of architectural 
aspects. 
Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
23.  CAD Drafters (national, 4 experts, 4 person-months each). The consultant should have 
(i) a bachelor’s degree or higher in architecture or engineering; (ii) At least 5 years of Professional 
experience  in  architectural  presentations  using  the  CAD  and  in  the  preparation  of  design  of 
drawings., (iii) Professional experience in similar project or in development partner funded project 
would be an advantage, and (iv) Good command of English. 
24.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i)  Assist the Project Architect and Architect in the planning and designing facilities. 
(ii)  Assess  space  planning  for  different  facilities  and  assist  in  maximizing  space 
utilization. 
(iii)  Prepare architectural presentations using the CAD and oversee CAD production 
(iv)  Assist in the preparation of design and production of drawings 
(v)  Provide inspection during construction as necessary to assist the Team Leader in 
conducting quality audit and administration of QA plan 
25. 
Heating,  Ventilation,  and  Air-Conditioning  (HVAC)  Engineer  (national,  10  person-
months).  The  consultant  should  have  (i)  a  graduate  degree  or  higher  in  HVAC  engineering  or 
equivalent, (ii) Additional relevant post-graduate courses that complement/ supplement the main 
degree are a strong asset; (iii) At least 8 years demonstrated experience in developing detailed 
engineering  designs  and  on  site  heating  system;  (iv)  Intermediate  time  management  and 
organizational  skills  with  the  ability  to  self-manage  billable  hours  and  ability  to  undertake  own 
work with a high degree of efficiency and accuracy; (v) Advanced knowledge of design software 
in  relation  to  MEP  design  including  AutoCAD  and  MS  office  software  such  as  Excel,  Word, 
PowerPoint,  MS  Pro;  (vi)  Site  inspection  or  supervision  experience  on  building  construction 
projects, (vi) Intermediate knowledge of International Building Codes and Design Standards; (vii) 
Intermediate  written  and  spoken  communication  skills  with  a  minimum  basic  understanding  of 
English; and (viii) Previous experience within design teams and on Author’s Supervision duties. 
26. 
The  Heating,  Ventilation,  and  Air-Conditioning  (HVAC)  Engineer  shall  take  overall 
responsibility to support the successful implementation of the project in terms of water supply and 
wastewater related issues and provide all necessary support to MET/PIU to fully comply with the 
ADB requirements. 
27.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Ensure all duties are undertaken within the required timeframe. 
Prepare detail design of HVAC drawings. 
Undertake all necessary design calculations and analysis along with schematic 
diagrams and select appropriate equipment size. 
Undertake quality assurance checking of drawings and calculations produced by 
self and that of other team members. 
Undertake site visits as required. 
(v) 
(vi) 
Undertake design of air-conditioning and mechanical ventilation system. 
(vii)  Review  shop  drawings  and  material  submission  from  contractor/construction 
(iv) 
manager. 
Liaise with contractors and undertake inspection of all mechanical works at site 
(viii) 
106 
Appendix 2 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
and attend to any revision of design, if required, during supervision. 
Undertake appropriate due diligence on the heating system design aspects of the 
detailed design, propose amendments where appropriate to reflect improved road 
safety  and  climate  resilience,  and  ensure  these  amendments  are  incorporated 
into the final detailed design for tourism facilities in Uvs Aimag. 
Liaise with local authorities and other institutions and apply for design permission. 
Prepare O&M plan. 
Ensure that all drawings are reviewed and checked before submission to approval 
of Expertise and Fire Safety. 
(xiii)  Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
28.  Water  Supply/  Wastewater  Engineer  (national,  10  person-months).  The  Consultant 
should have (i) a bachelor’s or graduate degree in plumbing systems, (ii) 5 years of professional 
experience  in  sanitary systems  including  clean  water, sewage systems,  sanitary  drainage  and 
water treatment systems is an advantage, (iii) Intermediate time management and organizational 
skills with the ability to self-manage billable hours and ability to undertake own work with a high 
degree of efficiency and accuracy, (iv) Advanced knowledge of design software in relation to MEP 
design including AutoCAD and MS office software such as Excel, Word, PowerPoint, MS Project, 
(v) Site inspection or supervision experience on building construction projects, (vi) Intermediate 
knowledge of International Building Codes and Design Standards, (vii) Intermediate written and 
spoken communication skills with a minimum basic understanding of English, and (viii) Previous 
experience within design teams and on Author’s Supervision duties. 
The Water Supply and Wastewater Engineer shall take overall responsibility to support 
29. 
the  successful  implementation  of  the  project  in  terms  of  water  supply  and  wastewater  related 
issues and provide all necessary support to MET/PIU to fully comply with the ADB requirements. 
30.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
Prepare designs, documentation, cost estimates and phasing of work in respect 
of water supply, plumbing, sanitary, and drainage systems. 
Provide inspection of the works during construction. 
(ii) 
(iii)  Assist the Team Leader and Resident Engineer in the efficient implementation of 
the project. 
(iv)  Assist HVAC and Building Services Expert. 
(v) 
Assess requirements for elevators, air-conditioning, and ventilation, water supply, 
and firefighting works, determine baselines, and design parameters. 
(vi)  Undertake  design  of  lifts,  air-conditioning,  and  mechanical  ventilation  system, 
water supply and fire detection/fighting system. 
(vii)  Supervise preparation of mechanical design drawings. 
(viii)  Undertake supervision of all mechanical works at site and attend to any revision 
of design, if required, during supervision. 
(ix)  Undertake  appropriate  due  diligence  on  the  water  supply  and  wastewater 
disposal  system  design  aspects  of  the  detailed  design,  propose  amendments 
where  appropriate  to  reflect  improved  road  safety  and  climate  resilience,  and 
ensure  these  amendments  are  incorporated  into  the  final  detailed  design  for 
tourism facilities in Uvs Aimag. 
In consultation with other engineers, reach mutually understanding and solution 
on  detailed  drawing  and  liaise  with  local  authorities  and  other  institutions  and 
apply for design permission. 
(x) 
(xi)  Conduct  the  feasibility  analysis  of  wastewater  disposal  system  in  tourism 
Appendix 2 
107 
facilities. 
(xii)  Prepare O&M plan. 
(xiii)  Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
31. 
Electrical  Engineer  (national,  10  person-months).  The  Consultant  should  have  (i)  a 
bachelor’s or  graduate  degree  in  electrical  engineering, (ii)  a Minimum  5  years  of  professional 
experience in electrical engineering for building, building automation, process electrification and 
automation, programming and instrumentation design, (iii) Be a licensed Electrical Engineer or be 
eligible to become a licensed Electrical Engineer, (iv) Professional experience working within an 
Engineering  consulting  environment  such  that  electrical  engineering  for  building,  building 
automation, process electrification and automation, programming and instrumentation design, (v) 
Experience in finding power source alternatives for saving electricity, emergency power supplies, 
fire detection systems, lighting, telephone and paging systems, elevator control etc. and (vi) Good 
command of English. 
The  Electric  Engineer  shall  take  overall  responsibility  to  support  the  successful 
32. 
implementation  of  the  project  in  terms  of  electrical  supply  and  related  issues  and  provide  all 
necessary support to MET/PIU to fully comply with the ADB requirements. 
33.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following. 
Ensure all duties are undertaken within the required timeframe. 
Assist the investigation teams during design services. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Undertake  planning  and  detail  designs  of  internal  and  external  electrical  works 
including area lighting and emergency power supply system. 
(iv)  Prepare detail design of electrical drawings in Auto CAD or Revit, ensuring that 
the  design  is  undertaken  in  accordance  with  local  codes  and  international 
standards. 
Liaise with the project architects, other engineering disciplines,  sub-consultants, 
and clients as required. 
(v) 
(vi)  Undertake site visits as required. 
(vii)  Produce  design  specifications,  design  reports,  and  to  finalize  all  designs 
calculations as required. 
(viii)  Prepare the BOQ, cost estimates, and specifications for electrical works. 
(ix)  Review  shop  drawings  and  material  submission  from  contractor/construction 
manager. 
Liaise with contractors and undertake site inspection duties as required. 
(x) 
(xi)  Ensure quality control, cost control, measurement of works, testing of materials, 
Verification  of  measurement  of  records,  certification  of  bills,  monitoring  of 
progress, and recommending  appropriate actions, supervising finalization of  as-
built drawings. 
(xii)  Ensure that all drawings are reviewed and checked before submission to approval 
of Expertise and Fire Safety. 
(xiii)  Undertake  appropriate  due  diligence  on  the  electricity  supply  design  aspects  of 
the detailed design, propose amendments where appropriate to reflect improved 
road  safety  and  climate  resilience,  and  ensure  these  amendments  are 
incorporated into the final detailed design. 
(xiv)  Examine  all  technical  issues  related  to  and  arising  during  implementation  of 
electrical works. 
(xv)  Develop plans and systems maintenance and monitoring of power generators and 
their associated switchgears, controls, alarms and shutdown systems, protections, 
108 
Appendix 2 
and auxiliary equipment. 
(xvi)  Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
34.  Automation  and  Communication  Engineer  (national,  10  person-months).  The 
consultant should have (i) a bachelor’s or graduate degree in Communication or related fields, 
(ii) At least 5 years of experience in communication related design, (iii) Professional experience 
in similar project or in development partner funded project would be an advantage and (iv) Good 
command of English is also an advantage. 
35.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i)  Undertake communication related works such as internet network planning / fiber 
optic and wireless technology / television system / IP TV, CATV, Analog and digital 
technology  /  Radio  communication  and  warning  system  planning  /  Shortest  and 
short  range  radio  communication  /,  Fire  alarm  and  fire  extinguishing  system, 
Security alarm, camera / IP and wireless, analog system /, Automation system and 
paging system, telephone. 
(ii)  Prepare detail design of automation and firefighting systems. 
(iii)  Prepare cost estimate and planning on related task. 
(iv)  Undertake quality assurance checking of drawings and calculations produced by 
self and that of other team members. 
(v)  Undertake site visits as required. 
(vi)  Review  shop  drawings  and  material  submission  from  contractor/construction 
manager. 
(vii)  Liaise with contractors and undertake inspection of all mechanical works at site and 
attend to any revision of design, if required, during supervision. 
(viii)  Assist in preparation of equipment and material quantity for cost estimates. 
(ix)  Ensure that all drawings are reviewed and checked before submission to approval 
of Expertise and Fire Safety. 
(x)  Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
(national,  3  person-months).  The  cost 
36.  Quantity  Surveyor/Budget  Estimator 
estimator/quantity surveyor should have (i) Master’s degree or higher in engineering and design, 
or related area, (ii) Professional experience supervising all activities of the project including pre-
construction  activities,  survey,  soil  investigations,  specially  to  ensure  attainment  of  all  works, 
monitoring of post construction work, (iii) Experience in testing of materials and works at site or 
at suitable laboratories, and (iv) Knowledge in interpretation of drawing, specifications, conditions 
of contract to the contractors/suppliers. 
37.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Guide the design and construction supervision team 
Advise  the  project  team  in  making  appropriate  assessment  of  field  data  and 
forecasting  demands  of  users,  facilities,  services,  and  equipment  in  respect  of 
survey and soil investigations 
Oversee  and  supervising  all  activities  of  the  project  including  pre-construction 
activities,  survey,  soil  investigations,  supervision  of  construction  including 
management and monitoring 
Guide, supervising, and coordinating activities of other project team members 
Guide management of supervision specially to ensure attainment of all works 
Oversee progress monitoring, cost, and quality control 
(vii)  Monitor of post construction work 
(viii)  Supervise  all  activities  of  the  project  including  survey,  soil  investigation,  and 
Appendix 2 
109 
(ix) 
(x) 
construction work 
Initiate testing of materials and works at site or at suitable laboratories 
drawing, 
Interpret 
contractors/suppliers 
Verify records of measurements of works done 
Scrutinize & certify contractor’s/supplier’s bills for payment 
(xi) 
(xii) 
(xiii)  Check and certify as-built drawings 
(xiv)  Supervise  progress  of  works  and  recommend  appropriate  actions  and  will 
specifications, 
conditions 
contract 
to 
the 
of 
prepare weekly and monthly progress report 
Green  Design  Specialist  (national,  5  person-months).  The  consultant  should  have  (i) 
38. 
bachelor’s degree and/or higher in architectural design, (ii) 7 years of professional experiences in 
the  field  of  architectural  design,  preferably  completed  the  green  design  of  2  buildings,  (iii) 
Excellent  computer  skills,  including  CAD  applications  (AutoCAD,  Photoshop  etc.);  (iv)  Proven 
knowledge  in  construction  law,  construction  processes,  and  preparing  and  reviewing  cost 
estimates; (v)  Previous experience  of  working  with IFI’s  is  an  important asset;  and (vi)  a  good 
command of English; 
39.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Support setting up green building design criteria and capacity development related 
to sustainable building. 
Research on the locally sourced available materials that is appropriate for green 
building construction. 
(iii)  Set-up  green  building  design  criteria  and  provide  green  design  analysis 
appropriate for Uvs Aimag. 
(iv)  Assist  construction  teams  in  implementation  of  the  project  to  meet  the  green 
(v) 
standard. 
Prepare training materials on the green building to contractors and occupants to 
meet the requirements of the green building standard. 
(vi)  Comply with requirements of green building impact toward productive areas such 
as agriculture and tourism. 
(xix)  Formulate the project document for EDGE certified green building. Within the cost 
estimates for O&M of the tourist street and tourism complex, include the cost for 
required EDGE assessment as needed to retain the EDGE rating. 
(vii)  At  the  completion of  works, coordinate,  in  collaboration  with  the  Contractor  and 
PIU, the formal EDGE rating process, leading to issuance of the EDGE certification 
by the EDGE assessors. 
(viii)  Monitor project during construction supervision. 
(ix)  Articulate  green  building  science  principles,  best  practices  on  sustainability  and 
green building program requirements to participants. 
(x)  Review prototype submissions for alignment with green building best practices and 
criteria. 
(xi)  Verify appropriate site implementation to align with green building implementation 
requirements. 
(xii)  Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
40.  Road Engineer (national, 8 person-months). The Consultant should have (i) a Bachelor’s 
or  graduate  degree  in  road  engineering,  (ii)  At  least  10  years  of  professional  experience  in 
110 
Appendix 2 
transport  sector  projects  preferably  with  projects  that  include  roads,  bridges  and  tunnels  is 
required,  (iii)  Experience  of  supervising  road  works  during  construction  period  and  testing  of 
materials  and  works  at  site  or  at  suitable  laboratory  building  are  preferable,  (iv)  Excellent 
knowledge of Mongolian construction standards, norms and regulations, (v) Excellent knowledge 
in interpretation of drawing, technical specifications, conditions of contract to the suppliers, (vi) 
experience in Project Management, Construction Supervision and Contract Administration, and 
(vii) Good command of English. 
41.  The  Road  Engineer  shall  take  overall  responsibility  to  support  the  successful 
implementation of the project in terms of road construction and related issues and provide all 
necessary support to MET/PIU to fully comply with the ADB requirements. Specific tasks include 
but are not limited to the following: 
42.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i).  Prepare detailed design for road facilities 
(ii).  For the detailed design of the roads including safety improvement works; assist the 
team  leader  with  the  administration  and  supervision  of  road  construction  works 
including coordination and liaison with the Employer 
(iii). Day-to-day construction supervision through the Resident Engineers and other site 
staff; review of daily reports prepared by site staff 
(iv). Prepare and maintain progress monitoring schedule; reviewing and approving shop 
drawings and preparation of as-built drawings 
(v).  Identify potential access road connections between the proposed bypass and tourist 
complexes 
(vi). Undertake  appropriate  due  diligence  on  the  road  design  aspects  of  the  detailed 
design, propose amendments where appropriate to reflect improved road safety and 
climate  resilience,  and  ensure  these  amendments  are  incorporated  into  the  final 
detailed design 
(vii). Any  other  tasks  reasonably  requested  by  the  IA/PIU,  Team  Leader,  Deputy  Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
43. 
Resident Engineer (2 experts, national, 21 person-months each). The Consultant should 
have (i) Bachelor’s degree in Engineering or equivalent work experience (supervisor level), (ii) 5+ 
years  of  experience  in  construction/site  environment  including  main  contractor  works,  (iii) 
Intermediate  time  management  skills  with  the  ability  to  work  under  pressure  and  to  tight 
timeframes  on  occasion,  (iv)  Basic  written  and  verbal  communication  skills,  with  the  ability  to 
collate  materials  into  a  template  report,  (v)  Basic  working  knowledge  of  software  such  as  MS 
Word, Excel and AutoCAD, (vi) Team player and able to adapt to changes within the construction 
process and (vii) Fluency in written and spoken English is preferred. 
44.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Review and comment on drawing specifications and any other documents that 
may be required for the project. 
Review and inspect the contractor capability in term of personal, equipment and 
other conditions with regard to the contract/bid conditions and legal requirements 
(iii)  Where applicable provide suggestions or observations in respect to the element 
of the works. 
Assist  with  the  development  of  the  inspection  process  for  the  C&S/Finishing 
works at site. 
Record accurate inspections carried out in line with the site documents. 
Advise line manager and record where applicable any works not carried out  in 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
accordance with the drawings and specifications, 
Appendix 2 
111 
(vii)  Check the work done by the contractor. 
(viii)  Assist with the H&S at site and advise line manager of any infringements. 
(ix) 
Assist where required in the development of the commissioning procedures that 
are required for the project. 
Review and comment in respect to as-built drawings, and operations manuals. 
Provide  support  for  the  functional  area  of  the  project  within  which  they  are 
allocated, or for the project team as a whole, as required by the structure of the 
project team. 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii)  Monitor and advise line manager of all of the works within their specific area of 
concern. 
(xiii)  Any  other  duties  that may  be  assigned  as  part of  the  construction  works.  Any 
other  tasks  reasonably  requested  by  the  IA/PIU,  Team  Leader,  Deputy  Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
45. 
Procurement Specialist (national, 1 person-months). The consultant should have (i) a 
graduate degree in business administration, law, economy or other relevant fields, (ii) 7 years of 
experience as procurement specialist at ADB funded projects, (iii) at least 5 years’ experience on 
Mongolian Procurement Law, ADB Procurement Guidelines, (iv) Good command of English. 
46.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following. 
(i)  Finalize the bidding document in compliance with the ADB guidelines. 
(ii)  Include the ADB and the PIU comments and proposals in the bidding document and 
prepare the document again, and submit to the PIU and EA. 
(iii)  In accordance with the No-Objection from ADB, hand in the final version of the bidding 
document to the PIU. 
(iv)  During the tender evaluation or procurement processing, provide support to the EA. 
(v)  Monitor the procurement whether it is complying with all the requirements. 
E. 
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS AND TIME SCHEDULE FOR DELIVERABLES 
47. 
The Consultant will directly report to the PIU project coordinator who will monitor contract 
implementation and the quality of the deliverables with the support of PIU M&E specialist under 
close  supervision  of  project  director.  The  project  implementation  unit  (PIU)  and  the  MET  will 
evaluate the consultant’s performance based on the agreed deliverables and approve the invoices 
for the reviewed and accepted deliverables. 
48.  Within  10  working  days  of  the  commencement  of  the  Contract,  a  detailed  work  plan  in 
accordance with scope of the work will be delivered to the PIU and approved by MET. The plan 
will  serve  as  the  basis  for  measuring  progress  on  desired  outcomes  and  goals  for  the  entire 
consultancy  service. Detailed  work  plan  shall  include  Reporting  Requirements  and  Time 
Schedule for Deliverables. 
49.  At a minimum, it should include the following. 
(a)  Format, frequency, and contents of reports. Content will indicate what deliverables 
will be included in the report. 
(b)  Number of copies, and requirements to electronic submission if any (or on flash 
disk). Final reports shall be delivered in flash disk in addition to the specified 
number of hard copies. 
(c)  Dates of submission for each report. 
(d)  Persons (indicate names, titles, submission address) to receive them. 
112 
Appendix 2 
50.  Following reports will be provided or modified in consultation with the MET. 
(a)  Inception report after 1 month of consultant’s mobilization 
(b)  Monthly and quarterly reports reporting the progress of the outputs within the above 
scope of work. 
(c)  Yearly report within 10 days of first month of the year. 
(d)  Final report by end of the contract. The final report will include a summary of 
lessons learned during implementation and measures or corrective actions taken to 
address challenges encountered. 
(e)  Any other deliverables reasonably requested by the PIU and MET. 
(f)  One report after each field monitoring session, including analysis and results of field 
sampling; a draft final report; and, a final report for DEIA. 
51.  The consultant is required to PIU various reports/documents including among others: 
No 
Types of Reports 
Date of Submission 
Number of 
copies 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Inception report 
Weekly progress report 
Monthly report 
Defect liability Period Report   Within  28  days  of  issue  of  certificate  of 
Within  1  month  after  commencement  of 
supervision  
Each week after commencement supervision  3 copies  
4 copies  
Each month 
4 copies  
4 copies  
Project Completion Report 
Monitoring  and  Evaluation 
Reports  
Project 
Management Report 
Performance 
completion 
End of the consultant’s work 
Three months after project completion report 
4 copies  
4 copies  
Before, 
implementation 
during 
and 
end 
of 
project 
4 copies  
52.  The supervision progress report are as follows. 
1)  Inception report will cover at a minimum an assessment of the project procurement 
status, implementation delays and recommended corrective actions (if any), the status 
of  design  development  for  the  installations  nominated  as  Provisional  Sum  in  the 
construction contract. 
2)  Weekly  progress  report  shall  include  details  of  the  works  carried  out  during  the 
previous week, the problems encountered or anticipated, information on outstanding 
claims  complete  with  summaries  of  both  Contractor  and  Employer  compliance  with 
contract  time  notification  periods.  The  report  will  document  the  status  of  design 
development  for  the  installations  nominated  as  Provisional  Sum  in  the  construction 
contract.  The  report  will  detail  the  steps  taken  or  the  recommendations  given  to 
address  the  given circumstance,  and  the  report  shall  capture  financial  and  physical 
progress to date. 
3)  Monthly progress report shall comprehensively cover all project aspects: the overall 
project  progress,  updates  on  implementation  arrangements  or  changes  in  project 
scope,  contract  awards  and  disbursement  status,  payments  to  the  consultants  and 
contractors,  progress  of  works,  status  of  training  programs,  difficulties  and  delays 
encountered or anticipated, and remedial actions taken or suggested, and summarize 
the  compliance  status  related 
the  grant/loan  covenants  and  social  and 
environmental safeguard. 
to 
4)  Progress  reports  will  include  an  assessment  on  construction  progress  against 
program,  an  indication  of  key  outstanding  issues,  and  an  updated  development 
program (if relevant) for key project activities. Copies of each report will be submitted 
Appendix 2 
113 
to PIU in English. The Consultant shall transmit an electronic version of the reports to 
ADB on issue of the reports to the Employer. 
5)  Progress  reports  will  include  an  assessment  on  construction  progress  against 
program,  an  indication  of  key  outstanding  issues,  and  an  updated  development 
program (if relevant) for key project activities. Copies of each report will be submitted 
to PIU in English. The Consultant shall transmit an electronic version of the reports to 
ADB on issue of the reports to the Employer. 
6)  Project completion report shall include a detailed description of all the work by items 
of technical and non-technical matters, as-built drawings, economic analysis, financial 
and  disbursement  data,  analyses,  difficulties  and  delays  encountered  and  reasons, 
and remedial actions taken, the overall progress of the Project. 
All reports will be reviewed upon submission by the MET. The Consultant shall respond in 
53. 
writing to the comments of the EA and IA or any of the reviewing bodies. The Consultant shall 
meet with these agencies, as necessary, to resolve any problems or concerns which may surface 
during the review. The Consultant shall have their own internal review system to review drawings 
prior  to  EA  and  IA’s  approval.  The  Consultant  shall  become  familiar  with  local  holidays  and 
customs so that in setting submittal schedules, the project and EA and IAs can take full advantage 
of the time periods scheduled for reviews and approvals. 
Drawings prepared and submitted by the Consultant shall be to the standard size of A0, 
54. 
Al, A2; and one‐half size reductions as may be required by the MET. The scale of all drawings is 
to be determined by mutual consent of the EA, IAs and the Consultant prior to the commencement 
of each project phase, at which time the Consultant shall also identify the number of drawings to 
be produced. All drawings information should be clear and legible. The Consultant shall submit 
the final drawings in digital format approved and reviewed by the MET. State expertise approved 
final drawings (three hardcopies) will be submitted to MET in English and Mongolian version. 
F.   CLIENTS INPUTS AND COUNTERPART PERSONNEL 
55.  The following staff will be assigned by the Client to support the Consultant’s team: 
-  MET DPAM and DTPC Counterpart Specialists 
-  All PIU staff 
56.  Counterpart Contribution to be provided by the Client: 
-  Support to obtain necessary approvals regarding external utilities (power, heating, 
water and sewage, communication, IT etc.) from relevant authorities (as appropriate) 
-  Support to arrange meetings with government organizations 
-  Support to obtain relevant information and negotiations with Clients 
57.  The Client will provide the following documents and papers to facilitate preparation of the 
proposals: 
-  Previous data, TA consultant’s report 
114 
Appendix 2 
APPENDIX A to the TOR 
UNIVERSAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES 
1. 
The  following  design  consideration  for  each  types  of  disability  must  be  reflected  on 
building design development and detail design stages. The Consultant must follow the Synthesis 
of the standards ISO/IEC Guide 71:2014 
1) 
Sensory Abilities and Characteristics 
(i)  Multiple  means  of  information  presentation  such  as  auditory  or  tactile  to 
supplement or substitute for visual information 
(ii)  Appropriate  size,  contrast,  form,  luminance,  lighting  and  viewing  distance  in 
relation to context of use 
(iii)  Avoidance  of  glare;  redundant  forms  of  coding  to  supplement  or  substitute  for 
information conveyed with color coding, e.g. shape or texture coding 
(iv)  Appropriate physical construction and properties of fonts such as size, spacing, 
with or without serif, upright form or italics, and light, medium or bold appearance 
within a specific context of use 
(v)  Visual information  and controls  placed  in a prominent  position,  or a  positioning 
that is flexible, adjustable or duplicated 
(vi)  Avoidance of f licker rates with f lashing or blinking text, objects or video screens, 
especially those that can trigger visually induced seizures 
(vii)  Distinctive form to facilitate identification of a product/environment and/or parts 
of  a  product/environment  (including  orientation,  e.g.  top/bottom,  front/back, 
entrance/exit) 
(viii)  Colored markings that draw attention to steps and potentially dangerous places  
(ix)  Tactile  indicators  that  draw  attention  to  stairs,  platform  edges  and  pedestrian 
crossings 
(x)  Traffic  lights  equipped  with  acoustic  signals  to  indicate  when  pedestrians  can 
cross streets safely 
2) 
Hearing Consideration 
(i)  Multiple  means  of  information  presentation  such  as  visual  (text  or  pictures)  or 
tactile to supplement or substitute for auditory information 
(ii)  Appropriate  volume,  pitch  and  frequency  of  spoken  announcements,  warnings 
and warning sounds in relation to context of use 
(iii)  Adjustable volume over a wide range and with multiple frequencies 
(iv)  Avoidance of sudden changes in volume of auditory signals 
(v)  Constant signal-to-noise ratio between the level of an announcement and that of 
the background noise 
(vi)  Group  assistive  listening  devices  or  communication  systems  such  as  induction 
loops, infrared or radio systems 
(vii)  Emergency announcements that are visual with text, and where appropr iate, in 
sign language, as well as of an appropriate volume and pitch decrease risk for 
persons with hearing impairment 
(viii)  A  good  acoustic  environment,  that  reduces  background  sounds  and  promotes 
sound that is important to be heard 
(ix)  Accommodation for and  compatibility with relevant assistive products, assistive 
technology and supports. 
Appendix 2 
115 
3) 
Touch Functions 
(i)  Multiple means of information presentation such as visual or auditory information 
to supplement or substitute for tactile information or biometric controls. 
(ii)  Multiple means of control such as eye and voice control, sensors and automatic 
or remote controls. 
(iii)  Avoidance of sharp and uneven points/edges/surfaces. 
(iv)  Avoidance  of  excessively  hot  or  cold  surfaces  which  can  be  touched  (even 
inadvertently). 
(v)  Distinctive form to facilitate identification of a product and its parts, which in turn 
can facilitate use/handling/assembly. 
4) 
Taste Functions and Smell Functions 
(i)  Multiple  means  of  information  presentation  to  supplement  or  substitute  for 
information gained by taste and smell functions. 
information in labeling on ingredients, use by and expiration dates. 
(ii) 
(iii)  Visual and auditory signals to alert people to the presence of smoke or dangerous 
chemicals. 
Information or labeling to warn about strong smell or taste. 
(iv) 
(v)  Provision  of  minimal  odors  and  taste,  except  where  necessary  (e.g.  odors  and 
taste are expected in foods). 
5) 
Immunological System Functions 
(i)  Avoidance of inclusion of allergens, sensitizing substances and chemicals known 
to cause hypersensitivities in products, foodstuffs and environments. 
(ii)  Appropriate information and labeling of ingredients/contents (including allergens, 
sensitizing  and  chemical  substances  known  to  cause  hypersensitivities)  in 
accessible  format,  the  provision  of  this  information  being  mostly  subject  to 
national or international regulation and which can include 
(iii)  A list of ingredients, 
(iv)  A separate statement that declares any major allergens or sensitizing substances 
included, and warnings such as information regarding any change in composition 
of significance related to allergens and sensitizing substances. 
(v)  Ventilation systems that filter out respiratory allergens. 
(vi)  Prevention  of  mold  growth,  e.g.  by  controlling  level  of  indoor  humidity,  and 
following appropriate cleaning routines. 
(vii)  Avoidance of dust-collecting furnishings in public areas. 
(viii)  Availability of “allergy-free” areas such as smoke-free and allergy-free rooms in 
hotels, and animal- free areas in public transportation. 
6) 
Physical Abilities And Characteristics 
(i)  Additional space in built environments. 
(ii)  Space for clothing and personal protective equipment. 
(iii)  Multiple size offerings and / or adjustability. 
(iv)  Height clearance for tall persons. 
(v)  Width clearance for large persons. 
(vi)  Step heights and reach distances for small persons. 
(vii)  Space  for  assistive  products,  assistive  technology,  service  animals  and 
accompanying persons. 
(viii)  Load  capacities  of  system  components  appropriate  for  larger  mass  (weight) 
requirements. 
116 
Appendix 2 
(ix)  Systems with a clear line of sight to important components for seated or standing 
users. 
(x)  Systems with a comfortable reach to all components for seated or standing users. 
(xi)  Grip sizes in systems components that accommodate variations in user sizes and 
shapes. 
7) 
Movement: Functions Of Upper Body Structures And Fine Hand Use Abilities 
(i)  Manufacturing materials of lighter weight or lower density to reduce the weight of 
products. 
(ii)  Products shaped to facilitate easy grasping, lifting and carrying with either or both 
hands. 
(iii)  Manual controls that allow a comfortable grip, avoid the need for twisting of the 
wrist, and offer minimal resistance. 
(iv)  Controls that avoid the need to manipulate multiple controls at the same  time. 
(v)  Non-slippery surface that aids gripping and manipulating for people with limited 
dexterity. 
(vi)  Textured surfaces, to increase friction, and facilitate the application of force. 
(vii)  Design  and  spacing  of  controls  that  guard  against  inadvertent  activation  of  a 
control other than the one intended. 
(viii)  Containers  that  allow  easy  opening  and  closing  with  reasonably  low  attainable 
operating force. 
(ix)  Simple and straightforward sequences for opening of packaging and assembling, 
installing or operating a product. 
(x)  Avoidance of simultaneous double movements, e.g. pushing and twisting. 
(xi)  Alternative controls for accommodation of upper body movement impairments. 
8) 
Movement: Functions Of Lower Body Structures 
(i)  Slip-resistant,  threshold-free  layout,  e.g.  in  buildings  and  paved  outdoor 
environments. 
(ii)  Avoidance of sudden changes in surface level, obstacles, bumps or  protrusions. 
(iii)  Equipment, such as elevators and other lifting systems. 
(iv)  Ramps  with appropriate  slopes  and adequate  space to  allow for  approach  and 
maneuvering, and use of wheelchairs, walking frames, or walking aids. 
(v)  Stairs with appropriate dimensions and banisters or hand grips alongside. 
(vi)  Ample time for persons with mobility limitations to pass through automatic doors 
and to use pedestrian crossings. 
9) 
Muscle Power And Muscle Endurance 
(i)  Use  of  power  grip  (whole  hand)  which  requires  less  effort  than  pinch  grip 
(between thumb and index or middle finger). 
(ii)  Appropriate  handling  characteristics  (e.g.  size  and  weight)  for  systems  that 
involve lifting, holding, carrying or opening. 
(iii)  Avoidance of long handling time and unnecessary repetition of operations. 
(iv)  Avoidance of long service lines that cause people to stand unsupported for long 
periods of time. 
(v)  Alternative means of control in vehicles to accommodate lower body movement. 
10) 
Voice And Speech 
(i)  Alternative  forms  of  communication  such  as  via  text,  facial  expressions,  hand 
movements or signs, body postures, and other forms of body language. 
Appendix 2 
117 
(ii)  Augmentative  and  alternative  communication  based  on  symbols,  aids, 
techniques, and/or strategies. 
(iii)  Support  for  the  use  of  assistive  products  such  as  speech  synthesizers  and 
communication amplifier and video communication. 
(iv)  Provision  of  alternative  means  to  interact  with  interactive  voice  systems  and 
intercom systems, such as real-time text. 
11) 
Cognitive Abilities 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Information about time and place. 
Schedules, structures, signals to indicate start and termination of  activities. 
An overview that informs the user what to expect before providing any  details. 
Appropriate  feedback/cues/reminders  that  hold  the  user’s  attention  and  give 
support through a process. 
Feedback that is adjustable to the needs and preferences of users. 
(v) 
(vi) 
Environments and presentations that are stimulating but also avoid distractions. 
(vii)  Systems  and  procedures  that  adapt  to  individual  situations,  abilities  and 
preferences. 
(viii)  Similar  arrangement/layout  and  design  of  feedback  and  control  logic  on 
products of a similar type. 
Similar design of feedback and control logic on products of a similar  type. 
Error-tolerant operating sequences. 
Flexible time period for assimilation of information and response. 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii)  Simple  and  straightforward  sequences 
for  opening  of  packaging  and 
(xiii) 
(xiv) 
assembling, installing or operating a product. 
Information  provided  in  multiple  formats,  e.g.  text  is  read  out,  diagrams  are 
provided in addition to text. 
Information and instructions that are easy to understand in the language of the 
user. 
(xv)  Explicit information on expectations placed on the user. 
(xvi)  Systems that can be used (as far as possible) without an instruction manual. 
(xvii)  Procedures  that  facilitate  learning  (learning  by  doing  is  generally  easier  than 
memorizing instructions, repetitions). 
(xviii)  Multiple  means  of  information  presentation  (e.g.  text  is  read  out,  widely 
recognized symbols). 
(xix)  Emergency evacuation routes designed so that they are intuitive  and easy to 
follow  which  clearly  designate  any  alternative  routes  that  accommodate  for 
persons with disabilities. 
(xx)  Accommodation for/compatibility with relevant supports and assistive products 
and assistive technology. 
118 
Appendix 2 
APPENDIX B to the TOR 
LOCAL BUILDING CODES, REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 
1. The Consultant will comply with local building codes and regulation in terms of accessibility and 
international best practice, including but not limited to the following. 
1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
Norms On Architectural Design 
(i)  BNbD: 30-01-04 /CCM 30-01-04/ Norm and Regulation for Urban Resettlement 
the  Ministry  of 
planning  and  building  construction,  Decree  No.130  by 
Infrastructure, 2004 
(ii)  BD 31-101-04 /31-104-04/ Handbook for barrier-free construction planning for the 
handicapped, Decree No.17 by Director of Construction, Urban Development and 
Public Utilities Office, 2004 
(iii)  BD  31-112-11  Building  regulations  of  space  planning  for  the  requirements  of 
handicapped people, Decree No.256 by the Ministry of Construction and Urban 
Development. 
(iv)  Other related norms and regulations 
Norms On Structural Design 
(v)  BNbD: 2.01.07.90 Load and effect 
(vi)  BNbD: 22.01.01*2006 Building cod of seismic regions 
(vii)  BNbD: 2.02.01.94 Ground and Foundation code for building design work 
(viii)  BNbD: 52.02.05 Cast in situ concrete and reinforced concrete 
(ix)  BNbD: 53.02.05 Steel Structure 
(x)  BNbD: 2.03.02.90 Masonry and reinforced masonry structure 
(xi)  BNbD: 52.01.10 Concrete and reinforced concrete structure 
Norms On Electrical Design 
(i)  BD 43-101-03 The regulations of electrical installations 
(ii)  BD 43-101-03*12 The regulations of electrical installations 
(iii)  BD 43-103-08 The instruction for design of the lighting protection of building and 
facilities 
(iv)  BD 43-102-07 Design and installation of electrical equipment in residential and 
public buildings 
Norms On Fire Safety And Automation 
(i)  BNbD 21-01-02 Fire safety of buildings and facilities 
(ii)  BNbD 21-02-02 Norm on fire safety for developing construction design drawings 
(iii)  BNbD 21-04-05 Automatic fire extinguisher and alarm equipment of buildings and 
facilities 
(iv)  BNbD 3.05.07-85 Automation systems for building 
Norms On HVAC Design 
(i)  BNbD 41-01-11 Heating, ventilation and air-conditioning 
(ii)  BNbD 43-03-07 Boiler equipment 
(iii)  BD 41-102-11 Design of independent heat supply sources 
(iv)  BNbD 23-01-09 Climate and geophysical parameters for construction 
(v)  BNbD 23-02-09 Building thermal performance 
(vi)  BD 23-103-10 Designing thermal performance for building 
Appendix 2 
119 
6) 
Norms On Water Supply, Plumbing Design 
(i)  BNbD 3.05.04-90 Water supply, sewerage, outdoor pipelines and facilities 
(ii)  BNbD 3.05.01-88 Indoor plumbing system 
(iii)  BNbD 40-05-98 Indoor water supply and sewerage pipelines 
(iv)  BNbD 40-02-06 Water supply, outdoor pipelines and facilities 
7) 
Mongolian National Standards 
(i)  MNS  6055:2009  –  Space  planning  for  building  and  environment  with  the 
requirements of handicapped people, 2009 
(ii)  MNS  6056:2009  –  Design  manual  for  planning  and  designing  accessibility  for 
handicapped people, 2009 
8) 
International Standards 
(iii)  EDGE standard 
APPENDIX C to the TOR: Domestic Detailed Environmental Impact Assessment for the 
proposed Uvs Tourist Complex, and Uvs Tourist Street, Uvs Aimag 
A. 
Background 
1. 
The  Sustainable  Tourism  Development  Project  (Phase  2)  is  being  implemented  by  the 
Government of Mongolia through the Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET), with funding 
support from the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The project includes the planned construction 
of two visitor centers, the Rock Art and Nomadic Cultural Center (RANCC) (Khovd  Aimag) and 
Uvs Tourism Complex (UVTC) (Uvs Aimag), two tourist streets (one each in Khovd Aimag and 
Uvs Aimag), and about 35 small facilities – public campsites, public toilets, carparks, information 
centers, information points, public cooking cabins, trail upgrades, fee collection stations, ranger 
stations – in five sites: Altai Tavan Bogd National Park and the Petroglyphic Complexes of the 
Mongolian  Altai  (Bayan-Ulgii  Aimag),  Khar  Us  Nuur  National  Park  and Tsenkher  Cave  (Khovd 
Aimag), and Khan Khukhii National Park and Uvs Nuur Special Protected Area (Uvs Aimag). 
In  2020  and  2021  the  following  documents  were  prepared:  (i)  preliminary  engineering 
2. 
designs and feasibility study report, (ii) a domestic environment baseline assessment (EBA), and 
(iii)  an  initial  environmental  examination  (IEE)  and  environment  management  plan  (EMP);  as 
required by ADB’s Safeguard Policy). In 2021, a General EIA Letter was issued by the MET, which 
requires the preparation of a Detailed EIA (DEIA) for the proposed facilities. The project will be 
implemented from December 2021 to December 2027. Implementation is coordinated through a 
project implementation unit (PIU), including an environment safeguard specialist. 
The UVTC site is 14.5 km from the center of Uvs Aimag capital, Ulaangom. The tourist 
3. 
street is a total of 6.4 ha of land to the southeast of the Uvs Aimag center, to the east of Aimag 
Central Stadium, and to the southwest of ger residential area directly connected to the main road 
was allocated. The existing parking lot of the nearby stadium will be used. This site location was 
agreed between the aimag government and MET. A detailed engineering design and construction 
supervision  company  (DED/CSC)  will  be  engaged  to  design  these  facilities  and  oversee  their 
construction. The DED/CSC will subcontract a qualified domestic firm to prepare the DEIA. This 
terms of reference is for the preparation of the DEIA for the UVTC and Uvs tourist street. 
120 
Appendix 2 
B. 
Objective of the Consulting Services 
4. 
The  objective  is  to  prepare  a  DEIA  that  fulfills  domestic  requirements.  In  fulfilling  the 
consulting  services,  the  firm  will  work  closely  with  the  DED/CSC,  PIU  environment  safeguard 
specialist, MET, local government agencies, ADB project team, and other stakeholders as needed. 
C. 
Scope of the Consulting Services 
5. 
The DEIA firm will do the following. 
(i) 
Review  and  be  familiar  with  the  preliminary  engineering  design,  environment 
baseline assessment, initial environment examination, and General EIA Letter. 
Review and be familiar with the draft detailed engineering designs. 
(ii) 
(iii)  Conduct all required field surveys and site assessments to prepare the DEIA. 
(iv)  Prepare a separate DEIA report for each facility. The reports will be developed in 
accordance  with  the  “Methodology  on  Environmental  Impact  Assessment”  which 
was adopted with Environment Minister’s Order No. A-117 on 10April 2014. 
(v)  Work closely with the DED/CSC firm to ensure that the DEIA findings help improve 
the DED, to avoid any risks and impacts as far as possible. 
(vi) 
Identify and highlight any new or additional impacts not identified in the EBA or IEE. 
(vii)  Prepare a domestic EMP to address the identified risks and domestic monitoring 
and reporting requirements. 
(viii)  Ensure there is alignment between the domestic EMP and the ADB funded IEE and 
EMP.  If  the  domestic  EMP  proposes  any  measures  or  actions  which  conflict  (or 
contradict) the ADB funded IEE and EMP, identify these. Seek discussion with the 
DED/CS firm and PIU environment safeguard specialist (who will discuss also with 
the ADB project environment specialist). 
(ix)  Submit  the  draft  DEIA  to  the  DED/CS  firm  and  PIU  for  review.  After  internal 
endorsement, submit the draft DEIA to MET for review. 
Facilitate MET review of the draft DEIA. 
(x) 
(xi)  Revise and finalize the draft DEIA based on the comments received. 
D. 
Team Composition and Qualification Requirements for key experts 
6. 
The firm will have: (i) all required domestic qualifications and certifications to prepare a 
DEIA;  (ii)  at  least  10  years  of  relevant  professional  experience  in  related  fields  and  projects, 
especially in the construction sector; (iii) have completed at least 3 DEIAs for projects funded by 
ADB or other international development agencies; (iv) all specialists as needed to conduct the 
environmental  assessments 
(physical,  chemical,  biological,  ecological,  and 
socioeconomic  parameters);  (v)  ability  to  communicate  and  work  effectively  with  local 
communities  and  government  agencies;  and  (vi)  ideally,  proficiency  in  English.  The  firm  will 
provide reference letters from a minimum of three previous clients for similar projects. 
required 
7. 
Output-based Terms of Reference. The assignment will be carried out by a consulting 
firm. Proposing entities will determine the number and the specific expertise along with their inputs 
of the specialists they will require to achieve the objectives of the contract, in accordance with 
their  proposed  approach  and  methodology.  All  proposals  will  include  a  minimum  of  six  key 
experts, one of which will be expected to act as team leader (Table 1). 
Appendix 2 
121 
Table 1: Key Expert Positions and Estimated Person-Months 
No.  Key Experts 
1  Team leader/ Senior Technical specialist 
2  Biologist/ecologist 
3  Physical science specialist 
4  Socioeconomic specialist 
5  Cultural resource specialist 
6  Field logistics assistant 
TOTAL 
Number of 
Experts 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
Person/month 
input 
Home 
3 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
1 
10 
Field 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1.5 
6.5 
Total 
4 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
16.5 
Team  leader/Senior  Technical  Specialist  (national).  The  specialist  will  have:  (i)  a 
8. 
master’s degree or equivalent in relevant field, (ii) at least 10 years professional experience in 
environmental  impact  assessment  in  Mongolia,  including  with  construction  or  infrastructure 
projects,  and  experience  with  protected  area  concepts  and  management,  (iii)  ability  to 
communicate and work effectively with local communities and government agencies, (iv) ability 
to quickly undertake field observations, analyses, and consultations required for EIA, (v) strong 
analytical  and  report  writing  skills,  and,  (vi)  ideally,  proficiency  in  English.  Specific  tasks  and 
responsibilities will include, but are not limited to, the following. 
(i) 
Lead the other technical specialists to ensure coverage of all environmental aspects 
affected by this project (physical, chemical, biological, and socioeconomic parameters). 
(ii)  Maintain communication and coordination with the DED/CS firm, PIU, and MET. 
(iii)  Set the template and schedule for proper completion of the EIA report. 
(iv)  Lead overall preparation of the draft and final draft DEIA, and assume responsibility for 
overall quality control. 
9. 
Technical Specialists (4 experts, national). The specialists will each have (i) a master’s 
degree  or  equivalent  in  relevant  field,  (ii)  at  least  10  years  professional  experience  in  their 
respective fields, for environmental impact assessment in Mongolia, including with construction 
or  infrastructure  projects,  and  experience  with  protected  area  concepts  and  management,  (iii) 
ability to communicate and work effectively with local communities and government agencies, (iv) 
ability to quickly undertake field observations, analyses, and consultations required for EIA; and, 
(v) ideally, proficiency in English. Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited 
to, the following. 
(i) 
Cover all environmental aspects affected by this project (physical, chemical, biological, 
and socioeconomic parameters), as follows. 
(ii)  Gain familiarity with the four project sites and potential impacts and required mitigation 
measures through: (i) review of the current IEE and EMP; (ii) review of the latest 
detailed designs and specifications for the facilities at the four sites; (iii) meetings with 
the project agencies; and (iv) site visits. 
(iii)  Verify the proposed project sites and undertake field observations and consultations to 
confirm the baseline environmental, PCR, and socioeconomic features at the four sites. 
(iv)  Re-configure and update the environmental baseline report for the four sites and adjust 
the  impact  matrix  and  mitigation  measures  accordingly,  as  well  as  the  environmental 
monitoring plan. 
(v)  Undertake  an  initial  review  of  findings  with  MET  and  the  PIU;  revise  draft  report  as 
needed. 
122 
Appendix 2 
(vi)  Complete the detailed EIA for the four sites to meet domestic requirements. 
10. 
Field Logistics Assistant (national). The position will have at least five years professional 
experience in coordinating field work and travel in Mongolia and handling related office duties and 
project documentation. Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to, the 
following. 
(i)  Gain familiarity with all the project requirements, the four sites, and the local government 
agencies and stakeholders who will be engaged with the project. 
(ii)  Determine field visit requirements of each of the technical specialists. 
(iii)  Work out schedules and coordination between the four specialists. 
(iv)  Arrange travel, housing, and consultation requirements to ensure successful field visits. 
(v)  Maintain project documentation for all field work and public consultation records/photo 
log, etc. 
E. 
Deliverables and Work Schedule 
11.  The following reports will be provided, in consultation with the DED/CS firm, MET and PIU. 
(i) 
(ii) 
Inception report. Fourteen (14) days after consultant’s mobilization. Format: Digital 
copy, in Mongolian language. 
Progress  report.  Two  (2)  months  after  consultant’s  mobilization.  Format:  Digital 
copy, in Mongolian language. 
(iii)  Draft  EIA  reports,  including  EMPs,  for  the  project  sites.  Three  (3)  months  after 
consultant’s  mobilization.  Format:  digital  copy  and  at  least  5  hard  copies.  In 
Mongolian and English language. 
(iv)  Final  EIA  reports,  including  EMPs.  Four  months  after  consultant’s  mobilization. 
Format: digital copy and at least 5 hard copies. In Mongolian and English language 
Any other deliverables as reasonably requested by the DED/CS firm, PIU, and MET. 
(v) 
Appendix 2 
123 
3. 
CS3: Detailed Engineering Design and Construction Supervision of Rock Art and 
Nomadic Cultural Center and Khovd Tourist Street 
A.  Background 
1. 
The Sustainable Tourism Development Project (Phase 2) will support the development of 
sustainable tourism within the three Aimags of western Mongolia, Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, and Uvs 
by  (i)  enhancing  inclusive  planning  and  capacity  for  local  tourism  businesses;  (ii)  enabling 
infrastructure for tourism constructed; (iii) improving sanitation and waste management; and (iv) 
strengthening management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas. 
2. 
The Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET) is the executing agency to implement the 
project. MET’s Department of Tourism Policy Coordination (DTPC) is the implementing agency 
(IA)  for  the  loan  and  the  Department  of  Protected  Areas  Management  (DPAM)  will  be  the 
implementing  agency  (IA)  for  the  Japanese  Fund  for  Poverty  Reduction  (JFPR)  grant: 
Strengthening  Community  Livelihoods  in  Buffer  Zones  of  Protected  Areas.  The  MET  has 
established  Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC)  for  the  project  to  facilitate  the  technical  and 
administrative  implementation  of  the  project.  The  PSC  is  the  main  body  of  the  project 
implementation related consultation and decision-making. 
During loan processing stage, The TA consultant had developed the various reports which 
3. 
meets  the  technical,  economic,  financial,  social,  environmental,  and  other  due  diligence 
requirements of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Government of Mongolia to design 
the  Project.  These  reports  include  the  following  but  not  limited  to: 
the  Report  and 
Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors; Project Administration Manual; Social 
Development  Action  Plan;  Gender  Action  Plan;  Initial  Environmental  Examination;  Risk 
Assessment  and  Risk  Management  Plan;  Feasibility  Study  Report;  and  Climate  Risk  and 
Vulnerability Assessment. The firm shall ensure that their deliverables follow the approved project 
targets and preliminary designs prepared during the processing and described in these reports. 
4. 
The  consultant  deliverables  need  to  reflect  a  holistic  design  approach  that  ensures 
synergy  and  integration,  where  relevant,  with  the  other  project  components  and  deliverables 
prepared by other consulting teams. Examples include, but are not limited to: (i) ensuring that the 
revised aimag tourism plans integrate the project components and operation and maintenance 
(O&M) plans for the project facilities, (ii) poverty, gender, and livelihood targets will be integrated 
within the regional tourism master plan, revised aimag tourism plans, and improved tour camp 
standards, and (iii) O&M of the loan-funded tourism complexes will include promotion of the grant-
supported community goods, services, and protected areas. The firm is therefore required to have 
a  good  understanding  of  the  overall  project  design  and  targets  in  addition  to  the  specific 
deliverables under the consultancy. 
B.  Objective of the Consulting Service 
5. 
The objectives of this consultancy are to produce detail design and deliver construction 
documents  including  appropriate  budget  estimates  for  Rock  Art  and  Nomadic  Cultural  Center 
(RANCC) and Khovd tourist street to support the MET in reviewing bidding documents, and to 
supervise construction works until its completion. 
6. 
The following design characteristics should be reflected to all design activities. 
-  Rationality  and  proper  capacity:  Tourism  facilities  will  be  aimed  to  (i)  enabling 
infrastructure for tourism, (ii) enhancing the capacity for tourism businesses, and (iii) 
124 
Appendix 2 
promoting  community-led  tourism  based  on  heritage,  education.  The  proposed 
design  should  be  prepared  based  on  sound  evidence-based  data  and  an 
assessment  of  the  relevant  needs  to  the  functionality  of  the  tourism  facility  in 
Mongolia. The design must be generated to consider the future expansion. 
-  Model and accreditation: The Khovd Tourism Facilities will follow international best 
practices in sustainable design specifically complying with the EDGE standard. The 
design of Tourism Facilities will be used as a model to be inspired in other regions 
of Mongolia. 
-  Modernization:  Investments  will  cover  (i)  modern  infrastructure  facilities  and 
equipment  which  shall  be  in  adequate  capacity;  (ii)  integrated  business  and 
operational  management;  (iii)  proper  waste  management;  and  (iv)  quality 
management. 
7. 
The  assignment  is  expected  to  be  commenced  in  Q1,  2023  and  be  completed  within  4 
years after signing on the contract. The MET is targeting to commence the construction 
works of the Khovd Tourism Facilities in Q2, 2025. 
Table 1: Indicative Duration for the Assignment 
2023 
Q
Q
3 
2 
Q
1 
2024 
Q
Q
3 
2 
Q
4 
Q
1 
2025 
Q
Q
3 
2 
Q
4 
Q
1 
Q
4 
Q
1 
2026 
Q
Q
3 
2 
Q
4 
№ 
Tasks 
1 
Design  development  including 
bid documents 
2  Bidding process 
3 
Construction  and  supervision 
contract administration 
C.  Scope of the Consulting Services and Expected Deliverables 
8. 
The Consultant will perform professionally and undertake activities necessary to achieve 
the  objectives  as  defined  above  by  (i)  coordinating  design,  and  contract  administration 
activities and prepare construction documents in professional standards, (ii) carrying out 
site survey and geotechnical survey, (iii) developing final architectural detail design, (iv) 
developing the structural design, (v) developing mechanical, electric and plumbing design, 
(vi) developing telecommunication and automation design, (vii) providing for construction 
cost  estimates,  (viii)  developing  the  bidding  documents  for  construction,  (ix)  providing 
technical  support  to  the  MET  in  evaluation  of  bidding  documents  and  provide  expert’s 
comments  and  recommendation,  (x)  providing  monitoring  and  reports  on;  structural 
inspection, mechanical inspection, electrical inspection, plumbing inspection including all 
external  engineering  works,  landscape  design,  record  drawings  and  certification  of  the 
progress, and (xi) providing a deficiency assessment, total inspection. 
9. 
Detailed scope of services has been outlined below but the defined services are not an 
exhaustive list but are indicative only as following: 
(i)  The Consultant will develop Detailed Engineering Designs of Rock Art and Nomadic 
Culture Center (RANCC) and Khovd Tourist street: 
(a)  All  detailed  engineering  designs  shall  be  prepared  based  on  the  approved 
conceptual design pursuant to relevant laws and regulations of Mongolia. All the 
design should be in conformity with the highest engineering standards adopted 
internationally and locally specifically complying to the EDGE standard. 
Appendix 2 
125 
(b)  Project related data, maps and other information shall be obtained from the MET 
DTPC  and  DPAM,  Border  Projection  Agency,  National  Center  for  Cultural 
Heritage, Land Authority of Khovd and Aimags, the project implementation unit 
(PIU)  and  other  relevant  agencies,  organizations  as  required.  The  Consultant 
needs  to  review  the  previous  data  prior  to  preparation  of  detailed  engineering 
design. 
(c)  The detailed designs will, as a minimum, include construction drawings, detailed 
cost estimates, necessary calculations to determine and justify the engineering 
details, detailed specifications of equipment, architectural/engineering drawings, 
bill  of  quantities  (BOQ),  implementation  schedule,  detailed  criteria  for  the 
procurement  of  contractors  etc.  The  technical  specifications  should  be  in 
accordance  with  the  best  national  and  international  practices  and  should  be 
prepared to achieve the highest standard of quality. For adopting market rates for 
the  detailed  cost  estimates,  a  proper  rate  analysis  should  be  carried  out. 
Construction  drawings  should  be  prepared  with  sufficient  details  to  permit 
contractors to carry out construction work effectively, unambiguously and with the 
highest standards of quality. 
(d)  The final design drawings, along with relevant documentations, technical reports 
and  working  drawings  comprising  of  the  following,  shall  be  submitted  to  and 
accepted  by  the  Client,  but  not  limited  to:  (i)  Architectural  drawings,  (ii) 
Construction  drawings;  (iii)  HVAC  drawings;  (iv)  Technology  drawing;  (v) 
Sewerage  and  Plumbing;  (vi)  Electricity  supply;  (vii)  Communication/IT  wiring; 
(viii) Fire and Security alarm systems; (ix) Site plan and exterior civil site work, 
including  parking,  landscaping,  signage,  etc.  (x)  Other  drawings  necessary  to 
describe  the  work  to  be  done;  (xi)  Requirements  for  construction  works;  (xii) 
equipment  and  furniture  delivery  schedule;  and  (xiii)  Permissions  from  the 
environmental, sanitary, and fire controlling authorities; 
(e)  The  designs  shall  be  at  the  necessary  level  of  detail  to  finalize  the  bidding 
documents  for  the  relevant  construction  works,  which  shall  be  reviewed  and 
approved by the Client, comprising of the following, but not limited to: (i) A site 
plan at 1/500 scale and 1/1000 scale; (ii) Plans for each level on a scale of 1/100, 
with details at 1/50 and 1/20; (iii) Sections and elevations on a scale of 1/100, 
with details at 1/50 and 1/20; (iv) Structural details (columns, beams, slabs, etc.); 
(v) Foundation details; (vi) Site plan and engineering utilities, including parking, 
landscaping,  signage,  etc.  (vii)  Equipment  Specification,  (viii)  BOQ;  (ix)  Cost 
estimate; (x) Other documents, as needed; The original design assignment will 
be provided in Mongolian with its English translation for the service purpose; 
(f)  All  the  drawings,  reports  and  manuals,  to  be  furnished  in  both  soft  and  hard 
copies, duly attested. The Consultant shall be fully responsible for accuracy of all 
the data, rate analyses for items of work used in the preparation, cost estimates 
and  design  irrespective of  the  fact  whether  the  same  has  been  examined  and 
approved by the PIU or not. 
(g)  The  design  shall  be  prepared  in  close  consultation  with,  and  to  meet  the 
requirements  of  the  PIU/IA/EA  and  will  be  incorporated  into  a  detailed 
engineering design report to be submitted for approval of respective professional 
expertise institutions as per the Law on Construction. Therefore, the consultant 
may cooperate with the certified companies to obtain such approval, and the fees 
involved  for  review  and  approval  of  the  detailed  design  drawings  by  the  state 
expertise should be budgeted by the Consultant. 
(h)  The design of green areas should comply with traffic engineering design and road 
safety issues. 
126 
Appendix 2 
(i)  Carry  out  all  engineering  surveys  and  investigations  such  as  geodetic  and 
topographical  surveys,  geotechnical  and  soil  survey,  etc.,  required  for  the 
development of RANCC and Khovd tourist street. All surveys and investigations 
shall  be  accurate  and  submitted  for  review  or  approval  of  the  PIU/IA/EA, 
endorsing professional institutions; Consultant shall budget all survey expenses 
in its financial proposal. 
(ii)  The Consultant will develop detailed engineering design for access road, car parking 
of Rock Art and Nomadic Culture Center and Khovd Tourist street as below but not 
limited to: 
(a)  Design (i) road structure, (ii) provide production of design drawings showing plan 
in 1:500 scale, Longitudinal profile in 500H to 100V scale, cross-sections, if any, 
at 20 m interval in 1:100 scale, (f) design of footpaths, bus stops, roadside parking 
facilities as appropriate. 
(b)  Use  the  data  collected  during  the  hydrological  survey  and  determine  the 
following: (i) type of the cross drainage structure if any; (ii) structural design of 
slab  and  box  culverts;  (iii)  size  and  location  of  roadside  drainage  and  cross 
drainage  structures  (appropriate  side  drains  and cross  drainages  such  as  pipe 
culverts); (iv) design of the water conduit/rain water inlets/manholes to take storm 
water safely to the nearby natural stream. 
(c)  The  traffic  engineering  and  traffic  management  plan  in  detailed  engineering 
design includes: (i) traffic engineering, ii) pedestrian paths and car parking and 
crossings,  iii)  bus  station  areas,  and  iv)  intersection  design  including  turning 
movement lane allocations, traffic signal phasing and times if any. 
(d)  Produce traffic management measures during the construction period, and 
(e)  Any other road tasks required for the successful project implementation by the 
IA/PIU. 
(iii)  The Consultant will develop an Operational and Management Plan for the Rock Art 
and Nomadic Culture Center and Khovd Tourist street as below but no limited to: 
(a)  The  Operational  and  Management  Plan  will  detail  implementation  strategies 
within the Regional Tourism Master Plan and Khovd  Aimag Tourism Plan, and 
will compose the detailed institutional structure and operational and management 
procedure for the Tourism Facilities 
(b)  Develop Institutional arrangements for management of the RANCC and Khovd 
tourist street through a local-owned enterprise (LOE). The LOE will function as a 
dedicated  management  unit  with  highly  qualified  staff  and  operational 
independence  that  oversees  operating  contracts  for  the  RANCC  and  Khovd 
tourist street. High-priority operating entities will be the tourism business entities, 
young  and  women-led  business,  the  businesses  supported  Credit  revolving 
funds. 
(c)  Prepare detailed staffing and financial plans for the LOE. The Consultant also will 
describe  the  division  of  responsibilities  between  the  LOE,  other  government 
departments,  and  private  sector  participants  in operations  and  ownership.  The 
plan should include a time line for set-up of the LOE. 
(iv)  The consultant shall prepare quantity estimates, rate analysis, detailed cost estimates 
and bidding documents but not limited to: 
(a)  Ensure market rate for basic materials. 
(b)  Prepare  BOQ  based  on  the  various  items  of  work  in  line  with  the  detailed 
drawings. 
Appendix 2 
127 
(c)  A Confidential Detailed Cost Estimate shall be developed, based on the BOQ for 
each work item and work category. Prices shall be broken down into direct costs 
(labor, materials, transportation and equipment), indirect costs (mobilization, on 
site and general overheads, contractor’s contingencies and profit) and taxes; A 
detailed cost estimate is subject to review by the Client and if necessary by an 
independent estimator. 
(d)  Government  approved norms  wherever  applicable;  and  where the  government 
approved norms are poor or not available, improve, develop and get necessary 
approval on norms with PIU’s support. 
(e)  There should not be any lump sum items for work related items in the BOQ. For 
items  not  covered  under  schedule  of  rates,  market  rates  to  be  assessed. 
(Necessary documents on quotations received should be made for assessment 
of market rates. This will be subject to scrutiny and approval of PIU); and 
(f)  Finalize Bidding Documents (The Procurement Document for Prequalification of 
Bidders,  if  required)  using master  bidding  documents  and  specific  qualification 
requirements  of  each  project  component,  with  due  consideration  to  Open 
competitive bidding for international advertising and National advertising. 
(g)  Provide  advice  and  inputs  on  the  EA’s  procurement  submissions  which  will 
include  bidding  documents,  bid  evaluation  reports  and  contract  administration 
queries. The timeframe and format in which Consultant’s advice and assistance 
to  be  provided shall  be  strictly  in  line  with  project  implementation  schedule  for 
202x-202x approved by the Project Steering Committee. 
(h)  Prepare  compliance  checklists  of  Evaluation  and  Qualification  Criteria  of  the 
issued bidding documents, based on the submitted bids. 
(ix)  EDGE  rating.  The  Consultant  will  ensure  the  detailed  engineering  designs  are 
compliant  with,  and meet,  the  minimum  EDGE  certification  rating:  “EDGE  Certified 
/20%”.  This  rating  level  is  to  ensure  the  designs  achieve  20%  reduction  in  energy 
consumption,  water  consumption  and  building  materials.  Note:  the  preliminary 
engineering designs prepared for the tourist street and tourism complex during project 
preparation already meet this EDGE rating target and may exceed it 
(x)  Specific tasks and responsibilities of the detailed engineering design and construction 
supervision company (DED/CSC) for DEIA will include the following. 
n.  Ensure familiarity of the design engineers with the EBA, General EIA Letter, IEE, 
and EMP. 
o.  Ensure  that  all  required  environment  management,  monitoring,  and  reporting 
measures are included in the site tasks of the DED/CSC’s personnel. 
p.  Subcontract, and work closely with, the firm that will prepare the  Detailed EIA 
(DEIA) to: (i) provide all needed support, and (ii) ensure that the design engineers 
incorporate the DEIA findings to avoid impacts and mitigate remaining risks. 
q.  Assign at least one qualified environment, health, and safety (EHS) specialist to 
oversee  all  onsite  activities.  Ensure  that  on  site  meetings  are  made  with  the 
contractor, local government, and PIU before any works are initiated. Clarify and 
confirm pre-works readiness for all safeguard measures. 
r.  Prepare  the  detailed  site  EMP,  based  on  the  project  EMP  and  findings  of  the 
DEIA. 
s.  Confirm the conditions and details provided by the Contractor for work clearance 
t. 
(the work go-ahead – that it is correct and appropriate). 
Identify appropriate locations and perspectives at each work site to support time-
(“same-frame”  photographs), 
series  photography  at 
intervals 
regular 
128 
Appendix 2 
immediately before, during, and immediately after construction works. Implement 
this photo-monitoring program. 
u.  Undertake  regular  site  visits  and  review  the  environmental  monitoring  reports 
provided by the Contractor, for EMP compliance, correctness/rigor, design and 
implementation effectiveness of corrective actions; recommend work stoppages, 
if needed. 
v.  Undertake environmental compliance monitoring (independent of the contractor) 
according to the environmental monitoring parameters, location, and frequency 
noted  in  the  IEE  and  EMP  (to  allow  comparisons  with  contractor  monitoring 
data). 
w.  Maintain  regular  communication  with  the  Contractor  and  PIU  environment 
safeguard specialist. 
x.  Confirm the site conditions (at completion of construction works) for hand-over 
to the local authorities. 
y.  Document  and  report  on  EMP  implementation  and  environmental  monitoring 
activities, as required in the overall contract. 
z.  TOR for Domestic DEIA is attached to this TOR as Appendix C. 
(v)  The  Consultant  will  carry  out  following  tasks  for  project  management,  construction 
supervision and quality assurance but not limited to: 
(a)  Develop detailed work plan, implementation schedule. The detailed work plan will 
be approved by the project director and will serve as basis for contract monitoring. 
(b)  Prepare narrative and photographic progress reports every month and at the end 
of every three months showing the current situation of works on site to ensure 
effective  monitoring  and  timely  project  outputs,  and  regularly  update  to 
PIU/IA/EA. 
(c)  Prepare  project  completion  report  including  submission  of  approved  as-built 
drawings  prepared  by  contractor  wherever  necessary,  on  the  completion  of 
works. 
(d)  Prepare  Quality  Assurance  and  Quality  Control  (QA  &  QC)  Plans,  Risk 
Assessment and Safety Manuals to be followed on the respective construction 
sites so as to enforce adequate QA and QC, and safety of construction workers, 
engineers and citizens. 
for 
(e)  Assist the IA/EA in preparing guidelines for contract administration for the use of 
PIU, 
their  day-to-day  contract  administration  requirements  such  as 
measurement of works; approval of variation, contract extension and contractor's 
claim, issue of completion certificate, financial closure of contract, management 
during the Defects Liability Period (DLP). 
(f)  Prepare  the  standard  construction  management  system  to  be  followed  by 
contractors  at  construction  sites  comprising  important  components  such  as 
planning  of  activities  (work  plan),  procurement  of  construction  material  and 
equipment;  construction  methodology:  deployment  of  construction  machinery, 
deployment of workers, disbursement of funds, etc.; and implement the same. 
(g)  Provide services as necessary during the Defects Liability Period, issue a Defects 
Liability Certificate and certify any final payment that is due to the contractor. 
(h)  Provide  all  necessary  support  to  the  PIU  and  the  IA/EA  regarding  on 
communication  and  reporting  to  all  relevant  authorities  such  as  the  Asian 
Development Bank (ADB), line ministries and government bodies, and all other 
stakeholders as and when needed. 
(i)  Consultant  shall  comply  indicated  baseline  of  the  Gender  Action  Plan  of  the 
Project in every surveys and design stages. 
Appendix 2 
129 
(j)  The  consultant  may  be  called  upon  to  deliver  customized  training  on  specific 
topics such as FIDIC contracts and issues related to subject matter. 
(k)  During  the  Detailed  Engineering  Design  of  the  Project,  the  Consultant  shall 
closely  work  with  the  PIU/IA/EA  and  perform  additional  works  which  are  not 
specified in TOR when necessary. 
(vi)  Each  staff  of  the  Consultant  shall  provide  the  training  to  PIU/IA/EA  staff  on  their 
expertise according to agreed schedule with PIU/IA/E but not limited to as follows: 
(a)  Ensure  implementation  of  the  Gender  Action  Plan  during  the  preparation  of 
curriculum of each training/workshop/seminar. 
(b)  Consider  the  technology  transfer  as  an  important  aspect  in  design  and 
supervision stages of the service. The Consultant shall provide the opportunity to 
the PIU/IA/EA officers and staffs to be involved in the working team of consultants 
during the design, contract administration and supervision works for their capacity 
development  wherever  possible.  If  requested  by  the  PIU,  the  Consultant  shall 
brief  and  demonstrate  the  survey  and  design  procedure,  the  construction 
supervision and contract management process and procedures. The consultant 
shall  assist  the  PIU  and  its  staff  to  build  their  capacity  as  a  part  of  on-the-job 
training under this project. 
D.  Expected Design Deliverables 
10. 
1.  Project Management 
2.  Site Survey and Geological report 
3.  Architectural Design 
4.  Structural Design 
5.  Interior Design 
6.  Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing design 
7.  Internet, Telecommunication, Automation and Fire safety 
8.  Construction and Supervision contract administration 
Project Management 
Document Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
Construction 
documents 
Bidding 
documents 
Table 2: Project Management 
Program of 
Requirements 
Project Initiation 
Document 
Project Organization 
Structure 
Communication 
Strategy 
Issues Log & Risk 
Register 
Design Deviations & 
Derogations List 
Program Timetable 
Responsibility Matrix 
Interface Agreements 
Project  Communication 
Portal 
Document/Narrative Text  ✔ 
Document/Narrative Text  ✔ 
Diagram//Schematic 
✔ 
Document/Narrative Text  ✔ 
MS Excel Table 
MS Excel Table 
MS Project Table 
MS Excel Table 
Narrative Text 
SharePoint website 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Revision/Record 
Revision/Record 
130 
Appendix 2 
Project Management 
Document Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
✔ 
Construction 
documents 
Bidding 
documents 
Government Approvals & 
Certification 
Document/Narrative Text  ✔ 
Table 3: Site Survey 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
Construction 
documents 
Licensing  &  Contracting 
Issues 
Commissioning 
procedures 
Site Survey 
Geotechnical soil survey 
including drainage, water 
courses 
Site hazardous 
material/substances 
investigation 
Topography map and 
analysis of city utility 
services available to site 
Master Plan 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
CAD version 
Document 
Type/Scale 
To  be  done  before 
detailed 
design 
begins.  
To  be  done  before 
detailed 
design 
begins.  
Phase 1 
Design 
development 
Bidding 
document
s 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Phase 3 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Record 
Record 
Revision 
Phase 2 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
Revision 
Revision 
1:500 
Revision 
1:300/500 
Revision 
Master plan 
Access road/Pedestrian 
path/Parking design 
Grading/cartogram 
Landscape design  
Distance Plan 
Urban planning & 
Integration 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
1:500 
1:500 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
1:100/200 
✔ 
Table 4. Architectural Design 
11.  The  architectural  design  comprises  all  documents  for  approvals  and  permits  from  the 
appropriate local authorities. Following drawing list are minimum requirements, but is not 
limited to the following documents. 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Construction 
documents (scale) 
Revision 
Design 
development 
✔ 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
Text, 
Architectural 
Design 
Building 
engineering 
physics report 
Design 
Description and 
technical data 
Layouts of 
basement, 
ground, and 
upper floor levels 
Section/Cross 
section 
Elevations  
Reflected ceiling 
plan 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Text, 
✔ 
Revision 
Detailed drawing 
1:50/100 
Revision 
Detailed drawing 
1:50/100 
Revision 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Revision 
Revision 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Furniture Plans 
Entrance and 
canopy details 
Façade details  
Ramp details 
Toilet 
Plans/Section/El
evations 
Floor finish plan   Detailed drawing 
Floor details 
Roof finish 
details 
Door and 
window 
schedules 
Door head, jamb 
and sill 
Door handle 
details 
Handrail details 
Tactile Paving 
details 
Universally 
accessible 
equipment 
details  
Narrative 
Architectural 
Specifications 
Diagrams/Table 
Bill of Quantities   MS Excel Table 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Text, 
1:50/100 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:25/50 
1:25/50 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
Appendix 2 
131 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Table 5: Structural Design 
12.  The  structural  Design  comprises  all  documents  for  approvals  and  permits  from  the 
appropriate local authorities. This comprises, but is not limited to the following documents. 
Structural Design 
Drawing list, explanation note 
Foundation settling drawing 
Foundation layout 
Foundation section, details, 
quantity estimation 
Plan of trenches in foundation, 
section and details 
Layout, section, reinforcement, 
quantity estimation of 1st floor slab, 
outside ramp  
Internal ramp, plan, section, detail 
and quantity estimation 
RC frame layout and quantity 
estimation 
RC column reinforcement plan, 
section, detail, quantity 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Narrative  Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Design 
developmen
t 
✔ 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
Bidding 
documen
ts 
✔ 
1:100 
✔ 
1:50/100 
✔ 
1:10/20/25/50  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:10/20/25/50  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:10/20/25/50  ✔ 
132 
Appendix 2 
RC beam reinforcement plan, 
section, detail, quantity 
RC slab layout, reinforcement, 
section and quantity estimation 
Masonry wall mesh and fixing 
layout, details and quantity 
estimation 
RC lintel layout, section, quantity 
estimation 
Steel frame layout, section, details 
and quantity estimation 
Detailed drawing 
1:10/20/25/50  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
NOTE: *The seismic and soil condition differ to each site. Additional drawings are required for structural designs. 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Table 6: Interior Design 
Design 
development 
Construction 
documents (scale) 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
Revision 
Interior Design 
Interior Design 
Colors, Finishes, 
Materials & 
Specifications 
Reception 
counters/desk 
and fixed 
cabinetry 
Interior Design 
Bill of Quantities 
Interior Design 
Sample Boards 
Special Sanitary 
Equipment 
Children Sanitary 
Equipment 
Drawing/Schematic  1:50/100 / 1:5 
Revision 
MS Excel Table  ✔ 
Color, Finishes & 
Material Samples 
Color, Finishes & 
Material Samples 
Color, Finishes & 
Material Samples 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Revision 
Revision 
Revision 
Revision 
Heating,  Ventilation  and 
Air-conditioning design 
Table 7: Heating, Ventilation and Air-conditioning design 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
✔ 
Design 
development 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Text, 
✔ 
Room Environmental 
Design Calculations 
HVAC System Schematics  Drawing/Schematic 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
HVAC Control System 
Schematics 
HVAC Duct Riser 
Diagrams 
Specialist Air Handling & 
Ventilation Systems 
Main Ducts/Pipe Routing 
Schematics & Sleeved 
Penetration Drawings 
Schedules of Equipment 
Mechanical Systems 
Specifications 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Text, 
✔ 
Text, 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Heating,  Ventilation  and 
Air-conditioning design 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
Mechanical Systems Bill of 
Quantities 
MS Excel Table 
✔ 
Electrical Design 
Table 8: Electrical Design 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
✔ 
Text, 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Drawing/Schematic  1:100/200 
Room to Room Electrical Service 
Requirements 
Main Electrical Power Distribution 
Systems 3Ø, LV & ELV 
Drawing/Schematic  1:100/200 
Earthing Systems 
Essential Electrical Services 
Drawing/Schematic  1:100/200 
Non-essential Electrical Services  Drawing/Schematic  1:100/200 
Drawing/Schematic  1:100/200 
Emergency Power Supply 
Systems 
Distribution Board/Panel Layouts  Drawing/Schematic  1:100/200 
Drawing/Schematic  1:100/200 
Motor Control Schematics 
Drawing/Schematic  1:100/200 
Main Cable Ducts/Trays Routing 
Schematics & Sleeved Penetration 
Drawings 
Internal Lighting Systems & 
Layouts 
Catering & Laundry Systems 
Schematics 
Lightning Protection Systems 
Electrical Systems Specifications  Narrative 
Drawing/Schematic  1:100/201 
Drawing/Schematic  1:100/200 
Drawing/Schematic  1:100/200 
Text, 
✔ 
Electrical Systems Bill of 
Quantities 
Diagrams/Table 
MS Excel Table  ✔ 
Appendix 2 
133 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
✔ 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
✔ 
Bidding 
document
s 
✔ 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Table 9: Water Supply and Plumbing design 
Water Supply and 
Plumbing design 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Drawing/Schematic 
Chilled Water Riser 
Diagrams 
Fire Strategy & Safety 
Systems Schematics 
Fire Service Dry Riser 
Diagram 
Internal Sewage Systems  Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
Design 
developmen
t 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Internal Drainage System 
Schematics 
Hot & Cold Water 
Distribution System 
Schematic 
Treated Water Supply & 
Distribution System 
Schematics 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
134 
Appendix 2 
Water Supply and 
Plumbing design 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
developmen
t 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
Bidding 
documents 
Plant Room Layouts 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
Main Ducts/Pipe Routing 
Schematics & Sleeved 
Penetration Drawings 
Schedules of Equipment 
Specifications 
Bill of Quantities 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
MS Excel Table 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Table 10: Internet and Telecommunication, Automation and Fire safety 
Mechanical Design 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
developmen
t 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
✔ 
✔ 
IT and security 
BMS 
Fire  Strategy  &  Safety 
Systems & Layouts 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table/Sche
matic drawing 
Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Table 11: External Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing engineering work 
Mechanical Design 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
Permission  for  connection 
to power grid 
Permission  for  connection 
to Sewage grid 
Permission  for  connection 
to Water grid 
Permission  for  connection 
to heating grid 
External  electrical  design 
and details  
External  water  supply  and 
sewage system, connection 
details 
External heating design 
External 
telecommunication  design 
and details 
Technical  specification  for 
MEP works 
Bill of quantities 
Estimating 
MEP Construction work 
for  External 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Text, 
Text, 
Text, 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
NOTE:  *The  grading  of  the  building  differs  to  each  site.  The  connectivity  of  external  MEP  differs  to  the 
distance of the sources. Additional and design adjustments are required. 
Appendix 2 
135 
Table 12: Construction and Supervision Contract Administration 
Document Type/Scale 
Construction contract administration 
Construction Inspection and Review 
Progress Reports/Evaluation 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Process Certificates for Payment 
Certificates 
Review of Shop Drawing Product Data/Sample 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Change Orders 
Change Orders 
Substantial Performance Report and Certification 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Client Consultation 
Interior Construction Inspection 
Full time Project Representation 
Administration of Separate Contracts 
Structural Inspection/Reports 
Mechanical Inspection/Reports 
Electrical Inspection/Reports 
Record Drawings 
Pre-installation F&E Inspection 
Civil Construction Inspection 
Landscape Inspection 
Detailed Cost Accounting 
Commissioning procedures 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Recordings 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
E.  Team Composition and Qualification Requirements for key experts 
General  requirements  for  the  Consultant  are  below.  These  shall  apply  for  the  sub-
13. 
consultants’ qualifications. 
(i)  The Consultant could be either a single firm or a joint venture of companies that have 
at least 10 years of extensive experience in respective fields. 
(ii)  At  least  7  years  of  proven  experience  in  detailed  architectural  and  engineering 
designs and supervision of contracts with the contracts of similar size and nature. 
(iii)  Available  personnel  qualified  in  architecture,  engineering,  cost  estimating/  BOQ, 
equipment  specification  and  reporting  software  programs  (CAD  applications)  to 
produce deliverables and supervise construction works. 
(iv)  The  consultant should provide  the reference letters  from  previous three (3)  Clients 
specifically to the similar projects to prove that the Consultant had had successfully 
completed with the relevant projects. 
(v)  In  the  financial  proposal,  prove  the  experts  are  the  consultant’s  full  time  staff  by 
providing  at  least  3  years  of  the  payment  records  of  the  social  insurance  to  claim 
overhead costs for the proposed experts. 
Subcontractors shall be approved by the MET and ADB based on complying to the below 
14. 
minimum requirements: 
(i)  At  least  10  years  of  extensive  experience  in  required  fields.  Must  be  a  licensed 
company for in the required fields if required by Mongolian Law and Standards and 
Norms. 
136 
Appendix 2 
(ii)  Must prove financially sound status. 
(iii)  Available personnel qualified to do required works. 
(iv)  Experts must have at least 7 years’ professional experience. 
(v)  Must provide the CV of the experts for the MET review and approval. 
15. 
The total person-months estimated for detailed engineering design team are 132 person-
months  (for  international  experts  –  4  PMs  and  for  national  experts  –  128  PMs).  The  person-
months (PM) estimation is given in the Table 13. 
Table 13: Estimated Person-Months for key experts 
No  Key Experts 
Number 
of 
Experts 
Person-month input 
Home 
Field 
Total 
International key experts 
I 
1 
International Architect 
II  National key experts 
2  Team Leader/National Architect 
3  Deputy Team Leader/Structural Engineer 
4  CAD Drafters (at least 4 persons) 
5  Heating, Ventilation, and Air-Conditioning (HVAC) Engineer 
6  Water Supply and Wastewater Engineer  
7  Electrical Engineer  
8  Automatic and Communication Engineer  
9  Quantity Surveyor/Budget Estimator 
10  Green Design Specialist  
11  Road Engineer 
12  Resident Engineers (2 persons for construction supervision) 
13  Procurement specialist 
TOTAL 
4 
1 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
17 
3.00 
1.00 
4.00 
8.00 
2.00 
12.00 
8.00 
8.00 
8.00 
8.00 
4.00 
3.00 
6.00 
0.00 
1.00 
71.00 
2.00 
2.00 
2.00 
2.00 
2.00 
2.00 
2.00 
0.00 
2.00 
2.00 
42.00 
0.00 
61.00 
10.00 
4.00 
14.00 
10.00 
10.00 
10.00 
10.00 
4.00 
3.00 
8.00 
42.00 
1.00 
132.00 
16. 
The  Consultant  may  propose  other  supporting  staff  required  to  accomplish  the  tasks 
outlined in the TOR. It is the Consultant's responsibility to select the optimum team and to propose 
the professionals, which he or she believes best meets the needs of the IA/EA. 
17.  The qualifications and experience required for key team members are below: 
18. 
Team Leader/National Architect (national, 10 person-months). National architect should 
have (i) graduate degree and/or higher in architecture, (ii) 10 years of professional experiences 
in the field of architectural design, preferably completed the design of 5 public buildings, (ii) at 
least 7 years team leadership experience, including demonstrated ability to lead a large team, 
prepare reports, and work with the government and private sector, communities, and CSOs; (iii) 
excellent  facilitation  skills  for  meetings  and  negotiations  for  a  wide  range  of  stakeholders, 
especially governments, private sector, and communities; (iv) Excellent computer skills, including 
CAD  applications  (AutoCAD,  Photoshop  etc.);  (v)  Proven  knowledge  in  construction  law, 
construction processes, and preparing and reviewing cost estimates; (vi) Previous experience of 
working with IFI’s is an important asset; and (vi) a good command of English; 
19.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
Appendix 2 
137 
(i)  Lead preparation of detailed and architectural design for the Khovd Tourism Facilities. 
(ii)  Identification,  assessment  and  finalization  of  the  various  project  requirements  and 
parameters  on  the  basis  of  the  required  functions  of  tourism  facilities  design  in 
consultation with the client 
(iii)  For  these  facilities,  apply  international  best  practice  and  standards,  ensuring  that 
environmental  risks  are  avoided  or  minimized,  and  that  designs  are  culturally 
appropriate and sensitive to landscape and aesthetic values 
(iv)  Design  and  coordinate  domestic  studies  as  needed  to  support  preparation  of  the 
detailed designs 
(v)  Ensure  that  the  detailed  designs  are  prepared  to  a  level  of  detail  that  will  enable 
finalization  of  the  architectural  designs  and  preparation  of  the  detailed  engineering 
designs during project implementation 
(vi)  Make amendments to the design as required 
(vii) Undertake detailed design work on projects as required, and fully check and ensure 
designs are properly validated as per the approved design process 
(viii) Undertake site visits as required 
(ix)  Undertake quality assurance checking of drawings and calculations produced by self 
and that of other team members as directed by International project Architect 
(x)  Ensure that all drawings are reviewed and checked by International Project Architect 
to external issue 
(xi)  Produce  architectural  design  briefs,  documents,  reports  and  specifications  as 
required 
(xii) Produce architectural drawings utilizing Revit and/or AutoCAD as appropriate for the 
project 
(xiii) EDGE rating and certification. Confirm the detailed engineering designs meet – at 
minimum – the “EDGE Certified/20%” rating achieved for the preliminary engineering 
design during project preparation. Assess the cost / benefit tradeoff between aiming 
for a higher EDGE rating versus the increased cost to do so – for both construction 
and operation of the facilities – and the available project budget. Follow up with EDGE 
team to coordinate and achieve an updated EDGE assessment and certification for 
the project facility. 
(xiv) Ensure  timely  achievement  of  outputs  and  smooth  implementation  of  contract 
activities in close coordination with the Deputy Team leader, and Residents Engineers 
(xv) Conduct  visits  to  the  sites  and  supervise  progress  and  the  quality  of  construction 
works; identify design and construction defects and recommend corrective actions. 
(xvi) Any  other  tasks  reasonably  requested  by  the  IA/PIU  to  successfully  complete  the 
project. 
20. 
Deputy  Team  Leader/Structural  Engineer  (national,  4  person-months).  Structural 
Engineer  should  have (i) Graduate  degree  qualified  in  Structural  or  Civil Engineering, (ii)  Be  a 
licensed  Structural  Engineer  or  Civil  Engineering,  (iii)  Professional  experience  in  engineering 
design and construction supervision, particularly in preparation of structural drawings, structural 
calculations according to Mongolian and international standards and legislation, quality assurance 
and quality control, building and site layout surveys, on site material testing, concrete mix design, 
planning  and  scheduling,  safety  engineering,  and  cost  engineering  and  budgeting  (iv) 
Intermediate time management and organizational skills with the ability to self-manage billable 
hours  and  ability  to  undertake  own  work  with  a  high  degree  of  efficiency  and  accuracy,  (v) 
Advanced knowledge of Structural Engineering Analysis & Design software packages (preferably 
SAP 2000) as well as CAD and general office software packages, (vi) Intermediate knowledge of 
International Building Codes and Design standards, (vii) Intermediate leadership skills with the 
ability to manage teams with a strong results-orientation, (viii) Intermediate written and spoken 
138 
Appendix 2 
communication  skills  with  a  minimum  basic  understanding  of  English,  and  (ix)  Previous 
experience within design teams and on Author’s Supervision duties. 
21.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i)  Co-lead the consultant team with the national architect and lead the engineering 
staff to ensure the  infrastructure  and  engineering  components  are  complied  with 
international and domestic law and requirements 
(ii)  Careful consideration of seismic and geological conditions for each location 
(iii)  Undertake structural calculations and analysis and produce economic and efficient 
buildable designs 
(iv)  Oversee the building and site layout surveys, on site material testing, concrete mix 
design,  planning  and  scheduling,  safety  engineering,  cost  engineering  and 
budgeting in consideration of the earthquake and seismic resistant requirements. 
(v)  Liaise with the project architects, other engineering disciplines, sub-consultants and 
clients are required. 
(vi)  Undertake site visits as required. 
(vii)  Carry out detailed structural design and preparation work for foundation. 
(viii)  Undertake quality assurance checking of drawings and calculations produced by 
self and that of other team members as directed by Team Leader. 
(ix)  Coordination  of the  works  of structural  design  engineers for timely completion of 
the structural design. 
(x)  Ensure  that  all  drawings  are  reviewed  and  checked  by  Team  Leader  prior  to 
external issue. 
(xi)  Produce structural design briefs, documents, reports and material specifications as 
required for civil construction. 
(xii)  Supervise all civil construction works. 
(xiii)  Assist  Resident  Engineer  during  the  design,  construction  and  post  construction 
phases. 
(xiv)  Monitor post construction activities as and when required. 
(xv)  Prepare and update construction supervision plan and quality check tools. 
(xvi)  Supervise  the  implementation  and  reporting  of  environmental,  health  and  safety 
management plans by works contractors; and 
(xvii) Review works contractors’ reports, claims, proposed changes and variations, and 
recommend approval, revision, or rejection to IA/ADB, and 
(xviii) Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
22. 
International  Architect  (international,  4  person-months).  International  Architect  should 
have (i) a graduate or post-graduate degree in architecture, engineering and design, or related 
area.,  (ii)  at  least  10  years  of  experience  in  architectural  and  engineering  design,  relevant 
international architectural certifications, and (iii) a track record in innovative designs tailored to 
local  culture  and  landscapes,  (iv)  Professional  experience  in  preparation  of  community-based 
facilities, multi-purpose use space such as well as office building design and drawings. 
23.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Identification, assessment and finalization of the various project requirements and 
parameters  on  the  basis  of  the  required  functions  of  universal  design  in 
consultation with the client. 
Leading the planning and design team in design of the physical facilities. 
Advise  and  support  the  team  leader/national  architect  to  prepare  detailed  and 
Appendix 2 
139 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
architectural design for Khovd Tourism Facilities 
For  these  facilities,  ensure  applying  international  best  practice  and  standards, 
ensuring that environmental risks are avoided or minimized, and that designs are 
culturally appropriate and sensitive to landscape and aesthetic values. 
Advise  to  design  and  coordinate  domestic  studies  as  needed  to  support 
preparation of the detailed designs. 
Advise the team in preparation of architectural and engineering designs including 
space  planning  keeping  in  view  the  equipment  and  future  layouts  and  other 
requirements of the client to achieve an efficient interrelationship of functions. 
(vii)  Guide the architectural team in interior decoration and design of furniture. 
(viii)  Guide  the  project  team  in  identifying  special  equipment  in  discussion  with  the 
(ix) 
(x) 
client. 
Guide management of supervision specially to ensure attainment of architectural 
aspects. 
Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
24. 
CAD Drafters (national, 4 experts, 14 person-months total). The consultant should have 
(i) a bachelor’s degree or higher in architecture or engineering; (ii) At least 5 years of Professional 
experience  in  architectural  presentations  using  the  CAD  and  in  the  preparation  of  design  of 
drawings., (iii) Professional experience in similar project or in development partner funded project 
would be an advantage, and (iv) Good command of English. 
25.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i)  Assist the Project Architect and Architect in the planning and designing facilities. 
(ii)  Assess  space  planning  for  different  facilities  and  assist  in  maximizing  space 
utilization. 
(iii)  Prepare architectural presentations using the CAD and oversee CAD production 
(iv)  Assist in the preparation of design and production of drawings 
(v)  Provide inspection during construction as necessary to assist the Team Leader in 
conducting quality audit and administration of QA plan 
Heating,  Ventilation,  and  Air-Conditioning  (HVAC)  Engineer  (national,  10  person-
26. 
months).  The  consultant  should  have  (i)  a  graduate  degree  or  higher  in HVAC  engineering  or 
equivalent, (ii) Additional relevant post-graduate courses that complement/ supplement the main 
degree are a strong asset; (iii) At least 8 years demonstrated experience in developing detailed 
engineering  designs  and  on  site  heating  system;  (iv)  Intermediate  time  management  and 
organizational  skills  with  the  ability  to  self-manage  billable  hours  and  ability  to  undertake  own 
work with a high degree of efficiency and accuracy, (v) Advanced knowledge of design software 
in  relation  to  MEP  design  including  AutoCAD  and  MS  office  software  such  as  Excel,  Word, 
PowerPoint, MS Project, (vi) Site inspection or supervision experience on building construction 
projects, (vi) Intermediate knowledge of International Building Codes and Design Standards, (vii) 
Intermediate  written  and  spoken  communication  skills  with  a  minimum  basic  understanding  of 
English, and (viii) Previous experience within design teams and on Author’s Supervision duties. 
27. 
The  Heating,  Ventilation,  and  Air-Conditioning  (HVAC)  Engineer  shall  take  overall 
responsibility to support the successful implementation of the project in terms of water supply and 
wastewater related issues and provide all necessary support to MET/PIU to fully comply with the 
ADB requirements. 
28.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
140 
Appendix 2 
(i)  Ensure all duties are undertaken within the required timeframe. 
(ii)  Prepare detail design of HVAC drawings. 
(iii)  Undertake  all  necessary  design  calculations  and  analysis  along  with  schematic 
diagrams and select appropriate equipment size. 
(iv)  Undertake quality assurance checking of drawings and calculations produced by 
self and that of another team members. 
(v)  Undertake site visits as required. 
(vi)  Undertake design of air-conditioning and mechanical ventilation system. 
(vii)  Review  shop  drawings  and  material  submission  from  contractor/construction 
manager. 
(viii)  Liaise with contractors and undertake inspection of all mechanical works at site and 
attend to any revision of design, if required, during supervision. 
(ix)  Undertake appropriate due diligence on the heating system design aspects of the 
detailed design, propose amendments where appropriate to reflect improved road 
safety and climate resilience, and ensure these amendments are incorporated into 
the final detailed design for tourism facilities in Khovd Aimag. 
(x)  Liaise with local authorities and other institutions and apply for design permission. 
(xi)  Prepare O&M plan. 
(xii)  Ensure that all drawings are reviewed and checked before submission to approval 
of Expertise and Fire Safety. 
(xiii)  Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
29.  Water  Supply/  Wastewater  Engineer  (national,  10  person-months).  The  Consultant 
should have (i) a bachelor’s or graduate degree in plumbing systems, (ii) 5 years of professional 
experience  in sanitary systems  including  clean  water, sewage systems,  sanitary  drainage  and 
water treatment systems is an advantage, (iii) Intermediate time management and organizational 
skills with the ability to self-manage billable hours and ability to undertake own work with a high 
degree of efficiency and accuracy, (iv) Advanced knowledge of design software in relation to MEP 
design including AutoCAD and MS office software such as Excel, Word, PowerPoint, MS Project, 
(v) Site inspection or supervision experience on building construction projects, (vi) Intermediate 
knowledge of International Building Codes and Design Standards, (vii) Intermediate written and 
spoken communication skills with a minimum basic understanding of English, and (viii) Previous 
experience within design teams and on Author’s Supervision duties. 
30. 
The Water Supply and Wastewater Engineer shall take overall responsibility to support 
the  successful  implementation  of  the  project  in  terms  of  water  supply  and  wastewater  related 
issues and provide all necessary support to MET/PIU to fully comply with the ADB requirements. 
31.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
Prepare designs, documentation, cost estimates and phasing of work in respect 
of water supply, plumbing, sanitary and drainage systems. 
Provide inspection of the works during construction. 
(ii) 
(iii)  Assist the Team Leader and Resident Engineer in the efficient implementation of 
the project. 
(iv)  Assist HVAC and Building Services Expert 
(v) 
Assess requirements for elevators, air-conditioning and ventilation, water supply 
and firefighting works, determine baselines and design parameters 
(vi)  Undertake  design  of  lifts,  air-conditioning  and  mechanical  ventilation  system, 
water supply and fire detection/fighting system. 
(vii)  Supervise preparation of mechanical design drawings 
Appendix 2 
141 
(viii)  Undertake supervision of all mechanical works at site and attend to any revision 
of design, if required, during supervision 
(ix)  Undertake  appropriate  due  diligence  on  the  water  supply  and  wastewater 
disposal  system  design  aspects  of  the  detailed  design,  propose  amendments 
where  appropriate  to  reflect  improved  road  safety  and  climate  resilience,  and 
ensure  these  amendments  are  incorporated  into  the  final  detailed  design  for 
tourism facilities in Khovd Aimag. 
In consultation with other engineers, reach mutually understanding and solution 
on  detailed  drawing  and  liaise  with  local  authorities  and  other  institutions  and 
apply for design permission. 
(x) 
(xi)  Conduct  the  feasibility  analysis  of  wastewater  disposal  system  in  tourism 
facilities. 
(xii)  Prepare O&M plan. 
(xiii)  Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
Electrical  Engineer  (national,  10  person-months).  The  Consultant  should  have  (i)  a 
32. 
bachelor’s or  graduate  degree  in  electrical  engineering, (ii)  a Minimum  5  years  of  professional 
experience in electrical engineering for building, building automation, process electrification and 
automation, programming and instrumentation design, (iii) Be a licensed Electrical Engineer or be 
eligible to become a licensed Electrical Engineer, (iv) Professional experience working within an 
Engineering  consulting  environment  such  that  electrical  engineering  for  building,  building 
automation, process electrification and automation, programming and instrumentation design, (v) 
Experience in finding power source alternatives for saving electricity, emergency power supplies, 
fire detection systems, lighting, telephone and paging systems, elevator control etc. and (vi) Good 
command of English. 
33. 
The  Electric  Engineer  shall  take  overall  responsibility  to  support  the  successful 
implementation  of  the  project  in  terms  of  electrical  supply  and  related  issues  and  provide  all 
necessary support to MET/PIU to fully comply with the ADB requirements. 
34.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
Ensure all duties are undertaken within the required timeframe. 
Assist the investigation teams during design services. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Undertake  planning  and  detail  designs  of  internal  and  external  electrical  works 
including area lighting and emergency power supply system. 
(iv)  Prepare detail design of electrical drawings in Auto CAD or Revit, ensuring that 
the  design  are  undertaken  in  accordance  with  local  codes  and  international 
standards. 
Liaise  with  the  project  architects,  other  engineering  disciplines,  sub-consultants 
and clients as required. 
(v) 
(vi)  Undertake site visits as required. 
(vii)  Produce  design  specifications,  design  reports  and  to  finalize  all  designs 
calculations as required. 
(viii)  Prepare the BOQ, cost estimates and specifications for electrical works. 
(ix)  Review  shop  drawings  and  material  submission  from  contractor/construction 
manager. 
Liaise with contractors and undertake site inspection duties as required. 
(x) 
(xi)  Ensure quality control, cost control, measurement of works, testing of materials, 
Verification of measurement of records, certification of bills, monitoring of progress 
and  recommending  appropriate  actions,  supervising  finalization  of  as-built 
142 
Appendix 2 
drawings. 
(xii)  Ensure that all drawings are reviewed and checked before submission to approval 
of Expertise and Fire Safety. 
(xiii)  Undertake  appropriate  due  diligence  on  the  electricity  supply  design  aspects  of 
the detailed design, propose amendments where appropriate to reflect improved 
road  safety  and  climate  resilience,  and  ensure  these  amendments  are 
incorporated into the final detailed design. 
(xiv)  Examine  all  technical  issues  related  to  and  arising  during  implementation  of 
electrical works. 
(xv)  Develop plans and systems maintenance and monitoring of power generators and 
their associated switchgears, controls, alarms and shutdown systems, protections 
and auxiliary equipment; and 
(xvi)  Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
35. 
Automation  and  Communication  Engineer  (national,  10  person-months).  The 
consultant should have (i) a bachelor’s or graduate degree in Communication or related fields, (ii) 
At least 5 years of experience in communication related design, (iii) Professional experience in 
similar project or in development partner funded project would be an advantage and (iv) Good 
command of English is also an advantage. 
36.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
Undertake communication related works such as internet network planning / fiber 
optic  and  wireless technology  /,  Television  system  / IP  TV,  CATV,  Analogy and 
digital technology /, Radio communication and warning system planning / Shortest 
and short range radio communication /, Fire alarm and fire extinguishing system, 
Security alarm, camera / IP and wireless, analog system /, Automation system and 
paging system, telephone. 
Prepare detail design of automation and firefighting systems. 
(ii) 
(iii)  Prepare cost estimate and planning on related task. 
(iv)  Undertake quality assurance checking of drawings and calculations produced by 
self and that of other team members. 
(v)  Undertake site visits as required. 
(vi)  Review  shop  drawings  and  material  submission  from  contractor/construction 
manager. 
(vii)  Liaise with contractors and undertake inspection of all mechanical works at site 
and attend to any revision of design, if required, during supervision. 
(viii)  Assist in preparation of equipment and material quantity for cost estimates. 
(ix)  Ensure that all drawings are reviewed and checked before submission to approval 
(x) 
of Expertise and Fire Safety. 
Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
Quantity  Surveyor/Budget  Estimator 
37. 
(national,  4  person-months).  The  cost 
estimator/quantity surveyor should have (i) Master’s degree or higher in engineering and design, 
or related area, (ii) Professional experience supervising all activities of the project including pre-
construction  activities,  survey,  soil  investigations,  specially  to  ensure  attainment  of  all  works, 
monitoring of post construction work, (iii) Experience in testing of materials and works at site or 
at suitable laboratories, and (iv) Knowledge in interpretation of drawing, specifications, conditions 
of contract to the contractors/suppliers. 
38.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
Appendix 2 
143 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Guide the design and construction supervision team 
Advise  the  project  team  in  making  appropriate  assessment  of  field  data  and 
forecasting  demands  of  users,  facilities,  services  and  equipment  in  respect  of 
survey and soil investigations 
Oversee  and  supervising  all  activities  of  the  project  including  pre-construction 
activities,  survey,  soil  investigations,  supervision  of  construction  including 
management and monitoring 
Guide, supervising and coordinating activities of other project team members 
Guide management of supervision specially to ensure attainment of all civil works 
Oversee progress monitoring, cost and quality control 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii)  Monitor of post construction work 
(viii)  Supervise  all  activities  of  the  project  including  survey,  soil  investigation  and 
(ix) 
(x) 
construction work 
Initiate testing of materials and works at site or at suitable laboratories 
Interpret 
drawing, 
contractors/suppliers 
Verify records of measurements of works done 
Scrutinize & certify contractor’s/supplier’s bills for payment 
(xi) 
(xii) 
(xiii)  Check and certify as-built drawings 
(xiv)  Supervise  progress  of  works  and  recommend  appropriate  actions  and  will 
specifications, 
conditions 
to 
the 
contract 
of 
prepare weekly and monthly progress report 
39. 
Green  Design  Specialist  (national,  6  person-months).  The  consultant  should  have  (i) 
bachelor’s degree and/or higher in architectural design, (ii) 7 years of professional experiences in 
the  field  of  architectural  design,  preferably  completed  the  green  design  of  2  buildings,  (iii) 
Excellent  computer  skills,  including  CAD  applications  (AutoCAD,  Photoshop  etc.);  (iv)  Proven 
knowledge  in  construction  law,  construction  processes,  and  preparing  and  reviewing  cost 
estimates; (v)  Previous experience  of  working  with IFI’s  is  an  important asset;  and (vi)  a  good 
command of English; 
40.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Support setting up green building design criteria and capacity development related 
to sustainable building. 
Research on the locally sourced available materials that is appropriate for green 
building construction. 
(iii)  Set-up  green  building  design  criteria  and  provide  green  design  analysis 
appropriate for Khovd Aimag. 
(iv)  Assist  construction  teams  in  implementation  of  the  project  to  meet  the  green 
(v) 
standard. 
Prepare training materials on the green building to contractors and occupants to 
meet the requirements of the green building standard. 
(vi)  Comply with requirements of green building impact toward productive areas such 
(xx) 
as agriculture and tourism. 
Formulate the project document for EDGE certified green building. Within the cost 
estimates for O&M of the tourist street and tourism complex, include the cost for 
required EDGE assessment as needed to retain the EDGE rating. 
(xiii)  At  the  completion  of  works, coordinate,  in  collaboration  with  the  Contractor  and 
PIU, the formal EDGE rating process, leading to issuance of the EDGE certification 
by the EDGE assessors. 
(vii)  Monitor project during construction supervision. 
144 
Appendix 2 
(viii)  Articulate  green  building  science  principles,  best  practices  on  sustainability  and 
green building program requirements to participants. 
(ix)  Review prototype submissions for alignment with green building best practices and 
(x) 
criteria. 
Verify appropriate site implementation to align with green building implementation 
requirements. 
(xi)  Any other tasks reasonably requested by the IA/PIU, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
41. 
Road Engineer (national, 8 person-months). The Consultant should have (i) a Bachelor’s 
or  graduate  degree  in  road  engineering,  (ii)  At  least  10  years  of  professional  experience  in 
transport  sector  projects  preferably  with  projects  that  include  roads,  bridges  and  tunnels  is 
required,  (iii)  Experience  of  supervising  road  works  during  construction  period  and  testing  of 
materials  and  works  at  site  or  at  suitable  laboratory  building  are  preferable,  (iv)  Excellent 
knowledge of Mongolian construction standards, norms and regulations, (v) Excellent knowledge 
in interpretation of drawing, technical specifications, conditions of contract to the suppliers, (vi) 
experience in Project Management, Construction Supervision and Contract Administration, and 
(vii) Good command of English. 
42. 
The  Road  Engineer  shall  take  overall  responsibility  to  support  the  successful 
implementation of the project in terms of water supply and wastewater related issues and provide 
all  necessary  support  to  MET/PIU  to  fully  comply  with  the  ADB  requirements.  Specific  tasks 
include but are not limited to the following: 
43.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i)  Prepare detailed design for road facilities 
(ii)  For the detailed design of the roads including safety improvement works; assist the 
team  leader  with  the  administration  and  supervision  of  road  construction  works 
including coordination and liaison with the Employer. 
(iii)  Day-to-day construction supervision through the Resident Engineers and other site 
staff; review of daily reports prepared by site staff. 
(iv)  Prepare and maintain progress monitoring schedule; reviewing and approving shop 
drawings and preparation of as-built drawings. 
(v)  Identify potential access road connections between the proposed bypass and tourist 
complexes 
(vi)  Undertake  appropriate  due  diligence  on  the  road  design  aspects  of  the  detailed 
design, propose amendments where appropriate to reflect improved road safety and 
climate  resilience,  and  ensure  these  amendments  are  incorporated  into  the  final 
detailed design 
(vii) Any  other  tasks  reasonably  requested  by  the  IA/PIU,  Team  Leader,  Deputy  Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
44. 
Resident Engineer (2 experts, national, 21 person-months each). The Consultant should 
have (i) Bachelor’s degree in Engineering or equivalent work experience (supervisor level), (ii) 5+ 
years  of  experience  in  construction/site  environment  including  main  contractor  works,  (iii) 
Intermediate  time  management  skills  with  the  ability  to  work  under  pressure  and  to  tight 
timeframes  on  occasion,  (iv)  Basic  written  and  verbal  communication  skills,  with  the  ability  to 
collate  materials  into  a  template  report,  (v)  Basic  working  knowledge  of  software  such  as  MS 
Word, Excel and AutoCAD, (vi) Team player and able to adapt to changes within the construction 
process and (vii) Fluency in written and spoken English is preferred. 
45.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
Appendix 2 
145 
(i) 
Review and comment on drawing specifications and any other documents that 
may be required for the project. 
Review and inspect the contractor capability in term of personal, equipment and 
other conditions with regard to the contract/bid conditions and legal requirements 
(iii)  Where applicable provide suggestions or observations in respect to the element 
(ii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
of the works. 
Assist  with  the  development  of  the  inspection  process  for  the  C&S/Finishing 
works at site. 
Record accurate inspections carried out in line with the site documents. 
Advise line manager and record where applicable any works not carried out in 
accordance with the drawings and specifications, 
(vii)  Check the work done by the contractor. 
(viii)  Assist with the H&S at site and advise line manager of any infringements. 
(ix) 
Assist where required in the development of the commissioning procedures that 
are required for the project. 
Review and comment in respect to as-built drawings, and operations manuals. 
Provide  support  for  the  functional  area  of  the  project  within  which  they  are 
allocated, or for the project team as a whole, as required by the structure of the 
project team. 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii)  Monitor and advise line manager of all of the works within their specific area of 
concern. 
(xiii)  Any other  duties that may  be  assigned  as  part of  the  construction  works.  Any 
other  tasks  reasonably  requested  by  the  IA/PIU,  Team  Leader,  Deputy  Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
46. 
Procurement Specialist (national, 1 person-months). The consultant should have (i) a 
graduate degree in business administration, law, economy or other relevant fields, (ii) 7 years of 
experience as procurement specialist at ADB funded projects, (iii) at least 5 years’ experience on 
Mongolian Procurement Law, ADB Procurement Guidelines, (iv) Good command of English. 
47.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i)   Finalize the bidding document in compliance with the ADB guidelines. 
(ii)   
Include the ADB and the PIU comments and proposals in the bidding document 
and prepare the document again, and submit to the PIU and EA. 
In accordance with the No-Objection from ADB, hand in the final version of the 
bidding document to the PIU. 
During the tender evaluation or procurement processing, provide support to the 
EA. 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v)   Monitor the procurement whether it is complying with all the requirements. 
F.  Reporting Requirements and Time Schedule for Deliverables 
48. 
The Consultant will directly report to the PIU project coordinator who will monitor contract 
implementation and the quality of the deliverables with the support of PIU M&E specialist under 
close  supervision  of  project  director.  The  project  implementation  unit  (PIU)  and  the  MET  will 
evaluate the consultant’s performance based on the agreed deliverables and approve the invoices 
for the reviewed and accepted deliverables. 
49.  Within  10  working  days  of  the  commencement  of  the  Contract,  a  detailed  work  plan  in 
accordance with scope of the work will be delivered to the PIU and approved by MET. The plan 
will  serve  as  the  basis  for  measuring  progress  on  desired  outcomes  and  goals  for  the  entire 
146 
Appendix 2 
consultancy  service. Detailed  work  plan  shall  include  Reporting  Requirements  and  Time 
Schedule for Deliverables. 
50.  At a minimum, it should include the following: 
(a)  format, frequency, and contents of reports. Content will indicate what deliverables 
will be included in the report. 
(b)  number of copies, and requirements to electronic submission if any (or on flash 
disk). Final reports shall be delivered in flash disk in addition to the specified 
number of hard copies. 
(c)  dates of submission for each report. 
(d)  persons (indicate names, titles, submission address) to receive them; etc. 
51.  Following reports will be provided or modified in consultation with the MET: 
(a)  Inception report after 1 month of consultant’s mobilization 
(b)  Monthly and quarterly reports reporting the progress of the outputs within the above 
scope of work. 
(c)  Yearly report within 10 days of first month of the year. 
(d)  Final report by end of the contract. The final report deliverables will include (i) a 
summary of lessons during implementation and measures or corrective actions 
taken to address challenges encountered, and (ii) recommendation on the potential 
for, and steps to, replicate or scale up relevant deliverables to other regions of 
Mongolia. 
(e)  Any other deliverables reasonably requested by the PIU and MET. 
(f)  One report after each field monitoring session, including analysis and results of field 
sampling; a draft final report; and, a final report. 
52.  The consultant is required to submit to the PIU the following reports: 
No 
1 
Types of Reports 
Inception report 
2  Weekly progress report 
Date of Submission 
Within 1 month after commencement of 
supervision  
Each  week 
supervision 
Each month 
commencement 
after 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Monthly progress report 
Defect liability Period Report   Within  28  days  of  issue  of  certificate  of 
Project Completion Report 
Monitoring  and  Evaluation 
Reports  
Project 
Management Report 
Performance 
completion 
End of the consultant’s work 
Three  months  after  project  completion 
report 
Before,  during  and  end  of  project 
implementation 
Number of copies 
4 copies  
3 copies  
4 copies  
4 copies  
4 copies  
4 copies  
4 copies  
53.  The supervision progress report are as follows: 
1)  Inception report will cover at a minimum an assessment of the project procurement 
status, implementation delays and recommended corrective actions (if any), the status 
of  design  development  for  the  installations  nominated  as  Provisional  Sum  in  the 
construction contract. 
2)  Weekly  progress  report  shall  include  details  of  the  works  carried  out  during  the 
previous week, the problems encountered or anticipated, information on outstanding 
claims  complete  with  summaries  of  both  Contractor  and  Employer  compliance  with 
contract  time  notification  periods.  The  report  will  document  the  status  of  design 
development  for  the  installations  nominated  as  Provisional  Sum  in  the  construction 
contract.  The  report  will  detail  the  steps  taken  or  the  recommendations  given  to 
Appendix 2 
147 
address  the  given circumstance,  and  the  report  shall  capture  financial  and  physical 
progress to date. 
3)  Monthly progress report shall comprehensively cover all project aspects: the overall 
project  progress,  updates  on  implementation  arrangements  or  changes  in  project 
scope,  contract  awards  and  disbursement  status,  payments  to  the  consultants  and 
contractors,  progress  of  works,  status  of  training  programs,  difficulties  and  delays 
encountered or anticipated, and remedial actions taken or suggested, and summarize 
the  compliance  status  related 
the  grant/loan  covenants  and  social  and 
environmental safeguard; 
to 
4)  Progress  reports  will  include  an  assessment  on  construction  progress  against 
program,  an  indication  of  key  outstanding  issues,  and  an  updated  development 
program (if relevant) for key project activities. Copies of each report will be submitted 
to PIU in English. The Consultant shall transmit an electronic version of the reports to 
ADB on issue of the reports to the Employer 
5)  Project completion report shall include a detailed description of all the work by items 
of technical and non-technical matters, as-built drawings, economic analysis, financial 
and  disbursement  data,  analyses,  difficulties  and  delays  encountered  and  reasons, 
and remedial actions taken, the overall progress of the Project. 
54. 
All reports will be reviewed upon submission by the MET. The Consultant shall respond in 
writing to the comments of the EA and IA or any of the reviewing bodies. The Consultant shall 
meet with these agencies, as necessary, to resolve any problems or concerns which may surface 
during the review. The Consultant shall have their own internal review system to review drawings 
prior  to  EA  and  IA’s  approval.  The  Consultant  shall  become  familiar  with  local  holidays  and 
customs so that in setting submittal schedules, the project and EA and IAs can take full advantage 
of the time periods scheduled for reviews and approvals. 
55. 
Drawings prepared and submitted by the Consultant shall be to the standard size of A0, 
Al, A2; and one‐half size reductions as may be required by the MET. The scale of all drawings is 
to be determined by mutual consent of the EA, IAs and the Consultant prior to the commencement 
of each project phase, at which time the Consultant shall also identify the number of drawings to 
be produced. All drawings information should be clear and legible. The Consultant shall submit 
the final drawings in digital format approved and reviewed by the MET. State expertise approved 
final drawings (three hardcopies) will be submitted to MET in English and Mongolian version. 
G.   Clients Inputs and Counterpart Personnel 
The following staff will be assigned by the Client to support the Consultant’s team: (i) MET 
56. 
DPAM and DTPC Counterpart Specialists, and (ii) all PIU staff. 
57.  Counterpart Contribution to be provided by the Client: 
-  Support to obtain necessary approvals regarding external utilities (power, heating, 
water and sewage, communication, IT etc.) from relevant authorities (as 
appropriate). 
-  Support to arrange meetings with government organizations. 
-  Support to obtain relevant information and negotiations with Clients. 
58.  The Client will provide the following documents and papers to facilitate preparation of the 
Proposals: Previous data, TA consultant’s report 
148 
Appendix 2 
APPENDIX A to the TOR 
UNIVERSAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES 
1.  The  following  design  consideration  for  each  types  of  disability  must  be  reflected  on 
building  design  development  and  detail  design  stages.  The  Consultant  must  follow  the 
Synthesis of the standards ISO/IEC Guide 71:2014 
1)  Sensory Abilities and Characteristics 
(i)  Multiple  means  of  information  presentation  such  as  auditory  or  tactile  to 
supplement or substitute for visual information. 
(ii)  Appropriate  size,  contrast,  form,  luminance,  lighting  and  viewing  distance  in 
relation to context of use. 
(iii)  Avoidance  of  glare;  redundant  forms  of  coding  to  supplement  or  substitute  for 
information conveyed with color coding, e.g. shape or texture  coding. 
(iv)  Appropriate physical construction and properties of fonts such as size, spacing, 
with or without serif, upright form or italics, and light, medium or bold appearance 
within a specific context of use. 
(v)  Visual information  and controls  placed  in a prominent  position,  or a  positioning 
that is flexible, adjustable or duplicated. 
(vi)  Avoidance of f licker rates with f lashing or blinking text, objects or video screens, 
especially those that can trigger visually induced seizures. 
(vii)  Distinctive form to facilitate identification of a product/environment and/or parts 
of  a  product/environment  (including  orientation,  e.g.  top/bottom,  front/back, 
entrance/exit). 
(viii)  Colored markings that draw attention to steps and potentially dangerous  places. 
(ix)  Tactile  indicators  that  draw  attention  to  stairs,  platform  edges  and  pedestrian 
crossings. 
(x)  Traffic  lights  equipped  with  acoustic  signals  to  indicate  when  pedestrians  can 
cross streets safely. 
2) 
Hearing Consideration 
(i)  Multiple  means  of  information  presentation  such  as  visual  (text  or  pictures)  or 
tactile to supplement or substitute for auditory information. 
(ii)  Appropriate  volume,  pitch  and  frequency  of  spoken  announcements,  warnings 
and warning sounds in relation to context of use. 
(iii)  Adjustable volume over a wide range and with multiple frequencies. 
(iv)  Avoidance of sudden changes in volume of auditory signals. 
(v)  Constant signal-to-noise ratio between the level of an announcement and that of 
the background noise. 
(vi)  Group  assistive  listening  devices  or  communication  systems  such  as  induction 
loops, infrared or radio systems. 
(vii)  Emergency announcements that are visual with text, and where appropriate, in 
sign language, as well as of an appropriate volume and pitch decrease risk for 
persons with hearing impairment. 
(viii)  A  good  acoustic  environment,  that  reduces  background  sounds  and  promotes 
sound that is important to be heard. 
(ix)  Accommodation for and compatibility with relevant assistive products, assistive 
technology and supports. 
Appendix 2 
149 
3) 
Touch Functions 
(i)  Multiple means of information presentation such as visual or auditory information 
to supplement or substitute for tactile information or biometric controls. 
(ii)  Multiple means of control such as eye and voice control, sensors and automatic 
or remote controls. 
(iii)  Avoidance of sharp and uneven points/edges/surfaces. 
(iv)  Avoidance  of  excessively  hot  or  cold  surfaces  which  can  be  touched  (even 
inadvertently). 
(v)  Distinctive form to facilitate identification of a product and its parts, which in turn 
can facilitate use/handling/assembly. 
4) 
Taste Functions And Smell Functions 
(i)  Multiple  means  of  information  presentation  to  supplement  or  substitute  for 
information gained by taste and smell functions. 
information in labeling on ingredients, use by and expiration dates. 
(ii) 
(iii)  Visual and auditory signals to alert people to the presence of smoke or dangerous 
chemicals. 
Information or labeling to warn about strong smell or taste. 
(iv) 
(v)  Provision  of  minimal  odors  and  taste,  except  where  necessary  (e.g.  odors  and 
taste are expected in foods). 
5) 
Immunological System Functions 
(i)  Avoidance of inclusion of allergens, sensitizing substances and chemicals known 
to cause hypersensitivities in products, foodstuffs and environments. 
(ii)  Appropriate information and labeling of ingredients/contents (including allergens, 
sensitizing  and  chemical  substances  known  to  cause  hypersensitivities)  in 
accessible  format,  the  provision  of  this  information  being  mostly  subject  to 
national or international regulation and which can include 
(iii)  A list of ingredients, 
(iv)  A separate statement that declares any major allergens or sensitizing substances 
included, and warnings such as information regarding any change in composition 
of significance related to allergens and sensitizing substances. 
(v)  Ventilation systems that filter out respiratory allergens. 
(vi)  Prevention  of  mold  growth,  e.g.  by  controlling  level  of  indoor  humidity,  and 
following appropriate cleaning routines. 
(vii)  Avoidance of dust-collecting furnishings in public areas. 
(viii)  Availability of “allergy-free” areas such as smoke-free and allergy-free rooms in 
hotels, and animal- free areas in public transportation. 
6) 
Physical Abilities And Characteristics 
(i)  Additional space in built environments. 
(ii)  Space for clothing and personal protective equipment. 
(iii)  Multiple size offerings and / or adjustability. 
(iv)  Height clearance for tall persons. 
(v)  Width clearance for large persons. 
(vi)  Step heights and reach distances for small persons. 
(vii)  Space  for  assistive  products,  assistive  technology,  service  animals  and 
accompanying persons. 
(viii)  Load  capacities  of  system  components  appropriate  for  larger  mass  (weight) 
requirements. 
150 
Appendix 2 
(ix)  Systems with a clear line of sight to important components for seated or standing 
users. 
(x)  Systems with a comfortable reach to all components for seated or standing users. 
(xi)  Grip sizes in systems components that accommodate variations in user sizes and 
shapes. 
7) 
Movement: Functions Of Upper Body Structures And Fine Hand Use Abilities 
(i)  Manufacturing materials of lighter weight or lower density to reduce the weight of 
products. 
(ii)  Products shaped to facilitate easy grasping, lifting and carrying with either or both 
hands. 
(iii)  Manual controls that allow a comfortable grip, avoid the need for twisting of the 
wrist, and offer minimal resistance. 
(iv)  Controls that avoid the need to manipulate multiple controls at the same  time. 
(v)  Non-slippery surface that aids gripping and manipulating for people with limited 
dexterity. 
(vi)  Textured surfaces, to increase friction, and facilitate the application of  force. 
(vii)  Design  and  spacing  of  controls  that  guard  against  inadvertent  activation  of  a 
control other than the one intended. 
(viii)  Containers  that  allow  easy  opening  and  closing  with  reasonably  low  attainable 
operating force. 
(ix)  Simple and straightforward sequences for opening of packaging and assembling, 
installing or operating a product. 
(x)  Avoidance of simultaneous double movements, e.g. pushing and twisting. 
(xi)  Alternative controls for accommodation of upper body movement impairments. 
8) 
Movement: Functions Of Lower Body Structures 
(i)  Slip-resistant,  threshold-free  layout,  e.g.  in  buildings  and  paved  outdoor 
environments. 
(ii)  Avoidance of sudden changes in surface level, obstacles, bumps or  protrusions. 
(iii)  Equipment, such as elevators and other lifting systems. 
(iv)  Ramps  with appropriate  slopes  and adequate  space to  allow for  approach  and 
maneuvering, and use of wheelchairs, walking frames, or walking aids. 
(v)  Stairs with appropriate dimensions and banisters or hand grips alongside. 
(vi)  Ample time for persons with mobility limitations to pass through automatic doors 
and to use pedestrian crossings. 
9) 
Muscle Power And Muscle Endurance 
(i)  Use  of  power  grip  (whole  hand)  which  requires  less  effort  than  pinch  grip 
(between thumb and index or middle finger). 
(ii)  Appropriate  handling  characteristics  (e.g.  size  and  weight)  for  systems  that 
involve lifting, holding, carrying or opening. 
(iii)  Avoidance of long handling time and unnecessary repetition of operations. 
(iv)  Avoidance of long service lines that cause people to stand unsupported for long 
periods of time. 
(v)  Alternative means of control in vehicles to accommodate lower body movement. 
10) 
Voice And Speech 
Appendix 2 
151 
(i)  Alternative  forms  of  communication  such  as  via  text,  facial  expressions,  hand 
movements or signs, body postures, and other forms of body language. 
(ii)  Augmentative  and  alternative  communication  based  on  symbols,  aids, 
techniques, and/or strategies. 
(iii)  Support  for  the  use  of  assistive  products  such  as  speech  synthesizers  and 
communication amplifier and video communication. 
(iv)  Provision  of  alternative  means  to  interact  with  interactive  voice  systems  and 
intercom systems, such as real-time text. 
11) 
Information about time and place. 
Cognitive Abilities 
(i) 
(ii)  Schedules, structures, signals to indicate start and termination of  activities. 
(iii)  An overview that informs the user what to expect before providing any  details. 
(iv)  Appropriate  feedback/cues/reminders  that  hold  the  user’s  attention  and  give 
support through a process. 
(v)  Feedback that is adjustable to the needs and preferences of users. 
(vi)  Environments and presentations that are stimulating but also avoid  distractions. 
(vii)  Systems  and  procedures  that  adapt  to  individual  situations,  abilities  and 
preferences. 
(viii)  Similar arrangement/layout and design of feedback and control logic on products 
of a similar type. 
(ix)  Similar design of feedback and control logic on products of a similar  type. 
(x)  Error-tolerant operating sequences. 
(xi)  Flexible time period for assimilation of information and response. 
(xii)  Simple and straightforward sequences for opening of packaging and assembling, 
installing or operating a product. 
(xiii)  Information  provided  in  multiple  formats,  e.g.  text  is  read  out,  diagrams  are 
provided in addition to text. 
(xiv)  Information and instructions that are easy to understand in the language of the 
user. 
(xv)  Explicit information on expectations placed on the user. 
(xvi)  Systems that can be used (as far as possible) without an instruction  manual. 
(xvii) Procedures  that  facilitate  learning  (learning  by  doing  is  generally  easier  than 
memorizing instructions, repetitions). 
(xviii)  Multiple  means  of  information  presentation  (e.g.  text  is  read  out,  widely 
recognized symbols). 
(xix)  Emergency  evacuation  routes  designed  so  that  they  are  intuitive  and  easy  to 
follow  which  clearly  designate  any  alternative  routes  that  accommodate  for 
persons with disabilities. 
(xx)  Accommodation  for/compatibility  with  relevant  supports  and  assistive  products 
and assistive technology. 
152 
Appendix 2 
APPENDIX B to the TOR 
LOCAL BUILDING CODES, REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 
1. The Consultant will comply with national standards and international best practice including but 
not limited to the following. 
1)  Norms on Architectural Design 
(i)  BNbD: 30-01-04 /CCM 30-01-04/ Norm and Regulation for Urban Resettlement 
the  Ministry  of 
planning  and  building  construction,  Decree  No.130  by 
infrastructure, 2004 
(ii)  BD 31-101-04 /31-104-04/ Handbook for barrier-free construction planning for the 
handicapped, Decree No.17 by Director of Construction, Urban Development and 
Public Utilities Office, 2004 
(iii)  BD  31-112-11  Building  regulations  of  space  planning  for  the  requirements  of 
handicapped  people,  Decree  No.256  by  the  Ministry  of  Construction,  Urban 
Development and Transportation. 
(iv)  Other related norms and regulations 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
Norms On Structural Design 
(i)  BNbD: 2.01.07.90 Load and effect 
(ii)  BNbD: 22.01.01*2006 Building cod of seismic regions 
(iii)  BNbD: 2.02.01.94 Ground and Foundation code for building design work 
(iv)  BNbD: 52.02.05 Cast in situ concrete and reinforced concrete 
(v)  BNbD: 53.02.05 Steel Structure 
(vi)  BNbD: 2.03.02.90 Masonry and reinforced masonry structure 
(vii)  BNbD: 52.01.10 Concrete and reinforced concrete structure 
Norms On Electrical Design 
(i)  BD 43-101-03 The regulations of electrical installations 
(ii)  BD 43-101-03*12 The regulations of electrical installations 
(iii)  BD 43-103-08 The instruction for design of the lighting protection of building and 
facilities 
(iv)  BD 43-102-07 Design and installation of electrical equipment in residential and 
public buildings 
Norms On Fire Safety And Automation 
(i)  BNbD 21-01-02 Fire safety of buildings and facilities 
(ii)  BNbD 21-02-02 Norm on fire safety for developing construction design drawings 
(iii)  BNbD 21-04-05 Automatic fire extinguisher and alarm equipment of buildings and 
facilities 
(iv)  BNbD 3.05.07-85 Automation systems for building 
Norms On HVAC Design 
(i)  BNbD 41-01-11 Heating, ventilation and air-conditioning 
(ii)  BNbD 43-03-07 Boiler equipment 
(iii)  BD 41-102-11 Design of independent heat supply sources 
(iv)  BNbD 23-01-09 Climate and geophysical parameters for construction 
(v)  BNbD 23-02-09 Building thermal performance 
(vi)  BD 23-103-10 Designing thermal performance for building 
Appendix 2 
153 
6) 
Norms On Water Supply, Plumbing Design 
(i)  BNbD 3.05.04-90 Water supply, sewerage, outdoor pipelines and facilities 
(ii)  BNbD 3.05.01-88 Indoor plumbing system 
(iii)  BNbD 40-05-98 Indoor water supply and sewerage pipelines 
(iv)  BNbD 40-02-06 Water supply, outdoor pipelines and facilities 
7) 
Mongolian National Standards. 
(i)  MNS  6055:2009  –  Space  planning  for  building  and  environment  with  the 
requirements of handicapped people, 2009 
(ii)  MNS  6056:2009  –  Design  manual  for  planning  and  designing  accessibility  for 
handicapped people, 2009 
8) 
International Standards 
(i)  EDGE standard 
154 
Appendix 2 
APPENDIX C to the TOR: Domestic Detailed Environmental Impact Assessment for the 
proposed Rock Art and Nomadic Cultural Center, and Khovd Tourist Street, Khovd 
Aimag 
A.  Background 
1.  The  Sustainable  Tourism  Development  Project  (Phase  2)  is  being  implemented  by  the 
Government  of  Mongolia  through  the  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Tourism  (MET),  with 
funding support from the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The project includes the planned 
construction  of  two  visitor  centers,  the  Rock  Art  and  Nomadic  Cultural  Center  (RANCC) 
(Khovd Aimag) and Uvs Tourism Complex (UVTC) (Uvs Aimag), two tourist streets (one each 
in  Khovd  Aimag  and  Uvs  Aimag),  and  about  35  small  facilities  –  public  campsites,  public 
toilets, carparks, information centers, information points, public cooking cabins, trail upgrades, 
fee collection stations, ranger stations – in five sites: Altai Tavan Bogd National Park and the 
Petroglyphic Complexes of the Mongolian Altai (Bayan-Ulgii Aimag), Khar Us Nuur National 
Park  and  Tsenkher  Cave  (Khovd  Aimag),  and  Khan  Khukhii  National  Park  and  Uvs  Nuur 
Special Protected Area (Uvs Aimag). 
2. 
In  2020  and  2021  the  following  documents  were  prepared:  (i)  preliminary  engineering 
designs and feasibility study report, (ii) a domestic environment baseline assessment (EBA), and 
(iii)  an  initial  environmental  examination  (IEE)  and  environment  management  plan  (EMP);  as 
required by ADB’s Safeguard Policy). In 2021, a General EIA Letter was issued by the MET, which 
requires the preparation of a Detailed EIA (DEIA) for the proposed facilities. The project will be 
implemented from December 2021 to December 2027. Implementation is coordinated through a 
project implementation unit (PIU), including an environment safeguard specialist. 
The RANCC will be located about 3 km from the Khovd Aimag center. The tourist street 
3. 
will be located at the edge of the urban center, near the Khovd airport. A detailed engineering 
design  and  construction  supervision  company  (DED/CSC)  will  be  engaged  to  design  these 
facilities and oversee their construction. The DED/CSC will subcontract a qualified domestic firm 
to prepare the DEIA. This terms of reference is for the preparation of the DEIA for the RANCC 
and Khovd tourist street. 
B. 
Objective of the Consulting Services 
The  objective  is  to  prepare  a  DEIA  that  fulfills  domestic  requirements.  In  fulfilling  the 
4. 
consulting  services,  the  firm  will  work  closely  with  the  DED/CSC,  PIU  environment  safeguard 
specialist, MET, local government agencies, ADB project team, and other stakeholders as needed. 
C. 
Scope of the Consulting Services 
12. 
The DEIA firm will do the following. 
(xii)  Review  and  be  familiar  with  the  preliminary  engineering  design,  environment 
baseline assessment, initial environment examination, and General EIA Letter. 
(xiii)  Review and be familiar with the draft detailed engineering designs. 
(xiv)  Conduct all required field surveys and site assessments to prepare the DEIA. 
(xv)  Prepare a separate DEIA report for each facility. The reports will be developed in 
accordance  with  the  “Methodology  on  Environmental  Impact  Assessment”  which 
was adopted with Environment Minister’s Order No. A-117 on April 10, 2014. 
Appendix 2 
155 
(xvi)  Work closely with the DED/CSC to ensure that the DEIA findings help feed into, and 
improve, the detailed engineering designs, to avoid any risks and impacts as far as 
possible. 
(xvii)  Identify  and  highlight  any  new  or  additional  impacts  which  are  not  previously 
identified in the EBA or IEE. 
(xviii)  Prepare a domestic EMP to address the identified risks and domestic monitoring 
and reporting requirements. 
(xix)  Ensure  there  is  alignment  between  the  domestic  environment  management  plan 
and the ADB funded IEE and EMP. If the domestic EMP proposes any measures 
or  actions  which  conflict  (or  contradict)  the  ADB  funded  IEE  and  EMP,  identify 
these.  Seek  discussion  with  the  DED/CS  firm  and  PIU  environment  safeguard 
specialist (who will discuss also with the ADB project environment specialist). 
(xx)  Submit  the  draft  DEIA  to  the  DED/CS  firm  and  PIU  for  review.  After  internal 
endorsement, submit the draft DEIA to MET for review. 
(xxi)  Facilitate MET review of the draft DEIA. 
(xxii)  Revise and finalize the draft DEIA based on the comments received. 
D. 
Team Composition and Qualification Requirements for key experts 
13. 
The firm will have: (i) all required domestic qualifications and certifications to prepare a 
DEIA,  (ii)  at  least  10  years  of  relevant  professional  experience  in  related  fields  and  projects, 
especially in the construction sector, (iii) have completed at least 3 DEIAs for projects funded by 
ADB or other international development agencies, (iv) all specialists as needed to conduct the 
environmental  assessments 
(physical,  chemical,  biological,  ecological,  and 
socioeconomic  parameters),  (v)  ability  to  communicate  and  work  effectively  with  local 
communities  and  government  agencies,  and  (vi)  ideally,  proficiency  in  English.  The  firm  will 
provide reference letters from a minimum of three previous clients for similar projects. 
required 
Output-based Terms of Reference. The assignment will be carried out by a consulting 
14. 
firm. Proposing entities will determine the number and the specific expertise along with their inputs 
of the specialists they will require to  achieve the objectives of the contract, in accordance with 
their  proposed  approach  and  methodology.  All  proposals  will  include  a  minimum  of  six  key 
experts, one of which will be expected to act as team leader (Table 1). 
Table 1: Key Expert Positions and Estimated Person-Months 
No.  Key Experts 
1  Team leader/ Senior Technical specialist 
2  Biologist/ecologist 
3  Physical science specialist 
4  Socioeconomic specialist 
5  Cultural resource specialist 
6  Field logistics assistant 
TOTAL 
Number of 
Experts 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
Person/month 
input 
Home 
3 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
1 
10 
Field 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1.5 
6.5 
Total 
4 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
16.5 
15. 
Team  leader/Senior  Technical  Specialist  (national).  The  specialist  will  have:  (i)  a 
master’s degree or equivalent in relevant field, (ii) at least 10 years professional experience in 
environmental  impact  assessment  in  Mongolia,  including  with  construction  or  infrastructure 
projects,  and  experience  with  protected  area  concepts  and  management,  (iii)  ability  to 
communicate and work effectively with local communities and government agencies, (iv) ability 
156 
Appendix 2 
to quickly undertake field observations, analyses, and consultations required for EIA, (v) strong 
analytical  and  report  writing  skills,  and,  (vi)  ideally,  proficiency  in  English.  Specific  tasks  and 
responsibilities will include, but are not limited to, the following. 
(v) 
Lead the other technical specialists to ensure coverage of all environmental aspects 
affected by this project (physical, chemical, biological, and socioeconomic parameters). 
(vi)  Maintain communication and coordination with the DED/CS firm, PIU, and MET. 
(vii)  Set the template and schedule for proper completion of the EIA report. 
(viii)  Lead overall preparation of the draft and final draft DEIA, and assume responsibility for 
overall quality control. 
16. 
Technical Specialists (4 experts, national). The specialists will each have (i) a master’s 
degree  or  equivalent  in  relevant  field,  (ii)  at  least  10  years  professional  experience  in  their 
respective fields, for environmental impact assessment in Mongolia, including with construction 
or  infrastructure  projects,  and  experience  with  protected  area  concepts  and  management,  (iii) 
ability to communicate and work effectively with local communities and government agencies, (iv) 
ability to quickly undertake field observations, analyses, and consultations required for EIA; and, 
(v) ideally, proficiency in English. Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited 
to, the following. 
(vii)  Cover all environmental aspects affected by this project (physical, chemical, biological, 
and socioeconomic parameters), as follows. 
(viii)  Gain familiarity with the four project sites and potential impacts and required mitigation 
measures through: (i) review of the current IEE and EMP; (ii) review of the latest 
detailed designs and specifications for the facilities at the four sites; (iii) meetings with 
the project agencies; and (iv) site visits. 
(ix)  Verify the proposed project sites and undertake field observations and consultations to 
confirm the baseline environmental, PCR, and socioeconomic features at the four sites. 
(x)  Re-configure and update the environmental baseline report for the four sites and adjust 
the  impact  matrix  and  mitigation  measures  accordingly,  as  well  as  the  environmental 
monitoring plan. 
(xi)  Undertake  an  initial  review  of  findings  with  MET  and  the  PIU;  revise  draft  report  as 
needed. 
(xii)  Complete the detailed EIA for the four sites to meet domestic requirements. 
17. 
Field Logistics Assistant (national). The position will have at least five years professional 
experience in coordinating field work and travel in Mongolia and handling related office duties and 
project documentation. Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to, the 
following. 
(vi)  Gain familiarity with all the project requirements, the four sites, and the local government 
agencies and stakeholders who will be engaged with the project. 
(vii) Determine field visit requirements of each of the technical specialists. 
(viii) Work out schedules and coordination between the four specialists. 
(ix)  Arrange travel, housing, and consultation requirements to ensure successful field visits. 
(x)  Maintain project documentation for all field work and public consultation records/photo 
log, etc. 
E. 
Deliverables and Work Schedule 
18.  The following reports will be provided, in consultation with the DED/CS firm, MET and PIU. 
Appendix 2 
157 
(vi) 
Inception report. Fourteen (14) days after consultant’s mobilization. Format: Digital 
copy, in Mongolian language. 
(vii)  Progress  report.  Two  (2)  months  after  consultant’s  mobilization.  Format:  Digital 
copy, in Mongolian language. 
(viii)  Draft  EIA  reports,  including  EMPs,  for  the  project  sites.  Three  (3)  months  after 
consultant’s  mobilization.  Format:  digital  copy  and  at  least  5  hard  copies.  In 
Mongolian and English language. 
(ix)  Final  EIA  reports,  including  EMPs.  Four  months  after  consultant’s  mobilization. 
Format: digital copy and at least 5 hard copies. In Mongolian and English language 
Any other deliverables as reasonably requested by the DED/CS firm, PIU, and MET. 
(x) 
F. 
Client Inputs and Counterpart Personnel 
19.  The following staff will be assigned by the Client to support the Consultant’s team. 
-  Focal points within the DED/CS firm, including at least one environment, health, and 
safety  specialist,  to  ensure  close  coordination  with  the  DED/CS  specialists  and 
integration of detailed designs and the DEIA findings. 
-  MET personnel from the Department of Tourism Policy Coordination and Department 
of  Protected  Areas  Management  (to  provide  information  and  guidance  as  needed) 
and  Department  of  Environment  and  Natural  Resources  (for  review  of  the  DEIA 
deliverables and issuance of review and endorsement letters). 
-  PIU  team,  including  the  PIU  coordinator,  PIU  environmental  safeguards  specialist, 
PIU Social, gender and civil society specialist. 
20.  Counterpart Contribution to be provided by the Client is as follows. 
-  Support to arrange meetings with government organizations. 
-  Support to obtain relevant information and negotiations with Clients. 
-  Provision  of  all  relevant  existing  project  documents,  including  the  preliminary 
engineering designs and feasibility study report, EBA, General EIA Letter, and IEE. 
4. 
CS4: Detailed IT System Design and Establishment Supervision for Digital Museum 
A. 
Background 
The project will support the development of tourism in three aimags (provinces) of western 
59. 
Mongolia,  focused  on  inclusive  benefits  for  communities,  the  protection  of  nature  and  cultural 
heritage,  and  post-COVID-19  recovery  and  resilience.  The  project  will  build  the  capacity  of 
residents and a small but growing private sector for community-based tourism, especially women- 
and youth-led initiatives, establish two tourism complexes, two streets, and a Digital Museum to 
catalyze tourism and create jobs, improve sanitation at key visitor sites, and improve small visitor 
facilities at five globally important protected areas and heritage sites. The designs are based on 
post-COVID-19  tourism  recovery  projections,  sanitation  measures  aligned  with  national  health 
and border procedures, and standards for green and climate-resilient infrastructure. 
60. 
Digital Museum. This will be located within the planned Rock Art and Nomadic Cultural 
Center (RANCC) in Khovd Aimag that will be constructed as part of the project. The key objectives 
of  the  Digital  Museum  are  to  (i)  provide  an  innovative  source  of  information,  education  and 
conservation of the archaeological values of western Mongolia, based on high-level technology, 
that  will  enhance  the  reach  of  tourism,  (ii)  improve  efficiency  of  tourism  operation  by  digital 
158 
Appendix 2 
enablement  of  tourism  value  chains,  (iii)  support  the  protection  of  a  key  cultural  heritage  site, 
Tsenkher  Cave,  as  well  as  a  heritage  site  in  Khovd  Aimag  center  (the  Manchu  fortress),  (iv) 
support  local  job  creation,  and  (v)  support  international  collaboration.  The  Digital  Museum  will 
comprise  hardware  (allocated  rooms  within  the  RANCC;  hard  drives,  cables)  and  software 
(database, management information system, online portal). It will be populated initially by MET’s 
digital library of rock art images. A key feature will be a virtual 3D experience of the TSC, which 
will be established through advanced photogrammetric mapping (using drones) of the TSC. The 
tourism experience will be enhanced with digital signages, virtual reality stations and laser guided 
equipment to provide preview to visitors and researchers on the rich cultural heritage of western 
Mongolia. 
61. 
The Digital Museum will also facilitate the digitalization of the tourism sector in western 
Mongolia, through its catalytic effect of including modules with few major attractions of the region 
and  enable  experiential  destination  tourism.  Collaboration  will  be  initiated  with  local  learning 
centers,  including  Khovd  University  (which  has  an  IT  graduate  course),  and  potentially  an 
international university with an existing rock art website. IT graduates from Khovd University and 
other learning institutions of western Mongolia will be prioritized for jobs for O&M of the  Digital 
Museum. Development and O&M of the Digital Museum will also be linked with a youth incubator 
(project output 1). Khovd University will be invited to design a program, led by its IT students, to 
be integrated with the Digital Museum and which will advertise additional services to visitors e.g., 
local transport and translation. The Digital Museum platform will integrate with other administrative 
systems  such  as  billing  and  booking  systems  to  provide  one  stop  shop  online  services.  The 
opportunity for advertising revenue to help support the costs of O&M will be assessed. The online 
platform of the Digital Museum will also be linked with the MET tourism portal and potentially also 
the  tourism  portal  of  the  Central  Asia  Regional  Economic  Cooperation  (CAREC)  Program, 
providing greater promotion opportunity. Overall, the Digital Museum will become a platform that 
supports  tourism,  knowledge  sharing,  education,  job  creation,  and  the  preservation  of  cultural 
heritage. For O&M, the Digital Museum will be maintained as part of the overall RANCC, which 
will be managed by a state-owned enterprise. Detailed O&M procedures will be developed during 
the detailed IT design. Potentially, two entry fee rates to the RANCC will be established: one with 
access to the Digital Museum and one without, to help finance O&M costs 
B. 
Objective of Services 
62. 
Scope  of  the  services  is  to  develop  Detailed  IT  System  Design  and  Establishment 
Supervision for Digital Museum in the Rock Art and Nomadic Culture Center in Khovd aimag. The 
consultancy will address all objectives outlined in Section A of this terms of reference. This will 
include high-quality 2- and 3-dimensional virtual displays of the rock art of the Tsenkher Cave and 
other  sites,  establish  a  digital  inventory  for  rock  art,  and  an  online  platform  to  promote  digital 
tourism for cultural heritage. It will support the educational requirements of researchers and help 
attract more tourism opportunities nationally and internationally. A room space of about 100 m2 in 
the RANCC has been allocated for the Digital Museum. 
63. 
Key  objectives  are  to  (i)  provide  an  innovative  source  of  information,  education  and 
conservation of the archaeological values of western Mongolia, based on high-level technology, 
that  will  enhance  the  reach  of  tourism,  (ii)  improve  efficiency  of  tourism  operation  by  digital 
enablement of tourism value chains, (iii) support the protection of a key cultural heritage site, TSC, 
as  well  as  a  heritage  site  in  Khovd  Aimag  center,  the  Manchu  fortress,  (iv)  support  local  job 
creation, and (v) support international collaboration. The Digital Museum will comprise hardware 
(allocated rooms within the RANCC; hard drives, cables) and software (database, management 
information system, online portal). It will be populated initially by MET’s digital library of rock art 
Appendix 2 
159 
images.  A  key  feature  will  be  a  virtual  3D  experience  of  the  Tsenkher  Cave,  which  will  be 
established through advanced photogrammetric mapping (using drones) of the TSC. The tourism 
experience  will  be  enhanced  with  digital  signages,  virtual  reality  stations  and  laser  guided 
equipment to provide preview to visitors and researchers on the rich cultural heritage of western 
Mongolia. 
64. 
During project preparation, a concept design for the Digital Museum was prepared along 
with other documents for the project designs and due diligence, including, but not limited to: the 
Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors; Project Administration 
Manual; Social Development Action Plan; Gender Action Plan; Initial Environmental Examination; 
Risk  Assessment  and  Risk  Management  Plan;  Feasibility  Study  Report; and  Climate  Risk  and 
Vulnerability Assessment. The firm shall ensure that their deliverables follow the approved project 
targets and preliminary designs prepared during the processing and described in these reports. 
65. 
The consultant deliverables will reflect a holistic design approach that ensures synergy and 
integration, where relevant, with the other project components and deliverables prepared by other 
consulting  teams.  Examples  include,  but  are  not  limited  to:  (i)  ensuring  that  the  revised  aimag 
tourism plans integrate the project components and operation and maintenance (O&M) plans for 
the project facilities, (ii) poverty, gender, and livelihood targets will be integrated within the regional 
tourism master plan, revised aimag tourism plans, and improved tour camp standards, and (iii) O&M 
of  the  loan-funded  tourism  complexes  will  include  promotion  of  the  grant-supported  community 
goods, services, and protected areas. The firm is therefore required to have a good understanding 
of  the  overall  project  design  and  targets  in  addition  to  the  specific  deliverables  under  the 
consultancy. 
C. 
Scope of Services, Tasks (Components) and Expected Deliverables 
66. 
Detailed tasks include but are not limited to the following: 
Task 1: Complete set-up of RADM. 
•  Hardware  installment  and  implementation-  to  set-up  VR  technology  room,  configure 
projectors, kiosk machine, and to apply possible interior design for RADM. 
•  Hand-over technical usage of all equipment and VR technology room training for RADM 
tasks. 
Task 2: Complete program development of RADM 
•  To develop Museum management system for RADM in RANCC – IT department control 
and monitoring system. 
•  To develop digital library system for RADM in RANCC – store information for website. 
•  To develop Library information system for RADM in RANCC - store information for kiosk 
machine and website. 
•  User  manual  of  Museum  management  system,  digital  library  system  and  Library 
information system for RADM tasks and O&M. 
•  Prepare training for RADM tasks and O&M. 
Task 3: To develop a RADM’s website. 
•  Fully functional dynamic website for RADM in RANCC. Develop a fully functional website 
for making payments and buying tickets. Also show stone age, heritage site, and other 
information related to other RADM programs such as digital library system and Library 
information system. 
•  User manual of website for RADM tasks and O&M. 
•  Prepare training for RADM tasks and O&M. 
Task 4: To develop a program (animation) for virtual cave. 
160 
Appendix 2 
•  Large-scale  and  high  resolution  3-D  cave  mapping  by  terrestrial  laser  scanning  for 
animation. 
•  To develop VR content of RADM in RANCC. 
•  User manual of VR room and content. 
Task 5: Data entry for RADM system 
•  Obtain available digital data on rock of Khovd Aimag and other digital data as available 
from the MET. Digitize the available data and put into a RADM kiosk and website. 
The quality- and cost-based selection method will be used to recruit the firm, with a quality-
67. 
cost  ratio  of  90:10  and  using  simplified  technical  proposals.  Output-based  proposals  will  be 
requested  from  short-listed  applicants.  Under  this  approach,  firms  will  select  the  types  and 
number  of  international  and  national  experts  and  skills  required  to  achieve  the  consultancy 
deliverables,  except  for a minimum  list  of “key  experts”  which all  applicants  will  be required  to 
include in their proposals. 
68. 
International and national inputs are required. The proposing entity will: (i) clearly describe 
the proposed business approach e.g. a joint venture between an international and national firm; 
and  (ii)  ensure  that  the  entity  has  the  required  office  space  and  equipment  in  Ulaanbaatar  to 
conduct  the  consultancy.  The  firm  will  be  recruited  through  the  MET,  and  work  under  the 
coordination  of  the  project  implementation  unit  (PIU).  The  specialist  will  liaise  with  aimag  and 
soum governments and other stakeholders as needed to develop and implement the program. 
Table 1: Key Expert Positions and Estimated Person-Months 
Key expert 
1 
2 
3 
4 
IT engineer (Team Leader) 
Senior IT software designer / programmer 
Digital Museum expert / Interior designer 
Senior  IT  software  engineer  /  programmer  (Deputy  team 
Leader) 
Junior IT software engineer/System tester 
Senior visual art designer 
Database administrator 
5 
6 
7 
8  Web developer 
TOTAL 
Number 
of Experts 
Person-month 
input 
Home  Field   
Total 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
2 
2 
2 
6 
4 
4 
4 
2 
26 
1 
2 
2 
6 
6 
6 
6 
3 
32 
3 
4 
4 
12 
10 
10 
10 
5 
58 
69. 
Proposing firms will determine the number and the nature of experts they will require to 
achieve  the  consultancy  deliverables,  in  accordance  with  their  proposed  approach  and 
methodology. However, MET requires a minimum of four key experts in Table 3: 
Positions 
Table 3: Required Qualifications, Roles, and Responsibilities 
Tasks / Responsibilities 
Qualification* 
International Consultants* 
IT engineer 
(Team Leader) 3 
person- month 
and Intermittent 
• master’s degree in 
computer sciences, 
database, software 
engineering or related 
discipline. 
• At least five years of 
system development 
experience – mainly 
•  Lead the technical design and delivery of the TA outputs 
•  Lead the detailed design of the RADM, website and 
installation and compatibility of the TA-supported software 
and hardware 
•  Directs, administers, and controls the day-to-day 
operations and activities of RADM system in an assigned 
area 
development / 
deployment of system 
Senior IT 
software 
designer / 
programmer 4 
person/month 
and Intermittent 
• bachelor’s degree in 
computer sciences, 
databases and 
software engineering 
• At least three years 
of professional IT 
development 
experience – mainly 
development / 
deployment of BIS 
Experience 
Impeccable 
Additional qualification: 
• 
attention to detail 
• 
with Linux and 
Windows Server 
environments 
• 
experience with 
database technologies 
(MySQL, MS SQL, 
PostgreSQL Oracle, 
MongoDB) 
Extensive 
Appendix 2 
161 
•  Determines operational objectives by studying business 
functions; gathering information; evaluating output 
requirements and formats 
•  Designs new computer programs by analyzing 
requirements; constructing workflow RADM charts and 
diagrams; studying system capabilities; writing 
specifications 
Improves systems by studying current practices, designing 
modifications 
• 
•  Recommends controls by identifying problems, writing 
improved procedures 
•  Defines project requirements by identifying project 
milestones, phases, and elements; forming project team; 
establishing project budget 
•  Monitors project progress by tracking activity; resolving 
problems; publishing progress reports; recommending 
actions 
•  Maintains system protocols by writing and updating 
procedures 
•  Provides references for users by writing and maintaining 
user documentation; providing help desk support; training 
users 
•  Maintains user confidence and protects operations by 
keeping information confidential 
•  Prepares technical reports by collecting, analyzing, and 
summarizing information, and trends 
•  To work closely with RANCC and its agencies and project 
implementation unit (PIU) 
•  Technical design and delivery of the TA outputs, focusing 
especially on the RADM and system application 
•  Support the team leader for project coordination, 
preparation of project deliverables, quality control of team 
member deliverables, and communications with ADB for 
project administration, as needed 
•  Develops information systems by designing, developing, 
and installing software solutions 
•  Determines operational feasibility by evaluating analysis, 
problem definition, requirements, solution development, 
and proposed solutions 
•  Develops software solutions by studying information 
needs, conferring with users, and studying systems flow, 
data usage, and work processes 
Investigates problem areas 
• 
•  Follows the software development lifecycle 
•  Documents and demonstrates solutions by developing 
documentation, flowcharts, layouts, diagrams, charts, 
code comments and clear code 
•  Prepares and installs solutions by determining and 
designing system specifications, standards, and 
programming 
Improves operations by conducting systems analysis and 
recommending changes in policies and procedures 
• 
162 
Appendix 2 
Digital Museum 
expert / Interior 
designer 4 
person/month 
and Intermittent 
Bachelor’s degree in 
computer sciences or 
MA/Diploma in 
museum studies 
At least three years of 
professional museum 
development 
experience – mainly 
development / 
deployment of Digital 
Museum 
Additional qualification: 
• 
Excellent 
written and verbal 
communication skills 
National Consultants* 
Senior IT 
software 
engineer / 
programmer 
(Deputy team 
Leader) 12 
person/month 
and full time 
• bachelor’s degree in 
computer sciences or 
databases 
• At least five years of 
professional IT 
development 
experience – mainly 
development / 
deployment of system 
Additional qualification: 
•  Obtains and licenses software by obtaining required 
information from vendors, recommending purchases, and 
testing and approving products 
•  Protects operations by keeping information confidential 
•  Provides information by collecting, analyzing, and 
summarizing development and service issues 
•  Accomplishes engineering and organization mission by 
completing related results as needed 
•  Plan programs of special and permanent exhibitions 
according to visitor needs, alongside the curator 
•  Source exhibits, research artists and select work 
•  Secure loans for exhibitions from chosen artists 
•  Work with curators to plan a long-term strategy for 
exhibitions 
•  Write draft proposals to attract new projects and assess 
tenders 
•  Coordinate liaisons between subject specialists and 
designers 
•  Create and monitor production and installation schedules 
for exhibitions 
•  Assist with installation, including the packing, loading, 
hanging and framing of exhibits 
•  Draw up and manage exhibition budgets and fundraise for 
projects 
•  Negotiate and agree conditions of loans with lenders 
•  Arrange transport, insurance and security for exhibitions 
•  Work with other staff, such as lenders, conservators, 
archivists and technicians, on the promotion and 
interpretation of exhibitions 
•  Write or comment on story boards and labels 
•  Contribute to program of events that aim to encourage 
broader audiences, including educational events 
•  Get involved in media work, such as talking to art critics 
•  Assist with the production and launch of exhibition 
catalogues, publicity material and displays 
•  Work with schools and local community groups 
•  Contribute to museum/gallery development, especially in 
the area of visitor services 
•  Liaise with internal and external staff and departments, 
including technical staff, artists, curators, contractors, 
conservators, departments such as education, finance, 
marketing and pr, and the museum shop. 
•  Technical design and delivery of the TA outputs, focusing 
especially on the RADM and system application 
•  Support the team leader for project coordination, 
preparation of project deliverables, quality control of team 
member deliverables, and communications with ADB for 
project administration, as needed 
•  Provides clients with information by designing methods to 
• 
collect and retrieve data 
Identifies client requirements by establishing personal 
rapport with potential and actual RANCC clients and other 
persons in a position to understand service requirements 
Appendix 2 
163 
• Excellent written and 
verbal communication 
skills 
• Impeccable attention 
•  Establishes and revises database by conferring with 
analysts and programmers to code and retrieve data 
•  Maintains database by entering data 
•  Design, implement, and continuously expand data 
to detail 
• Experience with Linux 
and Windows Server 
environments 
• Extensive experience 
with database 
technologies 
(MySQL, MS SQL, 
PostgreSQL Oracle, 
MongoDB) 
Junior IT 
software 
engineer/System 
tester 12 
person/month 
and full time 
• bachelor’s degree in 
computer sciences or 
software engineering 
• At least three years 
of professional IT 
development 
experience – mainly 
development / 
deployment of system 
• 
Excellent 
written and verbal 
communication skills 
pipelines by performing extraction, transformation, and 
loading activities 
•  Gather requirements and business process knowledge to 
transform the data in a way that is geared toward the 
needs of end users 
•  Ensure that the data architecture is scalable and 
maintainable 
•  Work with the business in designing and delivering 
correct, high-quality program for RADM 
•  Prepare documentation for further reference 
•  Organizes information by studying, analyzing, interpreting, 
and classifying data 
•  Resolves retrieval problems by altering design to meet 
requirements 
•  Prepares reference for users by writing operating 
instructions 
•  Maintains historical records by documenting system 
changes and revisions 
•  To work closely with RANCC and its agencies and project 
implementation unit (PIU) 
•  Technical design and delivery of the TA outputs, focusing 
especially on the RADM and system application 
•  Support the team leader for project coordination, 
preparation of project deliverables, quality control of team 
member deliverables, and communications with ADB for 
project administration, as needed 
•  Provides clients with information by designing methods to 
• 
collect and retrieve data 
Identifies client requirements by establishing personal 
rapport with potential and actual RANCC clients and other 
persons in a position to understand service requirements 
•  Establishes and revises database by conferring with 
analysts and programmers to code and retrieve data 
•  Maintains database by entering data 
•  Design, implement, and continuously expand data 
pipelines by performing extraction, transformation, and 
loading activities 
•  Gather requirements and business process knowledge to 
transform the data in a way that is geared toward the 
needs of end users 
•  Ensure that the data architecture is scalable and 
maintainable 
•  Work with the business in designing and delivering 
correct, high-quality program for RADM 
•  Prepare documentation for further reference 
•  Organizes information by studying, analyzing, interpreting, 
and classifying data 
•  Resolves retrieval problems by altering design to meet 
requirements 
164 
Appendix 2 
Senior Visual art 
designer 10 
person/month 
and full time 
Database 
administrator 10 
person/month 
and full time 
Bachelor’s degree in 
design, Visual Arts or 
relevant qualification 
• At least three years 
of professional 
experience – mainly 
development / 
deployment of system 
Additional qualification: 
• 
Excellent 
written and verbal 
communication skills 
Bachelor’s degree in 
computer sciences or 
databases 
• At least three years 
of professional IT 
development 
experience – mainly 
development / 
deployment of system 
• 
Excellent 
written and verbal 
communication skills 
Web developer 
5 person/month 
and Intermittent 
Bachelor’s degree in 
computer sciences or 
engineering 
• At least three years 
of professional IT 
development 
experience – mainly 
•  Prepares reference for users by writing operating 
instructions 
•  Maintains historical records by documenting system 
changes and revisions 
•  To work closely with RANCC and its agencies and project 
implementation unit (PIU) 
•  Collaborate with internal teams to define user interface 
requirements 
•  Combine various colors, shapes and typography fonts to 
improve user experience 
•  Paint by hand and use drawing applications to design 
original graphics 
•  Use visual design software to refine illustrations 
•  Apply sketching techniques, like gradients and contrasts to 
enhance digital images 
•  Present rough drafts to product managers and/or key 
stakeholders to gain approval 
•  Develop prototypes and models to use in various products 
to maximize aesthetic consistency 
•  Brainstorm new ideas, layouts and graphics 
•  Stay up-to-date with design application changes and 
industry developments 
•  Maintains database by entering data 
•  Design, implement, and continuously expand data 
pipelines by performing extraction, transformation, and 
loading activities 
•  Gather requirements and business process knowledge to 
transform the data in a way that is geared toward the 
needs of end users 
•  Ensure that the data architecture is scalable and 
maintainable 
•  Work with the business in designing and delivering 
correct, high-quality data 
•  Prepare documentation for further reference 
•  Confirms project requirements by studying user 
requirements, conferring with others on project team 
•  Ensures operation of equipment by completing preventive 
maintenance requirements; following manufacturer's 
instructions; troubleshooting malfunctions; calling for 
repairs; evaluating new equipment and techniques 
•  Determines changes in physical database by studying 
project requirements, identifying database characteristics, 
such as location, amount of space, and access method 
•  Protects database by developing access system, 
specifying user level of access 
•  To work closely with RANCC and its agencies and project 
implementation unit (PIU) 
•  The website has to be bi-lingual (Mongolian and English) 
•  The website design must be user friendly and responsive 
•  The website has to render appropriately on a wide variety 
of different browsers and mobile phones 
•  Administrator should be capable to upload and download 
any file formats on the website. The design and solution 
Appendix 2 
165 
development / 
deployment of website 
Additional qualification: 
Excellent 
• 
written and verbal 
communication skills 
must be easy to use by authorized users for prompt 
upload to and update the website 
Including the ability to create, remove, edit published 
content 
• 
•  Contain appropriate fonts, colors, and other design 
elements 
•  The website should integrate related social media 
accounts; and 
•  Utilize the latest tools and technology for website 
development to ensure security. 
70. 
Additional, “non-key” experts required to achieve the TA deliverables will be identified by 
proposing firms and included in their technical and financial proposals, personnel work plan, and 
schedule, in accordance with their proposed approach and methodology. The proposing firm must 
determine and indicate the number of person-months required for each key or non-key expert. All 
experts engaged under the contract, whether key or non-key experts, must be citizens of ADB 
member  countries.  Considering  the  scope  of  the  TA  deliverables,  additional  experts  required 
might  include,  but  not  be  limited  to,  international  and/or  national  specialists  in  software 
programming,  network  engineering,  museum  expert  and/or  technical  engineering,  interior 
designer and geographic information systems. 
71. 
If the proposing entity comprises a joint venture between (for example) an international 
and national firm, the proposal will clearly identify the roles and responsibilities of each venture 
partner and all persons to be mobilized for the consultancy. 
D. 
Deliverables 
Deliverables  are  listed  in  Table  2  and  will  be  provided  in  English  and  Mongolian 
72. 
languages. The consultant deliverables will demonstrate the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Compliance  with  national  technical  standards,  regulations,  and  laws;  and  ADB 
regulations and guidelines. 
Application of international best practice and principles to achieve the deliverables. 
Innovation, in the technical designs, design process, and/or training. 
Commitment to build counterpart capacity and facilitate knowledge transfer. 
Coordination,  alignment,  and  knowledge  exchange  with  relevant  stakeholders 
and/or projects and agencies that may help strengthen the deliverables and scale 
up  their  benefits  e.g.,  Khovd  University,  MET’s  tourism  website,  University  of 
Oregon (website for archaeological heritage of Bayan-Ulgii), and ADB’s CAREC 
tourism web portal. 
Table 2: Summary of Consultant Deliverables 
Deliverable 
Inception Report 
(draft report, and 
final draft report) 
Interim Report 
(draft) 
Content 
A detailed work plan along with realistic timelines which 
prepared based on the expected assignments and 
tasks under the consulting services. Analysis and 
design of each system. Possible interior design, 
website, Database structure, User interface and 
design. Programming Report and log system. See 
additional details in main text of TOR. 
IT Firm performances. Output 1: RADM progress. 
Hardware installment and implementation- to set-up 
Estimated 
Submission 
5 weeks after 
mobilization (about 
1 Jan 2024) 
Payment 
Milestone 
20% of total 
remuneration 
166 
Appendix 2 
Deliverable 
Content 
VR technology room, configure projectors, kiosk 
machine and to apply possible interior design for 
RADM. Output 2, 3, 4: RADM progress. Development 
and Deployment of Museum management system, 
digital library system, library information system and 
website. Development of VR content progress. See 
additional details in main text of TOR. 
As above 
IT Firm performances. Output 2, 3, 4, 5: RADM 
progress. Development and Deployment of system. 
Testing process of entire RADM’s system life cycle 
IT Firm performances. Final RADM progress 
IT Firm performances. Final RADM progress 
Interim Report 
(final draft) 
Digital Museum 
is operational; 
progress report 
Final Report 
(draft) 
Final Report (final 
draft) 
Estimated 
Submission 
12 weeks after 
mobilization (about 
1 June 2024) 
Payment 
Milestone 
20% of total 
remuneration 
1 July 2024 
30 weeks after 
mobilization (about 
1 Nov 2024) 
50 weeks after 
mobilization (about 
1 Dec 2024) 
1 Feb 2025 
10% of total 
remuneration 
10% of total 
remuneration 
20% of total 
remuneration 
30% of total 
remuneration 
73.  Deliverable:  Inception  Report  (draft;  and  then  approved  final  draft).  The report  will 
include the following: 
(i)  Best practice and principles to guide the design of the project. 
(ii)  Software required to design and establish the RADM and website, including technical 
specifications and information technology standards, spatial recording and mapping of 
data  (geographic  information  system),  and  to  ensure  full  functionality  for  data  entry, 
use,  storage,  and/or  migration,  access  control,  web-based  access,  backup,  external 
storage, data recovery, use of artificial intelligence concepts (such as chatbots), pattern 
discovery, and other issues and key features deemed necessary. 
(iii) Hardware  required  to  support  and  operate  the  RADM.  This  may  include,  but  not  be 
limited  to,  computers,  servers,  external  storage  devices,  and  global  positioning 
systems; as well as the availability and capacity of existing utilities (e.g. communication 
and optic cables, and download speeds) at the RANCC. 
(iv) Preliminary longlist of commercially available software and hardware suitable for the 
TA; and, a short-list of recommended brands and/or models which are most suitable to 
achieve  the  TA  outputs and outcome.  The short-list  will  be  based  on  clear  selection 
criteria  (e.g.,  functionality,  user-friendliness,  data  security,  compatibility  with  existing 
software  and  hardware  systems  in  MET  and  other  key  stakeholders,  extent  of 
installation  support  and/or  after-purchase  service  by  the  supplier,  and  cost)  and 
tabulated  ranking  of  the  brands  and  models,  in  consideration  of  the  specific  design 
objectives. These recommendations will form the basis of the software and hardware 
to be purchased under the project, through the firm, to achieve the consultancy outputs 
and outcome. 
74. 
Deliverable:  Interim  report  (draft;  and  then  approved  final  draft).  The  report  will 
include the following content, which will also serve as key performance indicators for progress. 
Approval of the final draft interim report will be based on satisfactory confirmation of this content 
and performance indicators. 
(i)  Progress toward achieving the deliverables, including methodology, functions, and 
key features. 
(ii)  Progress toward achieving output 2. This will include the following: 
Appendix 2 
167 
➢ 
Progress  with  procurement  and  installation  of  the  hardware.  Indicator: 
hardware has been procured, installed, and is operating. 
➢  Description of work tasks required for O&M of the Digital Museum. Indicator: 
➢ 
staff positions responsible for O&M and/or use of the MIS confirmed. 
Progress with implementation of the training program. Including: summary of 
trainings  conducted;  topics,  training  materials,  dates,  and  number  of 
participants  per  training (with  gender  breakdown);  and feedback evaluations 
from  participants.  Indicator:  by  submission  of  the  draft  interim  report,  the 
program is at least 70% completed. 
➢  Draft  O&M  manual  for  the  software  and  hardware.  Including:  roles  and 
responsibilities of key agencies and staff positions; procedures for O&M and 
data entry, use, and exchange; costs and funding sources for O&M of the MIS 
and hardware; and ongoing training needs and costs. Indicator: by submission 
of the draft interim report, it is expected that a comprehensive draft manual has 
been  prepared;  and  that  by  submission  of  the  final  draft  interim  report,  the 
manual is almost finalized. 
(iii)  Progress toward achieving the consultancy objectives. Including: description of key 
challenges and issues faced; time based corrective actions to resolve these during 
the  consultancy;  and  initial  lessons  learned,  new  opportunities,  and  other 
observations, as relevant. 
(iv)  Updated work schedule for the remainder of the consultancy. 
75. 
Deliverable:  A  fully  operational  Digital  Museum,  including  web  platform,  that  has 
been handed over to MET and the Khovd Aimag Government and is demonstrated to be 
functioning. The following performance indicators will be applied to confirm achievement of the 
deliverable:  (i)  Digital  Museum  designed,  pilot-tested,  installed,  and  handed  over  to  MET  and 
Khovd Aimag Government; (ii) the hardware necessary for operation has been procured, installed, 
and is operating; (iii) the training program has been completed; and (iv) the hardware and software 
are  confirmed  to  be  functioning,  as  indicated  by:  (a)  real-time  demonstration  by  the  firm;  (b) 
independent, real-time demonstration of use by MET; (c) independent, real-time demonstration 
of a ‘test group’ of non-technical tourists; and (d) confirmation of these indicators by the PIU. 
Deliverable:  Final  Report  (draft;  and  then  approved  final  draft).  By  this  stage,  it  is 
76. 
expected that all major deliverables have been completed. The Digital Museum will be operational; 
ongoing  technical  support  and  monitoring  will  have  been  provided  by  the  firm  after  the  Digital 
Museum is operational;  and minor revisions to the software and/or O&M manual will have been 
made by the firm, if needed. The report will include: (i) final drafts of all deliverables reported in the 
inception and interim reports, (ii) final design of the Digital Museum and web platform, (iii) final 
draft of the O&M manual, and (iv) summary of lessons during implementation and measures or 
corrective  actions  taken  to  address  challenges  encountered,  and  (ii)  recommendation  on  the 
potential for, and steps to, replicate or scale up relevant deliverables to other regions of Mongolia. 
77. 
The expectation on the firm’s performance and final deliverables is on the delivery of a 
fully  functional  RADM’s  system,  website,  User  manual,  training,  and  post-delivery  technical 
support, during the project. The MET expect high-quality products that have been pilot-tested and 
are demonstrated to be functioning and operational. Quality, rather than length, is emphasized 
for the consultant’s reports and knowledge product. The successful firm will combine international 
and national expertise with a hands-on approach to achieve the deliverables. 
E. 
Reporting Requirements and Time Schedule for Deliverables: 
168 
Appendix 2 
The consulting firm will report to the PIU. The PIU will act as liaison between the consulting 
78. 
firm  and  the  implementing  agency,  executing  agency,  ADB  and  other  relevant  national  and 
regional  stakeholders  for  the  project  implementation.  The  PIU  will  facilitate  the  workflow  and 
ensure that all relevant activities, all the reports, all the documents and relevant data as well as 
the entire assignment will be completed effectively and successfully by the consulting firm within 
the allocated time based on the agreed workplan. Validation/comments on deliverables will be 
provided within 7 days from receipt of the report. Reports shall be delivered in CD ROM in three 
copies. 
79.  MET and PIU support to the firm will include: (i) focal points from MET’s Department of 
Tourism Policy Coordination and Department of Protected Areas Management and PIU, (ii) and 
help facilitate meetings and information exchange, and provide relevant project data. 
Appendix 2 
169 
5. 
CS5: External Environmental Monitoring Firm (National) 
A. 
Background 
80.  The  Sustainable  Tourism  Development  Project  (Phase  2)  is  being  implemented  by  the 
Government of Mongolia through the Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET), with funding 
support from the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The project includes the planned construction 
of two visitor centers, the Rock Art and Nomadic Cultural Center (RANCC) (Khovd Aimag) and 
Uvs Tourism Complex (UVTC) (Uvs Aimag), two tourist streets (one each in Khovd Aimag and 
Uvs Aimag), and about 35 small facilities – public campsites, public toilets, carparks, information 
centers, information points, public cooking cabins, trail upgrades, fee collection stations, ranger 
stations – in five sites: Altai Tavan Bogd National Park and the Petroglyphic Complexes of the 
Mongolian Altai (Bayan-Ulgii Aimag), Khar Us Nuur National Park and Tsenkher Cave (Khovd 
Aimag), and Khan Khukhii National Park and Uvs Nuur Special Protected Area (Uvs Aimag). 
81. 
In  2020  and  2021  the  following  documents  were  prepared:  (i)  preliminary  engineering 
designs and feasibility study report, (ii) a domestic environment baseline assessment (EBA), and 
(iii)  an  initial  environmental  examination  (IEE)  and  environment  management  plan  (EMP);  as 
required by ADB’s Safeguard Policy). In 2021, a General EIA Letter was issued by the MET, which 
requires the preparation of a Detailed EIA (DEIA) for the proposed facilities. The project will be 
implemented from December 2021 to December 2027. Implementation is coordinated through a 
project  implementation  unit  (PIU),  including  an  environment  safeguard  specialist.  The  project 
safeguard requirements include monitoring by (i) self-monitoring by the contractors for the works, 
to comply with the EMP, (ii) the detailed engineering design and construction supervision firms 
(DED/CSCs) to supervise works of the contractors, and (iii) the PIU, to ensure compliance of all 
agencies with the project EMP. 
82. 
This terms of reference is for an external environment monitoring firm, which will provide 
third-party, independent monitoring to ensure compliance of the project works with the EMP and 
domestic and ADB policies and regulations. 
83. 
During loan processing stage, The TA consultant had developed the various reports which 
meets  the  technical,  economic,  financial,  social,  environmental,  and  other  due  diligence 
requirements of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Government of Mongolia to design 
the  Project.  These  reports  include  the  following  but  not  limited  to:  the  Report  and 
Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors; Project Administration Manual; Social 
Development  Action  Plan;  Gender  Action  Plan;  Initial  Environmental  Examination;  Risk 
Assessment  and  Risk  Management  Plan;  Feasibility  Study  Report;  and  Climate  Risk  and 
Vulnerability Assessment. The firm shall ensure that their deliverables follow the approved project 
targets and preliminary designs prepared during the processing and described in these reports. 
B. 
Objective of the Consulting Services 
84. 
This task is to be undertaken as a lumpsum contract for 3 months over six years (about 
once every two years, or as needed depending on the works progress and nature of issues). A 
national firm, reporting to the PIU and MET, will assess compliance of the project, the contractors, 
and associated partners with all elements of the EMP (and site-specific elements of the EMP). 
The objective is to determine to what extent and how compliance was achieved, and if there are 
residual issues or needs for corrective actions, to define those. In addition, the firm will document 
overall observations, conclusions, recommendations, and lessons learned, to help inform future 
170 
Appendix 2 
projects of this nature. Specific timing of the project site visits will be discussed with the PIU and 
MET and will consider actual work progress and operational status at each of the sites. 
C. 
Scope of the Consulting Services and Expected Deliverables 
85. 
The Consultant will perform professionally and undertake activities necessary to achieve 
the objectives as defined above. The external environmental monitoring firm will have a detailed 
understanding  of  the  project  IEE,  EMP,  and  supporting  documents.  The  firm  will  have  the 
following tasks. 
(i)  Gain  familiarity  with  all  project  sites  and  potential  impacts  and  required  mitigation 
measures  through:  (i)  review  of  the  current  IEE  and  EMP;  (ii)  review  of  the  latest 
detailed designs and specifications for the facilities at the project sites; (iii) meetings 
with the project agencies; and (iv) site visits (about 3 times over 6 years, or as needed 
pending the progress of works and nature of issues). 
(ii)  The  firm  will  verify  the  project  actions  and  environmental  conditions  at  each  site, 
through field observations and consultations, and document these in comparison to 
predictions in the IEE and required mitigation measures in the EMP. 
(iii)  Review  findings  after  each  visit  (every  second  year)  with  the  PIU  and  MET,  and 
determine if corrective actions are necessary. 
(iv)  Document  observations 
(with  photographic  evidence)  and  conclusions, 
recommendations, and lessons learned. 
D. 
Team Composition and Qualification Requirements for key experts 
86. 
The  firm  will  have:  (i)  all  required  domestic  qualifications  and  certifications  to  conduct 
environmental monitoring and auditing, (ii) at least 10 years of relevant professional experience 
in  related  fields  and  projects,  especially  in  the  construction  sector,  (iii)  have  completed 
environmental monitoring for at least three large construction projects, (iv) technical competency 
and  required  technical  expertise  and  specialists  as  needed  to  conduct  the  environmental 
monitoring, including the necessary technical and sampling equipment and access to laboratory 
analysis as needed (physical, chemical, biological, ecological, and socioeconomic parameters), 
(v) ability to communicate and work effectively with local communities and government agencies, 
and (vi) proficiency in spoken and written English. The firm will provide reference letters from a 
minimum of three previous clients for similar projects. 
This is a lumpsum contract, for the project duration (six years). The lumpsum will include 
87. 
all required technical specialists, equipment, analysis, travel costs, and reporting costs. 
E. 
Deliverables and Work Schedule 
88.  The following reports will be provided. The progress reports and final reports to the PIU, 
MET and ADB will be submitted at a frequency and schedule that will be tailored to fit the 
project  construction  progress  and  maximize  the  effectiveness  of  the  site  visits  by  the 
agency. The reporting frequency will be agreed with the PIU and described in the agency’s 
inception report. 
(i) 
Inception  report  (brief).  One  month  after  mobilization.  To  describe  initial 
preparation, activities, and updated work plan. Format: Digital copy, in Mongolian 
and English languages. 
Appendix 2 
171 
(ii) 
At least three progress reports (one after each site visit). Format: Digital copy, in 
Mongolian and English languages. 
(iii)  Draft final report. Format: Digital copy, in Mongolian and English languages. 
(iv)  Final report. Format: Digital copy; and about three hard copies. In Mongolian and 
English language. The final report deliverables will include (i) a summary of lessons 
during  implementation  and  measures  or  corrective  actions  taken  to  address 
challenges encountered, and (ii) recommendation on the potential for, and steps to, 
replicate or scale up relevant deliverables to other regions of Mongolia. 
Any other deliverables as reasonably requested by the MET. 
(v) 
6. 
Terms of Reference for the Project Implementation Unit Positions 
Table 1: Staff Inputs 
Positiona 
No. 
A. Project Implementation Unit Staff 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Project Coordinator 
PIU Finance specialist 
PIU Procurement and Contract Management specialist 
PIU  Deputy  Team  Leader  and  Monitoring  and  Evaluation 
specialist 
Sustainable Tourism and Protected Areas specialist  
PIU Civil Engineer 
Environment Safeguards specialist 
Social, Gender and Civil Society specialist 
Uvs Aimag Supervision officer 
Khovd Aimag Supervision officer 
Bayan-Ulgii Aimag Supervision officer 
IT specialist  
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
PIU = project implementation unit. 
a  All positions are national. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Anticipated Base 
Station 
Person-
Months 
Ulaanbaatar 
Ulaanbaatar 
Ulaanbaatar 
Ulaanbaatar 
Ulaanbaatar 
Ulaanbaatar 
Ulaanbaatar 
Ulaanbaatar 
Uvs Aimag 
Khovd Aimag 
Bayan-Ulgii Aimag 
Ulaanbaatar 
  72.0  
  72.0  
  30.0  
  60.0  
  50.0  
  50.0  
  36.0  
  48.0  
  36.0  
  36.0  
  36.0  
36.0 
PROJECT  COORDINATOR  (ICS1)  (national;  full  time;  PIU  based  with  frequent  field 
89. 
travel). The consultant will have: (i) a post-graduate degree related to general administration (e.g., 
economics,  business  administration,  public  administration)  or  technical  aspects  of  the  project 
(tourism,  natural  resource management,  waste management); (ii)  at  least  10  years  of  relevant 
professional experience working for projects financed by Asian Development Bank (ADB) or other 
international organizations, of which the consultant worked in a managerial capacity for at least 7 
years; (iii) demonstrated ability to manage a team, prepare reports, and work with the government 
and private sector, communities, and civil society organizations (CSOs); (iv) excellent facilitator 
of meetings and negotiations for a wide range of stakeholders, especially governments, private 
sector,  and  communities;  (v)  excellent  command  of  English  and  Mongolian;  and  (vi)  good 
computer skills. Previous experience with ADB projects is preferred. 
90. 
The coordinator will lead the PIU and be responsible for preparation of annual work plans 
and  budgets;  communicating  clearly  to  PIU  staff  the  activities  to  be  completed;  ensuring  that 
Aimag based staff complete agreed activities; monitoring progress according to agreed protocols; 
maintaining regular contacts with the project director to discuss progress and possible need for 
adjustments or modifications, periodically visiting field locations to have a first-hand knowledge of 
the  situation;  ensuring  project  activities  are  implemented  in  accordance  with  ADB  policy  and 
procedures  related  to  project  administration,  procurement  and  disbursement,  and  safeguards; 
172 
Appendix 2 
and  preparing  reports  for  the  executing  agency,  MOF  and  ADB.  He/she  will  report  directly  to 
MET’s project director. Specific duties include the following. 
(i)  Work closely with PIU staff, the Aimag supervision officers, project consultants, provide 
the  lead  in  project  implementation,  ensuring  all  outputs  are  delivered  according  to 
approved work plans and budgets. 
(ii)  Ensure  that  the  PIU  staff  have  a  clear  understanding  of  the  project  design  and 
components; and have read and understand the RRP and project administration manual, 
and other relevant reports and designs. Ensure that PIU staff work  toward the project 
targets and indicators in the design and monitoring framework, gender action plan, social 
development  action  plan,  consultation  and  participation  plan,  and  stakeholder 
communication strategy: regardless of the specific skillsets and terms of reference for 
each PIU position, all need to work holistically to help achieve the project objectives. 
(iii)  Supervise PIU project staff and contractors, ensuring that they follow the annual work 
plan and budget. 
(iv)  Assist the project director in discussing terms of reference and expected outputs of PIU 
staff, providing coaching where required, and review performance of PIU staff. 
(v)  Ensure communications among PIU staff and contractors on project work plans, project 
issues, and project performance. 
(vi)  Conduct monthly PIU project management meetings to address the progress of the work 
plan and any impediments. 
(vii)  Facilitate discussions with MET and the aimag governments to (a) develop state-owned 
and  aimag-owned  entities  for  operation  and  maintenance  (O&M)  of  the  tourism 
complexes and tourist streets,(b) ensure that these entities are established at least one 
year  before  the  facilities  are  completed,  and  (c)  facilitate  training  of  the  entities  as 
needed. 
(viii)  Coordinate the activities of the PIU and ensure that planned activities are carried out. 
(ix) 
Identify the need for any updates to the PAM to reflect any changes in project activities 
and responsibilities, and seek prior endorsement from MET and ADB. 
(x)  Obtain necessary and timely approval of the project director on required activities. 
(xi)  Ensure timely preparation of contracts with suppliers and contractors for various project 
activities according to ADB standards. 
(xii)  Coordinate  delivery  of  consultant  work  to  be  completed  following  the  approved  work 
plans. 
(xiii)  Ensure financial activities are managed smoothly. 
(xiv)  Monitor PIU activities on (a) a monthly basis against the annual work plan and budget, 
and report regularly to the project director on progress, (b) prepare semiannual reports 
for  MET  and  ADB,  and  (c)  prepare  annual  performance  reviews  of  PIU  activities  and 
expenditures highlighting activities outstanding and those that need to be strengthened 
or modified. 
(xv)  Participate  in  periodic  field  reviews  of  implementation  activities,  and  project-funded 
inputs and services. 
(xvi)  Propose possible revisions of project plans and corresponding reallocation of resources 
within budget limits. 
(xvii)  Organize Project Steering Committee meetings in accordance with the work plan. 
(xviii) Ensure that PIU staff and consultants are aware of ADB and JFPR policies, including for 
social  and  environmental  safeguards,  gender,  anticorruption,  financial  management, 
procurement and disbursement. 
(xix)  Ensure that the ADB Safeguards Policy Statement is shared with all project implementing 
staff  and  consultants.  Ensure  all  project  activities  are  in  line  with  project  social  and 
environmental  safeguards.  Make  all  aimag  supervision  officers  aware  of  safeguard 
Appendix 2 
173 
requirements  and  due  diligence  to  do  when  starting  project  activities  to  ensure 
compliance. 
(xx)  Ensure that all relevant and international agencies are consulted for the project activities, 
including the UNESCO national office (for activities at the Uvs Nuur Special Protected 
Area and Petroglyphic Complexes of the Mongolian Altai, which are both World Heritage 
Sites) and Ramsar national office (for activities at the Uvs Nuur Special Protected Area 
and  Khar  Us  Nuur  National  Park,  which  are  both  Ramsar  Wetlands  of  International 
Importance). 
(xxi)  Apply  the  JFPR  Guidelines  for  the  grant  implementation,  including  for  (i)  coordination 
with the Embassy of Japan in Mongolia and Japan International Cooperation Agency, 
and (ii) requirements to maximize Japanese visibility. The guidelines are in Appendix 7 
of the PAM. Ensure that all PIU staff and the executing and implementing agencies are 
aware of, and help achieve, the donor requirements. 
(xxii)  Identify  and  seek  opportunities  to  invite  the  participation  of  Japanese  expertise  in the 
project implementation, including but not limited to the agencies listed in the JFPR grant 
proposal (Appendix 11 of the Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board 
of Directors). 
(xxiii) Request the Mongolia Resident Mission (MRNM) of ADB for additional training on ADB 
policies and procedures when needed. 
FINANCE SPECIALIST (ICS2) (national; fulltime; PIU based with occasional field travel). 
91. 
The specialist will have: (i) a bachelor’s degree in accounting, finance or business administration; 
(ii) CPA certification; (iii) 7 years of proven experience in accounting in the public or private sector; 
(iv)  at  least  3  years  of  experience  with  donor-funded  project(s)  in  the  equivalent  capacity;  (v) 
demonstrated qualifications and/or training in financial management and procurement including 
experience in accounting systems used by the government; (vi) proficient command of Microsoft 
Word  and  Excel;  and (vii)  good  command  of  written  and  spoken  English.  Previous  experience 
with  international  financial  institution  (IFI)  project(s),  including  ADB  and/or  World  Bank,  is 
preferred. Under the supervision of the project coordinator, the specialist will oversee all financial 
aspects of project implementation. will provide administrative support to project activities at the 
PMU, including (i) efficient disbursement operations; (ii) recruitment of consultants; (iii) monitoring 
and controlling of contracts; and (iv) ensuring that all of the above tasks are carried out following 
ADB’s policies and guidelines and in accordance with government requirements. Specific duties 
include the following. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Assist the executing agency to maintain the advance accounts (established by MOF for 
the  project)  and  to  open  and  maintain  the  project  local  currency  accounts,  in 
accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement Guidelines (2017, as amended from time 
to time). 
Prepare draft withdrawal applications for payment of project costs in coordination with 
the executing and implementing agencies and submit these to MOF for verification and 
signature by authorized signatories. 
Prepare  documentation  for  withdrawal  of  project  funds  from  the  project  advance 
accounts and local currency accounts, for co-signing by MET and the PIU coordinator. 
Establish and maintain an accounting management system for the PIU. In agreement 
with MET’s Financial Division, identify and select financial management software to be 
used for  the  project,  which  is  acceptable to ADB  and  the  government,  supported  by 
maintenance of hard-copy ledgers and records. Excel may be used for daily work and 
management rather than for the final storing and security of the project accounts. 
Establish and maintain a systematic filing  system  and  asset management  system  at 
the PIU, for the future transfer of the files and assets to the executing agency. 
174 
Appendix 2 
(vi)  Maintain the project accounts. 
(vii) 
Liaise  and  coordinate  with  MET’s  Financial  Division  for  their  provision  of  financial 
oversight to the executing and implementing agencies. 
(viii)  Provide information required for annual audits. 
(ix)  Monitor contract awards, disbursement, and expenditures. 
(x) 
(xi) 
Monitor contractor performance to ensure timely completion of contracts. 
Document  project  activities  related  to  procurement  of  goods  and  services  and 
recruitment of consultants and file these in a systematic and timely manner, together 
with all other relevant documents, for auditing and translating of relevant documents as 
needed. 
(xii)  Prepare  statements  of  expenditure  as  required  for  domestic  and ADB  reporting  and 
replenishment of the advance accounts. 
(xiii)  Respond to reviews and/or requests for financial information by the government and 
ADB, as necessary, in the course of project operations. 
(xiv)  Consolidate financial statements and requests for payment by contractors and service 
providers and assist the MET in the process of approval for payment release. 
(xv)  Prepare annual budgets and disbursement projections during project implementation 
in coordination with the implementing agencies. 
(xvi)  Compile  and  prepare  project  quarterly  and  annual  financial  progress  reports  as 
required by MET and ADB. 
(xvii)  Prepare bank reconciliation statements on a monthly basis. 
(xviii)  Prepare financial statements and financial reports. 
(xix)  Maintain the project accounting ledgers and financial documents. 
(xx)  Manage  cash  and  accounts  payable,  including  but  not  limited  to  requisitions  for 
payments, payments to suppliers, and payment of income and other required taxes of 
PIU staff and contractors. 
(xxi)  Prepare draft withdrawal applications for payment of project costs in coordination with 
the executing and implementing agencies and submit these to MOF for verification and 
signature by authorized signatories. 
(xxii)  Prepare requests for replenishment to the advance accounts. 
(xxiii)  Assist the project coordinator, government, and ADB, as necessary, in the facilitation of 
annual external audit assessments. 
(xxiv)  Assist the PIU in organizing training and workshops. 
(xxv)  Respond to queries from ADB with respect to financial aspects of the project. 
(xxvi)  Prepare and maintain a fixed asset register. 
PROCUREMENT SPECIALIST (ICS3) (national; intermittent; PIU based). The specialist 
92. 
will have: (i) a bachelor’s degree in business administration, accounting, public administration; (ii) 
at  least  3  years  of  experience  as  a  procurement  specialist  with  donor-funded  projects,  in 
equivalent  capacity,  preferably  with  ADB;  (iii)  demonstrated  qualifications  and/or  training  in 
procurement;  (iv)  familiarity  with  procurement  systems  of  the  Mongolian  Government  and  the 
rules,  regulations,  and  practices  of  procurement  and  contracting  in  general;  (v)  proficient 
command of Microsoft Word and Excel; and (v) good command of written and spoken English. 
Previous  experience  with  multi-lateral  donor  projects,  especially  ADB  and/or  World  Bank,  is 
preferred. Under the supervision of the project coordinator, the consultant will: (i) implement the 
procurement of works, goods, and services based on ADB and MOF regulations; (ii) ensure the 
project  procurement  plan  is  completed  in  a  timely  and  effective  manner;  (iii)  report  on  the 
completion  of  procurement  packages;  and  (iv)  ensure  that  the  above  tasks  are  carried  out 
following ADB’s Procurement Regulations and in accordance with Government’s requirements. 
The specialist will oversee all procurement aspects of project implementation. He/she will report 
directly to the PIU project coordinator. Specific duties include the following. 
Appendix 2 
175 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Assist  the  project  coordinator  and  accountant  to  establish  and  maintain  the  project 
accounting  management  system  and  a  systematic  filing  and  asset  management 
system,  so  that  (a)  recording  the  implementation  of  the  project  procurement  plan  is 
integrated into the management systems, and (b) files and assets can be handed over 
to the executing agency at project completion. 
Ensure all procurement of goods and works, and recruitment of consultants follow ADB 
relevant rules and procedures. 
Advise the PIU on best practices in procurement of works, goods and services based 
on the policies and guidelines for procurement of ADB and the Mongolian Government. 
For each package in the project procurement plan, (a) prepare draft bidding documents 
including technical specifications and Bills of Quantity (BOQ) for the works and goods 
required, contract conditions that each bidder must accept, and formats/templates for 
bidders to use in preparing their bids, (b) prepare Invitations for Bidders (IFB), Request 
for Expression of Interests (REOI), Draft Request for Proposals (RFP) for consulting 
services. 
Supervise the advertisement of the requests for bids/proposals by the PIU and assist 
in bid/proposals opening as required. 
(vi) 
Prepare the list of qualified bids submitted in response to the request for bids. 
(vii)  Support the bidding evaluation committee and/or construction supervision companies 
(BSC/CSC)  on  final  evaluation  of  the  bids/  proposals  for  technical  compliance  and 
financial criteria, and ranking. 
(v) 
(viii)  Prepare  and  submit  final  bid  evaluation  report  for  goods  and  works,  Technical 
proposals and Financial proposals evaluation reports for consultancy services  to the 
BEC/CSC for review and to ADB for approval after review, as necessary. 
Provide advice to the BEC/CSC on evaluation as required. 
Assist the PIU/EA in finalizing a contract with the lowest evaluated bidder. 
Provide information to the Project Steering Committee, as required. 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii)  Review and periodically revise the procurement plan as set out in the PAM and submit 
revisions through the PIU coordinator and provide justifications for the new packages 
with  the  technical  inputs  of  technical  staff  to  the  implementing  agency  and  ADB  for 
approval. 
(xiii)  Regularly  monitor  and  monthly  report  the  procurement  progress  to  the  PIU  project 
coordinator  and  complete  quarterly  and  annual  procurement  reports  for  the 
implementing agency and ADB; and 
(xiv)  Advise the client on procurement issues that may impact the achievement of project 
outcomes (including issues of pre-award and post-award). 
93. 
DEPUTY TEAM LEADER AND MONITORING AND EVALUATION SPECIALIST (ICS4) 
(national; full time; PIU based with frequent travel). The specialist will have: (i) a graduate degree 
in  business  administration,  public  administration,  economics,  natural  resources  management, 
and/or a related field; (ii) at least 5 years of experience with donor-funded projects with extensive 
field operations, in a similar capacity; (iii) excellent facilitator of meetings and negotiations for a 
wide range of stakeholders, especially local governments, private sector, and communities; and 
(iv)  good  command  of  spoken  and  written  English.  Under  the  supervision  of  the  project 
coordinator, the consultant will be responsible for (i) ensuring project implementation toward the 
project targets specified in the DMF, (ii) ensuring project implementation in compliance with ADB 
social and environmental policies, and (iii) ensuring effective M&E of project activities. Specific 
duties include the following. 
(i) 
Establish  the  project  performance  monitoring  system  (PPMS)  consistent  with  the 
project  design  and  monitoring  framework  (DMF)  that  meets  the  requirements  of  the 
176 
Appendix 2 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Government  of  Mongolia  and  ADB  for  monitoring  of  project  implementation  and 
achievement of project outputs, outcome and impact. 
Develop a monitoring plan for routine monitoring to be used by the PIU and ensure this 
is approved by the project director. 
Complete an M&E baseline report for the project, including targets set out in the DMF, 
indicators, and data collected for the baseline including data required by the project’s 
SDAP, GAP, IEE and other documents. 
Ensure  that  all  PIU  members  and  other  relevant  stakeholders  (especially  the 
implementing agencies) are aware of and understand the PPMS, project targets in the 
DMF and SGAP, and compliance requirements and procedures in the PAM and loan 
agreements. 
Train  PIU  staff  in  generating  data  for  regular  monitoring  reports,  and  compiling 
monitoring reports based on the project DMF and approved monitoring plan according 
to the approved monitoring plan 
Ensure  that  all  PIU  members  and  other  relevant  stakeholders  (especially  the 
implementing agencies) regularly provide updated information and progress toward the 
project targets and requirements. 
As part of the PPMS, maintain a project-specific, gender-disaggregated database. 
(x) 
(ix) 
(vii) 
(viii)  Screen all proposed activities to ensure compliance with the project EMP, SGAP, DMF, 
and PAM and assist the PIU team as necessary for compliance with these documents. 
Assist  the  project  coordinator  in  preparing  and  updating  the  project  implementation 
schedule. 
Assist the PIU team in preparing proposals for training, workshops, and publications in 
line with the project implementation schedule. 
Assist  the  PIU  team  in  leading  and/or  facilitating  participatory  stakeholder  meetings, 
including taking a leading role in sensitive or complex negotiations as needed. 
(xii)  Oversee  and  lead  implementation  of  the  SCS,  including  ensuring  that  all  PIU  team 
members are aware of the strategy and their roles to support effective implementation. 
Lead the preparation of the project quarterly progress reports, including documentation 
of progress toward targets of the DMF and SGAP and compliance with the EMP, PAM, 
and loan assurances. 
(xiii) 
(xi) 
(xiv)  Assist  project  coordinator  in  reviewing  deliverables  provided  by  consultants  and 
contractors and in the evaluation of performance of consultants and PIU staff. 
Produce  semiannual,  annual,  midterm  and  a  final  M&E  reports  for  inclusion  in  the 
project progress, midterm, and completion reports. 
(xv) 
(xvi)  Provide written or aural translations as required. 
94. 
SUSTAINABLE  TOURISM  AND  PROTECTED  AREAS  SPECIALIST  (ICS5)  (national; 
intermittent; PIU based with frequent field travel). The consultant will have: (i) a graduate degree 
and 10 years of relevant experience in tourism planning and development, environmental policy 
and management, biodiversity conservation, protected area management, or a related field; (ii) at 
least 5 years of experience in the technical area of tourism policy and planning, engagement of 
private  sector  in  tourism,  community-based  tourism  development,  sustainability  of  tourism, 
designing protected areas and management plans and/or managing protected areas; (iii) strong 
participatory and facilitation skills, in leading stakeholder consultations and participatory planning; 
(iv) familiarity with relevant national laws and regulations and international policies and methods 
for tourism policy and protected area management; (v) good physical health and willingness to 
undertake extensive travel to the field sites as needed; and (vi) good command of written and 
spoken  English.  Previous  experience  with  donor-funded project(s),  are  an advantage.  Specific 
duties include the following. 
Appendix 2 
177 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
the  draft  documents,  and, 
Lead  overall  activities  relevant  to  tourism  policy  and  planning,  protected  areas 
management and conservancy. 
Supervise  and  monitor  the  project  components  and  project  consulting  firms  for 
preparation of the regional master plan, revision of the aimag tourism development sub-
programs, establishment and piloting of the tourism concession manuals for the project 
protected areas, and the eco-certification program for tour camps. Assist in finalization 
and  government  and  ADB  endorsement  of 
the 
implementation  of the manuals  and program. Once established, closely  monitor  and 
support the implementation of these components for the remainder of the project. 
Conduct a baseline evaluation of the management effectiveness status of the project 
protected areas, using the international management effectiveness tracking tool. 
Contribute to the development of standards and targets for community-based tourism, 
poverty alleviation, and tour operations in cultural heritage sites and protected areas 
(with  the  perspective  of  wildlife  protection),  including  recommendations  on  tourist 
number limits at each site. 
Develop  the  requirements  for  tour  camp  licenses  and  certifications  as  they  relate  to 
wildlife conservation and strict prohibition of wildlife capture, trade, or consumption. 
Together with the PIU social, gender, and civil society specialist, and working closely 
with the livelihoods and tourism business development consulting services (package 
CS6), co-lead and coordinate the establishment and training of the 13 CBOs that will 
be established and/or expanded to work with the project in the five protected areas and 
heritage  sites.  This  will  include  (a)  establishment  of  the  CBOs  and  selection  of 
members,  through  transparent,  consultative,  and  community-led  processes,  (b) 
establishment of roles and responsibilities for each CBO, including O&M of the project-
funded  small  public  facilities,  (c)  implementing  the  community  participation  in 
procurement  package  (PAM  Sections  VI.B.3  and  VI.C.6)  to  coordinate  and  lead 
additional  community-led  tourism  activities  in  these  sites  and  procure  materials  and 
mobilize  labor  as  needed,  and  (d)  mobilize  and  coordinate  the  communities  to 
participate in the project trainings (to be provided by the PIU and livelihood consulting 
services) to achieve these tasks. 
(vii)  Support preparation of the project water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) program. 
(viii)  Plan and facilitate the official process to revise site management plans, to integrate all 
project  subcomponents,  including  the  management  strategies  for  traffic,  waste, 
tourism, and livelihoods, O&M of project facilities. 
Ensure the activities mentioned above (ii) are effectively and efficiently implemented 
within the planned duration. 
Closely  cooperate  with  the  detailed  engineering  design  and  supervision  consulting 
firms  and  contractors  of  tourism  facilities  and  small  facilities  at  the  PAs  under  the 
Project. 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi)  With  the  other  PIU  team  members,  design  and  implement  on-the-job  training  for 
protected areas management department staff, focusing especially on protected area 
management related to tourism, livelihoods, traffic, and waste management. 
For all tasks: (a) apply the designs and lessons learned from the previous JFPR-funded 
projects, and (b) ensure that the JFPR Guidelines for project visibility and expertise are 
applied for all of the JFPR-funded components. 
(xii) 
(xiii)  Establish and maintain effective working relationships with other development agencies 
and  civil  society  organizations  involved  in  conservation  and  tourism  in  western 
Mongolia, especially within and near the project locations. In particular, ensure close 
coordination and information exchange with (i) The Nature Conservancy, WWF, GIZ, 
and KfW, which are implementing similar activities within some of the project sites, and 
(ii)  UNDP,  which  is  implementing  community-based  tourism  work  elsewhere  in 
178 
Appendix 2 
Mongolia. In particular, plan and implement the project activities in the protected areas 
in coordination with these other agencies, to ensure alignment and complementarity of 
outputs and deliverables. 
(xiv)  Establish and maintain effective working relationships with relevant national and local 
government  agencies  for  conservation,  tourism,  and  cultural  heritage  protection  in 
western  Mongolia  and  especially  the  project  sites;  and  ensure  that  agencies  are 
informed of the project and their inputs and feedback are obtained when necessary. 
(xv)  Develop lessons learned and policy recommendations for the effective and continued 
implementation of the tourism and conservation components, especially the institutional 
components,  visitor  facilities  and  information  materials,  project  trainings,  and 
integration  of  the  tourism  and  conservation  components  within  the  aimag  and  soum 
development plans and site management plans. 
(xvi)  Prepare semiannual progress reports to document the progress, including inputs to the 
project environmental monitoring reports for compliance with the EMP requirements for 
ecological monitoring. Submit the reports to the PIU project coordinator and MET for 
review  and  consolidation  within  the  semiannual  progress  reports  to  be  submitted  by 
MET to ADB. 
95. 
PIU CIVIL ENGINEER (ICS6) (national; intermittent; PIU based with frequent field travel). 
The Consultant will have (i) a Master’s degree in engineering in a field relevant to the project civil 
works,  (ii)  at  least  10  years  of  professional  experience  in  building  design  and  construction 
engineering  and  supervision,  (iv)  excellent  knowledge  of  Mongolian  construction  standards, 
norms  and  regulations,  (v)  excellent  knowledge  in  interpretation  of  drawing,  technical 
specifications,  conditions  of  contract  to  the  suppliers,  (vi)  experience  in  project  Management, 
construction  supervision  and  contract  administration,  and  (vii)  good  command  of  English.  The 
engineer will coordinate the design and construction of project infrastructure packages. Specific 
duties include the following. 
(i) 
Support the PIU procurement specialist for preparation of the TORs for the consulting 
services  packages  for  the  detailed  engineering  design  and  construction  supervision 
companies  (DED/CSC)  of  the  project  works,  preparation  of  bidding  documents,  and 
requirements for conforming tenders, including criteria for evaluation of bids based on 
price and performance; and bid evaluation against the established criteria. 
(ii)  Facilitate, coordinate, and review the work of the DED/CSC firms and works contractors, 
to ensure the designs meet the TORs and that the construction supervision and works 
are conducted according to requirements. 
(iii)  Guide in identifying the scope of, and assist the procurement of, site surveys as needed 
to prepare detailed road project designs. 
(iv)  Review design standards and detailed cost estimates. 
(v)  Review the daft DEDs and bills of quantities. 
(vi)  Check all necessary approvals from provincial and local authorities have been obtained. 
(vii)  Establish  construction  quality,  environmental  and  audit  procedures  and  ensure  the 
contractor has met financial and insurance obligations as required by the bid document 
and terms of reference. 
(viii)  Ensure construction procedures are followed, regular site visits and assessments are 
held, and view test results and quality audits. 
(ix)  Supervise the development of O&M plans for the project facilities and related training 
for the operators of the facilities. 
(x)  Work closely with the PIU environmental and social specialists to ensure compliance 
with the project EMP, CPP, SGAP, and SCS, as well as the relevant PAs management 
plans, laws on protected areas, waste management Strategy, and other relevant laws 
Appendix 2 
179 
and regulations. 
(xi)  Overview  determination  of  ‘Practical  Completion,’  establishment  of  ‘Defects  Liability 
Period’ and issue of ‘Final Certificate.’ 
(xii)  Prepare semiannual progress reports to document the progress. Submit the reports to 
the PIU project coordinator and MET for review and consolidation within the semiannual 
progress reports to be submitted by MET to ADB. 
96. 
PIU  ENVIRONMENT  SAFEGUARDS  SPECIALIST  (ICS7)  (national;  intermittent;  PIU 
based with frequent field travel). The consultant will have: (i) graduate degree in environmental 
management or related field; (ii) 10 years of relevant experience in environmental management, 
monitoring,  and  reporting  for  large  construction  projects;  (iii)  demonstrated  experience  in 
environmental impact assessment (EIA) and/or management for projects financed by ADB and/or 
other development organizations; (iii) strong participatory and facilitation skills, to work effectively 
with local stakeholders and facilitate consultations resulting in positive outcomes and dialogue; 
(iv) ability to analyze data and prepare technical reports; (v) willingness and health to regularly 
travel  to  all  project  construction  sites  and  in  different  seasons;  (vi)  national  certification  for 
environmental assessment, management, and/or monitoring; and (vii) good command of spoken 
and  written  English.  Under  the  supervision  of  the  project  coordinator,  the  specialist  will  work 
closely with the other PIU staff, protected area administrations, soum governments, communities, 
construction  supervision  companies,  contractors,  and  other  relevant  stakeholders,  to  ensure 
effective implementation of the project EMP. Specific duties include the following. 
(i)  Gain familiarity with the project sites and monitoring requirements through: (a) review of 
the potential impacts and monitoring requirements in the EMP, as well as the overall IEE 
and EMP and domestic environmental baseline assessment and General EIA prepared 
for the project; (b) meetings with the project agencies; and (c) site visits. 
(ii) 
(v) 
(iii) 
(vi) 
(iv) 
Determine  if  revisions  to  the  EMP  are  necessary  and  help  define  site-specific 
environmental management plans (SEMPs). 
Establish  positive  and  effective  working  relationships  with  stakeholders  and  work 
closely with the MET environment and social officers, protected area authorities and 
aimag  departments,  contractors,  construction  supervision  company,  and  all  other 
relevant agencies to implement the EMP. 
Distribute  the  Mongolian  language  version  of  the  EMP  to  all  relevant  agencies, 
including  the  aimag  and  soum  agencies  responsible  for  environment  and  social 
protection. This should occur at least 3 months before construction begins. 
Conduct meetings with agencies as necessary to ensure they understand their specific 
responsibilities described in the EMP. 
Ensure  that  relevant  mitigation,  monitoring,  and  reporting  measures  in  the  EMP  are 
included in the bidding documents, contracts, and relevant construction plans. 
(vii)  Coordinate the preparation of the detailed EIAs and ensure these are prepared in close 
coordination  with  the  detailed  engineering  designs  (DED).  Work  closely  with  the 
engineering firms  and MET to  ensure  timely finalization, review,  and  approval  of the 
detailed EIAs. 
Identify whether the final approved DEDs are consistent with the preliminary designs 
approved during project preparation; and confirm whether the EMP requires updating. 
If updates to the EMP are required, discuss and submit the proposed changes to MET 
and ADB for review and endorsement. Work closely with the PIU, MET and contractors 
to ensure that no civil works proceed until the EMP is confirmed to be adequate, or any 
revisions are approved. 
Ensure  that  all  relevant  and  international  agencies  are  consulted  for  the  project 
activities, including the UNESCO national office (for activities at the Uvs Nuur Special 
(viii) 
(ix) 
180 
Appendix 2 
Protected  Area  and  Petroglyphic  Complexes  of  the  Mongolian  Altai,  which  are  both 
World Heritage Sites) and Ramsar national office (for activities at the Uvs Nuur Special 
Protected Area and Khar Us Nuur National Park, which are both Ramsar Wetlands of 
International Importance). 
(x)  Working with the DED/CSCs and works contractors, ensure that the following measures 
are included in the work plans of the contractors: (a) work teams include one qualified 
environment,  health,  and  safety  specialist,  (b)  detailed  site  assessment  by  the  PIU 
specialist, DED/SCS, and contractor before any works, to assess site ecological and 
heritage  values  and  to  demarcate  all  off-limits  areas  for  project  staff  and  works,  (c) 
update the site-specific EMPs as needed to reflect local site conditions, (d) regular on 
site  monitoring  for  environmental  and  social  safeguards  and  compliance  with  the 
project EMP and site-specific EMPs, (e) monthly reporting from the contractors to the 
DED/SCSs on safeguard implementation progress. 
Closely monitor the project designs and works to ensure that all EMP requirements are 
strictly complied with, especially maintaining the design scope and specific locations in 
the protected areas. Ensure there will be no damage to, or loss of, critical habitat or 
physical cultural resources. 
(xi) 
(xii)  Supervise and monitor work site clean-up and hand-over to the local authorities. 
(xiii)  Develop  and  maintain  a  photographic  database  of  all  project  sites,  with  photo-
monitoring points at consistent site locations, to monitor “before” and “after” progress. 
(xiv)  Provide on-the-job training for the PIU, contractors, and other stakeholders as needed 
to  ensure  that  all  agencies  are  aware  of  their  roles  and  responsibilities  for 
implementation of the EMP, including the grievance redress mechanism (GRM). 
(xv)  With the PIU Social, gender, and civil society specialist, MET environment and social 
officers,  and  other  stakeholders,  establish  the  project  GRM.  Plan  and  implement 
regular  and  meaningful  stakeholder  consultations 
the  project 
implementation,  to  ensure  that  (a)  the  GRM  is  well  understood  and  known  by  all 
stakeholders,  (b)  any  grievances  are  quickly  reported  and  addressed,  and  (c) 
stakeholders, especially local communities and CSOs working in the project areas, are 
well informed of progress relating to environmental safeguards and management for 
the project 
throughout 
(xvi)  Ensure that contractors implement the EMP. 
(xvii)  Ensure  project  compliance  with  all  relevant  environmental  domestic  laws,  and 
international  conventions  that  Mongolia  is  a  signatory  to,  including  the  Core  Labour 
Standards of the International Labour Organization. 
(xviii) 
Implement the monitoring and reporting requirements in the EMP, including timely 
submission of progress reports to the MET environment and social officers. The reporting 
will include project compliance with country labor laws, the Core Labour Standards of the 
International Labour Organization, the Mongolian National standards and targets in EMP 
Table  for  environmental  parameters,  and  other  relevant  environmental  laws  and 
regulations as needed. 
(xix) 
Implement  the  monitoring  and  reporting  requirements  in  the  EMP,  including  timely 
submission of progress reports to the MET environment and social officers. 
(xx)  Make  regular  inspections  of  construction  sites  to  assess  progress,  meet  with 
contractors and/or local communities, and assess compliance with the EMP. 
(xxi)  Facilitate on site inspections by government agencies to ensure timely environmental 
certification and approvals of the completed civil works. 
(xxii)  Maintain digital records of all progress and information. 
(xxiii)  Prepare  semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports  to  document  progress  for 
implementation of the project environmental safeguards. Submit the reports to the PIU 
Appendix 2 
181 
project coordinator and MET for review and consolidation with the semiannual progress 
reports to be submitted by MET to ADB. 
(xxiv)  Support the PIU project coordinator in other tasks related to environment safeguards 
as needed. 
97. 
PIU SOCIAL, GENDER AND CIVIL SOCIETY SPECIALIST (ICS8) (national; intermittent; 
PIU based with frequent field travel). The specialist will have: (i) a post-graduate degree in social 
science or relevant discipline such as development studies, gender or social work; (ii) at least 7 
years  of  relevant  professional  experience  in  working  as  a  social,  gender,  and  civil  society 
specialist;  (iii)  at  least  5  years  of  experience  working  in  equivalent  capacity  for  international 
development agencies and donor projects on social issues, as well as with communities, CSOs, 
and  other  stakeholders;  (iv)  strong  participatory  and  facilitation  skills,  to  work  effectively  and 
sensitively with local communities and facilitate consultations resulting in positive outcomes and 
dialogue; (v) willingness to regularly travel to the project construction sites, sometimes staying on 
site to conduct local consultations; (vi) sound knowledge of gender mainstreaming and gender-
sensitive reporting; and (vii) good command of spoken and written English. Under the supervision 
of the project coordinator, the consultant will coordinate and manage the implementation of the 
project social development action plan (SDAP), gender action plan (GAP), and consultation and 
participation  plan  (CPP),  and  closely  support  the  deputy  team  leader  and  PIU  team  to  also 
implement the stakeholder communication strategy (SCS). Specific duties include the following. 
98.  He/she  will  be  responsible  to  provide  social  and  gender  aspect  support  for  project 
implementation in compliance of ADB social policies and procedures, and covenants on 
social aspects. 
(i)  Develop  a  work  plan  for  implementing  and  monitoring  the  poverty,  social  and  gender 
dimensions of the project based on key socioeconomic indicators. 
(ii)  With the project implementation and M&E specialist, ensure the PPMS is structured to 
efficiently record gender-disaggregated project trainings and targets in the DMF, SGAP, 
and summary poverty reduction and social strategy (SPRSS). Ensure that all social and 
gender  targets  and  sex-disaggregated  data  are  well  maintained  in  the  database  and 
stored in manner which enables quick retrieval and summarizing for the preparation of 
progress reports. 
(iii)  Provide practical advice and support to MET and the PIU team on the implementation of 
relevant plans following both ADB and domestic policy frameworks. 
(iv)  Closely monitor to ensure that the project does not have any involuntary resettlement 
impacts  or  indigenous  peoples  impacts  within  the  meaning  of  the  Safeguards  Policy 
Statement. 
(v)  Carry  out  updating  social  safeguard  screening  and  due  diligence  for  each  civil  works 
during the detailed design. 
(vi)  Assist MET and the PIU in supervising contractors to ensure compliance with the relevant 
project covenant and ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement. 
(vii)  Closely monitor and verify to ensure that the necessary budgetary and human resources 
to fully implement the SDAP, CPP, and GAP are available. 
(viii)  Review the bidding documents to ensure all the provisions related to labor and health, 
and the measures set forth in the GAP, SDAP, CPP, and/or SCS have been incorporated 
into the bidding documents. 
(ix)  Together with the PIU sustainable tourism and protected areas specialist, and working 
closely  with  the  livelihoods  and  tourism  business  development  consulting  services 
(package CS6), co-lead and coordinate the establishment and training of the 13 CBOs 
that  will  be  established and/or  expanded  to work  with  the  project  in the five  protected 
areas and heritage sites. This will include (a) establishment of the CBOs and selection 
of  members,  through  transparent,  consultative,  and  community-led  processes,  (b) 
182 
Appendix 2 
establishment of roles and responsibilities for each CBO, including O&M of the project-
funded  small  public  facilities,  (c)  implementing  the  community  participation  in 
procurement  package  (PAM  Sections  VI.B.3  and  VI.C.6)  to  coordinate  and  lead 
additional  community-led  tourism  activities  in  these  sites  and  procure  materials  and 
mobilize labor as needed, and (d) mobilize and coordinate the communities to participate 
in the project trainings (to be provided by the PIU and livelihood consulting services) to 
achieve these tasks 
(x)  Supervise  the  preparation  and  implementation  of  the  project  water,  sanitation,  and 
hygiene (WASH) program. 
(xi)  Design  and  lead training  for the  project  communities on the  prevention  and  control  of 
transmissible diseases and HIV/AIDS, and community disturbance to relevant officers at 
aimag/soum level, contractors and workers. 
(xii)  Ensure that all project consultations and trainings for the project communities which are 
led by the specialist, other PIU staff, and the project consulting services, are designed 
and planned to (a) be meaningful i.e. are held in languages, times, locations, and formats 
tailored to local needs and culture, (b) ensure cultural respect, and (c) be as efficient as 
possible, to minimize time burden on communities. 
(xiii)  Assist the executing agency and PIU to disclose information at aimag/soum levels on the 
project and its benefits. 
(xiv)  With  the  PIU  environment  safeguards specialist,  establish the  project  GRM.  Plan  and 
implement  regular  and  meaningful  stakeholder  consultations  throughout  the  project 
implementation,  to  ensure  that  (a)  the  GRM  is  well  understood  and  known  by  all 
stakeholders,  (b)  any  grievances  are  quickly  reported  and  addressed,  and  (c) 
stakeholders, especially local communities and CSOs working in the project areas, are 
well informed of progress relating to social safeguards and management for the project. 
(xv)  Provide  on-the-job  training  for  the  PIU,  MET,  contractors,  and  other  stakeholders  as 
needed  to  ensure  that  all  agencies  are  aware  of  their  roles  and  responsibilities  for 
implementation of the SDAP, GAP, CPP, and GRM. 
(xvi)  Ensure that construction supervision companies and contractors comply with the SDAP, 
CPP, GAP, applicable laws and regulations, and ADB’s social policies. 
(xvii)  Facilitate and support all project stakeholders to implement and achieve the social and 
gender targets in the DMF, SGAP, CPP, SCS, and SPRSS. 
(xviii) Coordinate with the relevant  social  and  gender focal  points  in MET,  aimag  and  soum 
governments,  communities,  and  other  development  agencies  and  civil  society 
organizations, to ensure regular communication and information sharing for efficient and 
effective project implementation. 
(xix)  Provide social and gender inputs to project progress reports, monitoring reports, midterm 
report, project completion report, and another project required documents. 
(xx)  Provide  inputs  for  the  training  and  capacity  development  of  MET/PIU  and  relevant 
officers  at  aimag  and  soum  levels,  coordinate  with  the  team  leader  and  other  team 
specialists to carry out training program and provide support to the capacity development 
activities for implementation and monitoring and evaluation of the SDAP, CPP, GAP and 
other social measures, as necessary; 
(xxi)  Ensure that the performance indicators set-up in the project DMF regarding gender and 
other social issues are met; and 
(xxii)  Undertake  any  other  necessary  work  assigned  by  the  project  coordinator  and  project 
director. 
99. 
UVS  AIMAG  SUPERVISION  OFFICER  (ICS9)  (national;  intermittent;  PIU  based  with 
frequent  field travel).  The  officer  will  be  a  citizen  of  the  project  aimag  and  have:  (i)  bachelor’s 
law,  civil  engineering,  public 
degree 
management, or related discipline, (ii) at least 8 years of work experience on rural livelihood or 
similar projects, of which 3 years of experience in team management in tourism development is 
in  business  administration, 
tourism,  economics, 
Appendix 2 
183 
preferable, (iii) ideally, experience in working on a large grant-funded or loan-funded project by 
an international development agency or civil society organization, (iv) familiarity with the project 
locations  and communities,  (v)  strong communication and coordination  skill,  (vi)  demonstrated 
ability  to  work  effectively  and  respectfully  with  a  wide  range  of  stakeholders,  especially  local 
communities,  government, tourists,  civil  society organizations,  and  works  contractors,  and  (vii) 
ideally (but not essential), moderate spoken English. 
100.  The  officer  will  report  to  the  PIU  project  coordinator  and  will  ensure  the  effective 
implementation of the project activities in Uvs Aimag. The officer will be responsible for: (i) project 
activities’  daily  management,  coordination,  implementation,  and  periodical  monitoring  and 
reporting; (ii) consolidation of project  activities with aimag work plans; (iii) closely working with 
consultants  contracted  for  the  project  and  working  in  the  aimag;  (iv)  maintaining  regular 
communication with relevant aimag and soum departments; and (v) ensuring project activities are 
implemented in accordance with ADB policies. The officer will report to the PIU project coordinator 
and will ensure the effective implementation of the project activities in Uvs Aimag. Specific duties 
include the following. 
(i) 
Provide  the  liaison  to  aimag  and  soum  staff  involved  in  project  implementation  and 
organize the necessary training on behalf of the PIU and project consultants. 
(ii)  Coordinate the overall project activities in the target aimag and soums in a timely manner 
in accordance with the approved work plan. 
(iii)  Supervise  design  and  supervision  consultants  and  works  contractors  for  timely 
completion of the contracts and daily monitor the process. 
(iv)  Ensure  proposed  activities  are  screened  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the 
aimag Environmental Office. 
(v)  Assist the PIU project coordinator in evaluation of performance of the consultants and 
contractors. 
(vi)  Ensure  smooth  communications  and  collaboration  with 
local  governments  and 
departments, contractors and consultants, and represent the PIU on a daily basis in the 
aimag. 
(vii)  Participate in and help facilitate regular PIU meetings to monitor the progress of the work 
plan, and address deviations and delays. 
(viii)  Monitor activities on a monthly basis against the annual work plan and budget, and report 
on the progress achieved to the PIU project coordinator. 
(ix)  Ensure  compliance  with  all  ADB  and  JFPR  policies  and  procedures  on  social  and 
environmental safeguards, gender, anticorruption, financial management, procurement 
and disbursement. 
(x)  Contribute to preparation of the project progress reports. 
(xi)  Support the PIU project coordinator in other tasks as required. 
101.  KHOVD AIMAG SUPERVISION OFFICER (ICS10). As for ICS9. 
102.  BAYAN-ULGII AIMAG SUPERVISION OFFICER (ICS11). As for ICS9. 
184 
Appendix 3 
APPENDIX 3: INDICATIVE TERMS OF REFERENCES FOR THE GRANT-FINANCED 
CONSULTING SERVICES 
1. 
Two  consulting  services  packages  will  be  financed  by  the  Japan  Fund  for  Poverty 
Reduction  (JFPR)  Grant:  (i)  Livelihoods  and  Tourism  Business  Development  and  Capacity 
Building (CS6, national firm), and (ii) Detailed Engineering Design and Construction Supervision 
for small works at five protected areas (CS7, national firm). The Department of Protected Areas 
Management  (DPAM)  of  the  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Tourism  (MET)  is  the  implementing 
agency  for  the  grant.  The  project  implementation  unit  (PIU)  will  work  on  behalf  of  the  DPAM  to 
coordinate  recruitment  of  the  consulting  services  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Procurement  Policy 
(2017, as amended from time to time) and Procurement Regulations for ADB Borrowers (2017, as 
amended from time to time). The consulting firms will be selected by (i) full technical proposals; and 
(ii) using the quality- and cost-based selection method, with a quality-cost weighting ratio of 90:10. 
The estimated duration and cost of each package is in Table 1. 
No 
CS6 
CS7 
Table 1: Summary of Consulting Services 
Package Name  
Livelihoods and Tourism 
Business Development and 
Capacity Building (National) 
Summary Details 
Selected through ADB’s QCBS (90:10) selection 
method. 
Expected duration: 58 person-months 
Estimated cost $265,000 
Detailed Engineering Design and 
Construction Supervision for 
Small Works at 5 Protected 
Areas and Heritage Sites 
(National) 
National firm. 
Selected through ADB’s QCBS (90:10) selection 
method 
Expected duration: 46 person-months 
Estimated cost $169,700 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
2. 
1. 
The scope and tasks of the consulting services financed by the grant are described below. 
CS6: Livelihoods and Tourism Business Development and Capacity Building 
A.  Overview 
3. 
The Sustainable Tourism Development Project (Phase 2) will be implemented in western 
Mongolia over six years with an estimated cost of $32.3 million, of which ADB is requested to 
finance $30.0 million through a regular loan. A $2.0 million grant will be implemented as part of 
the  overall  project,  financed  by  the  Japan  Fund  for  Poverty  Reduction  of  the  Government  of 
Japan. The Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET) is the executing agency for the overall 
project,  and  MET’s  Department  of  Protected  Areas  Management  (DPAM)  is  the  implementing 
agency for the grant. The grant will have three components: (i) inclusive planning and capacity 
for community-based tourism enhanced, (ii) sanitation and waste management improved, and (iii) 
management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened. 
B.  The Grant Project 
4. 
The grant will support three of the four outputs of the overall project: (i) inclusive planning 
and  capacity  for  community-based  tourism  enhanced,  (ii)  sanitation  and  waste  management 
improved, and (iii) management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened. 
Appendix 3 
185 
Grant component 1: Inclusive planning and capacity for community-based tourism 
5. 
enhanced.  This  component  will  establish  the  first  pilot  tourism  development  program  for 
Mongolia. It will focus on strengthening technical capacity and access to low-interest finance for 
poor and vulnerable households, community-based organizations (CBOs), and MSME, to develop 
tourism goods and services. The program will comprise (i)  vocational training, (ii) a community 
revolving  fund  (CRF),  (iii)  a  youth  incubator,  and  (iv)  the  establishment  of  nine  women-led 
markets. The program will focus initially on rural communities at five protected areas and cultural 
heritage  sites  (para.  4)  and  will  be  planned  and  implemented  in  partnership  with  aimag  youth 
employment centers, regional colleges, and tour camp operators. The CRF will apply a successful 
design piloted with previous JFPR support and will be the first such fund for community-based 
tourism in western Mongolia.1 The youth incubator will comprise (i) two training venues for youth 
in  the  loan-funded  tourism  complexes,  as  safe  learning  spaces  to  foster  innovation  and 
entrepreneurship, and (ii) through the grant, provide tourism related training and match youth with 
local  enterprises  to  develop  tourism  goods  and  services.  About  2,449  poor  and  vulnerable 
residents will benefit from new or expanded community enterprises supported under the program. 
Grant component 2: Sanitation and waste management improved. This component 
6. 
will  (i)  fund  the  installation  of  about  60  low-cost,  gender-sensitive  toilet  systems  at  public 
campsites and project-funded car parks at five protected areas. The project will replicate previous 
successful  JFPR-funded  toilet  designs  and  operation  and  maintenance  (O&M)  procedures, 
including the training of CBOs to manage the toilet facilities and litter collection, (ii) establish waste 
disposal procedures for the project facilities, including transport and treatment at rural wastewater 
treatment plants and landfills to be upgraded under the ADB funded ASDIP project (see Section 
I  [para.  15]  of  the  project  administration  manual),  and  (iii)  implement  a  water,  sanitation,  and 
hygiene (WASH) program. This will establish the first sanitation standards and health and safety 
protocols for the tourism sector in western Mongolia. The program will be prepared with aimag 
health  clinics  and  border  agencies  and  will  be  aligned  with  guidelines  of  the  World  Health 
Organization  for  infection  prevention  and  control. 2  The  program  will  focus  first  on  the  rural 
communities, visitors, and tour camps of 13 soums around five protected areas, then scale up to 
at least nine additional surrounding soums. It will be incorporated into the loan-funded regional 
tourism  master  plan  and  revised  aimag  tourism  plans,  ensuring  that  the  program  becomes 
integrated within the institutional framework for the tourism sector. Collectively, these measures 
will help establish post coronavirus (COVID-19) resilience and safety for over 16,296 residents 
and 36,000 visitors per year to the project sites. 
7. 
Grant  component  3:  Management  of  cultural  heritage  sites  and  protected  areas 
strengthened. This component will (i) construct at least 35 small public facilities at five cultural 
heritage  sites  and  protected  areas,  comprising  public  campsites,  information  centers,  public 
cooking cabins, bird watching towers, ranger stations, and fee collection stations, and (ii) establish 
O&M procedures and training for the facilities. The facilities will be operated by about 13 CBOs 
1   A total of $0.4 million (20.0%) of the grant proceeds will be allocated for the CRF, divided equally across the three 
project aimags. Procedures and conditions for loan application, repayment, and monitoring will apply the guidelines 
of  a  previous  JFPR-funded  CRF.  Three  CRF  committees  (one  per  aimag)  of  locally-elected  residents  will  be 
established to coordinate CRF implementation. The CRF interest rates will be low and reviewed regularly.  Interest 
repayments over the grant duration will replenish the funds. Loans will be limited to activities compatible with the 
grant  objectives  for  poverty  reduction,  domestic  regulations,  and  ADB  policies.  The  project  will  provide  financing 
expertise  and  training  to  establish  and  manage  the  CRF.  The  CRF  will  be  held  in  a  bank  account  of  a  qualified 
banking institution that will also manage an agricultural fund for another ADB-supported project in western Mongolia 
(ADB. 2017. Technical Assistance to Mongolia for Preparing the Aimag and Soum Centers Regional Development 
Investment Program [ASDIP]. Manila). The CRF financing will be issued in staged tranches, with the tranche amounts 
based on community demand, CRF performance, and the project monitoring.  
2   World Health Organization. 2020. Infection prevention and control guidance (COVID-19). 
186 
Appendix 3 
and generate about 176 jobs to be prioritized for the poor and vulnerable, and new revenue from 
visitor fees and sales. In particular, community management and guiding services for the TSC will 
be established, linked with O&M of a loan-funded tourism complex. This will be the first project in 
Mongolia for community-led protection of rock art heritage. Implementation will be planned with 
the  National  Cultural  Heritage  Center  and  will  provide  demonstration  and  lessons  for  the 
protection of other rock art sites in Mongolia. 
8. 
The consultant deliverables need to reflect a holistic design approach that ensures synergy 
and integration, where relevant, with the other project components and deliverables prepared by 
other consulting teams. Examples include, but are not limited to: (i) ensuring that the revised aimag 
tourism plans integrate the project components and operation and maintenance (O&M) plans for 
the project facilities, (ii) poverty, gender, and livelihood targets will be integrated within the regional 
tourism master plan, revised aimag tourism plans, and improved tour camp standards, and (iii) O&M 
of  the  loan-funded  tourism  complexes  will  include  promotion  of  the  grant-supported  community 
goods, services, and protected areas. The firm is therefore required to have a good understanding 
of  the  overall  project  design  and  targets  in  addition  to  the  specific  deliverables  under  the 
consultancy. 
C.  Objective of the Assignment 
The consultancy will lead the detailed design, preparation, and implementation of all non-
9. 
structural components of the grant under components 1 to 3. The consultancy will focus on the 
rural communities of 13 soums within and around five protected areas: Altai Tavan Bogd National 
Park  (ATBNP)  including  the  UNESCO  World  Heritage  Area  Petroglyphic  Complexes  of  the 
Mongolian Altai (PCMA) in Bayan-Ulgii Aimag, Tsenkher Cave (TSC) and Khar Us Nuur National 
Park (KUNNP) in Khovd Aimag, and Khan Khukhii National Park (KKNP) and Uvs Nuur Strictly 
Protected Area (UVSPA) in Uvs Aimag. The consultancy will be undertaken by a national firm. 
The project processing phase included the preparation of the specific project targets and 
10. 
designs  for  all  components,  and  reports  which meet  the  technical,  economic,  financial,  social, 
environmental, and other due diligence requirements of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and 
the Government of Mongolia to design the project. These reports include but are not limited to: 
the Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors; JFPR Grant proposal; 
Project  Administration  Manual;  Social  Development  Action  Plan;  Gender  Action  Plan;  Initial 
Environmental  Examination;  Risk  Assessment  and  Risk  Management  Plan;  Feasibility  Study 
Report;  and  Climate  Risk  and  Vulnerability  Assessment.  The  firm  shall  ensure  that  their 
deliverables  follow  the  approved  project  targets  and  preliminary  designs  prepared  during  the 
processing and described in these reports. In particular, the firm will be familiar with the RRP, 
JFPR  Grant,  social  development  action  plan,  gender  action  plan,  and  consultation  and 
participation  plan,  as  these  documents  are  highly  relevant  to  the  objectives  of  the  consulting 
service. 
D.  Scope of Services, Tasks, and Deliverables 
The scope of the services will include the following. The consultant will work closely with 
11. 
the PIU and other key stakeholders as needed, including MET, the Ministry of Labor and Social 
Protection,  Youth  Development  Centers  (YDCs),  protected  area  administrations  of  the  project 
sites, local learning centers (including Khovd University and Ulaangom Polytechnic College), and 
aimag public-private dialogue councils. 
Appendix 3 
187 
Component 1: Inclusive planning and capacity for community-based tourism enhanced 
Lead the detailed design, preparation, and implementation of the pilot tourism business 
12. 
development program, including the following major components. 
13. 
Quality jobs and livelihoods strategy. Key tasks: 
(i)  Develop a brief strategy to ensure that all livelihood-focused activities under the project 
are linked i.e., the targets for livelihoods, jobs, and trainings under project outputs 1–4 of 
the loan and components 1–3 of the grant. This will reflect the designed synergy between 
the  loan-  and  grant-funded  components,  and  the  targets  in  the  design  and  monitoring 
framework, social and development action plan, and gender action plan. 
14. 
(i) 
Subcomponent: vocational training. Key tasks: 
Assess key community training needs and demand, aligned with the project objectives to 
improve livelihoods through community-led tourism. 
(ii)  Focus the training on demands and needs of especially: poor and vulnerable households, 
the  project-supported  CBOs,  women’s  groups,  and  youth  groups.  This  strategic  focus 
should aim to maximize the training impacts by targeting key local groups, that will help 
mobilize and scale up community initiatives. 
(iii)  Design the training program. Topics are anticipated to include, but not be limited to, home 
business  management  and  administration,  starting  a  business,  customer  relations, 
reasons  for  business  failures,  cost/  benefit  analysis,  marketing  strategies,  hygiene  and 
sanitation  practices,  packaging,  labeling,  promotional  strategies  and  competition  in 
business  guiding,  trekking,  home  stay,  ger  camps,  horse  riding  and  rental,  sightseeing 
services, and handicrafts. Ensure the program is designed for maximum livelihood benefit, 
practicality, relevance, and impact. 
In addition, develop and implement training specifically tailored to: (a) establishment and 
O&M  of  the  CBOs,  (ii)  community-led  O&M  of  the  grant-funded  small  public  facilities, 
including the women-led markets, and (iii) establishment and operation of the CRF. 
(v)  Coordinate  with  local  learning  institutions,  aimag  youth  employment  centers,  and  other 
(iv) 
stakeholders as needed to achieve collaborative and participatory learning approaches. 
(vi)  Ensure that the training materials, timing, and locations are tailored to local conditions i.e. 
are prepared in formats and language relevant to local ethnic groups, as needed; are held 
in locations that are accessible for the poor and vulnerable; and at times that are suitable 
for communities, considering seasonal patterns (e.g. of herding). 
Implement the training, in staged sessions over the project duration. 
(vii) 
(viii)  Conduct before- and after- monitoring to assess the training results and benefits. For all 
trainees:  assess  skills  capacity  and  income  at  the  start  of  training.  Then  assess  these 
parameters at the end of the project. 
(ix)  Refine subsequent trainings based on lessons learned. 
(x)  Record sex- and age-disaggregated data. 
Subcomponent: community revolving fund (CRF). Key tasks: 
Facilitate establishment of three CRF committees (one per aimag). 
15. 
(i) 
(ii)  Prepare the CRF operational manual including all procedures, forms, and requirements 
for  loan  application,  review  by  the  CRF  committees,  loan  disbursement,  interest  rates, 
repayment  schedules,  penalties,  activities  prohibited  for  funding,  monitoring,  and 
reporting. 
(iii)  Establish two CRF interest rates – both to be low: a lowest rate, for poor and vulnerable 
households, and a higher rate, for other community residents. Identify the rates based on 
188 
Appendix 3 
market analysis and the need to recover CRF operational costs and to build the capital of 
the CRF, to achieve funding sustainability. 
(iv)  With the MET and PIU, facilitate the establishment of the CRF account within a national 
banking institution. 
(v)  Arrange  and  facilitate  all  stakeholder  consultants  required  to  establish,  implement,  and 
monitor the CRF. 
(vi)  Apply the procedures, forms, manuals, and lessons learned for the CRF developed with 
JFPR  financing  under  the  Grant  9183  Integrated  Livelihoods  Improvement  and 
Sustainable Tourism in Khuvsgul Lake National Park Project. 
(vii)  Facilitate and prepare tripartite contracts between the protected area administrations, local 
government,  and  CRF  committees,  for  O&M  of  the  CRF,  including  roles  and 
responsibilities of all agencies. 
(viii)  Ensure  that  sustainability  and  transparency  is  established  and  maintained  within  the 
design and implementation of the CRF. 
(ix)  Advise the PIU on the amount and timing of CRF loan disbursements, through tranches, 
based on community demand and performance of the previous tranches. 
(x)  Target the hand-over of the CRF from the PIU to a selected national bank by year 4 of 
grant implementation, and then monitor post-hand-over performance for the remaining 2 
years of project implementation. Identify challenges and facilitate resolutions. 
16. 
Subcomponent: youth incubator. Key tasks: 
(i)  Review  and  briefly  summarize  existing  efforts  in  Mongolia  by  the  government  and 
development agencies to support youth development, especially previous training efforts, 
the role of the youth employment centers, and measures focused on tourism value chains. 
(ii)  Design the youth training program so that (a) it complements and build upon previous and 
existing efforts and institutional arrangements, (b) is well integrated as a subset within the 
overall project vocational training, (c) is linked with all the project livelihood components, 
including O&M of the CRF, CBOs, and WASH program, and (d) reflects the topics and 
skills  that  are  most  relevant  and  beneficial  for  youth  employment  in  the  context  of  the 
project  and  local  tourism  value  chains.  This  should  include,  but  not  be  limited  to: 
management training, advisory services, access to capital sources, assistance to business 
operations for MSME. 
(iii)  Assess the person-capacity of the two learning rooms allocated at two loan-funded tourism 
complexes  for  the  youth  incubator.  Identify  the  key  equipment  and  designs  needed  for 
these spaces, to be  safe learning  environments  that foster  youth  entrepreneurship and 
innovation. 
(iv)  Coordinate with the PIU for the ADB funded Aimag and Soum Investment Development 
Program (ASDIP) to incorporate up to five additional learning rooms for youth in the five 
planned ASDIP agribusiness training centers. 
(v)  Establish O&M procedures for the youth incubators within the two tourism complexes and 
(up to) five agribusiness centers, including the roles of (a) the staff of the complexes and 
centers to maintain the rooms, and (b) the integration of the incubators within the overall 
O&M and operational objectives of each facility. 
(vi)  Work with the project youth to help facilitate and match youth with relevant youth programs 
in western Mongolia and elsewhere in Mongolia. 
(vii)  Train youth to participate in the water, sanitation, and hygiene program (see below). 
17. 
(i) 
Subcomponent: establishment of CBOs. Key tasks: 
Facilitate  a  participatory  and  community-led  process,  involving  all  relevant  local 
stakeholders,  to  establish  CBOs  that  will  (a)  represent  and  help  mobilize  the  target 
communities under the grant, (b) be responsible for O&M of the grant-funded small public 
Appendix 3 
189 
(ii) 
facilities, and (c) lead the community participation in procurement package (described in 
Sections VI.B.3 and VI.C.6 of the project administration manual) to coordinate and lead 
additional  community-led  tourism  activities  in  the  project  protected  areas  and  heritage 
sites and procure materials and mobilize labor as needed. About 13 CBOs are anticipated 
to be established, reflecting the widely dispersed locations of the grant-funded facilities 
across five protected areas in three aimags. 
Facilitate and prepare the roles and responsibilities and O&M procedures for the CBOs; 
identify  training  needs;  include  these  in  the  vocational  training;  and  provide  all  related 
support to implement the  training  and  foster  the  role  of the  CBOs.  The training  should 
especially include (a) roles and responsibilities of each CBO, (b) O&M of the CRF, so that 
the  CBOs  can  support  the  CRF  committees  and  communities,  including  assisting 
residents to prepare loan applications, (c) O&M of the grant-funded small public facilities, 
(d)  O&M  of  the  women-led  markets,  (e)  water,  sanitation  and  hygiene  standards  and 
scaling up of the WASH program (component 3). 
(iii)  Prepare  the  draft  tripartite  contracts  to  be  established  between  each  CBO  with  local 
government and the protected area administrations, and facilitate the process of review 
and finalization of these contracts by all parties. The contracts will include description of 
the roles and responsibilities of each party; O&M procedures by the CBOs for the small 
public facilities to be financed by the project; CBO members and their roles; and, financing 
arrangements for the CBOs. 
18. 
Integrated  design  approach.  Ensure  that  the  design  of  the  pilot  tourism  development 
program achieves an integrated approach across the grant- and loan-funded activities. This will 
include, but not be limited to: (i) beneficiaries of the grant-supported vocational training will be 
prioritized  for  loans  from  the  CRF,  (ii)  beneficiaries  of  the  vocational  training  and  CRF  will  be 
prioritized for vendor spaces at the loan-funded tourist streets, and (iii) CBO-led O&M of the small 
public facilities in the project protected areas will be linked with O&M of the loan-funded tourist 
streets and complexes, to maximize promotion of community goods and services. 
Component 2: Sanitation and waste management improved 
19. 
Prepare and implement the first water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) program for for 
the local tourism sector in western Mongolia, focusing initially on 13 soums in Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, 
and Uvs aimags which encompass five protected areas and heritage sites the project is focusing 
on. Key tasks: 
(i)  Review  the  existing  sanitation  standards  and  procedures  for  the  local  tourism  sector, 
including O&M of public hygiene facilities and by tour camps, CBOs, and MSME. 
(ii)  Prepare  situation  analyses  report,  by  analyzing  the  national  and  sub-national  policy 
documents related to WASH and identification of needs for strengthening WASH program 
in the protected areas and tourism facilities in the Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd and Uvs Aimags. 
(iii)  Identify  and  develop  standards  and  procedures  needed  to  strengthen  sanitation  and 
hygiene in the local tourism sector. Include links with national and health measures and 
border  screening  procedures.  Focus  especially  on  sanitation  standards  for  the  project 
communities,  CBOs,  and  tour  camp  operators,  to  strengthen  post-COVID-19  recovery 
and resilience to the project stakeholders and to reduce the risks of future infection to the 
project communities caused by disease spread including from tourists. 
(iv)  Design the standards and procedures in consultation with aimag health centers, border 
agencies, and other relevant stakeholders. 
190 
Appendix 3 
(v)  Ensure  the  standards  comply  with  the  guidelines  of  the  World  Health  Organization  for 
infection prevention and control.3 
(vi)  Design the WASH program for protected areas and tourism facilities, including prevention 
measures  for  public  health  pandemics  (e.g.  COVID-19).  The  program  should  focus 
initially  on  the  13  target  soums,  then  scale this  up  to  at  least  8  additional  surrounding 
soums,  to  achieve  a  coverage  of  at  least  22  soums  in  the  three  aimags  of  western 
Mongolia. 
(vii) Train the CBOs and a core team of youth to help implement the WASH program. Design 
and employ a cascaded model to train the youth members as youth ambassadors who 
will then train other youth, to scale up the project impacts. Apply tested and successful 
approaches from other ADB projects e.g., the Pilot And Demonstration Activity: Youth-
Led Approaches To Sustainable Bagmati River Basin Management. 
(viii) Organize consultation meetings for finalization of the WASH program and submit the final 
version to PIU for the Aimag governments approval and endorsement by the MET. 
Facilitate the adoption of improved toilet standards by tour camp operators and for hygiene 
20. 
procedures for the grant-funded public toilets. Key tasks: 
(i)  Review the existing toilet designs utilized within tour camps of the project sites. 
(ii)  Identify designs and procedures that do not comply with Mongolia’s Law on Hygiene and 
relevant national design standards. 
(iii)  Introduce,  disseminate  awareness  of,  and  promote  the  toilet  designs  selected  for  the 
project protected areas (as described in the project feasibility study report), and which are 
based  on  proven  designs  tested  under  other  ADB  projects  in  similar  cold-climate 
conditions. 
(iv)  Provide technical training to the CBOs for O&M of the grant-funded public toilet facilities. 
To support the above tasks, design and implement a behavior change communication (BCC) 
21. 
strategy to address WASH practices. Key tasks: 
(i) 
Identify key communication channels that will maximize dissemination of the project WASH 
procedures  to  the  target  communities,  tour  operators,  and  visitors.  The  methods  must  be 
cost-effective,  practical,  take  into  consideration  the  remoteness  of  some  sites,  differing 
poverty and education levels, and the need for different languages – Mongolian and Kazakh 
for  some  project  communities,  and  potentially  Russian  and  Chinese  languages  for  sites 
subject to frequent visitation from cross-border tourists. 
(ii)  Design  and  include  a  simple  before-  and  after-  questionnaire  in  the  BCC,  to  measure  the 
effectiveness of the WASH program, especially for the project communities and tour camp 
operators, as these stakeholders will be the ‘front line’ in maintaining WASH practices that 
help strengthen resilience to communities for COVID-19 and other diseases, especially due 
to exposure to visitors. 
(iii)  Work with the PIU Social, Gender, and Civil Society Specialist and other consulting services 
support as relevant to coordinate with related project trainings and communications (e.g. the 
information  dissemination  on  HIV/AIDs  and  other  sexually  transmitted  diseases  under  the 
project social development action plan and gender action plan) to avoid duplication of efforts 
and ‘training fatigue’ for project stakeholders. 
(iv) Integrate the BCC strategy within the WASH program. 
3   World Health Organization. 2020. Infection prevention and control guidance (COVID-19). 
Appendix 3 
191 
Component 3: Management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened 
22. 
Site protection and public access. Key tasks: (i) coordinate with the firm that will design 
the  grant-funded  small  public  facilities,  (ii)  ensure  that  the  designs  are  consistent  with  the  site 
management plans for the protected areas, and (iii) help identify the training needs for O&M of 
the facilities. 
23. 
Revision of site management plans. Key tasks: 
(i)  Facilitate, lead, and prepare revisions for the management plans of three of the project 
protected  areas  –  ATBNP  and  PCMA  (Bayan-Ulgii  Aimag)  and  TSC  (Khovd  Aimag). 
Include  the  following  components  in  the  revised  plans:  (a)  the  grant-supported  pilot 
tourism development program, WASH program and toilet standards, (b) O&M procedures, 
costs, and financing for the grant-supported small public facilities, (c) the livelihood and 
gender  targets  developed  with loan  financing  for  the regional  tourism master  plan  and 
revised  aimag  tourism  master  plans  –  ensuring  consistency  between  these  planning 
documents, (d) financing sources for grant-funded facilities, (e) a 4-year action plan and 
budget for each site, and (f) revision of internal site zoning (if needed). 
(ii)  Prepare and establish a simple monitoring program within the site management plan, to 
monitor progress for (a) O&M of the project facilities, (b) visitor feedback for the facilities, 
and  O&M  of  the  facilities  by  the  CBOs  and  protected  area  administrations,  and  (c) 
adaptive  management  by  the  protected  area  administrations  and  CBOs  to  respond  to 
issues identified through lessons learned and visitor feedback. 
(iii)  Facilitate  consultation  meetings  with  key  civil  society  organizations  and  development 
agencies, including The Nature Conservancy and WWF, and GIZ and KfW, so that O&M 
procedures for the grant-funded facilities are also included in the site management plans 
for the KUNNP, KKNP, and UVSPA, whose revision will be led by KfW and other agencies. 
(iv)  In all cases, revise, rewrite, and/or draft the specific materials needed for the various site 
management  plans;  and  ensure  that  the  project  targets  for  livelihoods,  gender,  and 
sanitation are included in the plans. 
(v)  Ensure that all of the firm’s activities for all of the project protected areas and communities 
are planned and implemented in a participatory and collaborative manner with CSOs and 
development partners working on tourism and conservation projects, including, but not 
limited to, JICA, GIZ, KfW, UNDP, The Nature Conservancy, and WWF. 
(vi)  Prepare and establish a simple monitoring program within the site management plan, to 
monitor progress for (a) O&M of the project facilities, (b) visitor feedback for the facilities, 
and  O&M  of  the  facilities  by  the  CBOs  and  protected  area  administrations,  and  (c) 
adaptive  management  by  the  protected  area  administrations  and  CBOs  to  respond  to 
issues identified through lessons learned and visitor feedback. 
24. 
The revision of the site management plans shall ensure that the following measures are 
complied with: (i) Strict prohibition of sale or consumption of protected flora and fauna, and (ii) 
Inclusion of wildlife trade in the awareness materials and training for the beneficiaries, especially 
on the prohibition of selling protected flora and fauna and/or their products and parts, to tourists. 
25. 
Capacity building for O&M of the grant-funded facilities. Develop and implement training 
for the CBOs, protected area administrations, tour camp operators, MSME, and local government 
agencies,  for  O&M  of  the  grant-funded  facilities  in  the  project  protected  areas.  Key  tasks  and 
topics: 
192 
Appendix 3 
(i)  Domestic regulations and requirements for protected area management and tourism and 
sanitation within protected areas. 
(ii)  Collaboration  and  participatory  approaches  between  communities  and  protected  area 
administrations to support livelihoods, foster community aspirations, and protect natural 
resources. 
(iii)  Social and environmental standards and conditions for tour camp operations. 
(iv)  Implementation of the revised site management plans. 
(v)  O&M of the grant-funded facilities, to maximize sustainability and durability. 
E.  Team Composition & Qualification Requirements for the Key Experts 
Consultants 
1 Team Leader/Sustainable Livelihood specialist 
2 MSME Business Development and Marketing specialist 
3 Youth Incubator specialist 
4 Financial Sector specialist 
5 Handicraft specialist 
6 Public Health specialist 
7 Water Supply and Sanitation specialist  
8 Waste management specialist 
9 Resource persons 
Total 
Total 
Field 
Total   H.O. 
10.00 
2.00 
12.00 
7.00 
2.00 
9.00 
4.00 
1.00 
5.00 
5.00 
2.00 
7.00 
5.00 
0.00 
5.00 
4.00 
1.00 
5.00 
4.00 
1.00 
5.00 
4.00 
1.00 
5.00 
5.00 
5.00 
0.00 
58.00  10.00  48.00 
The specialists will be recruited through the MET, and work under the coordination of the 
26. 
project  implementation  unit  (PIU).  The  specialists  will  liaise  with  aimag  and  soum  (district) 
governments and other stakeholders as needed to develop and implement the program. 
27. 
Qualification requirements for the key experts are detailed below: 
(i) Team Leader / Sustainable Livelihoods Specialist (national, 12 months) 
in 
-  Advanced  degree 
the  area  of  biology,  ecology,  wildlife  or 
forest 
conservation/management, or closely related field with appropriate background. 
-  At  least  10  years  of  demonstrated  experience  in  rural  livelihoods  linked  with 
natural resources management, protected area management, and ecotourism. 
-  At least 7 years of experience as a team leader for other donor-funded projects 
involved in rural livelihoods and natural resources management. 
-  Understanding  of  the  biodiversity  conservation  values  and  protected  areas  of 
western Mongolia, and the importance of carefully planned tourism that supports 
livelihoods but also protects the environment and biodiversity. 
-  Demonstrated experience in working with a wide range of stakeholders, including 
central,  provincial,  and  soum  government  agencies,  civil  society  organizations, 
communities, and donor agencies. 
-  Experience with GIS is a plus. 
-  Excellent written and oral communication in English and Mongolian. 
(ii) MSME Business Development and Marketing Specialist (national, 9 months) 
-  Bachelor´s Degree in Business Development, Economics, Marketing, or similar. 
-  Master of Business Administration Degree (MBA) preferred. 
-  At least ten (10) years of experience in Business Management, tourism business 
development  in  national  and  regional  destinations  marketing,  branding,  or 
Appendix 3 
193 
promotion in national and regional destinations. Experience in protected areas is 
a plus. 
-  Demonstrated experience in working with communities and micro and small sized 
enterprises, to  design  local  business  plans,  evaluate  and help strengthen local 
business proposals, and provide basic training in business management. Work 
experience in cultural-based and nature-based products and ecotourism will be 
an asset. 
-  Excellent written and oral communication in English and Mongolian. 
(iii) Youth Incubator Specialist (national, 5 months) 
-  A  minimum  of  ten  (10)  years´  experience  in  business  and  entrepreneurship 
promotion,  working  in  the  private  sector  or  in  support  of  private  sector 
development,  especially  related  to  entrepreneurship  or  enterprise  development 
activities. 
-  Strong working knowledge of business incubation approaches; prior experience 
working with an incubator is preferred. 
-  Experience working with youth entrepreneurs or in youth engagement. 
-  Experience in tourism industry or tourism/ecotourism sector is a plus. 
-  At  least  a  BSc  in  Business  Management,  Economics,  Agribusiness,  or  related 
discipline. 
-  Excellent communication and organization skills. 
-  Excellent written and oral communication in English and Mongolian. 
(iv) Financial sector Specialist (national, 7 months) 
-  A  minimum  of  ten  (10)  years´  experience  in  financial  sector  institutions  and 
regulatory frameworks with a specific focus on MSME access to finance. 
-  Strong  knowledge  of  private  sector  development  issues,  one  or  more  sectors, 
such investment climate, regulatory reform, industries including understanding of 
their investment and competitiveness policies, and global value chain integration 
would be a plus. 
-  A  Master’s  or  PhD  degree  in  finance,  economics,  public  policy,  business 
administration or other relevant discipline. 
-  Excellent written and oral communication in English and Mongolian. 
(v) Handicraft Specialist (national, 8 months) 
-  A minimum of ten (10) years´ experience in the field of Mongolian handicraft. 
-  Strong  interpersonal  communication  skills  and  capacity  to  involve  different 
stakeholders. 
-  Basic  command  of  English  (writing/speaking)  and  fluency  in  Mongolian 
(writing/speaking). 
(vi) Public Health Specialist (national, 1 months) 
-  Bachelor degree (in public health, behavior change communication and/or related 
field. 
-  Additional relevant post-graduate courses that complement/ supplement the main 
degree are a strong asset. 
-  At least 10 years demonstrated experience in the development policy documents 
and programs. 
-  To have an established professional network with key agencies in Mongolia that 
may be involved in the completion of the task. 
194 
Appendix 3 
-  Experience in capacity building and training of other agencies and personnel. 
-  Basic  command  of  English  (writing/speaking)  and  fluency  in  Mongolian 
(writing/speaking). 
Specific tasks include but are not limited to the following: 
-  Prepare  situation  analyses  report,  by  analyzing  the  national  and  sub-national 
policy documents related to public health prevention measures (including COVID-
19)  and  identification  of  needs  for  strengthening  water,  sanitation  and  hygiene 
(WASH) program in the protected areas and tourism facilities in the Bayan-Ulgii, 
Khovd and Uvs Aimags. 
-  Develop public health related contribution for development of the WASH program 
for protected areas and tourism facilities, including prevention measures for public 
health  pandemics  (e.g. COVID-19)  in  cooperation with  related  specialists  (e.g., 
Water supply and Wastewater specialist, Sanitation specialist). 
-  Organize  consultation  meetings  on  public  health  issues  for  finalization  of  the 
WASH program and submit the final version to PIU for the Aimag governments 
approval and endorsement by the MET. 
-  Organize required public health related training for targeted protected areas and 
communities. 
-  Co-lead (with the Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist) the field implementation 
of the BCC strategy that is prepared by the BCC specialist (short-term resource 
person). 
  (vii) Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist (national, 5 months) 
-  Bachelor’s degree in sanitary engineering, onsite sanitation, hygiene, health, 
and/or related field. 
-  Additional relevant trainings that complement/ supplement the main degree are 
a strong asset. 
-  At  least  10  years  demonstrated  experience  in  water,  sanitation  and  hygiene 
sector. 
-  To  have an  established professional  network  with key agencies  in Mongolia 
that may be involved in the completion of the task. 
-  Experience in capacity building and training of other agencies and personnel. 
-  Basic  command  of  English  (writing/speaking)  and  fluency  in  Mongolian 
(writing/speaking). 
  Specific tasks include but are not limited to the following: 
-  Lead the preparation, coordination, and implementation of the listed tasks for 
the WASH program under Component 2: Sanitation and Waste Management 
Improved, in coordination with the Public Health Specialist. 
-  Co-lead (with the Public Health Specialist) the field implementation of the BCC 
strategy that is prepared by the BCC specialist (short-term resource person). 
(viii) Waste management Specialist (national, 5 months) 
-  Advanced degree(s) (MSc or higher) in wastewater monitoring and treatment 
sanitary engineering, treatment, and/or related field. 
-  Additional  relevant  post-graduate  courses  that  complement/  supplement  the 
main degree are a strong asset. 
Appendix 3 
195 
-  At  least  10  years  demonstrated  experience  in  the  development  policy 
documents and programs in water supply and wastewater sector. 
-  To  have an  established professional  network  with key agencies  in Mongolia 
that may be involved in the completion of the task. 
-  Experience in capacity building and training of other agencies and personnel. 
-  Basic  command  of  English  (writing/speaking)  and  fluency  in  Mongolian 
(writing/speaking). 
Specific tasks include but are not limited to the following: 
-  Prepare situation analyses report, by analyzing the national and sub-national 
policy documents related to waste management and identification of needs for 
strengthening WASH program in the protected areas and tourism facilities in 
the Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd and Uvs Aimags. 
-  Develop  waste  management  related  contribution  for  development  of  three 
target  aimag  WASH  program  for  protected  areas  and  tourism  facilities, 
including prevention measures for public health pandemics (e.g. COVID-19) in 
cooperation  with  related  specialists  (e.g.,  Public  Health  specialist,  Water 
Supply and Sanitation specialist). 
-  Organize consultation meetings on waste management issues for finalization 
of the three aimag WASH program and submit the final version to PIU for the 
Aimag governments approval and endorsement by the MET. 
-  Organize required waste management related training for targeted protected 
areas and communities. 
(ix) Resource persons (including 1 Behavior Change Communication Specialist) 
-  Short-term resource persons (national positions) will be mobilized as needed 
to provide additional trainings to the project communities. The training topics 
and  specific  content  will  be  identified  based  on  stakeholder  consultations, 
community  demand,  and  the  assessment  of  existing  community  skills  and 
tourism value chains. 
-  The  resource  persons  will  design  short-term  courses that  provide  maximum 
benefit. Trainings will include before- and after- monitoring of beneficiaries to 
assess the results. 
for  10  working  days.  Qualifications:  Bachelor’s  degree 
-  One  national  behavior  change  communication  (BCC)  specialist  will  be 
in 
mobilized 
communications  or  related  field;  demonstrated  experience  in  the  design, 
preparation, and post-strategy measurement of BCCs; and, strong written and 
spoken  English.  Tasks:  the  specialist  will  prepare  a  BCC  strategy,  to  be 
integrated  within  the  project  WASH  program.  The  specialist  will  prepare  the 
strategy  based  on  information  provided  as  needed  by  the  other  team 
specialists and PIU. Deliverables: a draft and final draft BCC strategy including 
communication  campaign,  cost-efficient methods  tailored to the  local  project 
and  site  conditions,  communication  materials,  and  pre-  and  post-  campaign 
monitoring. 
F.  Reporting and Deliverables 
28. 
The consulting firm will report to the PIU. The PIU will act as liaison between the consulting 
firm  and  the  implementing  agency,  executing  agency,  ADB  and  other  relevant  national  and 
196 
Appendix 3 
regional  stakeholders  for  the  project  implementation.  The  PIU  will  facilitate  the  workflow  and 
ensure that all relevant activities, all the reports, all the documents and relevant data as well as 
the entire assignment will be completed effectively and successfully by the consulting firm within 
the allocated time based on the agreed workplan. Validation/comments on deliverables will be 
provided within 7 days from receipt of the report. 
29. 
Overall reporting deliverables. 
(vi)  Inception report, within 1 month of mobilization. 
(vii) Semiannual progress reports. 
(viii) Draft final report; and final draft report. 
(ix)  Draft and final draft of one knowledge product that summarizes the results, challenges, 
impacts, and lessons learned of the consultancy. The knowledge product will be of high-
quality  and  focus  on  disseminating  valuable  lessons  and  opportunity  for  replication, 
innovation, and scaling up for other regions. 
30. 
Component-specific deliverables. 
(x)  Component 1. Pilot tourism development program. Draft and final draft versions of: (a) 
vocational training program, (b) CRF operational manual, (c) CRF tripartite contracts, (d) 
youth incubator. 
(xi)  Component 2. Draft and final draft versions of: (a) WASH program, including the BCC 
strategy, (b) O&M manual for the public toilets, (c) adoption of improved toilet designs by 
tour camps. 
(xii) Component 3. Draft and final draft versions of: (a) revised site management plans for the 
ATBNP (including the PCMA) and TSC, (b) written inputs to the site management plans 
for the KUNNP, KKNP, and UVSPA, (c) results of training programs implemented. 
31. 
Note. All materials will: (i) include maps and diagrams as needed, (ii) record and provide 
sex-  and  age-disaggregated  data,  to  help  monitor  progress  against  the  grant  and  loan  project 
targets and indicators, especially for livelihoods. 
Performance 
indicators.  Confirmation  and 
32. 
the  reporting 
deliverables  will  be  partly  based  on  the  demonstration  of  participatory  and  collaborative 
approaches; and field support by the firm to the communities, CBOs, CRF. The focus of the firm 
is  to  be  on  establishing  the  specified  components  and  then  supporting  the  communities  to 
implement  them,  and,  to  address  and  resolve  challenges  and  lessons  learned.  The  baseline 
reports  should  focus  on  being  informative,  concise,  and  oriented  to  practical  measures  and 
designs. 
final  endorsement  of 
33. 
All  communications  and  reports  will  be  submitted  in  English,  using  the  standard report 
format  required  by  the  PIU.  The  Consultant  shall  submit  three  hard  copies  and  one  electronic 
copy of each deliverable. Besides, each deliverable will be accompanied with a summary in Power 
point format. Final reports shall be delivered in CD ROM in addition to the specified number of 
hard copies. 
G.  Clients Inputs and Counterpart Personnel 
The following staff will be assigned by the Client to support the Consultant’s team: (i) MET 
34. 
DPAM and DTPC counterpart specialists, and (ii) the PIU, 
35. 
Counterpart Contribution to be provided by the Client: (i) help facilitate project workshops, 
meetings, introductions with local government agencies, and provision of relevant information, (ii) 
Appendix 3 
197 
provide the project feasibility study report, social surveys and assessments, and all other relevant 
project documents preparing during the project processing. 
2.  CS7: Detailed Engineering Design and Construction Supervision for Small 
Works at Five Protected Areas 
A. 
Overview 
34.  The Sustainable Tourism Development Project (Phase 2) will be implemented in western 
Mongolia over six years with an estimated cost of $32.3 million, of which the Asian Development 
Bank  (ADB)  is  requested  to  finance  $30.0  million  through  a  regular  loan.  A  $2.0  million 
cofinanced grant will be implemented as part of the overall project, financed by the Japan Fund 
for Poverty Reduction of the Government of Japan. The Ministry of Environment and Tourism 
(MET) is the executing agency for the overall project, and MET’s Department of Protected Areas 
Management  (DPAM)  is  the  implementing  agency  for  the  grant.  The  grant  will  have  three 
components:  (i)  inclusive  planning  and  capacity  for  community-based  tourism  enhanced,  (ii) 
enabling  infrastructure  constructed,  (iii)  sanitation  and  waste  management  improved,  and (iv) 
management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened. 
35.  The Project will be implemented at the following protected areas: 
(i)  Altai  Tavan  Bogd  National  Park  (ATBNP)  including  the  UNESCO  World  Heritage 
Area Petroglyphic Complexes of the Mongolian Altai (PCMA) in Bayan-Ulgii Aimag. 
(ii)  Tsenkher Cave (TSC) in Khovd Aimag. 
(iii)  Khar Us Nuur National Park (KUNNP) in Khovd Aimag. 
(iv)  Khan Khukhii National Park (KKNP) in Uvs Aimag and, 
(v)  Uvs Nuur Strictly Protected Area (UVSPA) in Uvs Aimag. 
 The grant-funded small public facilities to be designed under this consultancy are listed 
36. 
in Appendix C of this terms of reference. 
37. 
The consultancy will be undertaken by a national firm 
B. 
Objectives of the Assignment 
38.  The  objectives  of  this  assignment  are  to:  (i)  produce  detailed  engineering  designs, 
including detailed cost estimates, for the facilities listed in Appendix C; (ii) provide construction 
supervision until the completion of the facilities; (iii) facilitate all domestic approvals as needed 
for finalization and state approval of the detailed designs; and (iv) support the PIU to prepare the 
bidding documents for the works package. 
39.  During project processing, reports were developed which meet the technical, economic, 
financial, social, environmental, and other due diligence requirements of the Asian Development 
Bank (ADB) and the Government of Mongolia to design the project. These reports include the 
following but not limited to: the Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of 
Directors; Project Administration Manual; Social Development Action Plan; Gender Action Plan; 
Initial  Environmental  Examination;  Risk  Assessment  and  Risk  Management  Plan;  Feasibility 
Study Report; and Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment. The firm shall ensure that their 
deliverables  follow  the  approved  project  targets  and  preliminary  designs  prepared  during  the 
processing and described in these reports. 
40.  The following design characteristics should be reflected to all design activities. 
198 
Appendix 3 
-  Rationale  and  proper  capacity:  Small  facilities  will  be  aimed  to  (i)  enabling 
infrastructure for tourism, (ii) enhancing the capacity for tourism businesses, and (iii) 
promoting  community-led  tourism  based  on  heritage,  education.  The  proposed 
design  should  be  prepared  based  on  sound  evidence-based  data  and  an 
assessment  of  the  relevant  needs  to  the  functionality  of  the  tourism  facility  in 
Mongolia. The design must be generated to consider the future expansion. 
-  Model  and  accreditation:  Small  facilities  will  follow  international  best  practices  in 
sustainable  design  specifically  complying  with  the  EDGE  standard.  The  design  of 
Facilities will be used as a model to be inspired in other regions of Mongolia. 
-  Modernization:  Investments  will  cover  (i)  modern  infrastructure  facilities  and 
equipment  which  shall  be  in  adequate  capacity;  (ii)  integrated  business  and 
operational  management;  (iii)  proper  waste  management;  and  (iv)  quality 
management. 
-  Location  of  facilities.  All  works  will  be  (i)  restricted  to  the  specific  geographic 
locations  specified  in  Appendix  C,  and  (ii)  comply  with  the  site  selection  criteria 
specified in the project environment management plan, including (a) located only in 
pre-existing sites already subject to the same land use as the planned facility, (b) 
located >200 m from the nearest lake or river, (c) does not involve any clearance of 
natural vegetation. 
-  All works will be designed, supervised, and established (i) in full consideration of the 
site-specific environmental, ecological, and cultural and heritage values of each site 
and  protected  area,  and  (ii)  in  regular  consultation  with  the  PIU,  protected  area 
administrations, community-based organizations, civil society organizations working 
within or near the project location, and other stakeholders as needed. The PIU will 
assist the firm to plan and implement such stakeholder consultation. 
41.  The assignment is expected to commence in Q1 2023 and be completed within 4 years 
after contract signing. Construction works for the facilities is scheduled to start in Q2 2025. 
Table 1: Indicative Duration for the Assignment 
2023 
Q
Q
3 
2 
Q
1 
2024 
Q
Q
3 
2 
Q
4 
Q
1 
2025 
Q
Q
3 
2 
Q
4 
Q
1 
Q
4 
Q
1 
2026 
Q
Q
3 
2 
Q
4 
№ 
Tasks 
1 
Design  development  including 
bid documents 
2  Bidding process 
3 
Construction  and  supervision 
contract administration 
C.  SCOPE OF THE CONSULTING SERVICES AND EXPECTED DELIVERABLES 
42.  The overall consultancy will work on the following tasks: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
To coordinate design, and contract administration activities and prepare 
construction documents in professional standards. 
To carry out site survey and geotechnical survey 
To develop final architectural detail design 
To develop the structural design 
To develop mechanical, electric and plumbing design 
To develop telecommunication and automation design if any 
To provide for construction cost estimates 
Appendix 3 
199 
(viii)  To develop the bidding documents for construction of small facilities 
(ix) 
To provide technical support to the MET in evaluation of bidding documents and 
provide expert’s comments and recommendation 
To provide monitoring and reports on; structural inspection, mechanical 
inspection, electrical inspection, plumbing inspection including all external 
engineering works, landscape design, record drawings and certification of the 
progress 
To provide for a deficiency assessment, total inspection. 
(x) 
(xi) 
43.  Design principals for environmental protection, climate resilience, and green best 
practice.  The facilities  to  be  designed  and  constructed  under  this  consultancy  are  located  in 
protected areas and cultural heritage sites. The consultant will ensure that all detailed designs 
will comply with the following. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Adhere to all requirements of the project EMP including site locations. 
Avoid impacts to permafrost: (a) ensure that site locations are not based on 
permafrost, (b) develop designs that minimize or avoid the need for soil 
excavation and foundations, (c) where possible, adopt elevated bases – e.g. for 
carparks and small structures – rather than excavation. 
Avoid clearance of vegetation and habitats. Avoid impacts to any existing sacred 
sites or physical cultural artifacts. Where this is not possible, clearly quantify the 
area of estimated clearance and seek endorsement and feedback from the PIU 
before proceeding with the designs. 
Prepare detailed designs which comply with EDGE standards for water and 
energy efficiency. 
Design the facilities in consolidated footprints that group facilities together, to 
reduce wide dispersion of facilities and impacts across the sites. 
Select materials for durability and local availability. 
(vi) 
(vii)  Design facilities for simple O&M. 
(viii)  Regularly consult with the PIU to seek guidance on best practice for consultation 
with communities and other stakeholders, to ensure that a transparent and 
participatory approach is implemented. 
44.  Expected design deliverables. The design developments at the protected area will be 
consistent  with  the  Client’s  Concept  Designs  and  Architectural  Specifications  prepared  and 
approved by MET and ADB during project preparation. The structural, mechanical, electrical and 
plumbing  designs  will  be  consistent  with the  Client’s  Outline  of  Construction  and Engineering 
Specifications. Draft and final draft versions of the design will be submitted and approved by ADB 
and MET. Following is the work program and the deliverables. 
Project Management 
Site Survey and Geological report 
Architectural Design 
Structural Design 
Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing design 
Internet, Telecommunication, Automation and Fire safety 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii)  Construction and Supervision contract administration. 
200 
Appendix 3 
Project Management 
Program of 
Requirements 
Project Initiation 
Document 
Project Organization 
Structure 
Communication 
Strategy 
Issues Log & Risk 
Register 
Design Deviations & 
Derogations List 
Program Timetable 
Table 2: Project Management 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Document/Narrati
ve Text 
Document/Narrati
ve Text 
Diagram//Schema
tic 
Document/Narrati
ve Text 
MS Excel Table 
MS Excel Table 
Design 
development 
Construction 
documents 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Revision/Record 
Revision/Record 
Responsibility Matrix  MS Excel Table 
MS Project Table  ✔ 
✔ 
Interface Agreements  Narrative Text 
Project 
Communication Portal 
Licensing & 
Contracting Issues 
Commissioning 
procedures 
SharePoint 
website 
Government 
Approvals 
Certification 
Document/Narrati
ve Text 
& 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Site Survey 
Geotechnical soil survey 
including drainage, water 
courses 
Site hazardous 
material/substances 
investigation 
Topography map and 
analysis of city utility 
services available to site 
Master Plan 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Table 3: Site Survey 
Design 
development 
To  be  done  before 
detailed 
design 
begins.  
Text, 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Text, 
Text, 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
CAD version 
Document 
Type/Scale 
To  be  done  before 
detailed 
design 
begins.  
Phase 1 
Design 
development 
Master plan 
Access road/Pedestrian 
path/Parking design 
Grading/cartogram 
Landscape design  
Distance Plan 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
1:500 
1:500 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
1:100/200 
Construction 
documents 
Record 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
Record 
Revision 
✔ 
✔ 
Phase 2 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
Revision 
Revision 
1:500 
Revision 
1:300/500 
Phase 3 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Appendix 3 
201 
Site Survey 
Urban planning & 
Integration 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Text, 
✔ 
Construction 
documents 
Revision 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
45.  The  architectural  design  comprises  all  documents  for  approvals  and  permits  from  the 
appropriate local authorities. Following drawing list are minimum requirements, but is not limited 
to the following documents: 
Table 4: Architectural Design 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
Revision 
Revision 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
Architectural Design 
Building engineering 
physics report 
Design Description and 
technical data 
Layouts of basement, 
ground, and upper floor 
levels 
Section/Cross section 
Elevations  
✔ 
✔ 
Text, 
Text, 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Reflected ceiling plan 
Detailed drawing 
Furniture Plans 
Entrance and canopy 
details 
Façade details  
Ramp details 
Toilet 
Plans/Section/Elevations 
Floor finish plan  
Floor details 
Roof finish details 
Door and window 
schedules 
Door head, jamb, and sill 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Door handle details 
Detailed drawing 
Handrail details 
Detailed drawing 
Tactile Paving details 
Detailed drawing 
Universally accessible 
equipment details  
Architectural Specifications  Narrative 
Detailed drawing 
Text, 
✔ 
Bill of Quantities  
Diagrams/Table 
MS Excel Table 
✔ 
1:50/100 
Revision 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Revision 
Revision 
Revision 
1:50/100 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:25/50 
1:25/50 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
1:10/25 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
46.  The  structural  Design  comprises  all  documents  for  approvals  and  permits  from  the 
appropriate local authorities. This comprises, but is not limited to the following documents. 
202 
Appendix 3 
Structural Design 
Drawing list, explanation 
note 
Foundation settling 
drawing 
Foundation layout 
Foundation section, 
details, quantity 
estimation 
Plan of trenches in 
foundation, section, and 
details 
Layout, section, 
reinforcement, quantity 
estimation of 1st floor 
slab, outside ramp  
Internal ramp, plan, 
section, detail, and 
quantity estimation 
RC frame layout and 
quantity estimation 
RC column reinforcement 
plan, section, detail, 
quantity 
RC beam reinforcement 
plan, section, detail, 
quantity 
RC slab layout, 
reinforcement, section, 
and quantity estimation 
Masonry wall mesh and 
fixing layout, details, and 
quantity estimation 
RC lintel layout, section, 
quantity estimation 
Steel frame layout, 
section, details and 
quantity estimation 
Table 5: Structural Design 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Detailed drawing 
Text, 
Design 
development 
✔ 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
Bidding 
documents 
1:100 
✔ 
✔ 
1:50/100 
✔ 
1:10/20/25/50  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:10/20/25/50  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
1:10/20/25/50  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:10/20/25/50  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
1:20/25/50/100  ✔ 
NOTE: *The seismic and soil condition differ to each site. Additional drawings are required for structural designs. 
Table 6: Heating, Ventilation and Air-conditioning design 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
✔ 
✔ 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Heating, Ventilation and 
Air-conditioning design 
Room Environmental 
Design Calculations 
HVAC System 
Schematics 
HVAC Control System 
Schematics 
HVAC Duct Riser 
Diagrams 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Appendix 3 
203 
Heating, Ventilation and 
Air-conditioning design 
Specialist Air Handling & 
Ventilation Systems 
Main Ducts/Pipe Routing 
Schematics & Sleeved 
Penetration Drawings 
Schedules of Equipment 
Mechanical Systems 
Specifications 
Mechanical Systems Bill 
of Quantities 
Electrical Design 
Room to Room Electrical 
Service Requirements 
Main Electrical Power 
Distribution Systems 3Ø, 
LV & ELV 
Earthing Systems 
Essential Electrical 
Services 
Non-essential Electrical 
Services 
Emergency Power 
Supply Systems 
Distribution Board/Panel 
Layouts 
Motor Control 
Schematics 
Main Cable Ducts/Trays 
Routing Schematics & 
Sleeved Penetration 
Drawings 
Internal Lighting Systems 
& Layouts 
Catering & Laundry 
Systems Schematics 
Lightning Protection 
Systems 
Electrical Systems 
Specifications 
Electrical  Systems  Bill  of 
Quantities 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Drawing/Schematic 
Design 
development 
1:100/200 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, 
Diagrams/Table 
MS Excel Table 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Table 7: Electrical Design 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Drawing/Schematic 
Text, 
Design 
development 
✔ 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
✔ 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/201 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
MS Excel Table 
Text, 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
204 
Appendix 3 
Table 8: Water Supply and Plumbing design 
Drawing/Schematic 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Water Supply and 
Plumbing design 
Chilled Water Riser 
Diagrams 
Fire Strategy & Safety 
Systems Schematics 
Fire Service Dry Riser 
Diagram 
Internal Sewage Systems  Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
Drawing/Schematic 
Design 
development 
1:100/200 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
1:50/100 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Internal Drainage System 
Schematics 
Hot & Cold Water 
Distribution System 
Schematic 
Treated Water Supply & 
Distribution System 
Schematics 
Plant Room Layouts 
Main Ducts/Pipe Routing 
Schematics & Sleeved 
Penetration Drawings 
Schedules of Equipment 
Specifications 
Bill of Quantities 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
MS Excel Table 
Text, 
✔ 
Text, 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Table 9: Internet and Telecommunication, Automation and Fire safety 
Mechanical Design 
IT and security 
BMS 
Fire  Strategy  &  Safety 
Systems & Layouts 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Text, 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table/Sche
matic drawing 
Drawing/Schematic 
Design 
developmen
t 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
✔ 
✔ 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Drawing/Schematic 
1:100/200 
1:50/100 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Table 10: External Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing engineering work 
Mechanical Design 
Permission for connection 
to power grid 
Permission for connection 
to Sewage grid 
Permission for connection 
to Water grid 
Permission for connection 
to heating grid 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Design 
development 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Text, 
Text, 
Text, 
Text, 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
Appendix 3 
205 
Mechanical Design 
External  electrical  design 
and details  
External water supply and 
sewage 
system, 
connection details 
External heating design 
External 
telecommunication 
design and details 
Technical specification for 
MEP works 
Bill of quantities 
Estimating 
MEP Construction work 
for  External 
Document 
Type/Scale 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Detailed drawing 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Narrative 
Diagrams/Table 
Text, 
Text, 
Text, 
Design 
development 
Construction 
documents 
(scale) 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
1:50/100 
Bidding 
documents 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
NOTE: *The grading of the building differs to each site. The connectivity of external MEP differs to the distance of the 
sources. Additional and design adjustments are required. 
Table 11: Construction and Supervision contract administration 
Document Type/Scale 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Certificates 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Change Orders 
Construction contract administration 
Construction Inspection and Review 
Progress Reports/Evaluation 
Process Certificates for Payment 
Review of Shop Drawing Product Data/Sample 
Change Orders 
Substantial Performance Report and Certification  Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Client Consultation 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Interior Construction Inspection 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Full time Project Representation 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Administration of Separate Contracts 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Structural Inspection/Reports 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Mechanical Inspection/Reports 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Electrical Inspection/Reports 
Recordings 
Record Drawings 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Pre-installation F&E Inspection 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Civil Construction Inspection 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Landscape Inspection 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Detailed Cost Accounting 
Narrative Text, Diagrams/Table 
Commissioning procedures 
Supplementary 
47.  Boiler house – if needed. 
48.  Rainwater tank, pump, and filter details. 
D. 
TEAM COMPOSITION & QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR THE KEY EXPERTS 
49.  General requirements for the Consultant are below: 
206 
Appendix 3 
(i)  The firm must have a Mongolian Special Licenses of Building Drawing (License No: 
1.2.2 or 1.2.3 and 1.2.8) from the Construction Development Centre by the Ministry of 
Construction and Urban Development. 
(ii)  The Consultant shall assemble a team of professionals with appropriate qualifications 
and expertise in similar projects, to satisfy the requirements of the scope of work both 
in terms of skills and time allocations. 
50.  The  Consultant  may  propose  other  supporting  staff  required  to  accomplish  the  tasks 
outlined  in  the  TOR.  It  is  the  Consultant's  responsibility  to  select  the  optimum  team  and  to 
propose the professionals, which they assess to meet the consultancy needs. 
51.  The total person-months estimated for detailed engineering design team are 46 person-
months. The person-months (PM) estimation is given in the Table 12. 
Table 12: Estimated Person-Months for Key Experts 
No 
Key Experts 
1  Team Leader/National Architect 
2  CAD Drafter 
3  Structural Engineer 
4  Water Supply and Wastewater Engineer  
5  Electrical Engineer  
6  Quantity Surveyor/Budget Estimator 
7  Road Engineer and traffic management specialist  
8 
Resident  Engineers  (3  persons  for  construction 
supervision) 
TOTAL 
Number of 
Experts 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Person/month input 
Home 
4.00 
3.00 
3.00 
3.00 
3.00 
3.00 
2.00 
Field 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
Total 
5.0 
4.0 
4.0 
4.0 
4.0 
4.0 
3.0 
3 
11 
0.00 
18.00 
18.0 
21.00 
25.00 
46.00 
52.  The qualifications and experience required for key team members are indicated below. 
53.  Team  Leader/National  Architect  (national,  5  months).  The  consultant  will  have  (i) 
Master’s degree or higher in engineering and design, or related area, (ii) Professional experience 
in preparation of social care, community-based facilities, multi-purpose use space such as well 
as  office  building  design  and  drawings,  Community,  (iii)  Advanced  knowledge  of  Universal 
Design  Principles  in  Space  Planning,  (iv)  Experience  in  planning  of  architectural  design, 
drawings  of  hospital  building  and  rehabilitation  center,  access roads,  and  infrastructure,  (v)  5 
years’  experience  in  project  management,  (vi)  A  knowledge  or  experience  in  architectural 
drawing in Mongolia would be advantageous, (vii) Proficiency in English language and effective 
communication and interpersonal communications skills are mandatory. 
54.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
Ensure implementation of the project within time and cost. 
(i) 
(ii)  Maintain liaison with MET, Contractor as and when required. 
(iii) 
Identification, assessment and finalization of the various project requirements and 
parameters on the basis of the required functions of universal design in 
consultation with the client. 
Lead the planning and design in design of the physical facilities. 
Advising the project team in making appropriate assessment of information, data 
and forecasting demands of users, facilities, services and equipment in respect of 
architectural planning needs. 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi)  Prepare of master plan on the basis of studies to be conducted on present and 
future space and master planning requirements. 
Appendix 3 
207 
(vii)  Prepare of architectural designs including space planning keeping in view the 
equipment and future layouts and other requirements of the client to achieve an 
efficient interrelationship of functions. 
(viii)  Guide the project team in identifying special equipment in discussion with the 
client. 
(ix)  Guide management of supervision specially to ensure attainment of architectural 
aspects. 
(x)  Undertake architectural, schematic and concept design for assigned projects, with 
the ability to undertake design details (e.g., windows, doors) including preliminary 
design calculations, preliminary sketches/drawings, preliminary specifications and 
other required design information. 
Liaise with engineers and other disciplines to ensure coherent and correct, as well 
as aesthetically pleasing design. 
(xi) 
(xii)  Make amendments to the design as required. 
(xiii)  Undertake detailed design work on projects as required, and fully check and 
ensure designs are properly validated as per the approved design process. 
(xiv)  Undertake site visits as required. 
(xv)  Undertake quality assurance checking of drawings and calculations produced by 
self and that of other team members as directed by International project Architect. 
(xvi)  Ensure that all drawings are reviewed and checked by International Project 
Architect to external issue. 
(xvii)  Produce architectural design briefs, documents, reports and specifications as 
required. 
(xviii)  Produce architectural drawings utilizing Revit and/or AutoCAD as appropriate for 
the project. 
55.  CAD  Drafter  (national,  4  months).  The  consultant  will  have  (i)  Qualified  degree  in 
architecture or engineering, (ii) Professional experience in architectural presentations using the 
CAD and in the preparation of design of drawings. 
56.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Assist the Project Architect and Architect in the planning and designing facilities. 
Assess space planning for different facilities and assist in maximizing space 
utilization. 
(iii)  Prepare architectural presentations using the CAD and oversee CAD production 
(iv)  Assist in the preparation of design and production of drawings 
(v) 
Provide inspection during construction as necessary to assist the Team Leader in 
conducting quality audit and administration of QA plan 
57.  Structural Engineer (national, 4 months). The consultant will have (i) Graduate degree 
qualified  in  Structural  or  Civil  Engineering,  (ii)  Be  a  licensed  Structural  Engineer  or  Civil 
Engineering,  (iii)  Professional  experience  in  engineering  design  and  construction  supervision, 
particularly in preparation of structural drawings, structural calculations according to Mongolian 
and international standards and legislation, quality assurance and quality control, building and 
site layout surveys, on site material testing, concrete mix design, planning and scheduling, safety 
engineering,  and  cost  engineering  and  budgeting,  (iv)  Intermediate  time  management  and 
organizational skills with the ability to self-manage billable hours and ability to undertake own 
work  with  a  high  degree  of  efficiency  and  accuracy,  (v)  Advanced  knowledge  of  Structural 
Engineering Analysis & Design software packages (preferably SAP 2000) as well as CAD and 
general office software packages, (vi) Intermediate knowledge of International Building Codes 
208 
Appendix 3 
and Design standards, (vii) Intermediate leadership skills with the ability to manage teams with 
a strong results-orientation, (viii)  Intermediate  written  and  spoken  communication skills  with a 
minimum basic understanding of English, and (ix) Previous experience within design teams and 
on Author’s Supervision duties. 
58.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(iii) 
(i) 
(ii) 
Careful consideration of seismic and geological conditions for each location. 
Undertake structural calculations and analysis and produce economic and 
efficient buildable designs. 
Liaise with the project architects, other engineering disciplines, sub-consultants 
and clients are required. 
(iv)  Undertake site visits as required. 
(v)  Carry out detailed structural design and preparation work for foundation. 
(vi)  Undertake quality assurance checking of drawings and calculations produced by 
self and that of other team members as directed by Team Leader. 
(vii)  Coordination of the works of structural design engineers for timely completion of 
the structural design. 
(viii)  Ensure that all drawings are reviewed and checked by Team Leader prior to 
external issue. 
(ix)  Produce structural design briefs, documents, reports and material specifications 
as required for civil construction. 
Supervise all civil construction works. 
(x) 
(xi)  Assist Quantity Site Engineer during the design, construction and post 
construction phases. 
(xii)  Monitor post construction activities as and when required. 
59.  Water Supply and Wastewater Engineer (national, 4 months). The consultant will have 
(i) Graduate degree in Plumbing systems, (ii) Extensive experience in hospital and rehabilitation 
center  sanitary  systems  including  clean  water,  sewage  systems,  sanitary  drainage  and  water 
treatment  systems, (iii) Years of  Experience:  Minimum  of  5  Years  Post-Graduate  Experience, 
(iv)  Intermediate  time  management  and  organizational  skills  with  the  ability  to  self-manage 
billable hours and ability to undertake own work with a high degree of efficiency and accuracy, 
(v) Advanced knowledge of design software in relation to MEP design including AutoCAD and 
MS  office  software  such  as  Excel,  Word,  PowerPoint,  MS  Project,  (vi)  Site  inspection  or 
supervision  experience  on  building  construction  projects,  (vii)  Intermediate  knowledge  of 
International  Building  Codes  and  Design  Standards,  (viii)  Intermediate  written  and  spoken 
communication skills with a minimum basic understanding of English, (ix) Previous experience 
within design teams and on Author’s Supervision duties. 
60.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
Prepare designs, documentation, cost estimates and phasing of work in respect of 
water supply, plumbing, sanitary and drainage systems 
Provide inspection of the works during construction 
(ii) 
(iii)  Assist the Team Leader and Site Engineer in the efficient implementation of the 
project 
(iv)  Assist HVAC and Building Services Expert 
(v) 
Assess requirements for elevators, air-conditioning and ventilation, water supply 
and firefighting works, determine baselines and design parameters 
(vi)  Undertake design of lifts, air-conditioning and mechanical ventilation system, 
water supply and fire detection/fighting system 
(vii)  Supervise preparation of mechanical design drawings 
Appendix 3 
209 
(viii)  Undertake supervision of all mechanical works at site and attend to any revision of 
design, if required, during supervision 
61.  Electrical Engineer (national, 4 months). The consultant will have (i) Graduate Degree in 
Electrical Engineering, (ii) Be a licensed Electrical Engineer or be eligible to become a licensed 
Electrical  Engineer,  (iii)  Professional  experience  working  within  an  Engineering  consulting 
environment  such  that  electrical  engineering  for  building,  building  automation,  process 
electrification  and  automation,  programming  and  instrumentation  design,  (iv)  Experience  in 
finding power source alternatives for saving electricity, emergency power supplies, fire detection 
systems,  lighting,  telephone  and  paging  systems,  elevator  control,  (v)  years  of  Experience: 
Minimum  of  5  Years  Post-Graduate  Experience,  (vi)  Intermediate  time  management  and 
organizational skills with the ability to self-manage billable hours and ability to undertake own 
work with a high degree of efficiency and accuracy, (vii) advanced knowledge of design software 
in  relation  to  MEP  design  including  AutoCAD  and  MS  office  software  such  as  Excel,  Word, 
PowerPoint, MS Project, (viii) site inspection or supervision experience on building construction 
projects, (ix) intermediate knowledge of International Building Codes and Design Standards, (x) 
intermediate written and spoken communication skills with a minimum basic understanding of 
English, and (xi) previous experience within design teams and on Author’s Supervision duties. 
62.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
Ensure all duties are undertaken within the required timeframe. 
Assist the investigation teams during design services. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Undertake  planning  and  detail  designs  of  internal  and  external  electrical  works 
including area lighting and emergency power supply system. 
(iv)  Prepare  concept,  basic  and  detail  design  of  electrical  drawings  in  Auto  CAD  or 
Revit, ensuring that the design are undertaken in accordance with local codes and 
international standards. 
Liaise with the project architects, other engineering disciplines, sub-consultants and 
clients as required. 
(v) 
(vi)  Undertake site visits as required. 
(vii)  Produce design specifications, design reports and to finalize all designs calculations 
as required. 
(viii)  Supervise  preparation  of  BOQ,  cost  estimates  and  specifications  for  electrical 
works. 
(ix)  Review  shop  drawings  and  material  submission  from  contractor/construction 
manager. 
Liaise with contractors and undertake site inspection duties as required. 
(x) 
(xi)  Ensure  quality  control,  cost  control,  measurement  of  works,  testing  of  materials, 
Verification of measurement of records, certification of bills, monitoring of progress 
and  recommending  appropriate  actions,  supervising  finalization  of  as-built 
drawings. 
(xii)  Ensure that all drawings are reviewed and checked before submission to approval 
of Expertise and Fire Safety. 
63.  Quantity Surveyor/Budget Estimator (national, 4 months). The consultant will have (i) 
Master’s degree or higher in engineering and design, or related area; (ii) Professional experience 
supervising  all  activities  of  the  project  including  pre-construction  activities,  survey,  soil 
investigations, specially to ensure attainment of all works, monitoring of post construction work; 
(iii)  Experience  in  testing  of  materials  and  works  at  site  or  at  suitable  laboratories;  and  (iv) 
Knowledge 
the 
contractors/suppliers. 
interpretation  of  drawing,  specifications,  conditions  of  contract 
to 
in 
210 
Appendix 3 
64.  Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Guiding the design and construction supervision team 
Advising the project team in making appropriate assessment of field data and 
forecasting demands of users, facilities, services and equipment in respect of 
survey and soil investigations 
(iii)  Overseeing and supervising all activities of the project including pre-construction 
activities, survey, soil investigations, supervision of construction including 
management and monitoring 
(iv)  Guiding, supervising and coordinating activities of other project team members 
(v)  Guiding management of supervision specially to ensure attainment of all works 
(vi)  Overseeing progress monitoring, cost and quality control 
(vii)  Monitoring of post construction work 
(viii)  Supervising all activities of the project including survey, soil investigation and 
construction work 
Initiate testing of materials and works at site or at suitable laboratories 
Interpret drawing, specifications, conditions of contract to the contractors/suppliers 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi)  Verify records of measurements of works done 
(xii)  Scrutinize & certify contractor’s/supplier’s bills for payment 
(xiii)  Check and certify as-built drawings 
(xiv)  Supervise progress of works and recommend appropriate actions and will prepare 
weekly and monthly progress report 
65. 
Road engineer and traffic management specialist (national, 3 months). The Consultant 
should  have  (i)  a  Bachelor’s  or  graduate  degree  in  road  engineering,  (ii)  At  least  10  years  of 
professional experience in transport sector projects preferably with projects that include roads, 
bridges  and  tunnels  is  required,  (iii)  Experience  of  supervising  road  works  during  construction 
period and testing of materials and works at site or at suitable laboratory building are preferable, 
(iv)  Excellent  knowledge  of  Mongolian  construction  standards,  norms  and  regulations,  (v) 
Excellent knowledge in interpretation of drawing, technical specifications, conditions of contract 
to the suppliers, (vi) experience in Project Management, Construction Supervision and Contract 
Administration, and (vii) Good command of English. 
66. 
The Road engineer and traffic management specialist shall take overall responsibility to 
support the successful implementation of the project-funded carparks and traffic management in 
the project protected areas. Specific tasks include but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Prepare detailed designs for the car parks. Ensure that: (a) the sites are not based 
on  permafrost,  (b)  the  designs  minimize  impacts  to the  environment  and  climate, 
and maximize resilience to climate change. This will include, but not be limited to: 
selection of materials that are durable; designs which minimize soil excavation and 
instead consider elevation of the road base, to improve protection and insulation of 
the subsurface layer. 
Identify and design small supporting facilities needed for each carpark to improve 
public safety and halt and reduce off-road impacts to habitats e.g., speed limit signs, 
information signs, speedhumps, barrier entry gates. 
(iii)  Prepare  a  brief  traffic management  plan  for  each  project  protected  area.  This  will 
include:  (a)  map  of  the  road  network,  (b)  establishment  of  legal  speed  limits, 
considering needs tailored to the protected areas e.g. risk of collisions with wildlife, 
(c) clear demarcation of locations for public vehicle access and locations which are 
Appendix 3 
211 
restricted  from  public  vehicle  access,  (d)  travel  times  between  the  site  and  other 
project facilities. 
(iv)  Costs for O&M of the carparks and small associated signs and facilities. 
(v)  Day-to-day construction supervision through the Resident Engineers and other site 
staff; review of daily reports prepared by site staff. 
(vi)  Prepare and maintain progress monitoring schedule. 
(vii)  Undertake appropriate due diligence on the detailed designs, propose amendments 
where appropriate to reflect improved road safety and climate resilience, and ensure 
these amendments are incorporated into the final detailed design 
(viii)  Any other tasks as reasonably requested by the Client, Team Leader, Deputy Team 
Leader to successfully complete the project. 
Resident  Engineers  (3  experts,  18  months).  The  consultant  should  have  (i)  degree 
67. 
qualified  in  engineering  or  equivalent  work  experience  (supervisor  level),  (ii)  5+  years  of 
experience  in  construction/site  environment  including  main  contractor  works,  (iii)  Intermediate 
time  management  skills  with  the  ability  to  work  under  pressure  and  to  tight  timeframes  on 
occasion,  (iv)Basic  written  and  verbal  communication skills,  with  the  ability  to  collate materials 
into  a  template  report,  (v)  Basic  working  knowledge  of  software  such  as  MS  Word,  Excel  and 
AutoCAD, (vi)  Team  player  and  able to  adapt to  changes  within the  construction  process, (vii) 
Fluency in written and spoken English is preferred. 
68. 
Specific tasks and responsibilities will include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i) 
Review and comment on drawing specifications and any other documents that 
may be required for the project. 
Review and inspect the contractor capability in term of personal, equipment and 
other conditions with regard to the contract/bid conditions and legal requirements 
(ii) 
(iii)  Where applicable provide suggestions or observations in respect to the element of 
the works. 
(iv)  Assist with the development of the inspection process for the C&S/Finishing works 
at site. 
(v)  Record accurate inspections carried out in line with the site documents. 
(vi)  Advise line manager and record where applicable any works not carried out in 
accordance with the drawings and specifications, 
(vii)  Check the work done by the contractor. 
(viii)  Assist with the H&S at site and advise line manager of any infringements. 
(ix)  Assist where required in the development of the commissioning procedures that 
are required for the project. 
(x)  Review and comment in respect to as-built drawings, and operations manuals. 
(xi)  Provide support for the functional area of the project within which they are 
allocated, or for the project team as a whole, as required by the structure of the 
project team. 
(xii)  Monitor and advise line manager of all of the works within their specific area of 
concern. 
(xiii)  Any other duties that may be assigned as part of the construction works. 
E. 
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS AND TIME SCHEDULE FOR DELIVERABLES 
69. 
The Consultant will directly report to the PIU project coordinator who will monitor contract 
implementation and the quality of the deliverables with the support of PIU M&E specialist under 
close  supervision  of  project  director.  The  project  implementation  unit  (PIU)  and  the  MET  will 
212 
Appendix 3 
evaluate the consultant’s performance based on the agreed deliverables and approve the invoices 
for the reviewed and accepted deliverables. 
70.  Within  10  working  days  of  the  commencement  of  the  Contract,  a  detailed  work  plan  in 
accordance with scope of the work will be delivered to the PIU and approved by MET. The plan 
will  serve  as  the  basis  for  measuring  progress  on  desired  outcomes  and  goals  for  the  entire 
consultancy  service. Detailed  work  plan  shall  include  Reporting  Requirements  and  Time 
Schedule for Deliverables. 
71. 
At a minimum, it should include the following: 
(a)  format, frequency, and contents of reports. Content will indicate what deliverables 
will be included in the report. 
(b)  number of copies, and requirements to electronic submission if any (or on flash 
disk). Final reports shall be delivered in flash disk in addition to the specified number 
of hard copies. 
(c)  dates of submission for each report. 
(d)  persons (indicate names, titles, submission address) to receive them. 
72.  Following reports will be provided or modified in consultation with the MET: 
(a)  Inception report after 1 month of consultant’s mobilization 
(b)  Monthly and quarterly reports reporting the progress of the outputs within the above 
scope of work. 
(c)  Yearly report within 10 days of first month of the year. 
(d)  Final report by end of the contract. 
(e)  Any other deliverables reasonably requested by the PIU and MET. 
73.  The consultant is required to PIU various reports/documents including among others: 
No 
1 
Inception report 
Types of Reports 
Date of Submission 
Number of copies 
2  Weekly progress report 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Monthly progress report 
Defect liability Period Report  
Project Completion Report 
Monitoring and Evaluation Reports  
Project  Performance  Management 
Report 
Within 1 month after 
commencement of 
supervision  
Each week after 
commencement supervision 
Each month 
Within 28 days of issue of 
certificate of completion 
End of the consultant’s work 
Three months after project 
completion report 
Before, during and end of 
project implementation 
2 copies  
2 copies  
2 copies  
4 copies  
4 copies  
4 copies  
4 copies  
74.  The supervision progress report are as follows: 
1)  Inception report will cover at a minimum an assessment of the project procurement 
status, implementation delays and recommended corrective actions (if any), the status 
of  design  development  for  the  installations  nominated  as  Provisional  Sum  in  the 
construction contract. 
2)  Weekly  progress  report  shall  include  details  of  the  works  carried  out  during  the 
previous week, the problems encountered or anticipated, information on outstanding 
claims  complete  with  summaries  of  both  Contractor  and  Employer  compliance  with 
contract  time  notification  periods.  The  report  will  document  the  status  of  design 
Appendix 3 
213 
development  for  the  installations  nominated  as  Provisional  Sum  in  the  construction 
contract.  The  report  will  detail  the  steps  taken  or  the  recommendations  given  to 
address  the  given circumstance,  and  the  report  shall  capture  financial  and  physical 
progress to date. 
3)  Monthly progress report shall comprehensively cover all project aspects: the overall 
project  progress,  updates  on  implementation  arrangements  or  changes  in  project 
scope,  contract  awards  and  disbursement  status,  payments  to  the  consultants  and 
contractors,  progress  of  works,  status  of  training  programs,  difficulties  and  delays 
encountered or anticipated, and remedial actions taken or suggested, and summarize 
the  compliance  status  related 
the  grant/loan  covenants  and  social  and 
environmental safeguard; 
to 
4)  Progress  reports  will  include  an  assessment  on  construction  progress  against 
program,  an  indication  of  key  outstanding  issues,  and  an  updated  development 
program (if relevant) for key project activities. Copies of each report will be submitted 
to PIU in English. The Consultant shall transmit an electronic version of the reports to 
ADB on issue of the reports to the Employer. 
5)  Project completion report shall include a detailed description of all the work by items 
of technical and non-technical matters, as-built drawings, economic analysis, financial 
and disbursement data, analyses, difficulties, and delays encountered and reasons, 
and remedial actions taken, the overall progress of the Project. 
75. 
All  reports  will  be  reviewed  by the MET.  The  Consultant shall  respond  in  writing to the 
comments of the EA and IA or any of the reviewing bodies. The Consultant shall meet with these 
agencies,  as  necessary,  to  resolve  any  problems  or  concerns  which  may  surface  during  the 
review. The Consultant shall have their own internal review system to review drawings prior to EA 
and IA’s approval. The Consultant shall become familiar with local holidays and customs so that 
in setting  submittal  schedules, the  project  and  EA  and  IAs  can  take full advantage  of the time 
periods scheduled for reviews and approvals. 
76. 
Drawings prepared and submitted by the Consultant shall be to the standard size of A0, 
Al, A2; and one‐half size reductions as may be required by the MET. The scale of all drawings is 
to be determined by mutual consent of the EA, IAs and the Consultant prior to the commencement 
of each project phase, at which time the Consultant shall also identify the number of drawings to 
be produced. All drawings information should be clear and legible. The Consultant shall submit 
the final drawings in digital format approved and reviewed by the MET. State expertise approved 
final drawings (three hardcopies) will be submitted to the MET in English and Mongolian version. 
F.   CLIENTS INPUTS AND COUNTERPART PERSONNEL 
77.  The following staff will be assigned by the Client to support the Consultant’s team: 
-  MET DPAM and DTPC Counterpart Specialists 
-  All PIU staff 
78.  Counterpart Contribution to be provided by the Client: 
-  Support to obtain necessary approvals regarding external utilities (power, heating, 
water and sewage, communication, IT) from relevant authorities (as appropriate). 
-  Support to arrange meetings with government organizations. 
-  Support to obtain relevant information and negotiations with Clients. 
79.  The Client will provide the following documents and papers to facilitate preparation of the 
proposals: 
214 
Appendix 3 
-  Previous data, TA consultant’s report 
APPENDIX A to the TOR 
UNIVERSAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES 
The  following  design  consideration  for  each  types  of  disability  must  be  reflected  on 
1. 
building design development and detail design stages. The Consultant must follow the Synthesis 
of the standards ISO/IEC Guide 71:2014 
1) 
Sensory Abilities and Characteristics 
(i)  Multiple  means  of  information  presentation  such  as  auditory  or  tactile  to 
supplement or substitute for visual information. 
(ii)  Appropriate  size,  contrast,  form,  luminance,  lighting  and  viewing  distance  in 
relation to context of use. 
(iii)  Avoidance  of  glare;  redundant  forms  of  coding  to  supplement  or  substitute  for 
information conveyed with color coding, e.g. shape or texture  coding. 
(iv)  Appropriate physical construction and properties of fonts such as size, spacing, 
with or without serif, upright form or italics, and light, medium or bold appearance 
within a specific context of use. 
(v)  Visual information  and controls  placed  in a prominent  position,  or a  positioning 
that is flexible, adjustable, or duplicated. 
(vi)  Avoidance of f licker rates with f lashing or blinking text, objects or video screens, 
especially those that can trigger visually induced seizures. 
(vii)  Distinctive form to facilitate identification of a product/environment and/or parts 
of  a  product/environment  (including  orientation,  e.g.  top/bottom,  front/back, 
entrance/exit). 
(viii)  Colored markings that draw attention to steps and potentially dangerous  places. 
(ix)  Tactile  indicators  that  draw  attention  to  stairs,  platform  edges  and  pedestrian 
crossings. 
(x)  Traffic  lights  equipped  with  acoustic  signals  to  indicate  when  pedestrians  can 
cross streets safely. 
2) 
Hearing Consideration 
(i)  Multiple  means  of  information  presentation  such  as  visual  (text  or  pictures)  or 
tactile to supplement or substitute for auditory information. 
(ii)  Appropriate  volume,  pitch  and  frequency  of  spoken  announcements,  warnings 
and warning sounds in relation to context of use. 
(iii)  Adjustable volume over a wide range and with multiple frequencies. 
(iv)  Avoidance of sudden changes in volume of auditory signals. 
(v)  Constant signal-to-noise ratio between the level of an announcement and that of 
the background noise. 
(vi)  Group  assistive  listening  devices  or  communication  systems  such  as  induction 
loops, infrared or radio systems. 
(vii)  Emergency announcements that are visual with text, and where appropriate, in 
sign language, as well as of an appropriate volume and pitch decrease risk for 
persons with hearing impairment. 
(viii)  A  good  acoustic  environment,  that  reduces  background  sounds  and  promotes 
sound that is important to be heard. 
Appendix 3 
215 
(ix)  Accommodation for and compatibility with relevant assistive  products, assistive 
technology and supports. 
3) 
Touch Functions 
(i)  Multiple means of information presentation such as visual or auditory information 
to supplement or substitute for tactile information or biometric controls. 
(ii)  Multiple means of control such as eye and voice control, sensors and automatic 
or remote controls. 
(iii)  Avoidance of sharp and uneven points/edges/surfaces. 
(iv)  Avoidance  of  excessively  hot  or  cold  surfaces  which  can  be  touched  (even 
inadvertently). 
(v)  Distinctive form to facilitate identification of a product and its parts, which in turn 
can facilitate use/handling/assembly. 
4) 
Taste Functions And Smell Functions 
(i)  Multiple  means  of  information  presentation  to  supplement  or  substitute  for 
information gained by taste and smell functions. 
information in labeling on ingredients, use by and expiration dates. 
(ii) 
(iii)  Visual and auditory signals to alert people to the presence of smoke or dangerous 
chemicals. 
Information or labeling to warn about strong smell or taste. 
(iv) 
(v)  Provision  of  minimal  odors  and  taste,  except  where  necessary  (e.g.  odors  and 
taste are expected in foods). 
5) 
Immunological System Functions 
(i)  Avoidance of inclusion of allergens, sensitizing substances and chemicals known 
to cause hypersensitivities in products, foodstuffs and environments. 
(ii)  Appropriate information and labeling of ingredients/contents (including allergens, 
sensitizing  and  chemical  substances  known  to  cause  hypersensitivities)  in 
accessible  format,  the  provision  of  this  information  being  mostly  subject  to 
national or international regulation and which can include 
(iii)  A list of ingredients, 
(iv)  A separate statement that declares any major allergens or sensitizing substances 
included, and warnings such as information regarding any change in composition 
of significance related to allergens and sensitizing substances. 
(v)  Ventilation systems that filter out respiratory allergens. 
(vi)  Prevention  of  mold  growth,  e.g.  by  controlling  level  of  indoor  humidity,  and 
following appropriate cleaning routines. 
(vii)  Avoidance of dust-collecting furnishings in public areas. 
(viii)  Availability of “allergy-free” areas such as smoke-free and allergy-free rooms in 
hotels, and animal- free areas in public transportation. 
6) 
Physical Abilities and Characteristics 
(i)  Additional space in built environments. 
(ii)  Space for clothing and personal protective equipment. 
(iii)  Multiple size offerings and / or adjustability. 
(iv)  Height clearance for tall persons. 
(v)  Width clearance for large persons. 
(vi)  Step heights and reach distances for small persons. 
(vii)  Space  for  assistive  products,  assistive  technology,  service  animals  and 
accompanying persons. 
216 
Appendix 3 
(viii)  Load  capacities  of  system  components  appropriate  for  larger  mass  (weight) 
requirements. 
(ix)  Systems with a clear line of sight to important components for seated or standing 
users. 
(x)  Systems with a comfortable reach to all components for seated or standing users. 
(xi)  Grip sizes in systems components that accommodate variations in user sizes and 
shapes. 
7) 
Movement: Functions Of Upper Body Structures And Fine Hand Use Abilities 
(i)  Manufacturing materials of lighter weight or lower density to reduce the weight of 
products. 
(ii)  Products shaped to facilitate easy grasping, lifting and carrying with either or both 
hands. 
(iii)  Manual controls that allow a comfortable grip, avoid the need for twisting of the 
wrist, and offer minimal resistance. 
(iv)  Controls that avoid the need to manipulate multiple controls at the same  time. 
(v)  Non-slippery surface that aids gripping and manipulating for people with limited 
dexterity. 
(vi)  Textured surfaces, to increase friction, and facilitate the application of force. 
(vii)  Design  and  spacing  of  controls  that  guard  against  inadvertent  activation  of  a 
control other than the one intended. 
(viii)  Containers  that  allow  easy  opening  and  closing  with  reasonably  low  attainable 
operating force. 
(ix)  Simple and straightforward sequences for opening of packaging and assembling, 
installing or operating a product. 
(x)  Avoidance of simultaneous double movements, e.g. pushing and twisting. 
(xi)  Alternative controls for accommodation of upper body movement impairments. 
8) 
Movement: Functions Of Lower Body Structures 
(i)  Slip-resistant,  threshold-free  layout,  e.g.  in  buildings  and  paved  outdoor 
environments. 
(ii)  Avoidance of sudden changes in surface level, obstacles, bumps or  protrusions. 
(iii)  Equipment, such as elevators and other lifting systems. 
(iv)  Ramps  with appropriate  slopes  and adequate  space to  allow for  approach  and 
maneuvering, and use of wheelchairs, walking frames, or walking aids. 
(v)  Stairs with appropriate dimensions and banisters or hand grips alongside. 
(vi)  Ample time for persons with mobility limitations to pass through automatic doors 
and to use pedestrian crossings. 
9) 
Muscle Power And Muscle Endurance 
(i)  Use  of  power  grip  (whole  hand)  which  requires  less  effort  than  pinch  grip 
(between thumb and index or middle finger). 
(ii)  Appropriate  handling  characteristics  (e.g.  size  and  weight)  for  systems  that 
involve lifting, holding, carrying or opening. 
(iii)  Avoidance of long handling time and unnecessary repetition of operations. 
(iv)  Avoidance of long service lines that cause people to stand unsupported for long 
periods of time. 
(v)  Alternative means of control in vehicles to accommodate lower body movement. 
10) 
Voice and Speech 
Appendix 3 
217 
(i)  Alternative  forms  of  communication  such  as  via  text,  facial  expressions,  hand 
movements or signs, body postures, and other forms of body language. 
(ii)  Augmentative  and  alternative  communication  based  on  symbols,  aids, 
techniques, and/or strategies. 
(iii)  Support  for  the  use  of  assistive  products  such  as  speech  synthesizers  and 
communication amplifier and video communication. 
(iv)  Provision  of  alternative  means  to  interact  with  interactive  voice  systems  and 
intercom systems, such as real-time text. 
11) 
Information about time and place. 
Cognitive Abilities 
(i) 
(ii)  Schedules, structures, signals to indicate start and termination of  activities. 
(iii)  An overview that informs the user what to expect before providing any  details. 
(iv)  Appropriate  feedback/cues/reminders  that  hold  the  user’s  attention  and  give 
support through a process. 
(v)  Feedback that is adjustable to the needs and preferences of users. 
(vi)  Environments and presentations that are stimulating but also avoid  distractions. 
(vii)  Systems  and  procedures  that  adapt  to  individual  situations,  abilities  and 
preferences. 
(viii)  Similar arrangement/layout and design of feedback and control logic on products 
of a similar type. 
(ix)  Similar design of feedback and control logic on products of a similar  type. 
(x)  Error-tolerant operating sequences. 
(xi)  Flexible time period for assimilation of information and response. 
(xii)  Simple and straightforward sequences for opening of packaging and assembling, 
installing or operating a product. 
(xiii)  Information  provided  in  multiple  formats,  e.g.  text  is  read  out,  diagrams  are 
provided in addition to text. 
(xiv)  Information and instructions that are easy to understand in the language of the 
user. 
(xv)  Explicit information on expectations placed on the user. 
(xvi)  Systems that can be used (as far as possible) without an instruction  manual. 
(xvii) Procedures  that  facilitate  learning  (learning  by  doing  is  generally  easier  than 
memorizing instructions, repetitions). 
(xviii)  Multiple  means  of  information  presentation  (e.g.  text  is  read  out,  widely 
recognized symbols); 
(xix)  Emergency  evacuation  routes  designed  so  that  they  are  intuitive  and  easy  to 
follow  which  clearly  designate  any  alternative  routes  that  accommodate  for 
persons with disabilities; 
(xx)  Accommodation  for/compatibility  with  relevant  supports  and  assistive  products 
and assistive technology. 
218 
Appendix 3 
APPENDIX B to the TOR 
LOCAL BUILDING CODES, REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 
The  Consultant  will  comply  with  all  relevant  domestic  regulatory  requirements  and 
1.  
international standards, including but not limited to the following. 
1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
Norms On Architectural Design 
(i)  BNbD: 30-01-04 /CCM 30-01-04/ Norm and Regulation for  Urban Resettlement 
the  Ministry  of 
planning  and  building  construction,  Decree  No.130  by 
infrastructure, 2004 
(ii)  BD 31-101-04 /31-104-04/ Handbook for barrier-free construction planning for the 
handicapped, Decree No.17 by Director of Construction, Urban Development and 
Public Utilities Office, 2004 
(iii)  BD  31-112-11  Building  regulations  of  space  planning  for  the  requirements  of 
handicapped  people,  Decree  No.256  by  the  Ministry  of  Construction,  Urban 
Development and Transportation. 
(iv)  Other related norms and regulations 
Norms On Structural Design 
(i)  BNbD: 2.01.07.90 Load and effect 
(ii)  BNbD: 22.01.01*2006 Building cod of seismic regions 
(iii)  BNbD: 2.02.01.94 Ground and Foundation code for building design work 
(iv)  BNbD: 52.02.05 Cast in situ concrete and reinforced concrete 
(v)  BNbD: 53.02.05 Steel Structure 
(vi)  BNbD: 2.03.02.90 Masonry and reinforced masonry structure 
(vii)  BNbD: 52.01.10 Concrete and reinforced concrete structure 
Norms On Electrical Design 
(i)  BD 43-101-03 The regulations of electrical installations 
(ii)  BD 43-101-03*12 The regulations of electrical installations 
(iii)  BD 43-103-08 The instruction for design of the lighting protection of building and 
facilities 
(iv)  BD 43-102-07 Design and installation of electrical equipment in residential and 
public buildings 
Norms On Fire Safety And Automation 
(i)  BNbD 21-01-02 Fire safety of buildings and facilities 
(ii)  BNbD 21-02-02 Norm on fire safety for developing construction design drawings 
(iii)  BNbD 21-04-05 Automatic fire extinguisher and alarm equipment of buildings and 
facilities 
(iv)  BNbD 3.05.07-85 Automation systems for building 
Norms On HVAC Design 
(i)  BNbD 41-01-11 Heating, ventilation and air-conditioning 
(ii)  BNbD 43-03-07 Boiler equipment 
(iii)  BD 41-102-11 Design of independent heat supply sources 
(iv)  BNbD 23-01-09 Climate and geophysical parameters for construction 
(v)  BNbD 23-02-09 Building thermal performance 
(vi)  BD 23-103-10 Designing thermal performance for building 
Appendix 3 
219 
6) 
Norms On Water Supply, Plumbing Design 
(i)  BNbD 3.05.04-90 Water supply, sewerage, outdoor pipelines and facilities 
(ii)  BNbD 3.05.01-88 Indoor plumbing system 
(iii)  BNbD 40-05-98 Indoor water supply and sewerage pipelines 
(iv)  BNbD 40-02-06 Water supply, outdoor pipelines and facilities 
7) 
Mongolian National Standards 
(i)  MNS  6055:2009  –  Space  planning  for  building  and  environment  with  the 
requirements of handicapped people, 2009 
(ii)  MNS  6056:2009  –  Design  manual  for  planning  and  designing  accessibility  for 
handicapped people, 2009 
8) 
International Standards 
(i)  EDGE standard 
APPENDIX C: List of the small facilities to be designed 
Refer to Table 2 of Appendix 1 in this project administration manual. 
220 
Appendix 4 
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN PROCUREMENT 
This  Appendix  provides  additional  information  for  the  implementation  of  the  Community 
1. 
Participation in Procurement (CPP) method listed in the procurement plan (Section VI.C). 
A. 
Planning Community Participation in Procurement 
2. 
Procurement planning means the process by which the efforts of all personnel responsible 
for  procurement  are  coordinated  and  integrated  through  a comprehensive  plan for fulfilling  the 
need in a timely manner and at a reasonable cost. CPP Procurement planning consists of the 
following milestones and should allow appropriate time to implement the below: (i) approval of 
procurement plan by the Project Steering Committee and ADB, (ii) preparation of CPP Invitation 
to Quotation, (iii) advertise and solicit CPP Invitation to Quotation, (iv) opening and evaluation of 
quotations, (v) award of contract, (vi) contract signing, and (vii) contract implementation. 
B. 
3. 
Subproject Criteria 
Subproject criteria for CPP will include but not be limited to the following. 
i)  The proposed subproject should benefit the target beneficiaries. 
ii)  The community should demonstrate adequate capacity to execute or supervise the project. 
If not, acceptable arrangements should exist to appoint a capable qualified service provider. 
iii)  The  community  should  indicate  its  willingness  to  participate  with  counterpart funds  or  in-
kind,  such  as  labor  and  should  confirm  such  to  ensure  suitability  of  the  facilities  by 
organizing recurrent operation and maintenance (O&M) works, if required. 
iv)  The scope of work should be simple so that community implementation is the most practical 
solution. 
v)  The  community  should  not  have  been  declared  ineligible  by  the  government  due  to 
unsatisfactory performance or otherwise in earlier executed projects. 
vi)  The community group leader should be authorized legally to sign a contract for procurement 
purposes and should follow approved procurement procedures. 
C. 
Organizing CPP Procurement 
4. 
For subproject financing, MET will establish a bid evaluation committee (BEC) consisting 
of  no  less  than  five  representatives,  including  two  members  from  civil  society  organizations 
(CSOs), of which one member must be project procurement specialist. The BEC is expected to 
(i)  advertise  Request  for  CPP  Quotations  through  www.tender.gov.mn,  www.met.mn  and 
meantime solicit Request for CPP Quotations from four to five prospective qualified community-
based  organizations  (CBOs)  to  minimize  the  risk  of  obtaining  only  one  or  two  quotations,  (ii) 
evaluate all quotations and recommend contract award. The award decision should be made to 
the  lowest  evaluated  CBOs.  The  responsible  person  of  the  MET  signs  the  contract  with  the 
recommended CBOs. 
D. 
Procurement Procedures and Ceiling 
5. 
All  procurement  for  goods  and  works  under  CPP  will  follow  National  Community 
Participation in Procurement Guidelines and Sample Quotation Documents developed by Ministry 
of  Finance.  For  the  CPP  method,  the  bidder  shall  be  a  group  of  citizens  (community  group) 
established on the basis of a cooperation agreement that meets the requirements of the Civil Law. 
Appendix 4 
221 
6.  Works  under  CPP  are  labor  intensive  and  do  not  require  professional  contractors, 
estimated  to  cost  less  than  $30,000  equivalent  per  assignment  up  to  an  aggregate  amount  of 
$162,000, would be carried out using CPP method. 
Under this arrangement, the communities will purchase materials from local markets and 
7. 
mobilize the labor required to undertake the works. CBOs will purchase the construction materials 
such  as  cement,  wood,  stone  aggregate,  and  sand  in  bulk  through  shopping  procedures  by 
inviting at least three quotations, preferably from local suppliers if they are performing small works. 
Labor component of the subprojects can be extended by the members of the community, provided 
adequate  expertise  exists,  who  should  be  reimbursed  adequately  for  the  services  rendered.  It 
should  be  ensured  that  children  are  not  employed  for  the  subprojects.  To  the  extent  possible, 
members of the local community will be employed by the contractors as labor. 
E. 
Contract Management 
The project implementation unit (PIU) will assume certain responsibilities of overseeing the 
8. 
contracts implemented through community participation, such as the following. 
i)  Oversee  the  award  of  contract  and  signing  of  the  contract  agreement,  if  necessary,  in 
certain situations, also countersigning the contracts. 
ii)  Allocate funds for each CPP contracts. 
iii)  Monitor progress and quality of works regularly. 
iv)  Release funds to CBO leaders as per schedule or stage-wise completion. 
v)  Certify quality of works done. 
vi)  Provide  regular  progress  reports  on  CPP  contracts  implementation  status  and  fund 
utilization to MET and the PIU. 
vii)  Prepare  statements  of  expenditures,  maintain  proper  accounts,  and  conduct  selective 
audits. 
viii)  Provide advice to CBOs concerned regarding ADB’s policies and guidelines, especially on 
procurement, indigenous people, involuntary resettlement, and gender. 
F. 
Subproject Implementation 
An implementation plan will be prepared and approved by all concerned parties. The aimag 
9. 
supervision officer and PIU coordinator will monitor the contract implementation with support of 
the  PIU  monitoring  and  evaluation  specialist  and  report  the  progress  to  MET.  The  aimag 
supervision officer will submit a 6-monthly and annual report of all sub-agreements/subprojects 
being implemented in the soum, according to templates developed by the PIU. 
The CBO leader will submit monthly progress status to the PIU aimag supervision officer. 
10. 
The PIU will handle the project finances and pay the contractors directly. The CBO leader should 
also  apprise  the  community  on  the  status  of  project  implementation  either  by  way  of  general 
meetings, posting on notice boards or both. On completion of the project, the CBO leader shall 
prepare  a  comprehensive  completion report  which  will  be  submitted to the  PIU  for  review  and 
approval. Following the completion of Grant, the technical group established at Aimag level will 
conduct  final  inspection  and  certify  completion  to  grant  project.  On  final  acceptance,  final 
payments should be released with the approval of the PIU or EA to the CBO. 
222 
Appendix 4 
G. 
Fund Flow 
11. 
Fund  flow  mechanisms  will  follow  the  project  fund  flow  diagram  in  PAM  Section  IV.  I. 
Supporting documents for payments and due diligence checks should be same as other contracts 
under different procurement methods. 
12.  Members of the communities who provide labor are eligible for payments. 
13.  MET’s internal audit department or an externally appointed auditor will conduct selective 
audits  of  the  subprojects  under  the  loan  which  has  community  participation.  This  audit  report 
should form a part of the overall audit of the Project and will be submitted to ADB in accordance 
with the project reporting requirements for financial management and auditing. 
CONSULTATION AND PARTICIPATION PLAN 
Appendix 5 
223 
Stakeholder Group 
Output 1: Inclusive planning and capacity for community-based tourism enhanced 
1.1 Institutional framework  
-  Local residents, youth, poor and 
Objective of their Involvement 
-  Discussion on dissemination of information on project objectives 
and activities including: project sites (UVTC, RANCC, tourist 
streets, tourism facilities), CBOs, youth incubators, community 
revolving funds, training 
Participation Methods 
Schedule 
Budget 
Responsible 
-  Workshops 
-  Leaflets 
2022-2027 
Included in 
project budget 
PIU, MET  
-  Discuss items to include in draft concession manuals in particular 
priority employment for local residents, women, youth, vulnerable, 
health protocol, universal accessibility; and tour camps licenses. 
-  Invitation letters and/or 
internet, mass media 
-  Round-table and group 
2022-2027 
Included in 
project budget 
PIU, MET  
vulnerable HHs, women 
-  CSOs (women and, youth 
organizations) 
-  Tourism organizations /CBOs  
-  Local government organizations 
-  CSOs (WWF, women 
organizations, youth 
organizations) 
-  Private companies/tour operators 
-  Tourism organizations /CBOs 
-  Communities 
1.2 Destination management and promotion 
-  Aimag and soum administration 
-  Women and youth organizations 
-  Communities residing around 
tourist streets 
-  Finalize contents of draft concession manuals through 
participatory discussion with stakeholders. 
-  Inform stakeholders on contents of final concession manuals and 
encourage their participation in its implementation  
-  Inform local authorities, communities and CBOs and encourage 
participation of youth and women; 
-  Encourage women and youth leadership in CBOs; 
-  Seek views of communities including women on the design and 
management of tourist streets; 
discussions 
-  Stakeholders 
consultations, public 
meetings, workshops 
-  Public meetings / 
workshops 
-  Newspaper advertisement 
/ leaflets 
-  Workshop on design of 
tourist streets 
1.3 Pilot tourism development program – improve local competitiveness to benefit from tourism 
-  Inform on community revolving fund functioning and application 
-  Local government organizations 
-  CSOs (women organizations, 
process; discuss on how to improve the revolving fund; 
-  Public meetings and 
leaflet 
youth organizations) 
-  Inform on women-led market functioning; seek ideas to improve 
-  Meeting with 
-  Communities including youth and 
the women-led market; 
women 
-  Inform on incubator functioning; seek ideas to improve the youth 
-  Youth employment centers in 
incubator; 
each Aimag 
-  Khovd, Uvs and Bayan-Ulgii 
Universities 
-  Discuss on training needs. Finalize training contents; 
-  Discuss collaboration for training; 
-  Training, capacity development and skills upgrading of local 
entrepreneurs.  
-  Local entrepreneurship 
-  Chamber of commerce 
Output 2: Enabling infrastructure constructed 
2.1 Tourism complex and supporting infrastructures  
-  Local government organizations 
including soum health center 
-  CSOs (women organizations, 
-  Seek views on detailed design of the UVTC 
-  Participation of residents (including vulnerable ones) for skilled 
and unskilled construction works 
youth organizations) 
-  Community representatives 
-  Vulnerable people contact 
-  Leasing out market space in tourism complex and car parks 
-  Health and sanitation quality assurance 
-  Conduct awareness raising for HIV/AIDS/STIs prevention and 
persons 
domestic violence 
women/youth in pre-
determined locations 
-  Public 
meetings/workshops 
-  Interview and discussions 
-  Individual visit to 
entrepreneurs  
-  Construction workers 
-  All construction workers under the project shall be received 
-  Specific training for 
training on HIV/AID/STIs 
workers 
2.2 Traffic management and safety at key tourism site 
-  Public meetings organized 
jointly with CSOs and 
Soum Women/Youth 
Councils 
Throughout 
construction 
duration 
-  Project 
budget 
PIU, Soum 
administration 
-  Workshops 
-  Soums health 
center 
-  Contractor 
-  Included in 
construction 
budget 
2022-2027  Project 
budget, 
investment 
cost,  
PIU 
Design  firms  for 
the tourist streets 
2022-2027  Project 
budget, 
investment 
cost,  
PIU 
Design firms for 
the women-led 
markets 
224 
Appendix 6 
Stakeholder Group 
-  Local government organizations 
-  CSOs (women organizations, 
youth organizations) 
-  Communities residing around the 
Objective of their Involvement 
-  Inform about roads and facilities built 
-  Seek feedback on issues, impacts and solutions 
-  Seek advice on workers recruitment including women 
-  Conduct awareness raising for residents on safety issues during 
project areas 
construction and operation 
Output 3: Sanitation and waste management improved 
3.1 Sanitation and wastewater management 
-  Government agencies 
-  CBOs and communities 
-  CSOs (women organizations, 
wastewater management 
-  Seek inputs on design and installation of sanitation and 
-  Provide information on O&M of the sanitation systems for the tour 
youth organizations) 
-  Tour operators and other 
businesses; Tourists  
camps, campsites, and car parks 
-  Inform tourists about use of the public sanitation systems and 
park codes of conduct and regulations 
Output 4: Management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened 
4.1 Rock art and nomadic culture center (RANCC) 
4.2 Rock art Digital Museum – to be housed at RANCC 
-  Local government organizations 
including soum health center 
-  CSOs (women organizations, 
-  Seek views on detailed designs 
-  Participation of residents (including vulnerable ones) for skilled 
and unskilled construction works 
youth organizations) 
-  Community representatives 
-  Vulnerable people contact 
-  Health and sanitation quality assurance 
-  Conduct awareness raising for HIV/AIDS/STIs prevention and 
domestic violence 
Participation Methods 
-  Public meetings; print and 
electronic media; TV 
announcements 
-  Group training 
-  Meeting with women in 
pre-determined location 
-  Public meetings; Focused 
group discussions 
-  Notices/leaflets published 
in newspaper or public 
places 
-  Visits to tourist camps 
-  Public meetings organized 
jointly with CSOs and 
Soum Women/Youth 
Councils 
-  Workshops 
-  Specific training for 
Schedule 
2022-2027  -  Project 
budget 
Budget 
Responsible 
-  PIU, 
contractor, 
soum 
administration 
2020-2027  Project 
budget 
PIU, contractor,  
Throughout 
construction 
duration 
-  Project 
budget 
-  PIU, Soum 
administration 
-  Included in 
-  Soums health 
construction 
budget 
center 
-  Contractor 
persons 
-  All construction workers under the project shall be received 
workers 
-  Construction workers 
4.3 Site protection and public access 
-  CSOs (WWF, GIZ, TSC, Nature 
training on HIV/AID/STIs 
Conservancy) 
-  Visitors 
4.4 Site Management Plans 
-  Park/Protected areas 
management 
-   CSOs 
-  Herder groups 
-   
-  Seek stakeholder inputs on site protection and public access 
-  Inform visitors on access regulations and protection of natural 
-  Workshops 
-  Notices/leaflets available 
2022-2027 
Project 
budget 
-  PIU, MET, 
PAAOs 
value 
-  Seek stakeholder inputs on management plan revision for 2 sites, 
ATBNP (including PCMA) and TSC; and seek consultation with 
KfW to provide input to KfW-supported revision of management 
plans for KUNNP, KKNP, UVSPA 
-  Inform stakeholders about contents 
-  Raise awareness on stakeholder roles for the revised plans 
-  Train CSO members on aspects of park management 
at each site 
-  Public meetings 
-  Information sessions 
-  Group training 
-  Workshops 
2024-2026  Project 
budget 
-  PIU, MET, 
PAAOs 
-  DPAM 
-  Seek views on training needs and finalize training contents 
-  Train government personnel, operators of project facilities, 
4.5 Capacity building 
-  Soum government staff 
-  CSOs 
-  CBOs 
-  Operators of project facilities 
-  Park/Protected areas staff 
ATBNP = Altai Tavan Bogd National Park, CBOs = community-based organizations, CSO = civil society organization, km = kilometer, HHs = households, KKNP = Khan Khukhii 
National Park, KUNNP = Khar Us Nuur National Park, MET = Ministry of Environment and Tourism, O&M = operation and maintenance, PCMA = Petroglyphic Complexes of the 
Mongolian Altai UNESCO World Heritage Area, PIU = project implementation unit, RANCC = rock art and nomadic culture center, TSC = Tsenkher Cave, UVSPA = Uvs Nuur 
Strictly Protected Area, UVTC = Uvs tourism complex, WWTP = wastewater treatment plant. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
management councils on innovative methods and best practices 
in management 
-  Group training 
-  Undertaking field visits 
-  Train facilities operators 
-  PIU, MET, 
PAAOs 
-  Group training 
2024-2027 
Objective 
Risk 
Audience 
Desired 
Behavior 
Information 
Needs 
Channel Activity  Timing 
Respon-
sibility 
Resources 
Needs 
Expected 
Outcome 
STAKEHOLDER COMMUNICATION STRATEGY 
OBJECTIVE 1: EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION WITH PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS 
Output 1: Inclusive planning and capacity for community-based tourism enhanced 
Appendix 6 
225 
Effective 
communication 
with communities 
for informed and 
supportive 
engagement. As a 
result, beneficiaries 
will have better 
access to benefits 
and opportunities 
from the project 
Limited 
engagement due 
to poorly informed 
communities 
Communities 
expect the project 
to deliver benefits 
to them within 
unrealistically 
short timeframe 
Residents in 
project areas 
(including poor 
and vulnerable), 
tour operators, 
tour camps 
owners, CSOs 
(including women 
and youth) 
Well informed 
residents, 
CSOs and other 
stakeholders 
co-planning 
tourism initiative 
Community 
awareness of 
existing and 
planned 
community-
based and other 
tourism 
initiatives 
Awareness on 
potential 
benefits and 
risks associated 
with increased 
tourism 
Meeting venues in 
communities soum 
centers. 
Designated information 
points in communities 
and soum centers 
Posters and forms in 
Mongolian on meeting 
locations and times 
Local media e.g. TV, 
radio 
PIU 
2022– 
2027 
PIU staff time 
Printed 
materials 
(posters, 
forms), 
budget 
Co-planning by 
residents, CSOs, 
tour operators and 
other 
stakeholders for 
community 
based tourism 
initiatives 
Social website 
page 
Capacity building 
for local 
communities to 
deliver reliable 
tourism related 
goods and 
services in the 
target protected 
areas and 
heritage sites 
Communities not 
aware of 
capacity building 
opportunities 
and availability 
of community-
based tourism 
support including 
Community 
revolving Fund 
(CRF) 
Residents, 
CSOs, and 
owners of tour 
camps, 
Entrepreneurs 
and business 
persons 
engaged in the 
tourism value 
chain 
Residents are 
skilled in 
targeted 
tourism 
products and 
services and 
can apply for 
tour camp jobs 
and/or develop 
or expand 
businesses 
Awareness 
raising 
information on 
availability of 
training 
courses, CRF 
and capacity 
building 
support and 
community-
based 
tourism 
support 
Strengthening social 
network through the 
regular updates via 
social media 
Meeting venues in visitor 
information centers and 
local administration 
offices 
Designated information 
points in protected areas 
Community contact 
points (one per soum) 
Direct visits by PIU 
team to remote 
communities and 
families 
Posters, forms in 
Mongolian on meeting 
locations and times 
Local media e.g. TV, 
radio 
2022– 
2027 
PIU 
PIU staff time 
Printed 
materials 
(posters, 
forms), 
budget 
Social website 
page 
Residents skilled 
in the provision 
of tourism 
related goods 
and services 
Local brand 
products are 
more diversified 
and of better 
qualify Remote 
and poor 
households have 
more opportunity 
to engage in and 
benefit from the 
training and 
community-
based tourism 
activities 
Household 
income and 
226 
Appendix 6 
Objective 
Risk 
Audience 
Desired 
Behavior 
Information 
Needs 
Channel Activity  Timing 
Respon-
sibility 
Resources 
Needs 
Residents, 
owners of 
tour camps, 
CSOs 
Output 2: Enabling infrastructure constructed 
Community 
Effective 
complaints 
communication 
and/or lack of 
with communities 
support due to 
and local traffic 
limited 
authorities about 
consultation. 
construction 
Communities not 
schedules, 
aware of the 
activities, and 
GRM 
potential 
disturbances e.g. 
noise 
Well informed 
residents 
support 
construction 
and participate 
in scheduling 
of work 
Stakeholder 
concerns and 
opinions 
Awareness 
raising on 
project 
designs, and 
impacts 
Information 
about 
temporary 
bypass 
routes and 
construction 
timetable 
Expected 
Outcome 
livelihoods 
improved and 
sustained 
PIU 
2022– 
2027 
PIU staff time 
Printed 
materials 
(posters, 
forms), 
budget 
Social website 
page 
Any concerns 
and suggestions 
raised by 
stakeholders are 
addressed; and 
measures 
implemented to 
address them 
will be duly 
documented in 
the project 
reports 
Dedicated project 
website (including 
online training 
and dissemination of 
good practices) 
Community contact 
points to explain the 
anticipated 
infrastructure design 
and receive feedback 
on constraints to 
integrate 
Regular consultation 
meetings during 
construction phase 
PIU visits remote 
families 
Posters in Mongolian on 
meeting locations, times 
Local media e.g. TV, 
radio 
Relevant 
authorities do 
not enforce 
campsite 
regulations 
Output 3: Sanitation and waste management improved 
Residents, 
tourists, tour 
operators, and 
other 
stakeholders 
comply with park 
regulations and 
codes of conduct 
for litter and 
sewage disposal. 
Residents, 
tour operators, 
tour camps, 
domestic and 
international 
tourists, 
CSOs 
All 
stakeholders 
proactively 
contribute to 
sewage,  
waste 
management, 
sanitation and 
hygiene 
Visitors are 
not well 
informed of 
park/protected 
areas 
regulations 
Key polluting 
sources (tour 
camps) and 
key sites of 
uncollected 
litter 
Dissemination of 
parks/protected areas 
regulations and WASH 
content at fee collection 
stations, camp sites 
and visitor/info centers 
WASH 
program 
Stakeholder 
concerns and 
opinions 
Social website pages, 
in Mongolian, Russian, 
English 
Local media e.g. TV, 
radio 
Environmental 
assessment and 
PIU 
2022- 
2027 
PIU staff time 
Printed 
materials 
(posters, 
forms), 
budget 
Improved 
stakeholder 
awareness of 
pollution threats 
Improved waste 
management 
Reduced 
pollution in parks 
and protected 
areas 
Social website 
page 
Objective 
Risk 
Audience 
Desired 
Behavior 
Information 
Needs 
Channel Activity  Timing 
Respon-
sibility 
Resources 
Needs 
Expected 
Outcome 
Appendix 6 
227 
Water, sanitation 
and hygiene 
WASH) program 
is implemented 
Communities 
and tour camps 
of 13 project 
soums Bayan-
Ulgii, Khovd, 
Uvs aimags 
Stakeholders 
adopt the 
project WASH 
procedures 
Clear WASH 
procedures for 
the project 
facilites 
Sustained 
provision of 
training and 
awareness 
raising of the 
WASH 
procedures  
Visitors to the 
protected areas 
and heritage 
sites in the 
project soums  
Output 4: Management of cultural heritage sites and protected areas strengthened 
All relevant 
stakeholders 
participate in 
review of park 
management 
plans 
Stakeholders 
support and 
ownership to 
implement the 
revised 
management 
plans 
Stakeholder 
concerns and 
opinions 
Scientific data 
on 
park 
management 
Residents in 
parks and 
buffer zones 
(including 
herders), tour 
operators, 
CSOs 
Project 
sanitation 
activities and 
facilities not 
adopted by 
stakeholders, 
leading to 
inadequate risk 
management for 
COVID-19 
and/or other 
diseases 
Remote or 
poor 
communities 
uninformed or 
unable to 
participate 
Poorly informed 
communities 
do not see 
value in park/ 
protected areas  
management 
inspection reports will 
be included in the 
semiannual progress 
reports to ADB, which 
will be posted on ADB’s 
website 
Behavior change 
communication strategy 
– included in the WASH 
program and will be 
implemented under 
consulting services 
package CS6 
(Appendix 2) 
Stakeholder meetings 
in the 22soums of the 
project area, 3 Aimag 
centers, Ulaanbaatar 
Visits by PIU team to 
remote communities 
and families 
Focus group 
discussions 
and Key informant 
interviews 
2023-
2027 
Consulting 
services 
(CS) 
package 
(PAM 
Appendix 
2) 
Consulting 
services time 
PIU time 
Stakeholders 
adopt project 
WASH 
procedures 
Project budget 
for awareness 
materials, 
trainings 
Risk 
management for 
COVID-19 and 
other diseases is 
strengthened 
Youth 
ambassadors 
PIU staff time 
and travel 
costs 
Map 
preparation 
Park management 
plans reviewed 
and improved in 
consultation with 
stakeholders 
OBJECTIVE 2: PROJECT VISIBILITY, INFORMATION EXCHANGE, AND DISSEMINATION OF LESSONS LEARNED 
National: 
Public and 
political 
awareness of and 
support for 
project 
Incorrect or 
negative 
publicity of 
project due to 
inadequate 
information 
Project 
experience does 
Ministries, 
especially in 
transport, 
construction, 
sanitation 
sectors, 
general public, 
national media, 
CSO (including 
Technical and 
non-technical 
project data 
Increased 
opportunity to 
apply the 
project lessons 
learned in 
other site 
Social website pages, in 
Mongolian, Russian, 
English 
Media releases; 
interviews with Aimag, 
soum, MET officials. 
Briefings/consultation 
PIU staff, 
MET, IAs, 
ADB 
project 
team 
PIU staff time. 
Contact 
points, PIU 
manager, 
field 
coordinator, 
social, gender 
and civil 
Protected area 
managers and 
tourism planners 
able to apply the 
project lessons 
learned to other 
sites 
228 
Appendix 6 
Objective 
Risk 
not benefit other 
sites 
Audience 
women and 
youth) 
Desired 
Behavior 
Information 
Needs 
Channel Activity  Timing 
meetings with oliticians, 
committees, CSOs 
Respon-
sibility 
Resources 
Needs 
Expected 
Outcome 
International: 
Sharing of 
lessons learned; 
contribute to RCI 
Missed 
opportunity to 
contribute to 
regional 
tourism 
planning 
CAREC 
tourism 
agencies, 
CSOs, PA 
managers 
Regional 
awareness of 
project lessons 
learned; 
contribution to 
RCI for  
tourism plans 
MET, PIU 
staff, 
ADB 
project 
team 
CAREC 
agencies 
involved in 
regional 
planning for 
tourism, and, 
PA 
management; 
regional CSOs 
involved in 
tourism, 
conservation, 
livelihoods 
Briefs, pamphlets, 
blogs, small technical 
publications 
Project website pages, 
in Mongolian, Russian, 
English 
National and regional 
workshops and 
webinars on lessons 
learned 
Presentations at the 
annual meetings of the 
CAREC tourism 
working group 
Blogs; articles in 
DevelopmentAsia 
society 
specialist 
Project 
website page 
MET, PIU, 
and ADB staff 
time, 
resources for 
international 
travel and 
participation 
in regional 
meetings 
Project lessons 
learned support 
Mongolia’s 
participation 
OBJECTIVE 3: COORDINATION AND ALIGNMENT OF THE PROJECT ACTIVITIES WITH OTHER DONOR PROGRAMS 
Coordination and 
alignment of 
project activities 
with other donor 
programs in 
protected areas 
Overlap of 
resources 
and/or missed 
opportunities 
for collaboration 
Open and 
regular 
information 
exchange, 
coordination, 
support 
Other donors 
for tourism 
sector and 
protected areas 
management 
including GIZ, 
JICA, KfW, 
TNC, UNDP, 
WWF 
Timely and 
updated 
information on 
the 
project, and, 
other 
donor’s 
projects 
Meetings; emails; other 
direct forms of regular 
contact 
Convene at least 1 
meeting per year with 
relevant agencies to 
share information and 
maintain or expand 
collaboration 
PIU, ADB 
project 
officer, 
IAs 
PIU and ADB 
staff time 
Social 
website page 
Donor programs 
coordinated and 
aligned 
ATBNP = Altai Tavan Bogd National Park, CAREC = Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation, CSO = civil society organization, CBO = Community-Based Organization, GIZ = 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit, HIV/AIDS/STI = Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome/ Sexually Transmitted Infections, 
IEC = Information, Education, and Communication, JICA = Japan  International Cooperation Agency, KfW = Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau, KKNP = Khan Khukhii National Park, 
KUNNP = Khar Us Nuur National Park, CRF = Community Revolving Fund, MET = Ministry of Environment and Tourism, O&M = operation and maintenance, PCMA = Petroglyphic 
Complexes of the Mongolian Altai, PIU = project implementation unit, RANCC = rock art and nomadic culture center, SDG = Sustainable Development Goals, RCI = regional cooperation 
and integration, TNC = The Nature Conservancy, TSC = Tsenkher Cave, UNDP = United Nations Development Programme, UVSPA = Uvs Nuur Strictly Protected Area, UVTC = Uvs 
tourism complex, WWF = World Wide Fund for Nature. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Appendix 7 
229 
JAPAN FUND FOR POVERTY REDUCTION: GUIDANCE NOTES 
The  executing  agency, 
implementation  unit,  and  Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) project team will ensure that all project activities funded by the Japan 
Fund for Poverty Reduction (JFPR) will comply with the following JFPR Guidance Notes. 
implementing  agency,  project 
GUIDANCE NOTE ON COORDINATION WITH THE EMBASSY OF JAPAN AND JICA 
I.  
INTRODUCTION 
The Final Report on the Review of Japanese Official  Development Assistance11 (ODA) 
1. 
underscores the need for strategic and effective aid. One way to ensure alignment of Japan Fund 
for Poverty Reduction (JFPR) projects and technical assistance (TA) with Government of Japan’s 
(GOJ)  bilateral  assistance  strategy  for  a  particular  developing  member  country  (DMC)  is  by 
bringing on board the comments and suggestions of the Embassy of Japan (EOJ) and the Japan 
International  Cooperation  Agency  (JICA).2 Thus,  the  summary  of  consultations  with  EOJ  and 
JICA  (to  include,  date  of  consultation,  name  and  position  of  staff  met,  and  EOJ  and  JICA's 
response) should be included in the proposal submitted to SDPF.3 This Guidance Note provides 
detailed instructions regarding coordination activities with EOJ and JICA.4 
II.  
EOJ AND JICA CONTACT PERSONS 
As soon as project officer informs SDPF of the intent to apply for JFPR funding,5 SDPF 
2. 
will identify the appropriate contact persons in EOJ and JICA. The contact persons’ information6 
will be provided by SDPF to the project officer to start consultation. 
III.  
CONSULTATION WITH EOJ AND JICA – PROPOSAL PREPARATION 
At  concept  stage,  project  officer  should consult with EOJ  and JICA7 through e-mail  the 
3. 
proposed project to, (i) seek if it is in line with Japan ODA priorities, (ii) ensure no duplication, and 
(iii) present the concept itself, with copy to SDPF. 
Upon SDPF’s confirmation to proceed with proposal preparation, the project officer may 
4. 
arrange  the  project  design  meeting  with  EOJ  and  JICA.  This  meeting  intends  to  explain  and 
discuss the actual project design. This is ideally conducted during the fact-finding mission.8 The 
proposal,9 should be provided to EOJ and JICA with copy to SDPF at least 5 working days before 
the meeting to give ample time for review and consideration. After the meeting, if needed, SDPF 
in coordination with the project officer, may follow up with EOJ and JICA, and respond to requests 
for clarification. 
1   Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. 2010. ODA Review - Summary of the Final Report. Tokyo. 
2   Incorporated administrative agency in charge of administering Japan’s ODA. 
3   GOJ gives importance on the inputs provided EOJ and JICA during the internal approval process. 
4   A  copy  of  the  Guidance  Note  on  Coordination  with  Embassy  of  Japan  and  JICA  is  appended  to  the  Project 
Administration Manual as guide to the project team and the government, during project implementation 
5   Project name and brief outline of proposal should be provided to SDPF. 
6   Name, status, telephone number and e-mail address. 
7   Please refer to the contact persons provided by SDPF. 
8   If  a  meeting  with  EOJ  and/or  JICA  is  not  possible,  e-mail  exchange,  telephone  discussion  or  any  other  form  of 
communication may be used. 
9   Draft Grant assistance report (for project grants) and draft TA Summary and Report (for TAs). 
230 
Appendix 7 
In the case of regional TAs, the draft TA Summary and Report should be sent by e-mail 
5. 
to EOJ and JICA contact persons on no-objection basis. 
IV.  
ROLE OF THE RESIDENT MISSION AND SDPF 
6. 
Project officer’s communications with EOJ and JICA should be done in coordination with 
the resident mission10 with copy to SDPF. If needed, SDPF supports to identify the appropriate 
staff to be consulted. 
Resident mission also arrange the Grant Agreement/TA letter signing event (section V) 
7. 
and in the overall coordination/relationship management with EOJ and JICA. 
SDPF’s role are as follows: (i) provide contact details of relevant staff from EOJ and JICA 
8. 
for project consultation; (ii) liaise any need for clarification by EOJ and JICA in coordination with 
the project officer, during project consultation; (iii) inform EOJ and JICA when there is withdrawal 
or cancellation of a project; and (iv) forward all completion reports to both agencies. 
V.  
COORDINATION WITH EOJ AND JICA – UPON APPROVAL OF THE PROPOSAL 
9. 
Project  officer  should  inform  EOJ  and  JICA  about  ADB’s  approval.  Project  officers  are 
strongly  encouraged  to  conduct  signing  or  launching  ceremonies  with  the  attendance  of  EOJ 
officials.11 
10. 
In coordination with the resident mission, the project officer should inform EOJ and SDPF 
of the signing ceremony– at least 10 working days in advance. SDPF then informs GOJ of this 
activity. The project officer should also draft news release in consultation with the Department of 
communications and coordinate arrangements with the resident mission. Local and international 
press are invited to these ceremonies. 
COORDINATION WITH EOJ AND JICA – DURING PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 
VI.  
AND UPON PROJECT COMPLETION 
Throughout implementation, the project officer should inform EOJ about project progress, 
11. 
milestones,  and  outcomes,  and  discuss  when  major  changes  in  scope  and  objectives  are 
required. Progress and outcomes of JFPR projects are also requested to be shared with JICA. 
From time to time, EOJ and JICA may also wish to join completion review missions to see project 
results and to interact first-hand with project recipients. Lessons from the JFPR projects are also 
requested  to  be  shared  to  enable  both  sides  to  explore  and  seek  potential  collaboration. 
Completion reports are required to be submitted by the project officer to SDPF for forwarding to 
EOJ and JICA.12 
______ 
22 April 2019 
10  Please inquire respective resident missions on their protocols or coordination arrangements with EOJ and JICA. 
11  Please refer to the Guidance Note on Japanese Visibility for details on visibility requirements under JFPR. 
12  Links to the completion reports will suffice. 
Appendix 7 
231 
GUIDANCE NOTE ON JAPANESE VISIBILITY 
 I.  
Introduction 
The Revised Operating Framework for the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction (JFPR) was 
1. 
approved on 6 October 2009, combining Japan’s project grant and technical assistance support 
under one umbrella, and paving the way for a more comprehensive approach to the use of these 
funds toward addressing poverty, building up human resources, and empowering institutions and 
communities  in  the  region.  Japan  has  been  making  generous  contributions  for  technical 
assistance activities through the Japan Special Fund, and for poverty reduction projects through 
JFPR, since they were established in 1988 and 2000, respectively. It is but fitting and proper that 
said contributions are acknowledged and the recipients and general public are informed of the 
source of the funding assistance both at the Fund level and at the level of the individual TA and 
project grants. The purpose of this note is to provide guidance on measures to ensure that the 
contribution of Japan in supporting JFPR is widely recognized.13 
II.  
Statement on Japanese Visibility 
Project teams are required to help promote the visibility and local awareness of JFPR in 
2. 
recipient countries through the following: 
(a) All press releases issued by ADB with respect to JFPR should refer to the financial 
contribution from the Government of Japan (GOJ);14 
(b) Signing ceremonies and other publicity events should be encouraged, inviting Japan 
embassy officials, JICA staff, local and international press;15 
(c) Civil works, project billboards/signages, vehicles, and equipment must carry the JFPR and 
Japan ODA logos (see below). Likewise, all publications and training programs must bear the 
said logos, including all collaterals used (i.e. training materials, banners, posters, flyers, etc.) 
that are financed by JFPR; these logos are available in the SDPF-JFPR website;16
(d) Publications, reports, training programs, seminars and workshops financed by JFPR should 
acknowledge receipt of funding from GOJ; 
(e) Recipients should be encouraged to ensure that JFPR-financed activities are well covered 
by local print and electronic media, and that all related publicity materials, and official notices 
13 A copy of the Guidance Note on Japanese Visibility is appended to the Project Administration Manual as guide to 
the project team and the government, during project implementation  
14 Staff may coordinate with the Department of Communications.  
15 Coordination with resident missions are necessary. 
16 https://lnadbg1.adb.org/oco0006p.nsf/0/EEE594E105EAC26A482576C7002240AB/?OpenDocument  
232 
Appendix 7 
explicitly acknowledge funding from GOJ. Below is the suggested standard text to be used by 
those who prepare publicity materials: "The grant fund for (project name/activity) was received 
from the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction financed by the Government of Japan through the 
Asian Development Bank.” 
III.  
Participation of Japanese Entities in Implementation 
3. 
It  is  also  important  to  generate  visibility  of  the  project  within  Japan.  Involvement  or 
cooperation  with  Japanese  experts,  financial  resources  and  technologies  are  encouraged; 
occasional information sessions on JFPR for Japanese organizations may also be conducted. It 
is  also  highly  recommended  that  ADB  involve  and  cooperate  with  Japanese  organizations 
including NGOs, civil society organizations, aid agencies in particular JICA and JBIC, the private 
sector enterprises or academic institutions. 
IV.  
Reporting 
At  the  end  of  the  project,  the  completion  report  submitted  by  the  project  team  should 
4. 
include  evidences  of  Japanese  visibility  such  as  photos  (preferably  high  resolution),  press 
releases,  articles  or  write-ups,  and  testimonials  from  project  recipients  and/or  implementers. 
Sample products generated from the project grant are requested to be made available to SDPF 
for inclusion in future exhibits. Copies of publications17 that are outputs of the project should also 
be provided to SDPF. 
V.  
Visibility Support by ADB 
5. 
SDPF promotes visibility of JFPR by: (i) informing Office and Department Heads of the 
importance  of  achieving  high  visibility  to  garner  support  for  JFPR  from  Japanese  officials  and 
taxpayers; (ii) informing Country Directors of the importance of signing ceremonies to Japanese 
officials and the public to ensure recognition and support for JFPR funding; and (iii) continuing 
widespread distribution of the JFPR Annual Report, inclusion of JFPR information in relevant ADB 
documents, and occasional information sessions for Japanese organizations. 
Resident Mission staff are requested to forward copies of all visibility materials, such as 
6. 
press  releases,  newspaper  and  magazine  articles,  and  photographs  (including  descriptive 
captions) to SDPF’s assigned focal staff for JFPR or e-mail to (jfpr@adb.org). 
__________ 
22 April 2019 
17  This particularly applies to knowledge and support TAs. Links to publication available online may be provided in lieu 
of print copy. 
