Yunnan  Sayu River Basin  Rural Water Pollution  Management  and 
Eco-Compensation  Demonstration  Project (RRP PRC 52025) 
Project Administration  Manual 
Project Number: 52025-001 
Loan Number: {LXXXX} 
September  2020 
People’s Republic of China: Yunnan Sayu River 
Basin Rural Water Pollution  Management  and  
Eco-Compensation  Demonstration  Project 
CURRENCY  EQUIVALENTS 
(as of 5 August 2020) 
– 
= 
= 
yuan (CNY)  
$0.1434  
CNY6.9736   
Currency unit 
CNY1.00 
$1.00 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB 
COD 
COVID-19 
CSC  
EFMC 
EIA 
EMA 
EMDP 
EMP 
ESMS 
GAP 
GRM 
IWRM 
LAR 
LCG 
LPMO 
M&E 
mu 
NH3-N 
NPS 
O&M 
OCB 
PMO 
PRC 
SDAP 
SOE 
SPS 
YPFD 
YREB 
YWPCO 
ZCG 
ZDG 
–  Asian Development  Bank 
chemical oxygen  demand 
– 
coronavirus  disease 
– 
construction  supervision  company 
– 
eco-compensation  fund management  committee 
– 
environmental  impact assessment 
– 
environmental  monitoring  agency 
– 
ethnic minority development  plan 
– 
environmental  management  plan 
– 
environmental  and social management  system 
– 
gender action plan 
– 
grievance  redress mechanism 
– 
integrated  water resources management 
– 
land acquisition and resettlement 
– 
Ludian County Government 
– 
– 
local project management  office 
–  monitoring  and evaluation 
a Chinese  unit of measurement  (1 mu = 666.67  square meters) 
– 
ammoniacal  nitrogen 
– 
nonpoint source 
– 
operation  and maintenance 
– 
open competitive  bidding 
– 
– 
project management  office 
–  People’s Republic  of China 
– 
– 
–  Safeguard  Policy Statement (2009) 
–  Yunnan Provincial  Finance Department 
–  Yangtze River Economic  Belt 
–  Yudong Reservoir  Water Resources Protection  Committee  Office 
–  Zhaotong  City Government 
–  Zhaoyang  District Government 
social development  action plan 
statement  of expenditures 
NOTE 
In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars. 
CONTENTS 
Page 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Rationale 
Impact and Outcome 
Outputs 
Value Added by ADB 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
A. 
B. 
Project Readiness Activities 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARANGEMENTS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Key Persons Involved in Implementationmary 
Project Organization Structure 
COST AND FINANCING 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions 
Key Assumptions 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Output 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve 
Fund Flow Diagram 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Financial Management Assessment 
Disbursement 
Accounting 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Advance Contracting and Retroactive Financing 
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services 
Procurement Plan 
Consultant's Terms of Reference 
SAFEGUARDS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
Environment 
Involuntary Resettlement 
Indigenous People 
Environmental and Social Management System 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Prohibited Investment Activities 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
A. 
B. 
Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy 
Gender 
1 
1 
4 
4 
6 
7 
7 
8 
12 
12 
14 
15 
16 
16 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
24 
25 
27 
28 
29 
29 
29 
30 
37 
38 
38 
40 
40 
41 
42 
43 
43 
43 
43 
IX. 
X. 
XI. 
PERFORMANCE  MONITORING,  EVALUATION,  REPORTING,  AND 
COMMUNICATION SAFEGUARDS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
Monitoring 
Evaluation 
Reporting 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
XII. 
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL  
Appendix 1: Detailed Project Outputs and Activities 
Appendix 2: Indicative Terms of Reference for Consulting Services 
Appendix 3: Environmental Management Plan  
Appendix 4: Environmental and Social Management System 
51 
51 
54 
56 
56 
56 
58 
58 
58 
59 
73 
103 
135 
Project Administration  Manual Purpose and Process 
1.  The  project  administration  manual  (PAM)  describes 
the  essential  administrative  and 
management  requirements  to implement  the project  on time, within  budget, and  in accordance 
with  the policies  and procedures  of the  borrower,  the Government  of the  People’s  Republic  of 
China;  and  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB).  The  PAM  should  include  references  to  all 
available  templates  and  instructions  either  through  linkages  to  relevant  URLs  or  directly 
incorporated  in the PAM. 
2.  The Zhaotong  City Government (ZCG), the executing  agency; and the Yudong Reservoir Water 
Resources Protection Committee Office of the ZCG, the Zhaoyang District Government,  and the 
Ludian  County  Government,  the  implementing  agencies,  are  wholly  responsible  for  the 
implementation  of the ADB-financed projects,  as agreed jointly between  the borrower and ADB; 
and in accordance with the policies and procedures of the government and ADB. The ADB staff 
is  responsible  for  supporting  implementation,  including  compliance  by  the  ZCG,  the  Yudong 
Reservoir  Water  Resources  Protection  Committee  Office,  the  Zhaoyang  District  Government, 
and  the  Ludian  County  Government  of  their  obligations  and  responsibilities 
for  project 
implementation  in accordance  with ADB’s policies and procedures. 
3.  At  loan  negotiations,  the  borrower  and  ADB  shall  agree  to  the  PAM;  and  ensure  consistency 
with the  loan and project  agreements.  Such agreement  shall be reflected  in the  minutes  of the 
loan  negotiations.  In  the  event  of  any  discrepancy  or  contradiction  between  the  PAM  and  the 
loan and project  agreements, the provisions  of the loan and project agreements  shall prevail. 
4.  After  ADB  Board’s  approval  of  the  project's  report  and  recommendations  of  the  President, 
changes  in the implementation  arrangements  are subject  to agreement  and approval  pursuant 
to relevant government and ADB administrative  procedures (including the project administration 
instructions);  and upon such approval,  they will be subsequently  incorporated  in the PAM. 
A. 
Rationale 
I.  
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
The  Yangtze  River  Economic  Belt  (YREB)  covers  nine  provinces  and  two  specially 
1. 
administered  cities in  the Yangtze  River  Basin. It accounts  for more  than 40%  of  the population 
of the People’s Republic  of China (PRC) and has 40% of the freshwater resources. It also serves 
as the drinking water source for 400 million people, provides 60% of the total fisheries production, 
has 20% of the total wetland area, and contributes about 45% of the PRC’s economic output. The 
YREB  has  been  earmarked  as  one  of  three  key  growth  engines  to  ensure  the  PRC’s  future 
economic  development.1 
The  YREB  has  benefited  from  extensive  development  since  the  1990s.  Yet,  economic 
2. 
growth  in  the  middle  and  upper  reaches  of  the  Yangtze  River  Basin  is  lagging  and  below  its 
potential capacity.  The middle and upper reaches of the Yangtze River Basin still face significant 
development  challenges because of (i) slow transformation  for green development and economic 
diversification;  (ii) limited integration  of waterways,  ports, and intermodal  logistics;  (iii) increasing 
pollution  and pressure  on natural resources;  and  (iv) weak institutional  coordination  for strategic 
planning.2  The  YREB  faces  a  growing  imbalance  between  economic  achievements  and  the 
quality  of the environment.  For example,  since  1980, water  pollution  in the Yangtze  River  Basin 
has  risen  by  73%  because  of  the  discharge  of  waste;3  soil  erosion,  which  is  critical  in  small 
watersheds;4  and agriculture-related  nonpoint  source (NPS) pollution. 
3. 
To  address  these  challenges,  the  Government  of  the  PRC  formulated  the  YREB 
Development  Plan,  2016–2030,5  which  stipulates  the  prioritization  of  ecological  protection  and 
the  promotion  of  green  development  as  the  guiding  principle  for  the  YREB  development.6  In 
relation  to  this,  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  and  the  government  agreed  to  adopt  a 
framework  approach,  providing  about  $2.0  billion  of  funding  in  the  YREB  during  2018–2020  to 
strategically  program  ADB’s lending  support  for development  initiatives  in the YREB,  prioritizing 
the following four areas: (i) ecosystem restoration, environmental protection, and water resources 
management;  (ii) green  and inclusive  industrial  transformation;  (iii) construction  of an integrated 
multimodal  transport corridor; and (iv) institutional strengthening  and policy reform. 
4. 
Zhaotong  City  of  Yunnan  Province  has  been  selected  to  demonstrate  water  pollution 
reduction  in  the  Sayu  River  Basin.  Zhaotong  has  one  district,  one  county-level  city,  and  nine 
counties, of which the district  and all counties are nationally designated  poverty areas. Zhaotong 
has 1,336,700 poor people (as of 2016)—the largest  poor population  in Yunnan. The Sayu River 
is  a  186-kilometer  long  tertiary  tributary  of  the  Yangtze  River.  The  Sayu  River  Basin,  covering 
3,558 square kilometers, is an important area for ecological protection in the upper Yangtze River 
Basin.  It  is  the  only  centralized  drinking  water  source  in  Zhaotong.  Urban  drinking  water  is 
1  The  other  flagship  projects  are  the  Belt  and  Road  Initiative  and  the  Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei  Integrated  Regional 
Development  Strategy. 
2  Asian  Development  Bank (ADB). 2016.  Yangtze  River Economic  Belt  Environmental  Protection  and  Rehabilitation 
Project—A Preliminary  Study. Consultant’s  report.  Manila (TA 9044-PRC). 
3   The  upper  and  middle  reaches  of the  Yangtze  River Basin  account  for 80%  of the  YREB’s  wastewater  discharge, 
and the tributaries  have the worst water quality in the basin.  Among the rural villages  in the YREB, about 40% do not 
have garbage  collection  facilities and about  80% lack basic sewage  treatment. 
4  Every year, the Yangtze  River Basin  loses  2.24  billion  tons  of soil,  damaging  67,000  hectares  of farmland because 
of soil erosion. 
5  Government of the PRC. 2016.  Outline of the Yangtze  River Economic Belt Development  Plan,  2016–2030.  Beijing. 
6  Green  development  aims  to  (i)  change  the  traditional  development  model  to  a  sustainable  development  model, 
(ii) address  the challenges  of rapid urbanization,  and  (iii) serve as a guide  to socioeconomic development. 
2 
primarily  provided  from  the  Yudong  Reservoir.  The  entire  Yudong  Reservoir  Basin  is  part  of 
Ludian  County  and Zhaoyang  District  in Zhaotong.  Water in the  Sayu River  Basin, including  the 
Yudong  Reservoir,  is polluted because  of (i) waste discharging  in the Sayu River  Basin, (ii) high 
sediment  runoff  into  the  Sayu  River  because  of  soil  erosion,  and  (iii) agriculture-related  NPS 
pollution. In many locations of the Sayu River, the water quality is worse than the Class III national 
standard, which is unfit for drinking.7 Local people living around the Sayu River Basin, particularly 
women and the poor, suffer from water pollution. Poor water quality also increases the time spent 
by women  seeking clean water for their families. 
5. 
Rural domestic wastewater,  solid waste, and human and animal wastes pollute the water 
in the Sayu  River Basin because  of inadequate  waste  management.  Rural domestic  wastewater 
and solid waste contribute  27% of the chemical oxygen  demand (COD), 9% of the total nitrogen, 
16%  of the  total  phosphorus,  and  22%  of the  ammoniacal  nitrogen  (NH3-N)  in  the Sayu  River. 8 
Human and animal wastes contribute  39% of the COD, 25% of the total nitrogen, 52% of the total 
phosphorus,  and 48%  of the NH3-N in the  Sayu River  (footnote  8). Since  forest  coverage  in the 
Sayu  River  Basin  is  only  30.2%  because  of  the  expansion  of  farmland,  which  is  significantly 
smaller than the 60%−70% appropriate for centralized drinking water sources, soil erosion is quite 
serious  in  this  basin.  About  57.9%  of  the  Sayu  River  Basin  is  prone  to  soil  erosion,  providing 
1.1 million tons  of soil per year.  High sediment  runoff  caused by  soil erosion  contributes  34% of 
the  COD,  21%  of the  total  nitrogen,  11%  of  the total  phosphorus,  and  18%  of  the NH3-N  in the 
Sayu  River  (footnote  8).  Water  in  the  Sayu  River  Basin  is  further  deteriorated  by  agriculture-
related NPS pollution because  of inadequate  waste management  systems,  uncontrolled  fertilizer 
release, and outdated  production systems. Agriculture-related  NPS pollution (e.g., farmland solid 
waste and fertilizer) contributes  45% of the total nitrogen, 21% of the total phosphorus,  and 12% 
of the  NH3-N in the Sayu  River  (footnote  8). It also  contributes  to climate  change  through  direct 
and indirect emission  of greenhouse  gases. This situation  may be aggravated  by intensified  and 
more frequent rainfall events induced by global climatic changes,  which contribute  to soil erosion 
and agriculture-related  pollution  to water systems. 
6. 
Capacity  is  lacking  for  holistic  planning,  financing,  and  implementing  of  water  pollution 
reduction  activities.9  Public  awareness  of  water  pollution  problems,  particularly  interlinkages 
between household and economic activities and water quality, is also insufficient. As Zhaotong is 
considered  a poor  city,  it  urgently  needs  a  sustainable  financing  mechanism  for investments  to 
address water pollution  sustainably. 
7. 
In  2006,  the  Zhaotong  City  Government  (ZCG)  established  a  fund  for  ecological 
restoration  and remediation  of water source protection  areas of the Yudong  Reservoir. The ZCG 
provided  CNY3  million  to  the  fund  every  year  from  2006  to  2014.  Since  2015,  the  fund  has 
received  CNY17 million  annually.10  Deficiencies  of  this  fund  include  the  small  contribution  from 
beneficiaries—only  CNY2  million  out  of  CNY17  million  annually  (footnote  10);  and  lack  of 
operational  procedures  of  a  committee  managing  the  fund,  including  criteria  for  screening  of 
7  Following  the PRC’s Environmental  Water Quality Standard  (GB 3838-2002). 
8  Zhaotong  City  Government  (ZCG).  2015.  Zhaotong  Yudong  Reservoir  Water  Resources  Protection  Special 
Remediation  Plan, 2015–2020.  Zhaotong.  In 2013,  the Sayu River had  14,345.51  tons of COD, 75,655  tons  of total 
nitrogen,  3,818.98  tons  of total  phosphorus,  and  185.12  tons of NH3-N.  
9  An example is the “river chief” system, which was introduced  in the PRC in 2017.  It assigns  each part of a river and 
lake to a certain official. Currently, river chiefs have difficulties collecting  the data and information necessary  for river 
management. 
10 This  comprises  CNY8  million  from  the  ZCG,  CNY5  million  from  the  Zhaoyang  District  Government  (ZDG), 
CNY2 million  from the Ludian  County Government (LCG), and CNY2 million  of water resources  utilization  fees from 
a downstream  hydropower  station  every year. Zhaoyang  District  and Ludian  County  are in  Zhaotong  City, and  the 
LCG and the ZDG are the project implementing  agencies  (TableIII.1). 
3 
activities proposed  for financing  from the fund. The ZCG would like to upgrade the fund to a new 
eco-compensation  fund,  incorporating  international  good  practices  for  sustainable  financin g 
mechanisms.  In 2018,  the ZCG  established  a district-  and  county-level  horizontal  (i.e., between 
the  same  levels  of  local  government)  eco-compensation  mechanism,  which  consists  of 
14 horizontal  eco-compensation  agreements  for  17  river  sections  crossing  the  borders  of 
Zhaotong’s  one  district,  one  county-level  city,  and  nine  counties.11  However,  these  agreements 
have not yet been implemented  because of lack of water quality monitoring facilities.   
In February 2018,  the State Council  of the PRC promulgated  a policy on rural vitalization 
8. 
as a driver for the PRC’s modernization  goals and for building  a moderately  prosperous  society. 
The  policy  targets  establishing  an  institutional  framework  by  2020,  modernizing  rural  areas  by 
2035,  and  beautifying  the  countryside  by  2050.  Local  governments  will  formulate  and  start 
implementing  their  plans,  aimed  at  improving  public  services  and  promoting  environmental 
protection,  during  2018–2022.  Yunnan  Province,  particularly  Zhaotong,  will  be  a  government 
priority for this policy implementation.12 
COVID-19  pandemic.  The  coronavirus  disease  (COVID-19)  pandemic  has amplified  the 
9. 
effects  of  interlinkages  between  biodiversity,  public  health,  and  ecosystem-dependent  global 
supply chains. COVID-19 is being contained  in the PRC, but it remains a risk. With COVID-19 as 
a trigger,  the need for  measures  to prevent  the spread  of future infectious  diseases  is attracting 
attention. 
10. 
Strategic  fit.  The  project  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  management  in  the 
Sayu River Basin. This will contribute to the PRC’s goal of building a harmonious  and prosperous 
society  through  environmentally  sustainable  growth;  and  is  consistent  with  (i)  the  PRC’s 
Thirteenth  Five-Year  Plan,  2016–2020,  which  aims  to  realize  “ecological  civilization;”13  (ii)  the 
YREB  Development  Plan,  2016–2030  (footnote  5),  which  emphasizes  green  development, 
environmental  protection,  rehabilitation,  and  management  of  water  resources;  (iii)  the  PRC’s 
policy to vitalize rural areas (para. 8); (iv) ADB’s Strategy 2030, which emphasizes the importance 
of  environmentally  sustainable  and  inclusive  growth;14  (v)  ADB’s  country  partnership  strategy, 
2016–2020  for  the  PRC,  which  aims  to  improve  the  PRC’s  environment  and  manage  climate 
change by realizing “ecological civilization;”15 and (vi) ADB’s Water Operational Plan, 2011–2020, 
which  emphasizes  integrated  water  resources  management  (IWRM).16  It is  also  in line  with  the 
Sustainable  Development  Goals 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 12, 13, and 15.17 
11 Each  agreement  is  for one  to  three  river  sections  crossing  the  border.  Compensation  is  paid  based  on  the  water 
quality at the border. Of the 14 agreements,  one is for the Longshu  River in the Sayu River Basin and two other rivers 
outside  the  Sayu  River Basin,  signed  by the  LCG and  the  ZDG. Each  of them  provides  CNY2.0  million  per  year; 
CNY2.4 million  is  allocated  to  the  upstream  LCG  and  CNY1.6  million  to  the  downstream  ZDG.  At  the  border  of 
Zhaoyang  District and Ludian  County, the water quality  of the  Longshu  River and two other rivers in the  Sayu River 
Basin  is measured  monthly (36  sets  of monitoring  data/year).  Every year, CNY2.4  million  multiplied  by the ratio  of 
monitoring  data  number  which did  not meet the  standard  agreed  between  the  LCG and  the ZDG is  deducted  from 
the LCG and added  to the ZDG. 
12 State Council of the PRC. 2018.  Policies  Released  on China’s  Rural Vitalization.  News release.  4 February. 
13 Government  of  the  PRC.  2015.  Outline  of  the  Thirteenth  Five-Year  Plan  on  National  Economic  and  Social 
Development,  2016–2020.  Beijing. 
14 ADB. 2018.  Strategy 2030:  Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient,  and Sustainable  Asia and Pacific . Manila. 
15 ADB.  2016.  Country  Partnership  Strategy:  People’s  Republic  of  China,  2016–2020—Transforming  Partnership: 
People’s  Republic of China and Asian Development  Bank. Manila. 
16 ADB. 2011.  Water Operational  Plan, 2011–2020.  Manila. 
17 United  Nations.  Sustainable  Development  Goals. 
4 
B. 
Impact and Outcome 
11. 
The  project  is  aligned  with  the  following  impact:  quality  of  life  and  sustainable  aquatic 
ecosystem  in the Yangtze  River  Basin improved  (footnote  5). The project  will have the following 
outcome: condition  of water resources  and environment  in the Sayu River Basin improved.18 
C. 
Outputs 
Output  1:  Wastewater  management  and  pollution  control  in  the  Sayu  River  Basin 
12. 
strengthened.  This  includes  (i)  the  development  of  waste  management  systems,  particularly 
distributed  systems,  which  have  advantages  over  the  traditional  centralized  system  (e.g.,  lower 
operational  cost);  (ii)  the  development  of  solid  waste  management  systems,  including  garbage 
pyrolysis  facilities,  with  capacity  and  institutional  development  for  garbage  classification  and 
collection;  (iii) the  development  of  pilot  eco-villages  to reduce  emissions  through  environmental 
protection  activities,  education,  and  publicity;  (iv)  wetland  construction  to  reduce  the  NPS 
pollution,  introducing  new  types  of  artificial  wetlands  combined  with  wastewater  treatment 
facilities;  (v) afforestation  and  the  establishment  of  a  quantifiable  soil  and  water  conservation 
model  to  estimate  afforestation’s  effects  on soil  and  water  conservation  based  on  tree species, 
planting  density,  age  of  trees,  and  slope  degrees.;  and  (vi)  the  promotion  of  low-emission 
agriculture  with  innovative  technologies  (ecological  drainage  ditches,  gridded  surface  source 
pollution monitoring platforms, and measures to estimate at least necessary fertilizer volume) and 
incentives  (establishing  green  and  organic  crop  brands).  The  project  will  conduct  baseline  and 
“endline”  surveys  to  compare  the  amount  of  time  women  spend  on  waste  and  solid  waste 
management  before and after the project.19 
13. 
Output  2:  Water  resources  management  in  the  Sayu  River  improved.  This includes 
(i) the establishment of a smart water integrated management platform by constructing monitoring 
facilities  and  integrating  them  with  the  existing  irrigation  area  information  system  for  real-time 
monitoring  and  actions in the  event of water  quality deterioration;  and (ii) the  establishment  of  a 
river protection model that links the existing river chief system in the PRC, a real-time water quality 
monitoring  system  (a  subsystem  of  the  smart  water  integrated  management  platform),  and 
facilities to protect rivers from pollution  (e.g., ecological embankments). 
14. 
Output 3: Eco-compensation  mechanism  for the Sayu River Basin established. This 
includes  the  (i)  implementation  of  the  horizontal  eco-compensation  agreement  between  the 
Ludian  County Government  (LCG) and  the Zhaoyang  District  Government  (ZDG),  (footnote 11); 
(ii)  establishment  and  implementation  of  new  town-  and  township-level  horizontal  eco-
compensation  mechanisms,  consisting  of  six  agreements;  and  (iii)  establishment  and 
implementation  of  an  eco-compensation  fund  that  will  contribute  to  sustainable  water  pollution 
management. 
15. 
For the implementation  of the horizontal eco-compensation  agreement and new town- and 
township-level  horizontal  eco-compensation  mechanisms,  water  quality  monitoring  will  be 
conducted to judge whether water quality targets set in the agreements were achieved, which will 
be the basis for compensation. 
16.  While  the  horizontal  eco-compensation  agreements  incentivize  good  upper  basin 
management and cost-sharing between upstream and downstream governments, (i) they lack the 
18 The design  and  monitoring  framework is in Section IX. 
19 An “endline”  survey aims to measure  the effects at the end of the project.   
5 
involvement  of  ecosystem  services  providers  and  beneficiaries  and  value  flow  between  the 
ecosystem  service  providers  and  beneficiaries;  and  (ii)  compensation  amounts  to  upstream 
governments  are small and insufficient  for interventions  needed in the upstream areas. The eco-
compensation  fund  will  make  up  for  these  shortcomings  of  the  horizontal  eco-compensation 
agreements. It will be established by improving the fund for ecological restoration and remediation 
of water source protection  areas of the Yudong Reservoir  (para. 7). The eco-compensation  fund 
will  provide  grants  to  relevant  government  agencies  and  private  companies,20  for  (i)  activities 
under Output 1, including wastewater  management,  solid waste management,  pilot eco-villages, 
operation  and maintenance  (O&M)  of the constructed  wetlands,  compensation  for the farmland -
to-forest  conversion,  and  promotion  of  low-emission  agriculture;  (ii)  the  operation  of  the  river 
protection model established under Output 2; (iii) the implementation  of the seven horizontal eco-
compensation  agreements  under  Output  3  (para.  14);  and  (iv)  management  of  the  eco-
compensation  fund,  excluding  any  civil  works.  The  fund  will  be  initially  supported  by  the  ZCG, 
LCG,  ZDG,  ADB,  and  a beneficiary,21  with  the longer-term  goal  of collecting  more  funding  from 
beneficiaries,22 to improve the sustainability  of the fund and strengthen the direct linkage between 
upstream  eco-service  providers  and downstream  beneficiaries,  following  the principle  that those 
who benefit should compensate. Assurances are included in the project agreement to ensure and 
increase  contributions  to  the  fund,  particularly  from  beneficiaries.  An  eco-compensation  fund 
management  committee (EFMC), of which women will comprise at least 35%, will be established  
in the ZCG.23 The EFMC will conduct screening  of activities proposed  for financing  from the eco-
compensation  fund,  following  an  environmental  and  social  management  system  (ESMS).  The 
Yudong  Reservoir  Water  Resources  Protection  Committee  Office  (YWPCO)  in  the  ZCG  will 
manage  the  fund,  following  the  decisions  of  the  EFMC.24  The  Zhaotong  City  Finance  Bureau 
(ZCFB)  will open and manage  an account for the eco-compensation  fund,  following decisions  of 
the EFMC.   
Output  4:  Education,  capacity,  and  public  awareness 
17. 
for  water  pollution 
management  strengthened.  This includes (i) capacity development of government  staff on rural 
water  pollution  management  and eco-compensation;  (ii) the education  of students  in rural water 
pollution  management  and  eco-compensation;  (iii)  public  awareness  raising;  and  (iv) the 
dissemination  and replication of project initiatives, with at least 40% participation  by women. 
18. 
Detailed project outputs  and activities  are given in Appendix 1. 
19. 
Lessons.  The  project  design  has  incorporated  lessons  from  international  practices  and 
previous ADB-financed  projects and studies on the IWRM and the environmental  and ecosystem 
improvement,  such  as  the  importance  of  (i)  implementation  arrangements  for  funds,  25  (ii) 
20 Private companies will operate  a wastewater  treatment plant or conduct solid waste management based on contracts 
with the ZDG or the LCG. 
21 From  2023,  annual  contributions 
fund  will  be  as  follows:  ZCG,  CNY8  million; 
ZDG, CNY5 million;  and  LCG,  CNY2 million.  Some  CNY2  million  of  water  resources  utilization  fees  from  the 
downstream  Baoho  hydropower  station  will be contributed  to the fund every year from 2023.  An ADB loan  of about 
$5 million  will be contributed  to the fund during  the project. 
to  the  eco-compensation 
22 Beneficiaries  will include  downstream  water and  hydropower users,  irrigation  water users,  and the business  sector. 
23 The chair  of the EFMC will  be the  vice mayor of the ZCG; and  the  members will be  the deputy  directors  general  of 
about  10  ZCG  agencies,  including  the  Zhaotong  City  Development  and  Reform  Committee,  the  Zhaotong  City 
Finance  Bureau, and the Zhaotong  City Environment and Ecology Bureau. 
24 About 15 full-time staff of the YWPCO, which manages  the fund for ecological restoration  and remediation  (para.  7), 
will manage the new eco-compensation  fund. 
25 ADB. 2019.  Report and Recommendation  of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed  Loan to the People’s 
Republic  of  China  for  the  Anhui  Huangshan  Xin’an  River  Ecological  Protection  and  Green  Development  Project. 
Manila. 
6 
promoting  the  IWRM  at  river  basin  scale  by  prioritizing  upstream–downstream  and  urban–rural 
linkages,  (iii)  promoting  nature-based  solutions,  (iv) strengthening  nonstructural  measures,  (v) 
supporting  institutional  reforms  that  contribute  to  sustainable  IWRM,  (vi)  providing  capacity 
development  for project  implementation  and  O&M,  and (vii)  establishing  an effective  monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) system for project performance. 
D. 
Value Added by ADB 
The  project  has  added  value  through  integrated  water  pollution  management,  with 
20. 
innovations, including (i) distributed wastewater management systems with innovative information 
technology for operation and management,  operated at low cost; (ii) animal feces collection tanks 
using a new material; (iii) garbage pyrolysis facilities with a shorter processing cycle, smaller  floor 
space,  and  maximum  volume  reduction;  (iv) pilot  eco-villages  to  demonstrate  integrated 
emissions  management;  (v)  introducing  new  types  of  artificial  wetlands;  (vi)  establishing  a 
quantifiable  soil  and  water  conservation  model,  which  will  enable  quantitative  estimates  of 
afforestation’s effects on soil and water conservation; (vii) promoting low-emission agriculture with 
innovative  technologies and incentives;  (viii) establishing  a river protection  model with innovative 
information  technology  and  institutional  development;  and  (ix) establishing  and  implementing 
horizontal  eco-compensation  mechanisms  and  an  eco-compensation  fund  as  a  sustainable 
funding mechanism  for water pollution management.  Experience  and knowledge  gained  through 
the  project  can  be  replicated  in  other  small  tributaries  in  the  upper  and  middle  reaches  of  the 
Yangtze  River,  which  account  for  80%  of  the  wastewater;  and  in  other  key  river  basins  in  Asia 
and  the  Pacific.  Consultants  will  assist  in  the  replication  through  workshops,  publications, 
disclosure  of  project  information  on  websites,  submission  of  papers  to  academic  associations, 
and a proposal of the project as a model for eco-civilization  and awards. 
21. 
Response to COVID-19 pandemic. The project will contribute to the holistic development 
of the YREB by shifting traditional investments  toward valuing nature and reducing inequalities in 
rural areas.  This is part of the nature-positive  stimulus  package for recovery  from the COVID-19 
pandemic  which will promote a greener and healthier growth model. 
22. 
Although  COVID-19  is  being  contained  in  the  PRC,  measures  to  prevent  the  spread  of 
future  infectious  diseases  are  strongly  required  for  the  post-COVID-19  world.  The  project  will 
reduce  the  risk  of  future  epidemics  by  creating  a  safe  and  healthy  living  environment  through 
strengthened wastewater and solid waste management and pollution control and improved quality 
of source water for water supply. 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
A. 
Project Readiness  Activities 
Table II-1: Project Readiness  Activities 
7 
Indicative 
Activities 
Procurement agent 
recruited 
Advance 
contracting  actions 
Retroactive 
financing actions 
Domestic FSR 
approved 
FCUP approved 
EIA, RP, and 
EMDP approved 
ADB management 
review 
Loan  negotiations 
ADB Board 
consideration 
Loan  and project 
agreements  signed 
Government legal 
opinion  provided 
Government 
budget  inclusion 
Loan  effectiveness 
Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May 
Jun 
Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec  Responsibility 
2020 
PMO 
PMO 
ADB, YPG, PMO 
YPDRC 
NDRC 
ADB 
ADB 
ADB, MOF, YPG, 
ZCG 
ADB 
ADB, MOF, YPG 
MOF, YPG, ZCG 
ZCG, ZDG, LCG 
ADB, MOF 
ADB = Asian  Development  Bank, EIA = environmental  impact assessment,  EMDP = ethnic minority development  plan, FCUP = 
foreign  capital  utilization  plan,  FSR  = feasibility  study  report,  LCG =  Ludian  County  Government,  MOF =  Ministry  of Finance, 
NDRC = National  Development  and Reform Commission,  PMO = project management office, RP = resettlement  plan, YPDRC = 
Yunnan  Provincial  Development  and  Reform  Committee,  YPG  =  Yunnan  Provincial  Government,  ZCG  =  Zhaotong  City 
Government, ZDG = Zhaoyang District Government.  
Source: Asian  Development Bank. 
8 
B. 
Overall Project Implementation  Plan  
Table II-2: Project Implementation  Plan  
Continuous activitiesIntermittent activitiesPreliminary DesignProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementInstallationProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementInstallationProcurementConstructionProcurementDeliveryProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionLoan ClosingProject CompletionLoan EffectivenessProject ApprovalActivity2020202120222023202420252026Revision of EMP, RP, and EMDP based on the approved preliminary Design (T2 and T3)Output 1: Wastewater Management and Pollution Control in the Sayu River Basin Strengthened1.1 Waste managementBidding design by design instituteLand acquisition 1.1.1 Centralized wastewater management systemInspectionTechnical assistance by consultants in O&M and related institutional and capacity development (T7)1.1.2 Distributed wastewater management systemInspectionPurchase of equipment for the intelligent cloud platform information management systems (G4)Installation of manure collection tanks at 2,350 households in Xinjie Town in Ludian County (C1)Technical assistance by consultants in O&M and related institutional and capacity development (T7)1.1.3 Animal feces managementInspectionTechnical assistance by consultants in O&M and related institutional and capacity development (T7)Installation of manure collection tanks at 3,134 households in Shuimo Town in Ludian County (C2)Installation of manure collection tanks at 8,386 households in Longshu Town in Ludian County (C3 and C4)Installation of manure collection tanks at 2,329, 628, and 496 households in Sujia Township, Sayu Town, and Leju Township in Zhaoyang District (C14)Installation of wastewater collection pipes and construction of 2 pump stations in Xinjie Town in Ludian County (C1)Installation of wastewater collection pipes in Shuimo Town in Ludian County (C2)Installation of wastewater collection pipes and construction of a pump station in Longshu Town in Ludian County (C3 and C4)Purchase and installation of equipment for 15 wastewater treatment facilities in Xinjie, Shuimo, and Longshu Towns in Ludian County (G1)Installation of wastewater collection pipes and construction of 2 pump stations in Xinjie Town in Ludian County (C1)Installation of wastewater collection pipes in Shuimo Town in Ludian County (C2)Installation of wastewater collection pipes and construction of a pump station in Longshu Town in Ludian County (C3 and C4)Purchase and installation of equipment for 10 wastewater treatment facilities in Sujia Township in Zhaoyang District (G5)Installation of wastewater collection pipes in Sujia Township, Sayu Town, and Leju Township in Zhaoyang District (C14) 
9 
Continuous activitiesIntermittent activitiesProcurementInstallationProcurementConstructionProcurementDeliveryProcurementInstallationProcurementConstructionProcurementInstallationProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionLand acquisition and land transferringProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstruction2020202120222023202420252026InspectionTechnical assistance by consultants in O&M (including establishment of comprehensive solid waste management from households to plants) and related institutional and capacity development (T7)1.3 Pilot eco-villages to reduce emissionBidding design by design instituteAgreements for use of rural collective-owned landsInspectionTraining on garbage classification, recycling, reduction of resource use and waste stream (T7)Education at schools to promote garbage classification, recycling, reduction of resource use and waste stream (T7)Development of environmental health management system including institutional development (T7)Construction of basic infrastructure in Longshu Town in Ludian County (C7)Publicity  (T7)1.4 Wetlands construction to reduce nonpoint sourcce pollution1.2 Solid waste managementBidding design by design instituteLand acquisitionActivityBidding design by design instituteInspectionTechnical assistance by consultants in O&M and related institutional and capacity development (T7)1.5 Establishment of quantifiable soil and water conservation modelBidding design by design instituteInspectionEstablishment of a model to estimate effects of afforestation on soil and water conservation (T7)New wetlands construction in Zhongheba and Dahaizi Wetlands in Longshu Town in Ludian County (C9)New wetland construction in Xiaohebian Wetland in Shumo Town and Longxiang and Longshu Wetlands in Longshu in Ludian County (C10)New wetland construction in Xinhe Wetland in Leju Township in Zhaoyang District (C16)Afforestation, perennial herb planting, and construction of irrigation facilities and ponds in Xinjie Town in Ludian County (C11)Afforestation, perennial herb planting, and construction of irrigation facilities and ponds in Shuimo Town in Ludian County (C11)Afforestation, perennial herb planting, and construction of irrigation facilities and ponds in Longshu Town in Ludian County (C11)Development of a plan to actually measure effects of afforestation on soil and water conservation on sites (T7)Measurement of effects of afforestation on soil and water conservation on sites (T7)Revision of the model based on the measured data (T7)Purchase of equipment for the garbage pyrolysis facility in Shuimo Town in Ludian County (G2)Construction of the 3 solid waste transfer stations and garbage pyrolysis facility in Xinjie, Shuimo, and Longshu Towns in Ludian County (C5)Provision of equipment for garbage collection, compression, and transfer in Xinjie, Shuimo, and Longshu Towns in Ludian County (G3)Purchase of equipment for the garbage pyrolysis facility in Sujia Township in Zhaoyang District (G6)Construction of a solid waste transfer station and garbage pyrolysis facility in Sujia Township in Zhaoyang District (C15)Provision of equipment for garbage collection, compression, and transfer in Suijia Township, Sayu Town, Leju Township, Dahaizi Township, and Dashanbao Town in Zhaoyang District (G7)Construction of basic infrastructure in Xinjie Town in Ludian County (C6)Construction of basic infrastructure in Shuimo Town in Ludian County (C8)Land use agreementsProject CompletionLoan ClosingProject ApprovalLoan Effectiveness 
10 
Continuous activitiesIntermittent activitiesProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionLand acquisition and resettlementProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionProcurementConstructionInspectionProcurementDeliveryProcurementInstallationProject ApprovalLoan Effectiveness1.6 Promotion of low emission agricultureBidding design by design instituteLand use agreementsInspectionTechnical assistance by consultants  in O&M and related institutional and capacity development (T7)Technical assistance by consultants in reduction of fertilizer use, increase of organic and/or special fertilizer use (e.g., animal feces, compost made of vegetables and straw), etc. (T7)Construction of basic infrastructure in Zhaotong Featured Potato Industry Demonstration Point in Shuimo Town in Ludian County (C13)Construction of basic infrastructure in Vegetable Industry Demonstration Point in Longshu Town in Ludian County (C12)Construction of basic infrastructure in Highland Characteristic Agricultural Demonstration Zone in Longshu Town in Ludian County (C12)Output 2. Water Resources Management in the Sayu River Improved2.1. Establishment of river protection modelBidding design by design instituteInspectionTechnical assistance by consultants in O&M and related institutional and capacity development, including collaboration with river chief system (T7)2.2. Establishement of smart water integrated management platformBidding design by design instituteInspectionEcological embankment construction in Longshu River tributaries in Longshu Town in Ludian County (area 1) (C18)Ecological embankment construction in Longshu River tributaries in Longshu Town in Ludian County (area 2) (C19)Ecological embankment construction in Longshu River tributaries in Xinjie Town in Ludian County (NBF-C3)Ecological embankment construction in Longshu River tributaries in Shuimo Town in Ludian County (NBF-C2)Purchase of equipment for intelligent cloud platform river information management system (G4)Purchase and installation of equipment for the monitoring systems and smart water integrated management platform (G4)Ecological embankment construction in a Longshu River tributary in Dazhaizi Township in Zhaoyang District (C23)Activity2020202120222023202420252026Project CompletionLoan ClosingConstruction of basic infrastructure in High Standard Farming Demonstration Points in Xinjie Town, Shuimo Town, Longshu Town, and Sujia Townhip in Zhaoyang District (C13 and C17)Construction of basic infrastructure in Breeding and Recycling Agriculture Demonstration Point in Sujia Township in Zhaoyang District (C17)Construction of basic infrastructure in Zhaotong Featured Apple Industry Demonstration Point in Sayu Town in Zhaoyang District (C17)Ecological embankment construction in small rivers in Sujia Township in Zhaoyang District (area 1) (C20)Ecological embankment construction in small rivers in Sujia Township in Zhaoyang District (area 2) (C21)Ecological embankment construction in small rivers in Sayu Town and Leju Township in Zhaoyang District (C22)Technical assistance by consultants in O&M and related institutional and capacity development (T7)Technical assistance by consultants  in establishment of a green and organic apple brand, organic vegetable brand, etc. (T7) 
11 
Continuous activitiesIntermittent activitiesRecruitmentServiceRecruitmentServiceRecruitmentServiceRecruitmentServiceRecruitmentServiceRecruitmentServiceRecruitmentServiceRecruitmentServiceRecruitmentServiceRecruitmentServiceRecruitmentServiceSource: Asian Development Bank.EMDP = ethnic minority development plan, EMP = environmental management plan, M&E = monitoring and evaluation, O&M = operation and maintenance, PRC = People's Republic of China, RP = resettlement plan.Project ApprovalLoan EffectivenessAudit reportsProject management consulting team (T4)External resettlement and social development M&E agency (T5)External environmental monitoring agency (T6)Quarterly project progress reportsSemiannual external resettlement and social development M&E reports4.4 Dissemination and Replication of Project InitiativesDissemination and replication of water pollution management and eco-compensation demonstrated under the project to other areas of the PRC and also other countries (T7)Semiannual external environmental monitoring reportsProject CompletionLoan ClosingActivity2020202120222023202420252026Implementation of the eco-compensation agreement between Ludian County and Zhaoyang District (T7)Signing of six agreements between four towns and two townships for new town- and township-level horizontal eco-compensation mechanisms (T7)Implementation of the six agreements for town- and township-level horizontal eco-compensation mechanisms (T7)Establishment of an eco-compensation fund (T7)Consulting ServicesProject ManagementProject completion reportTraining, workshops, domestic study tours, and overseas study tour and training for rural water pollution management and eco-compensation (T7)4.2 Education of students for rural water pollution management and eco-compensationPeriodical special lectures at schools, study tours for students, etc. (T7)4.3 Public Awareness RaisingPublic awareness raising through publicity, handbook, brochure, media, internet, campaigns, etc. (T7)Eight construction supervision companies (for [i] agriculture and forestry; [ii] water and hydrology; [iii] construction; and [iv] urban development for each of Ludian County and Zhaoyang District) (T10−17-NBF)Two quality testing companies for Ludian County and Zhaoyang District (T11-NBF, T12-NBF)Initial project management support by individual consultant (T1, procurement and project management)Initial project management support by individual consultant  (T2, environment)Initial project management support by individual consultant (T3, social)Zhaotong city government's endorsement of the design of eco-compensation mechanismsImplementation of the eco-compensation fund (charge of the fund, financing from the fund, etc.) (T7)Output 4: Education, capacity, and public awareness for water pollution management strengthened4.1 Capacity development of government staff for rural water pollution management and eco-compensationOutput 3. Eco-compensation Mechanism Established for the Sayu River Basin3.1 Establishment of eco-compensation mechanismTechnical assistance consultant team (T7)Design institute (T8-NBF)Procurement agency (T9-NBF) 
12 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A. 
Project Implementation  Organizations:  Roles and Responsibilities 
The ZCG is the executing agency;  and the implementing  agencies are the YWPCO,26 the 
23. 
ZDG,  and  the  LCG.27  A  project  leading  group  has  been  established  in  the  ZCG.28 The  project 
management office (PMO) has also been established under the project leading group in the ZCG, 
and it is in the YWPCO. 
24. 
In each of the ZDG and the LCG, a district- or county-level  local project leading group has 
been  established,29  under  which  a local  PMO  has also  been  established.30  The local  PMOs  are 
located in water resources  bureaus in both the ZDG and the LCG.   
25. 
The  outbreak  of  COVID-19  that  occurred  in  the  beginning  of  2020  will  not  affect 
implementation  of  the  project  since,  in  the  PRC,  (i)  the  epidemic  is  being  contained;  and  (ii)  
economic activities  are returning to their previous  states; and the agencies of the ZCG, the ZDG, 
and the LCG related to the project have returned to normal operations. 
Table III-1: Project  Implementation  Organization 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Executing agency— ZCG 
Project leading group 
PMO 
Implementing agency 1—
YWPCO 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Conduct overall project preparation and management 
•  Oversee the preparation and implementation of the overall project 
and provide overall guidance 
•  Recruit individual consultants, consulting firms, an external 
resettlement social development M&E agency, an external 
environmental monitoring agency, design institutes, a procurement 
agency, etc. 
•  Prepare semiannual environmental monitoring reports and submit 
them to ADB 
•  Ensure submission of semiannual external resettlement and social 
development M&E reports to ADB 
•  Monitor project progress and performance, and report to ADB through 
quarterly project progress reports 
•  Coordinate for annual audit of project financial statements 
•  Prepare and submit to ADB a project completion report 
•  Conduct any other overall project management activities 
• 
Implement the following activities: (i) establishment of intelligent cloud 
platform information management systems for the 44 wastewater 
treatment facilities; (ii) establishment of intelligent cloud platform river 
information management system and related institutional 
development (including collaboration with the river chief system) and 
26 The YWPCO, whose director  is the mayor of the ZCG, is on  the same level as  the other  agencies  of the ZCG such 
as  the  Yunnan  Provincial  Development  and  Reform  Committee  (YPDRC),  and  the  finance  and  water  resources 
bureaus. 
27 Zhaoyang  District and Ludian  County are in Zhaotong  City. 
28 The  project  leading  group  comprises  the  Chair:  Mayor; Vice  Chair:  Vice  Mayor; Members:  Deputy  Secretary  and 
representatives  from relevant ZCG agencies,  including the YPDRC; the Yudong Reservoir Management Bureau; and 
the finance and water resources  bureaus. 
29 The district-  or county-level project leading  group  comprises  the Chair: Head  of the  ZDG or the  LCG; Vice Chair(s): 
a Deputy Head in Zhaoyang District and three Deputy Heads in Ludian County; and members from relevant agencies. 
30 The  local  PMO  Directors  are  the  Director  of  the  Water  Resources  Bureau  in  the  ZDG  and  the  Director  of  the 
Development  and Reform Committee in the LCG. 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Implementing agency 
2—ZDG 
Implementing agency 
3—LCG 
District- or county-level 
project leading groups 
Local PMOs 
Yunnan Provincial 
Finance Department 
Zhaotong City Finance 
Bureau 
ADB 
13 
• 
• 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
capacity development; (iii) establishment of water integrated 
management platform; (iv) establishment of eco-compensation 
mechanism; and (v) education, capacity, and public awareness for 
water pollution management 
Implement the following activities in Zhaoyang District: (i) wastewater 
management; (ii) animal feces management; (iii) solid waste 
management; (iv) wetland construction; (v) promotion of low-emission 
agriculture; and (vi) ecological restoration of rivers, including 
construction of ecological embankments 
Implement the following activities in Ludian County: (i) wastewater 
management; (ii) animal feces management; (iii) solid waste 
management; (iv) pilot of eco-villages; (v) wetland construction; (vi) 
establishment of a quantifiable soil and water conservation model; 
(vii) promotion of low-emission agriculture; and (viii) ecological 
restoration of rivers, including construction of ecological 
embankments 
•  Oversee the implementation of project components in Zhaoyang 
District and Ludian County 
•  Ensure the implementation of the EMP and environmental monitoring, 
and provide information and data to the PMO for the preparation of 
semiannual environmental monitoring reports 
•  Ensure semiannual external resettlement and social development 
M&E by the external monitor 
•  Monitor project progress and performance, and provide information 
and data to the PMO for preparation of quarterly project progress 
reports and a project completion report 
•  Conduct any other activities for the implementation of project 
components in the county 
•  Establish an advance account 
•  Manage the advance account, including disbursement of the ADB 
loan proceeds from the advance account at request 
•  Review, endorse, and submit to ADB withdrawal applications 
submitted from the PMO 
•  Establish and manage an account for the eco-compensation fund 
following decisions of the eco-compensation fund management 
committee 
•  Endorse withdrawal applications prepared by the PMO 
•  Receives the ADB loan proceeds from the advance account 
established by the Yunnan Provincial Finance Department 
•  Conduct overall project preparation and administration, including (i) 
provision of orientation to the ZCG, including the PMO and local 
PMOs; LCG, YWPCO, and ZDG; (ii) review of project progress and 
performance and implementation of remedial measures through daily 
communication and missions; (iii) review and approval of documents 
for procurement; (iv) review and approval of withdrawal applications, 
and disbursement of loan proceeds; (v) changes in the project, as 
necessary; and (vi) preparation of the ADB-version project completion 
report 
ADB = Asian  Development  Bank, EMP = environmental  management  plan,  LCG = Ludian  County Government, M&E 
=  monitoring  and  evaluation,  PMO  =  project  management  office,  YWPCO  =  Yudong  Reservoir  Water  Resources 
Protection  Committee Office, ZCG = Zhaotong  City Government, ZDG = Zhaoyang  District Government. 
Source: Asian  Development Bank. 
14 
B. 
Key Persons Involved  in Implementation   
Executing  Agency  
Zhaotong  City Government  Officer’s Name:  
Position:  
Telephone: 
Facsimile:   
Email address: 
Office Address:  Asian Development  Bank  
Mr. Shuqing Chen 
Director, Project Management  Office 
+86 870 3188804, +86 870 3188829 
+86 870-3188811 
ztydsbb@163.com 
Project Management  Office,  
Yudong Reservoir  Water Resources  
Protection  Committee Office,  
110 Zhuquan Road, Zhaoyang  District,  
Zhaotong  City, Yunnan  Province,  
People’s Republic  of China 
Postal Code: 657000 
Asian Development  Bank 
Environment,  Natural 
Resources,  and Agriculture 
Division; East Asia 
Department 
Mission Leader 
Staff Name: 
Position:  
Telephone: 
Facsimile:   
Email address: 
Staff Name:  
Position:   
Telephone: 
Facsimile:   
Email address: 
Mr. Qingfeng Zhang 
Director 
+63 2 8632 6769/6161 
+63 2 8636 2534/2444 
qingfengzhang@adb.org 
Mr. Yoshiaki Kobayashi 
Principal Water Resources  Specialist 
+63 2 8632 6255/5584 
+63 2 8636 2534/2444 
yoshikobayashi@adb.org 
15 
ADB 
East Asia  Department 
EAER 
PRCM 
C. 
Project Organizational  Structure  
PRC Central Government 
DRC 
Ministry of Finance 
Yunnan Provincial  Government 
DRC 
Ministry of Finance 
Zhaotong City Government (EA) 
Deputy Secretariat 
Mayor 
Vice Mayor 
Chair 
Vice Chair 
PLG 
DRC 
Finance  Bureau 
YWPCO (IA) 
PMO 
Other relevant agencies 
Zhaoyang  District Government (IA) 
Ludian County Government  (IA) 
Head 
Vice Head 
Chair 
Vice 
Chair 
Vice Head 
Head 
Vice 
Chair 
Chair 
DRC 
Local PLG 
DRC 
Local PLG 
Finance  Bureau 
Finance  Bureau 
Water Resources  Bureau 
Local PMO 
Investment  Service Center 
Local PMO 
Other relevant agencies 
Other relevant agencies 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DRC = development and reform committee, EA = executing agency, EAER = Environment, Natural 
Resources,  and  Agriculture  Division  of  East  Asia  Department,  IA  = implementing  agency,  PLG  = project  leading  group,  PMO = 
project  management  office, PRC =  People’s  Republic  of China,  PRCM =  PRC Resident  Mission,  YWPCO =  Yudong  Reservoir 
Water Resources  Protection  Committee Office. 
Source: Asian  Development Bank. 
16 
IV. 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
26. 
The project is estimated to cost $234.61 million. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic 
that occurred  in the beginning  of 2020 has not  affected  the cost estimates  since,  in the PRC, (i) 
the epidemic is coming to an end; and (ii) economic activities are returning to their previous states; 
and the agencies of the ZCG, the ZDG, and the LCG related to the project have returned to normal 
operations. 
The  government  has  requested  a  regular  loan  of  $100.0  million  from  ADB’s  ordinary 
27. 
capital resources to help finance the project. The loan will have a 25-year term, including a grace 
period of 6 years; an annual interest rate determined in accordance  with ADB’s London interbank 
offered  rate  (LIBOR)-based  lending  facility;  a commitment  charge  of  0.15%  per  year;  and  such 
other terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan and project agreements. Based on the annuity 
method, the average maturity is 18.53 years; and the maturity premium payable to ADB is 0.20% 
per year. 
ADB will finance  expenditures  relating to works,  goods, eco-compensation  fund, capacity 
28. 
development,  and  consulting  services.  The  government  will  finance  expenditures  relating  to 
works,  goods,  eco-compensation  fund,  project  preparation,  procurement,  supervision,  audit, 
environmental  management, 
(LAR),  ethnic  minority 
development,  education,  capacity  development,  public  awareness  raising,  and  others.  The 
government  will ensure  that counterpart  funds for the project are provided in a timely manner.   
land  acquisition  and 
resettlement 
29. 
Climate mitigation is estimated to cost $15.99 million, and climate adaptation is estimated 
to cost $12.57 million. ADB will finance  80.6% of mitigation costs and 77.3% of adaptation  costs.  
A. 
Cost Estimates Preparation  and Revisions   
The cost estimates were prepared based on the feasibility study in accordance with ADB’s 
30. 
Guidelines  on Preparing  and Presenting  Cost Estimates for Projects  and Programs  Financed by 
ADB. 
31. 
The cost estimates  may be updated during the implementation  of the project. 
B. 
Key Assumptions 
32. 
The following key assumptions  underpin the cost estimates  and financing plan: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Exchange  rate: CNY6.9736  = $1.00 (as of 5 August 2020)  
Price  contingencies  based  on  expected  cumulative 
implementation  period are as follows: 
inflation  over 
the 
Table IV-1: Escalation  Rates for Price Contingency  Calculation 
2020 
2023 
Item 
Foreign rate of price inflation 
1.50%  1.60%  1.60%  1.60%  1.60%  1.60%  1.60% 
Domestic rate of price inflation  1.80%  2.00%  2.00%  2.00%  2.00%  2.00%  2.00% 
Source: Asian  Development Bank estimates. 
2025 
2022 
2024 
2021 
2026  Average 
1.59% 
1.97% 
C. 
Detailed Cost Estimates  by Expenditure  Category   
Table IV-2: Detailed Cost Estimates  by Expenditure  Category 
17 
Item Foreign ExchangeLocal ExchangeTotal CostForeign ExchangeLocal ExchangeTotal Cost% of Total Base CostA. Investment Costs1.Works271.33      813.99      1,085.32 38.91        116.72      155.63 73.2%a. ADB financing for Ludian County133.05      399.14      532.19    19.08        57.24        76.32   35.9%b. ADB financing for Zhaoyang County53.49        160.48      213.98    7.67          23.01        30.68   14.4%c. non-ADB finncing84.79        254.36      339.15    12.16        36.48        48.63   22.9%2.Goods15.75        36.75        52.50      2.26          5.27          7.53     3.5%a. ADB financing12.70        29.64        42.35      1.82          4.25          6.07     2.9%b. Non-ADB financing3.04          7.10          10.15      0.44          1.02          1.46     0.7%3.Consulting services4.60          10.74        15.34      0.66          1.54          2.20     1.0%4.Eco-compensation fund-           103.00      103.00    -           14.77        14.77   6.9%a. ADB financing-           35.00        35.00      -           5.02          5.02     2.4%b. Non-ADB financing-           68.00        68.00      -           9.75          9.75     4.6%5.Project preparation, procurement, supervision, and audit-           114.11      114.11    -           16.36        16.36   7.7%6.Land acquisition and resettlement-           106.42      106.42    -           15.26        15.26   7.2%7.Ethnic minority develoment-           0.20          0.20        -           0.03          0.03     0.0%8.Education, capacity development, and public awareness raising-           6.62          6.62        -           0.95          0.95     0.4%291.68      1,191.83   1,483.50 41.83        170.91      212.73 100.0%291.68      1,191.83   1,483.50 41.83        170.91      212.73 100.0%B. Contingencies1.Physical Contingency11.37        42.92        54.30      1.63          6.16          7.79     3.7%2.Price Contingency10.26        55.39        65.65      1.47          7.94          9.41     4.4%21.63        98.32        119.95    3.10          14.10        17.20   8.1%C.Financing Charges During Implementation1.Interest During Implementation30.53        -           30.53      4.38          -           4.38     2.1%2.Commitment Charge2.11          -           2.11        0.30          -           0.30     0.1%32.64        -           32.64      4.68          -           4.68     2.2%Total Project Cost (A+B+C)345.95      1,290.14   1,636.09 49.61        185.00      234.61 110.3%ADB = Asian Development Bank.Notes: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.Total Base CostSubtotal (B)Subtotal (C)($ million)(CNY million)Subtotal (A) 
18 
D. 
Allocation  and Withdrawal  of Loan Proceeds   
Table IV-3A: Allocation  and Withdrawal  of Loan Proceeds   
Table IV-3B: Allocation  and Withdrawal  of Loan Proceeds  (Detailed  Financing Percentages) 
CategorySubcategory1Works86,708,2251AWorks for Ludian County58,396,638Up to 100% of total expenditures claimeda1BWorks for Zhaoyang District28,311,587Up to 100% of total expenditures claimeda2Goods, Consulting Services, and Eco-Compensation Fund13,291,775100% of total expenditure claimed100,000,000ADB = Asian Development Bank.a Detailed financing percentages to be used during disbursement are set out in Table IV-3B of the project administration manual.TotalBasis for Withdrawal from Loan AccountNumberItemTotal Amount Allocated for ADB Financing ($)CategorySubcategory1Works86,708,2251AWorks for Ludian County58,396,63876.5%of total expenditure claimed1BWorks for Zhaoyang District28,311,58792.3%of total expenditure claimed2Goods, Consulting Services, and Eco-Compensation Fund13,291,775100.0%of total expenditure claimed100,000,000ADB = Asian Development Bank.TotalBasis for Withdrawal from Loan AccountItemNumberTotal Amount Allocated for ADB Financing ($) 
E. 
Detailed Cost Estimates  by Financier 
Table IV-4: Detailed Cost Estimates  by Financier 
($ million) 
19 
Total CostItemAmount% of Cost CategoryAmount% of Cost CategoryAmountA. Investment Costs1.Works86.7155.7%68.9244.3%155.63a. ADB financing for Ludian County58.4076.5%17.9223.5%76.32b. ADB financing for Zhaoyang County28.3192.3%2.377.7%30.68c. non-ADB finncing0.000.0%48.63100.0%48.632.Goods6.0780.7%1.4619.3%7.53a. ADB financing6.07100.0%0.000.0%6.07b. Non-ADB financing0.000.0%1.46100.0%1.463.Consulting services2.20100.0%0.000.0%2.200Eco-compensation fund5.0234.0%9.7566.0%14.77a. ADB financing5.02100.0%0.000.0%5.02b. Non-ADB financing0.000.0%9.75100.0%9.755.Project preparation, procurement, supervision, and audit0.000.0%16.36100.0%16.366.Land acquisition and resettlement0.000.0%15.26100.0%15.267.Ethnic minority develoment0.000.0%0.03100.0%0.038.Education, capacity development, and public awareness raising0.000.0%0.95100.0%0.95100.0047.0%112.7353.0%212.73100.0047.0%112.7353.0%212.73B. Contingencies1.Physical Contingency0.000.0%7.79100.0%7.792.Price Contingency0.000.0%9.41100.0%9.410.000.0%17.20100.0%17.20C.Financing Charges During Implementation1.Interest During Implementation0.000.0%4.38100.0%4.382.Commitment Charge0.000.0%0.30100.0%0.300.000.0%4.68100.0%4.68100.0042.6%134.6157.4%234.617.8657.3%5.8642.7%13.72ADB = Asian Development Bank.a The government will finance taxes and duties of $5.70 million by cash contribution.Notes: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.Taxes ad duties includedaSubtotal (A)Total Base CostSubtotal (B)Subtotal (C)Total Project Cost (A+B+C)ADBGovernments 
20 
F. 
Detailed Cost Estimates  by Output 
Table IV-5: Detailed Cost Estimates  by Output 
($ million) 
ItemTotal CostAmount% of Cost CategoryAmount% of Cost CategoryAmount% of Cost CategoryAmount% of Cost CategoryAmount% of Cost CategoryA. Investment Costs1.Works155.63 81.28   52.2%74.35   47.8%-       0.0%-        0.0%-       0.0%a. ADB financing for Ludian County76.32   63.99   83.8%12.33   16.2%-       0.0%-        0.0%-       0.0%b. ADB financing for Zhaoyang County30.68   11.73   38.2%18.96   61.8%-       0.0%-        0.0%-       0.0%c. non-ADB finncing48.63   5.56     11.4%43.07   88.6%-       0.0%-        0.0%-       0.0%2.Goods7.53     6.36     84.5%1.17     15.5%-       0.0%-        0.0%-       0.0%a. ADB financing6.07     4.90     80.8%1.17     19.2%-       0.0%-        0.0%-       0.0%b. Non-ADB financing1.46     1.46     100.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%-        0.0%-       0.0%3.Consulting services2.20     0.63     28.7%0.05     2.3%0.13     5.9%0.19      8.6%1.20     54.5%4.Eco-compensation fund14.77   -       0.0%-       0.0%14.77   100.0%-        0.0%-       0.0%a. ADB financing5.02     -       0.0%-       0.0%5.02     100.0%-        0.0%-       0.0%b. Non-ADB financing9.75     -       0.0%-       0.0%9.75     100.0%-        0.0%-       0.0%5.Project preparation, procurement, supervision, and audit16.36   -       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%-        0.0%16.36   100.0%6.Land acquisition and resettlement15.26   6.62     43.4%8.64     56.6%-       0.0%-        0.0%-       0.0%7.Ethnic minority develoment0.03     -       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%-        0.0%0.03     100.0%8.Education, capacity development, and public awareness raising0.95     -       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%0.95      100.0%-       0.0%212.73 94.89   44.6%84.21   39.6%14.90   7.0%1.14      0.5%17.59   8.3%212.73 94.89   44.6%84.21   39.6%14.90   7.0%1.14      0.5%17.59   8.3%B. Contingencies1.Physical Contingency7.79     4.39     56.4%2.73     35.1%0.01     0.1%0.06      0.7%0.60     7.6%2.Price Contingency9.41     3.95     42.0%3.36     35.7%1.42     15.1%0.10      1.0%0.58     6.1%17.20   8.35     48.5%6.09     35.4%1.43     8.3%0.15      0.9%1.17     6.8%C.Financing Charges During Implementation1.Interest During Implementation4.38     3.19     72.8%1.02     23.2%0.13     2.9%0.00      0.1%0.04     1.0%2.Commitment Charge0.30     0.15     50.7%0.11     37.8%0.03     9.6%0.00      0.4%0.00     1.5%4.68     3.34     71.3%1.13     24.2%0.16     3.3%0.01      0.1%0.05     1.1%234.61 106.57 45.4%91.44   39.0%16.48   7.0%1.30      0.6%18.82   8.0%ADB = Asian Development Bank.Notes: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.Total Project Cost (A+B+C)Output 3: Eco-Compensation Mechanism for the Sayu River Basin EstablishedOutput 4: Education, Capacity, and Public Awareness for Water Pollution Management StrengthenedProject ManagementSubtotal (A)Total Base CostOutput 1: Wastewater Management and Pollution Control in the Sayu River Basin StrengthenedOutput 2: Water Resources Management in the Sayu River ImprovedSubtotal (B)Subtotal (C) 
G. 
Detailed Cost Estimates  by Year 
Table IV-6: Detailed Cost Estimates  by Year 
(million) 
21 
ItemTotal CostAmount% of Cost CategoryAmount% of Cost CategoryAmount% of Cost CategoryAmount% of Cost CategoryAmount% of Cost CategoryAmount% of Cost CategoryAmount% of Cost CategoryAmount% of Cost CategoryA. Investment Costs1.Works155.63 35.10   22.6%-       0.0%24.32   15.6%45.11   29.0%28.45   18.3%22.35   14.4%0.30     0.2%-       0.0%a. ADB financing for Ludian County76.32   -       0.0%-       0.0%18.82   24.7%34.43   45.1%17.57   23.0%5.49     7.2%-       0.0%-       0.0%b. ADB financing for Zhaoyang County30.68   -       0.0%-       0.0%2.79     9.1%6.17     20.1%8.61     28.1%13.11   42.7%-       0.0%-       0.0%c. non-ADB finncing48.63   35.10   72.2%-       0.0%2.71     5.6%4.51     9.3%2.26     4.6%3.76     7.7%0.30     0.6%-       0.0%2.Goods7.53     1.46     19.3%-       0.0%0.19     2.6%5.25     69.8%0.58     7.8%0.04     0.5%-       0.0%-       0.0%a. ADB financing6.07     -       0.0%-       0.0%0.19     3.2%5.25     86.5%0.58     9.6%0.04     0.7%-       0.0%-       0.0%b. Non-ADB financing1.46     1.46     100.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%3.Consulting services2.20     -       0.0%-       0.0%0.45     20.4%0.32     14.6%0.34     15.6%0.40     18.3%0.35     16.1%0.33     15.0%4.Eco-compensation fund14.77   -       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%3.87     26.2%3.87     26.2%3.87     26.2%3.15     21.4%a. ADB financing5.02     -       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%1.43     28.6%1.43     28.6%1.43     28.6%0.72     14.3%b. Non-ADB financing9.75     -       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%2.44     25.0%2.44     25.0%2.44     25.0%2.44     25.0%5.Project preparation, procurement, supervision, and audit16.36   5.68     34.7%1.07     6.6%3.29     20.1%2.94     18.0%2.30     14.1%0.75     4.6%0.22     1.4%0.10     0.6%6.Land acquisition and resettlement15.26   -       0.0%1.62     10.6%6.64     43.5%4.37     28.6%2.64     17.3%-       0.0%-       0.0%-       0.0%7.Ethnic minority develoment0.03     -       0.0%0.00     7.7%0.00     15.4%0.00     15.4%0.00     15.4%0.00     15.4%0.00     15.4%0.00     15.4%8.Education, capacity development, and public awareness raising0.95     -       0.0%-       0.0%0.03     3.0%0.20     21.5%0.20     21.5%0.20     21.5%0.20     21.5%0.10     10.8%212.73 42.24   19.9%2.69     1.3%34.92   16.4%58.21   27.4%38.39   18.0%27.63   13.0%4.95     2.3%3.69     1.7%212.73 42.24   19.9%2.69     1.3%34.92   16.4%58.21   27.4%38.39   18.0%27.63   13.0%4.95     2.3%3.69     1.7%B. Contingencies1.Physical Contingency7.79     -       0.0%0.13     1.7%1.75     22.4%2.91     37.4%1.73     22.2%1.19     15.3%0.05     0.7%0.03     0.3%2.Price Contingency9.41     -       0.0%0.03     0.3%1.00     10.6%2.85     30.3%1.96     20.8%2.52     26.7%0.56     6.0%0.50     5.3%17.20   -       0.0%0.16     0.9%2.75     16.0%5.76     33.5%3.68     21.4%3.70     21.5%0.62     3.6%0.53     3.1%C.Financing Charges During Implementation1.Interest During Implementation4.38     -       0.0%-       0.0%0.10     2.2%0.40     9.2%0.74     16.9%0.97     22.1%1.08     24.6%1.09     25.0%2.Commitment Charge0.30     -       0.0%-       0.0%0.14     45.1%0.10     31.5%0.05     16.3%0.02     5.9%0.00     1.0%0.00     0.3%4.68     -       0.0%-       0.0%0.23     5.0%0.50     10.6%0.79     16.8%0.99     21.1%1.08     23.1%1.10     23.4%234.61 42.24   18.0%2.85     1.2%37.90   16.2%64.47   27.5%42.87   18.3%32.32   13.8%6.65     2.8%5.31     2.3%ADB = Asian Development Bank.Notes: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.202420252026Until 20192020202120222023Subtotal (C)Total Project Cost (A+B+C)Subtotal (A)Total Base CostSubtotal (B) 
22 
H. 
Contract and Disbursement  S-Curve   
Figure IV-1: Contract and Disbursement  S-Curve 
Table IV-7: Contract Award and Disbursement 
($ million) 
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because  of rounding. 
Source: Asian  Development Bank estimates. 
YearQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total2020-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       20212.10     36.12   -       10.25   48.48   0.18     2.88     5.68     8.89     17.62   20225.54     6.63     -       -       12.17   9.48     12.12   8.67     7.34     37.62   2023-       10.12   1.43     24.21   35.77   1.75     4.50     5.01     12.50   23.76   2024-       -       1.43     -       1.43     9.38     7.16     1.52     0.11     18.17   2025-       -       1.43     -       1.43     0.08     0.10     1.51     0.10     1.79     2026-       -       0.72     -       0.72     0.08     0.09     0.80     0.09     1.05     Total100.00 100.00 Contract AwardDisbursement 
23 
I. 
Fund Flow Diagram 
ADB 
Advance 
YPG 
Finance  Department 
An advance account 
established 
Reimbursement 
ZCG 
Finance  Bureau 
Endorse 
Manage 
YWPCO 
EFMC 
Decision 
Eco-Compensation  Fund 
Beneficiaries 
Other donors 
ZDG 
Private companiesa 
Finance  Bureau 
Endorse 
Endorse 
       LCG 
Finance  Bureau 
Water Resources  Bureau 
Investment  Service  Center 
Contractors, suppliers,  consultants,  etc.  
, Consultants,  etc. 
       Indicative  flow of the ADB loan 
       Indicative  flow of other  funds 
       Flow of the WAs and  other documents 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, EFMC = eco-compensation  management  committee, LCG = Ludian  County Government, WA = 
withdrawal  application,  YWPCO = Yudong  Reservoir  Water  Resources  Protection  Committee Office, YPG = Yunnan  Provincial 
Government, ZCG = Zhaotong  City Government, ZDG = Zhaoyang  District Government.  
a  Private  company to  operate  a  wastewater  treatment  plant  and  conduct  solid  waste  management  based  on  contracts  with  the 
ZDG and LCG. 
24 
V. 
FINANCIAL  MANAGEMENT 
A. 
Financial  Management  Assessment 
The financial management  assessment (FMA) was conducted in 2019 in accordance with 
33. 
ADB’s Guidelines  for the Financial  Management  and Analysis  of Projects  and the Financial  Due 
Diligence:  A  Methodology  Note. The  FMA  considered  the  capacity  of the  ZCG,  ZDG, and  LCG, 
including  fund  flow arrangements,  staffing,  accounting  and financial  reporting  systems,  financial 
information systems, and internal and external auditing arrangements. Based on the assessment, 
the  key financial  management  risks  identified  are  inherent  risks,  including  country-specific  risks 
(e.g., lack of or delay in counterpart  funding); entity-specific  risks (e.g., poor coordination  among 
different  agencies,  organizational  structure  of  the  ZCG,  ZDG,  and  LCG  unfit  for  project 
supervision  and  implementation,  and  finance  divisions  in  weak  positions  to  exert  influence  on 
financial  issues);  and control  risks  (e.g.,  lack of  the PMO’s  authority  to control  project  activities, 
inadequate  staff’s skills and experiences  and high staff turnover, inadequate  accounting  policies 
and  procedures,  delay  in  delivery  of  audited  financial  statements,  and  weak  monitoring  and 
reporting  capacities).  It is concluded  that the overall  pre-mitigation  financial management  risk of 
the  ZCG,  ZDG,  and LCG  is  moderate.  The FMA  confirmed  that,  with  the implementation  of the 
financial management  action plan below, the ZCG, ZDG, and LCG can properly conduct financial 
management,  including  fund  flow  management,  use  of  statement  of  expenditures  (SOE) 
procedures,  accounting  and  financial  reporting,  and  auditing.  The  ZCG,  ZDG,  and  LCG  have 
agreed  to implement  an  action plan  as  key measures  to address  the  deficiencies.  The financial 
management  action  plan  is  provided  in  Table  V-1. An  advance  account  will  be established  and 
managed by the Yunnan Provincial Finance Department (YPFD). The YPFD has established and 
managed  advance accounts for more than 10 ADB projects. 
Table V-1: Financial  Management Action Plan 
Action 
1  Undertake measures for job rotation, physical asset 
inventory, insurance on assets, etc.; and revise relevant 
policies 
2  Designate finance staff who understand project 
accounting 
3  Establish a separate accounting mode specifically for 
the project 
4  Develop a comprehensive financial policies and 
procedures manual in the PMO to guide staff activities 
and ensure staff accountability, including a requirement 
for the PMO to endorse all payments requested by the 
LCG and the ZDG  
5  Modify written job descriptions of finance staff to reflect 
project responsibilities 
6  Prepare the project budget, covering the full project 
implementation period; and update this on an annual 
basis. The starting point for the preparation of the initial 
budget should be the project forecasts agreed between 
the YPG, the ZCG, and ADB at loan negotiations; and 
as subsequently recorded in the PAM. The budget 
should include physical and financial targets. 
Responsibility 
ZCG, LCG, and ZDG, 
especially finance bureaus 
ZCG, LCG, and ZDG, 
especially finance bureaus 
Accounting staff of the 
PMO and the LPMOs 
PMO with external 
assistance 
Timeline 
Immediately 
after the 
TRTA 
Before loan 
effectiveness 
Before loan 
effectiveness 
Before loan 
effectiveness 
Accounting staff of the 
PMO and the LPMOs 
Accounting staff of the 
LPMOs; together with 
engineers of the LPMOs 
and accounting staff and 
engineers in the PMO 
Before loan 
effectiveness 
Before loan 
effectiveness 
Action 
7  Provide start-up financial management consulting 
support to the ZCG, the LCG, and the ZDG, particularly 
the PMO and the LPMOs, to assist them in the above 
tasks 
8  Conduct regular liaison between the ZCG, the LCG, the 
ZDG, and ADB to ensure that ADB’s guidelines are 
followed 
9  Put in place regular inter-agency coordination at all 
levels to discuss the portfolio performance of the project 
10  Conduct workshop training and on-the-job training on 
ADB’s disbursement procedures and ADB’s project 
accounting and financial reporting requirements for staff 
of the ZCG, the ZDG, and the LCG responsible for 
accounting for the project. 
Responsibility 
Individual consultant for 
initial project management 
support, project 
management support 
consultant team 
Accounting staff of the 
PMO 
Accounting staff of the 
PMO 
Financial specialist of 
project management 
support consultant team 
25 
Timeline 
Consultants 
on board 
After loan 
effectiveness 
After loan 
effectiveness 
Consultant 
on board 
progress reports 
financed by ADB and the governments 
13  Conduct prompt financial reporting to project 
14  Prepare financial section of the quarterly project 
stakeholders after the end of each accounting period 
11  Maintain separate accounts for all project outputs 
submit loan withdrawal applications, and disburse funds 
12  Verify invoice and supporting documents, prepare and 
After loan 
effectiveness 
After loan 
effectiveness 
After loan 
effectiveness 
After loan 
effectiveness 
After loan 
effectiveness 
After loan 
effectiveness 
After loan 
effectiveness 
ADB = Asian  Development  Bank, LCG = Ludian  County Government,  LPMO = local  project management  office, PAM 
= project  administration  manual,  PMO = project management  office, TRTA = transaction  technical  assistance,  YPG = 
Yunnan  Provincial Government, ZCG = Zhaotong  City Government, ZDG = Zhaoyang  District Government. 
Source: Asian  Development Bank. 
Accounting staff of the 
PMO and the LPMOs 
Accounting staff of the 
PMO and the LPMOs 
Accounting staff of the 
PMO and the LPMOs 
Accounting staff of the 
PMO 
Accounting staff of the 
PMO 
Accounting and IT staff of 
the PMO and the LPMOs 
LCG and ZDG 
16  Put in place regular back-up of all accounting systems 
and appropriate security measures over back-up data 
15  Monitor compliance with loan covenants, including 
17  Training on physical asset management 
submission of audited project accounts 
B. 
Disbursement 
1. 
Disbursement  Arrangements  for ADB Funds 
The  loan  proceeds  will  be  disbursed  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement 
34. 
Handbook  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),31  and  detailed  arrangements  agreed  upon 
between  the government  and ADB. Online  training for project staff on disbursement  policies and 
procedures  is  available.32  Project  staff  are  encouraged  to  avail  of  this  training  to  help  ensure 
efficient disbursement  and fiduciary control. 
35. 
The  YWPCO  will  be  responsible  for  all  disbursement  arrangements  for  expenditures 
related to establishment  of the intelligent cloud platform information  management systems (under 
Outputs  1  and  2),  establishment  of  the  smart  water  integrated  management  platform  (under 
31 The handbook  is  available  electronically  from the ADB website  (http://www.adb.org/documents/loan-disbursemen t-
handbook). 
32 Disbursement  eLearning.  http://wpqr4.adb.org/disbursement_elearning   
26 
Output 2), establishment of the eco-compensation  fund (under Output 3), and consulting services. 
The  LCG  and  the  ZDG  will  be  responsible  for  all  disbursement  arrangements  for  expenditures 
related to management of wastewater, animal feces, and solid waste; implementation  of pilot eco-
villages;  construction  of  wetlands;  establishment  of  a  quantifiable  soil  and  water  conservation 
model;  and promotion  of low-emission  agriculture  (under Output  1) and ecological  restoration  of 
rivers (under Output 2). 
36. 
The Water Resources  Bureau of the ZDG and the Investment  Service  Center of the LCG 
will prepare and obtain endorsement of the withdrawal applications,  respectively,  from the ZDG’s 
Finance Bureau  or the LCG’s Finance  Bureau; and submit  the endorsed  withdrawal  applications 
to the YWPCO  of the ZCG.  The YWPCO  will prepare  and obtain  endorsement  the consolidated 
withdrawal  applications  from  the  ZCG’s  Finance  Bureau  and  submit  them  to  the  YPFD.  The 
YPFD, after its review and endorsement,  will submit the withdrawal  applications  to ADB.  
37. 
Advance  fund  procedure.  The  YPFD  will  establish  and  maintain  an  advance  account. 
The  currency  of the  advance  account  is the  United  States  dollar.  The advance  account  is to be 
used exclusively for ADB’s share of eligible expenditures. The YPFD that administers the advance 
account is accountable  and responsible  for proper  use of advances to the advance account. 
38. 
The total outstanding  advance  to the advance account  should not exceed the estimate of 
ADB’s  share  of  expenditures  to  be  paid  through  the  advance  account  for  the  forthcoming  6 
months.  The  ZCG  through  the  YPFD  may  request  for  initial  and  additional  advances  to  the 
advance  account  based  on  an  Estimate  of  Expenditure  Sheet,  setting  out  the  estimated 
expenditures  to  be  financed  through  the  account  for  the  forthcoming  6  months.33  Supporting 
documents  should  be  submitted  to  ADB  or  retained  by  the  YPFD,  the  ZCG,  the  ZDG,  and  the 
LCG  in accordance  with ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  (2017,  as  amended  from  time to 
time) when liquidating or replenishing  the advance  account. 
Specific  disbursement  arrangements  for eco-compensation  fund.  An EFMC  will be 
39. 
established  in the ZCG to make decisions  on management  of the eco-compensation  fund (para. 
16). Before  the  eco-compensation  fund  is established,  the  EFMC  will (i) finalize  the draft  ESMS 
in Appendix  4 with  ADB’s  prior  approval;  (ii) issue  a  formal  directive  to integrate  the ESMS  into 
the  EFMC’s  operational  procedures  with  ADB’s  prior  approval;  and  (iii)  establish  the    EFMC’s 
operational  procedures  integrating  the  ESMS,  including  screening,  selection,  and  approval 
procedures for activities, financial transfer mechanisms, and technical and financial reporting, with 
ADB’s prior approval.  The EFMC  will conduct screening  of activities  proposed for financing  from 
the fund in accordance with EFMC’s operational  procedures.  The YWPCO  will manage the fund, 
following the decisions of the EFMC (footnote 24). The YWPCO will open an account for the fund. 
The YWPCO  will manage the account  following the decisions  of the EFMC; and disburse  grants 
from  the  fund  to  recipients  based  on  EFMC’s  decisions  through  either  the  Zhaoyang  District 
Finance  Bureau  or  the  Ludian  County  Finance  Bureau  (and  relevant  town  or  township  finance 
bureau,  as  necessary).  For the  ADB  loan,  following  the  schedule  for  ADB’s  contributions  to the 
eco-compensation  fund (CNY10 million/year  in 2023, 2024, and 2025 and CNY5 million in 2026) 
at the beginning of each year, the YWPCO, with endorsement of the ZCFB, will request the YPFD 
to disburse necessary  loan amount  from the advance  account  to the eco-compensation  fund, as 
advance. The YWPCO will issue to ADB an official document as a certificate for each contribution 
of the ADB loan to the eco-compensation  fund. 
33 Estimate  of  Expenditure  sheet  is  available  in  Appendix  8A  of  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  (2017,  as 
amended  from time to time),  
27 
Statement  of  expenditure  procedure.34  The  SOE  procedure  may  be  used  for 
40. 
reimbursement  of  eligible  expenditures  or  liquidation  of  advances  to  the  advance  account.   
Supporting  documents  and  records  for  the  expenditures  claimed  under  the  SOE  should  be 
maintained  and made  readily  available  for review  by  ADB’s  disbursement  and review  missions, 
upon  ADB’s  request  for  submission  of  supporting  documents  on  a  sampling  basis,  and  for 
independent  audit.  
41. 
Before the submission  of the first withdrawal application,  the YPFD should submit to ADB 
sufficient  evidence  of the authority  of  the person(s)  who  will sign  the withdrawal  applications  on 
behalf  of  the  YPFD,  together  with  the  authenticated  specimen  signatures  of  each  authorized 
person.  The  minimum  value  per  withdrawal  application  is  stipulated  in  the  Loan  Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time). Individual payments below such amount should 
be  paid  (i)  by  the  ZCG,  the  ZDG,  or  the  LCG;  and  subsequently  claimed  to  ADB  through 
reimbursement;  or (ii) through  the advance  fund procedure,  unless  otherwise  accepted  by ADB. 
The  ZCG  and  the  YPFD  should  ensure  sufficient  category  and  contract  balances  before 
requesting  disbursements.  Use of ADB’s  Client  Portal  for Disbursements  system  is encouraged 
for submission  of withdrawal applications  to ADB. 35  
2. 
Disbursement  Arrangements  for Counterpart  Fund 
The ZCG,  the ZDG,  and the LCG  will timely  provide  counterpart  funds  for works;  goods; 
42. 
project  preparation,  procurement,  supervision,  and  audit;  LAR;  ethnic  minority  development; 
education,  capacity  development,  and public  awareness  raising;  and contingencies  as specified 
in the  loan  and  project  agreements.  The ZCG,  the  ZDG,  and  the LCG  will  disburse  counterpart 
funds  to contractors,  suppliers,  service  providers,  people  affected  by the  LAR, and  others  (e.g., 
villagers participating  in pilot eco-villages).   
43. 
The  YWPCO  of the ZCG,  the Water  Resources  Bureau  of the ZDG,  and  the Investment 
Service  Center  of the LCG  will prepare  annual  disbursement  projections  and  make requests  for 
annual allocations of counterpart funds for the project. The requests will be reviewed in the ZCG, 
the ZDG, or the LCG; and approved by the city, district, or county people’s congresses.  Based on 
actual  incurrence  of  costs,  the  ZCFB  and  the  respective  Finance  Bureaus  of  the  ZDG  and  the 
LCG  will  disburse  counterpart  funds  to the  YWPCO,  the  Water  Resources  Bureau  of  the  ZDG, 
and the Investment  Service Center of the LCG, respectively,  at their requests.   
C. 
Accounting 
44. 
The ZCG will maintain, or cause to be maintained, separate books and records by funding 
source for all expenditures  incurred on the project, following the Accounting Methods for Projects 
Financed  by  the  World  Bank  (reference  No.  2000  [13]).36  The  ZCG  will  prepare  consolidated 
project financial statements in accordance with the government’s accounting laws and regulations 
which are consistent with the international  accounting  principles  and practices. 
34 SOE forms are  available  in Appendix  7B and  7D of ADB’s Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  (2017,  as  amended  from 
time to time). 
35 ADB’s Client  Portal  for Disbursements  facilitates  online  submission  of the withdrawal  applications  to ADB, resulting 
in 
the  Borrower  are  available  online  at 
to  be  completed  by 
https://www.adb.org/documents/client-portal-disbursements-guide.      
faster  disbursement.  The 
forms 
36 Accounting regulations  issued  by the Ministry of Finance for all foreign aid-funded  projects. 
28 
D. 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
45. 
The ZCG will consolidate  all financial  information  of the YWPCO, the ZDG, the LCG, and 
the utilization  of the eco-compensation  fund into one  set of detailed  project  financial  statements 
and  cause  the  Yunnan  Provincial  Audit  Department  in  the  Yunnan  Provincial  Government, 
authorized by the National Audit Department of the PRC, to audit the consolidated detailed project 
financial  statements  in  accordance  with  the  PRC’s  auditing  standards.  The  audited  project 
financial  statements  for the whole project  together  with the auditor’s  opinion will be presented  in 
the English language to ADB within 6 months from the end of the fiscal year by the ZCG.  
46. 
The audit report for the project financial  statements  will include a management  letter and 
auditor’s  opinions,  which  cover  (i)  whether  the  project  financial  statements  present  an accurate 
and  fair  view  or  are  presented  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  in  accordance  with  the  applicable 
financial reporting standards; (ii) whether the proceeds of the loan were used only for the purposes 
of the project; and (iii) whether the ZCG was in compliance  with the financial covenants contained 
in the legal agreements. 
47. 
Compliance with financial reporting and auditing requirements will be monitored by review 
missions  and during  normal  program  supervision,  and  followed  up regularly  with all  concerned, 
including the external auditor. 
48. 
The ZCG, the ZDG,  and the LCG have been  made aware of ADB’s  approach  to delayed 
submission  and  the  requirements  for  satisfactory  and  acceptable  quality  of  the  audited  project 
financial  statements.37  ADB  reserves  the  right  to  require  a  change  in  the  auditor  (in  a  manner 
consistent  with  the  constitution  of  the  borrower);  or  for  additional  support  to  be  provided  to  the 
auditor,  if the audits  required  are not conducted  in a manner  satisfactory  to ADB; or if the audits 
are  substantially  delayed.  ADB  reserves  the  right  to  verify  the  project’s  financial  accounts  to 
confirm  that  the  share  of  ADB’s  financing  is  used  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  policies  and 
procedures. 
49. 
Public disclosure of the audited project financial statements, including the auditor’s opinion 
on the project  financial statements,  will be guided by ADB’s Access to Information  Policy.38 After 
the  review,  ADB  will  disclose  the  audited  project  financial  statements  and  the  opinion  of  the 
auditors  on the project financial  statements  not later than 14 days of ADB’s  confirmation  of their 
acceptability  by posting them on ADB’s website.  The management  letter and additional auditor’s 
opinions will not be disclosed.39 
37 ADB’s approach  and procedures  regarding  delayed submission  of audited  project  financial statements:   
(i)  When  audited  project  financial  statements  are  not  received  by the  due  date,  ADB will  write  to  the  executing 
agency  advising  that  (a)  the  audit  documents  are  overdue;  and  (b)  if  they are  not  received  within  the  next  6 
months,  requests  for new contract awards  and disbursement  such as new replenishment  of advance accounts, 
processing  of new reimbursement,  and  issuance  of new commitment letters  will not be processed. 
(ii)  When audited  project financial statements  are not received within 6 months after the due date, ADB will withhold 
processing  of  requests  for  new  contract  awards  and  disbursement  such  as  new  replenishment  of  advance 
accounts,  processing  of new reimbursement,  and  issuance  of new commitment letters.  ADB will  (a) inform the 
executing  agency of ADB’s  actions;  and (b) advise  that the  loan  may be suspended  if the  audit  documents are 
not received within the next 6 months. 
(iii)  When  audited  project  financial  statements  are  not  received  within  12  months  after  the  due  date,  ADB  may 
suspend  the loan. 
38 Available  at: https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/450636/access-information-policy.pdf. 
39 This type of information would generally  fall under access to information policy exceptions  to disclosure.  ADB. 2018. 
Access to Information  Policy. Paragraph  17 (iv)− (vi). 
29 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT  AND CONSULTING  SERVICES 
A. 
Advance Contracting  and Retroactive  Financing 
All  advance  contracting  and  retroactive  financing  will  be  undertaken  in  conformity  with 
50. 
ADB’s  Procurement  Policy  (2017, as amended  from  time to time) and Procurement  Regulations 
for  ADB  Borrowers  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time).40 The  issuance  of  invitations  to  bid 
under advance contracting and retroactive financing  will be subject to ADB’s approval. The ZCG, 
the ZDG,  and the  LCG have  been advised  that  approval  of advance  contracting  and retroactive 
financing does not commit ADB to finance the project. 
51. 
Advance  contracting.  Advance  contracting  will  apply to consulting  services  for (i) initial 
project  management  support  by  individual  consultants  (package  numbers  T1,  T2,  and  T3; 
recruitment  method:  individual  consultant  selection);  (ii) project  management  support  consultant 
team  (package  number  T4; recruitment  method:  quality-  and  cost-based  selection  [QCBS]);  (iii) 
external  resettlement  and  social  M&E  agency  (package  number  T5;  recruitment  method: 
consultants’  qualifications  selection);  and  (iv)  technical  assistance  consultant  team  (package 
number T7; recruitment  method: QCBS). 
52. 
Retroactive  financing.  Retroactive  financing will apply to the recruitment  of consultants. 
Retroactive financing  will be subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the loan amount 
for eligible expenditures  incurred prior to loan effectiveness, but not earlier than 12 months before 
the loan agreement  is signed.   
B. 
Procurement  of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services 
53. 
Procurements  of  all  works  and  goods  to  be  funded  by  ADB  and  recruitment  of  all 
consultants to be financed by ADB will be undertaken in accordance with the  Procurement  Policy 
(2017,  as amended  from time  to time)  and  Procurement  Regulations  for  ADB Borrowers  (2017, 
as amended  from time to time), (footnote 40).  
The project has a total of 37 contract packages to be financed by ADB, including 23 works 
54. 
contracts;  7 goods contracts; and 7 consulting  services contracts.   
55. 
Open competitive bidding. Open competitive bidding (OCB) with national advertisement 
will be used for all 30 works and goods contract packages.  For procurement  under the OCB with 
national advertisement: (i) an advertisement will be published on a national press, official gazette,   
or free and publicly accessible website, as well as on the national e-procurement  information and 
monitoring  portal  at  cebpubservice.com;  (ii)  the  PRC’s  specific  standard  bidding  documents 
(accepted  by ADB, as updated  in 2020) will be used unless  otherwise  agreed between  the ZCG 
and  ADB; and  (iii) documents  for bidding  and  contract  will only  be in Chinese  language  (except 
for  documents  which  require  ADB’s  review  and  approval),  and  the  currencies  for  bidding  and 
payment will be in Chinese yuan (CNY) unless otherwise agreed between the ZCG and ADB. The 
relevant  sections  of  ADB’s  Anticorruption  Policy  (1998,  as  amended  from  time  to  time)  will  be 
included in all procurement  documents  and contracts.41 
Consulting  services. 
56. 
Individual  consultant  selection  method  will  be  applied  to 
recruitments  of  three  individual  consultants  for  initial  project  management  support  (package 
40 https://www.adb.org/documents/adb-procurement-policy. 
41 http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Anticorruption-Integrity/default.asp 
30 
numbers  T1,  T2,  and  T3;  inputs:  3.00  person-months  [pm]  of  national  inputs  for  each  contract 
package);  QCBS  method  with  a  quality–cost  ratio  of  90:10  will  be  applied  to  recruitments  of  a 
project  management  support  consultant  team  (package  number  T4;  inputs:  13.00  pm  of 
international  and  46.50  pm  of  national  inputs),  and  a  consultant  team  for  rural  water  pollution 
management  and eco-compensation  (package  number T7; inputs: 12.00 pm of international  and 
62.25  pm  of national  inputs);  and  consultants’  qualifications  selection  method  will be  applied  to 
recruitments  of  an  external  resettlement  and  social  M&E  agency  (package  number  T5;  inputs: 
27.00  pm of  national  inputs),  and  an external  environmental  monitoring  agency  (EMA;  package 
number T6; inputs: 14.00 pm of national inputs). 
57. 
ADB review. There are two ADB review procedures  for procurement of works and goods: 
prior  review  and  post  review  (sampling).  For  contract  packages  for  prior  review,  each  step  of 
bidding  (bidding document,  bid evaluation  report,  draft negotiated  contract,  and signed contract) 
needs  ADB’s prior  review and  approval.  For contract  packages  for post-review  (sampling),  ADB 
reviews the bid evaluation report and signed contract after the contract is signed; and on sampling 
basis.  Under  the  project,  contract  packages  for  works  and  goods  for  prior  review  are  the  first 
works and first goods contract packages to be procured by the LCG; the first works and first goods 
contract packages to be procured by the ZDG; and the first and only good contract package to be 
procured by the YWPCO. All the other contract packages for works and goods are for post-review 
(sampling).  Regarding  consulting  services,  all  contract  packages  are  for  prior  review.  Each 
sample size should cover at least 20% of the total number of the post review (sampling) contracts 
awarded  before  the  initial  post  review  (sampling),  or  between  two  consecutive  post  reviews 
(sampling).  Total  sample  size aggregated  should capture  contracts  representing  (i) about  30%–
50%  of total  project  value  and  (ii) about  20%  of the  total  number  of  contracts  identified  for post 
review (sampling). It should ensure that, to the extent possible, all types of contracts are included 
in the sample. 
58. 
Procurement  principles  for eco-compensation  fund.  The eco-compensation  fund will 
provide  grants for (i) wastewater  management,  solid  waste management,  activities  for pilot eco-
villages,  the  O&M  of  the  constructed  wetlands,  compensation  for  the  farmland-to-forest 
conversion,  and promotion  of low-emission  agriculture  under  Output  1; (ii) operation  of  the river 
protection  model  established  under  Output  2;  (iii)  implementation  of  the  horizontal  eco-
compensation  mechanisms under Output 3; and (iv) management of the eco-compensation  fund; 
but not to finance any civil works. Even if recipients of the grants (relevant government  agencies 
and  a  private  company  to  operate  a  wastewater  treatment  plant  in  Ludian  County  based  on  a 
contract with the LCG) procure goods for the above-mentioned  activities, the size of each contract 
package  will  be  quite  small.  If  procurement  is  required,  the  grant  recipients  will  conduct 
procurement  following their own procedures; but should address the core procurement principles 
as stated in ADB’s  Procurement  Policy  and adopt appropriate  procedures,  including  (i) payment 
of reasonable  prices; and (ii) fair canvassing when selecting  suppliers. All grant recipients  will be 
encouraged  to procure  all  goods  through  competitive  bidding  when  it is most  appropriate  in the 
interest  of  economy  and  efficiency.  The YWPCO  should  monitor  the  procurement  and report  to 
ADB  if  there  occurs  any  inconsistency  with  ADB’s  core  procurement  principles  and  the  PRC’s 
procurement  laws. 
C. 
Procurement  Plan 
59. 
The procurement  plan shall be updated  as needed throughout  the duration  of the project. 
31 
Basic Data 
Project Name: Yunnan Sayu River Basin Rural Water Pollution Management and Eco-Compensation 
Demonstration Project 
Project Number: 52025-001 
Country:  People’s Republic of China 
Project Procurement Classification: B 
Procurement Risk: Moderate 
Approval Number: XXX 
Executing Agency: Zhaotong City Government 
Implementing Agency: Yudong Reservoir Water 
Resources Protection Committee Office, Zhaoyang 
District Government, and Ludian County Government 
Project Closing Date: 31 December 2026 
Project Financing Amount: $234.61 million 
   ADB Financing: $100.00 million 
   Non-ADB Financing: $134.61 million 
Date of First Procurement Plan:  
6 August 2020 
Date of this Procurement Plan: 6 August 2020 
1. 
Methods,  Review, and Procurement  Plan 
a. 
Procurement  and Consultant  Recruitment  Methods 
Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the following methods shall apply to procurement of 
60. 
goods and works and recruitment  of consultants. 
Method 
Open Competitive Bidding 
with National Advertisement 
Method 
Quality- and Cost-Based 
Selection 
Consultants’ Qualifications 
Selection 
Individual Consultant 
Selection 
Procurement of Goods and Works 
For all 30 works and goods contract packages 
Comments 
Consulting Services 
Comments 
For recruitments of a project management support consultant team 
(package number T4) and a consultant team for rural water pollution 
management and eco-compensation (package number T7), (a quality–
cost ratio of 90:10 for both packages) 
For recruitments of an external resettlement and social monitoring and 
evaluation agency (package number T5) and an external 
environmental monitoring agency (package number T6) 
For recruitments of three individual consultants for initial project 
management support (package numbers T1, T2, and T3)  
b. 
Goods and Works Contracts  Estimated to Cost $1 Million or More 
The following table lists goods and works contracts over the life of the project to cost more 
61. 
than $1 million. 
Package 
Number 
C1 
C2 
General Description 
Wastewater  management 
systems and manure collection 
tanks in Xinjie  Town in Ludian 
County 
Wastewater  management 
systems and manure collection 
tanks in Shuimo Town in Ludian 
County  
Estimated 
Value 
($ million) 
6.236 
Procurement 
Method 
OCB (NA) 
6.309 
OCB (NA) 
Review 
(Prior/Post 
[Sampling]) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Bidding 
Procedure 
1S1E 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Q1 2021 
Comments 
1S1E 
Q1 2021 
32 
General Description 
Wastewater  management 
systems and manure collection 
tanks in Longshu  Town in Ludian 
County (area 1) 
Wastewater  management 
systems and manure collection 
tanks in Longshu  Town in Ludian 
County (area 2) 
Solid  waste transfer stations  and 
garbage  pyrolysis  facility in 
Ludian  County 
Basic infrastructure for eco-
village  in Xinjie Town in Ludian 
County 
Basic infrastructure for eco-
village  in Longshu  Town in 
Ludian  County 
Basic infrastructure for eco-
village  in Shuimo Town in Ludian 
County 
New wetlands  in Zhongheba  and 
Dazhaizi  Wetlands  in Longshu 
Town in Ludian  County 
New wetlands  in Xiaohebian 
Wetland  in Shuimo Town and 
Longxiang  and  Longshu 
Wetlands  in Longshu  in Ludian 
County 
Afforestation,  perennial  herb 
planting,  and irrigation  facilities in 
Ludian  County 
Basic infrastructure for low-
emission  agriculture  promotion in 
in Longshu  Town in Ludian 
County 
Basic infrastructure for low-
emission  agriculture  promotion in 
Shuimo Town in Ludian  County 
Wastewater  management 
systems and manure collection 
tanks in Zhaoyang  District 
Basic infrastructure for low-
emission  agriculture  promotion in 
Zhaoyang  District 
Ecological  embankment in 
Longshu  River tributaries  in 
Longshu  Town in Ludian  County 
(area 1) 
Ecological  embankment in 
Longshu  River tributaries  in 
Longshu  Town in Ludian  County 
(area 2) 
Ecological  embankment in small 
rivers in Sujia Township  in 
Zhaoyang  District (area 1) 
Ecological  embankment 
construction  in small rivers in 
Sujia  Township  in Zhaoyang 
Package 
Number 
C3 
C4 
C5 
C6 
C7 
C8 
C9 
C10 
C11 
C12 
C13 
C14 
C17 
C18 
C19 
C20 
C21 
Estimated 
Value 
($ million) 
13.543 
Procurement 
Method 
OCB (NA) 
4.734 
OCB (NA) 
1.342 
OCB (NA) 
3.809 
OCB (NA) 
3.011 
OCB (NA) 
3.073 
OCB (NA) 
4.983 
OCB (NA) 
3.243 
OCB (NA) 
Review 
(Prior/Post 
[Sampling]) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Bidding 
Procedure 
1S1E 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Q1 2021 
Comments 
1S1E 
Q1 2021 
1S1E 
Q3 2021 
1S1E 
Q1 2023 
1S1E 
Q1 2023 
1S1E 
Q1 2023 
1S1E 
Q3 2021 
1S1E 
Q3 2023 
First works 
contract for 
LCG  
First works 
contract for 
ZDG 
7.123 
OCB (NA) 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q4 2020 
4.745 
OCB (NA) 
1.838 
OCB (NA) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
1S1E 
Q1 2022 
1S1E 
Q1 2022 
7.576 
OCB (NA) 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q4 2020 
2.765 
OCB (NA) 
5.541 
OCB (NA) 
6.786 
OCB (NA) 
4.987 
OCB (NA) 
4.173 
OCB (NA) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
1S1E 
Q1 2023 
1S1E 
Q3 2023 
1S1E 
Q3 2021 
1S1E 
Q3 2023 
1S1E 
Q3 2023 
Package 
Number 
C22 
C23 
G2 
G4 
General Description 
District (area 2) 
Ecological  embankment 
construction  in small rivers in 
Sayu Town and Leju  Township  in 
Zhaoyang  District 
Ecological  embankment 
construction  in a Longshu  River 
tributary in Dazhaizi  Township  in 
Zhaoyang  District 
Equipment  for garbage  pyrolysis 
facility in Ludian  County 
Equipment  for information 
management  and water 
monitoring  systems 
Estimated 
Value 
($ million) 
Procurement 
Method 
5.059 
OCB (NA) 
4.737 
OCB (NA) 
Review 
(Prior/Post 
[Sampling]) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
33 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Comments 
1S1E 
Q3 2023 
1S1E 
Q3 2023 
2.008 
OCB (NA) 
1.249 
OCB (NA) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Prior 
1S1E 
1S1E 
Q4 2021 
Q2 2021 
First and 
only goods 
contract for 
the 
YWPCO 
LCG = Ludian  County Government, NA = national  advertisement,  OCB = open  competitive bidding,  Q = quarter,  YWPCO = Yudong  Reservoir 
Water Resources  Protection  Committee Office, ZDG = Zhaoyang District Government,  1S1E = one stage-one  envelope. 
c. 
Consulting  Services Contracts  Estimated  to Cost $100,000 or More 
The  following  table  lists  consulting  services  contracts  over  the  life  of  the  project  to  cost 
62. 
more than $100,000. All consulting services  contracts are for ADB’s prior review. 
Package 
Number 
T4 
T5 
T7 
General Description 
Project management  support  consultant 
team 
External resettlement  and social 
development  M&E agency 
Consultant  team for rural water pollution 
management  and eco-compensation 
Estimated 
Value 
($ million) 
0.802 
Recruitment 
Method 
QCBS 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Q2 2020 
Type of 
Proposal 
STP 
0.217 
CQS 
Q2 2020 
BTP 
1.000 
QCBS 
Q2 2020 
STP 
Comments 
For advance 
contracting 
For advance 
contracting  and 
retroactive financing 
For advance 
contracting 
BTP = biodata  technical proposal,  CQS = consultants’  qualifications  selection,  M&E = monitoring  and evaluation,  Q = quarter,  QCBS = quality- 
and cost-based  selection,  STP = simple  technical proposal. 
d. 
Goods  and  Works  Contracts  Estimated  to  Cost  Less  than  $1  Million 
and Consulting Services Contracts Less than $100,000 (Smaller Value 
Contracts) 
The following  table groups  smaller-value  goods  and works contracts  to cost less than $1 
63. 
million and consulting services  contracts to cost less than $100,000 for the life of the project. 
Goods and Works  
Package 
Number 
C15 
C16 
General Description 
Solid  waste transfer station  and 
garbage  pyrolysis  facility in 
Zhaoyang  District 
New wetland  construction  in 
Xinhe  Wetland  in Leju Township 
in Zhaoyang  District 
Estimated 
Value 
($ million) 
0.827 
Procurement 
Method 
OCB (NA) 
0.560 
OCB (NA) 
Review 
(Prior/Post 
[Sampling]) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Bidding 
Procedure 
1S1E 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Q4 2021 
Comments 
1S1E 
Q1 2022 
34 
Goods and Works  
Package 
Number 
G1 
G3 
G5 
G6 
G7 
General Description 
Equipment  for wastewater 
management  system in Ludian 
County 
Equipment  for garbage 
collection,  compression,  and 
transfer in Ludian  County 
Equipment  for wastewater 
management  systems in 
Zhaoyang  District 
Equipment  for garbage  pyrolysis 
facility in Zhaoyang  District 
Equipment  for garbage 
collection,  compression,  and 
transfer in Zhaoyang  District 
Estimated 
Value 
($ million) 
0.481 
Procurement 
Method 
OCB (NA) 
Review 
(Prior/Post 
[Sampling]) 
Prior 
Bidding 
Procedure 
1S1E 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Q3 2021 
0.957 
OCB (NA) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
1S1E 
Q4 2021 
0.301 
OCB (NA) 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q3 2021 
0.717 
OCB (NA) 
0.360 
OCB (NA) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
Post 
(Sampling) 
1S1E 
1S1E 
Q1 2022 
Q1 2022 
Comments 
First goods 
contract for 
LCG 
First goods 
contract for 
ZDG 
LCG  =  Ludian  County  Government,  NA  =  national  advertisement,  OCB  =  open  competitive  bidding,  Q =  quarter,  ZDG =  Zhaoyang  District 
Government, 1S1E = one stage-one  envelope. 
Consulting Services 
Package 
Number 
T1 
T2 
T3 
General Description 
Initial  project management  support  by 
individual  consultant  (procurement  and project 
management) 
Initial  project management  support  by 
individual  consultant  (environment) 
Estimated 
Value 
($ million) 
0.028 
Recruitment 
Method 
ICS 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Q2 2020 
Type of 
Proposal 
NA 
0.028 
ICS 
Q2 2020 
NA 
Initial  project management  support  by 
individual  consultant  (social) 
0.028 
ICS 
Q2 2020 
NA 
Comments 
For advance 
contracting 
and retroactive 
financing 
For advance 
contracting 
and retroactive 
financing 
For advance 
contracting 
and retroactive 
financing 
T6 
External environmental  monitoring  agency 
0.097 
BTP = biodata  technical proposal,  CQS = consultants’  qualifications  selection,  ICS = individual  consultant  selection,  NA = not applicable,  Q = 
quarter. 
Q1 2021 
CQS 
BTP 
2. 
List of Awarded  and Ongoing,  and Completed  Contracts   
64. 
The following tables list the awarded  and ongoing contracts  and completed contracts. 
a. 
Awarded and Ongoing  Contracts 
Goods and Works  
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
($ million) 
Consulting Services 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
($ million) 
Actual 
Contract 
Value 
($ million) 
Actual 
Contract 
Value 
($ million) 
Procurement 
Method 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Date of ADB 
Approval of 
Contract 
Award 
Comments 
Recruitment 
Method 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Date of ADB 
Approval of 
Contract 
Award 
Comments 
b. 
Completed  Contracts 
Goods and Works  
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
($ million) 
Contract 
Value 
($ million) 
Procurement 
Method 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Consulting Services 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
($ million) 
Contract 
Value 
($ million) 
Recruitment 
Method 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
35 
Date of 
ADB 
Approval 
of 
Contract 
Award 
Date of 
ADB 
Approval 
of 
Contract 
Award 
Date of 
Completion  Comments 
Date of 
Completion  Comments 
3. 
Non-ADB  Financing 
The  following  table  lists  goods,  works,  consulting  services,  and  other  services  contracts 
65. 
over the life of the project, financed by non-ADB sources. 
Goods and Works 
General Description 
Wastewater  treatment  plant  in Longshu  Town in Ludian 
County 
Ecological  embankment in Longshu  River tributaries  in 
Ludian  County 
Ecological  embankment in Longshu  River in Ludian  County 
Equipment  for one wastewater  treatment facility in Ludian 
County 
Equipment  for 18 wastewater  treatment  facilities in the 
Zhaoyang  District 
Consulting Services  and other services 
General Description 
Design  institutes 
Estimated  Value 
(cumulative) 
($ million) 
5.563 
Estimated 
Number of 
Contracts 
1 
Procurement 
Method 
Comments 
Domestic method  Contract completed 
13.530 
29.540 
0.076 
1.379 
2 
1 
1 
1 
Domestic method 
Domestic method  Contract completed 
Domestic method  Contract completed 
Domestic method  Contract completed 
Estimated  Value 
(cumulative) 
($ million) 
10.377 
Estimated 
Number of 
Contracts 
3 
Recruitment 
Method 
Comments 
Domestic method  Contracts awarded 
and ongoing 
Procurement agency 
Quality testing  company for Ludian  County 
Quality testing  company for Zhaoyang  District 
Construction  supervision  companies  for Ludian  County 
Construction  supervision  companies  for Zhaoyang  District 
Operation  of a wastewater  treatment  plant and  conduct of 
solid  waste management 
0.340 
0.183 
0.159 
1.659 
0.540 
0.000 
1 
1 
1 
4 
4 
3 
Domestic method 
Domestic method 
Domestic method 
Domestic method 
Domestic method 
Domestic method 
For public-private-
partnership 
36 
Open Competitive  Bidding (with National Advertisement) 
1. 
Regulation  and Reference  Documents 
The  procedures  to be  followed  for the  OCB  (with  national  advertisement)  shall be  those 
66. 
set  forth  in ADB’s  Procurement  Policy  (2017,  as amended  from  time  to  time)  and  Procurement 
Regulations  for  ADB  Borrowers  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),  (footnote  40);  the 
Government Procurement  Law of the People’s Republic of China approved on 29 June 2002; and 
Law of the People’s  Republic  of China  on Bid Invitation  and Bidding  of the People’s  Republic  of 
China promulgated  on 30 August  1999, with the clarifications  and modifications  described  in the 
following paragraphs.  Any relevant type of standard bidding documents issued by ADB (2018) or 
the PRC on specific standard bidding documents for goods and works accepted by ADB (updated 
in 2020) shall be used.    
2. 
Procurement  Procedures   
a. 
Competitive  Bidding  Procedure  (Procurement  Law  Art. 26  and  Law  on 
Bidding Art. 10) 
Public  tendering  is  the  acceptable  method  of  government  procurement,  and  public 
67. 
invitation is the accepted  bid invitation  mode.  
b.  
Eligibility   
The  eligibility  of  bidders  shall  be  as  defined  under  section  I  of  the  Procurement 
68. 
Regulations;  and  accordingly,  no  bidder  or  potential  bidder  should  be  declared  ineligible  for 
reasons other than those provided  in section I of the Regulations,  as amended from time to time. 
c. 
Advertising 
69. 
All invitations  to prequalify  or to bid shall  be advertised  in the national press  (China Daily 
Newspaper)  or  a  free  and  open  access  website  (China  Tendering  &  Bidding  Public  Service 
Platform).  Such  advertisement  shall  be made  in sufficient  time for  prospective  bidders  to  obtain 
prequalification  or bidding  documents  and  prepare  and  submit  their  responses.  In any  event,  a 
minimum preparation period of twenty-eight (28) days shall be given. The preparation period shall 
count  (a)  from  the  date  of  advertisement;  or  (b)  when  the  documents  are  available  for  issue, 
whichever  date is later. The advertisement  and the prequalification  and bidding documents  shall 
specify the deadline for such submission. 
d. 
Bidding Period 
70. 
The minimum bidding period is 28 days prior to the deadline for the submission  of bids. 
e. 
Participation  by Government-Owned  Enterprises 
Government-owned  enterprises  in the borrower’s  country  may be permitted  to bid if they 
71. 
can  establish  that they  (i) are  legally  and financially  autonomous,  (ii) operate  under  commercial 
law, and (iii) are not a dependent  agency of the borrower  and/or the project executing  agency. 
f. 
Rebidding 
72. 
Re-bidding  shall not be allowed solely because the number of bids is less than three (3). 
37 
3. 
Bidding Documents   
g. 
Qualification  Requirements 
73. 
Qualification  requirements  of  bidders  and  the  method  of  evaluating  the  qualification  of 
each  bidder  shall  be  specified  in  detail  in  the  bidding  documents;  and  in  the  prequalification 
documents  if the bidding is preceded  by a prequalification  process.  
h. 
Bid Submission  and Opening 
74. 
Bidders shall be allowed  to submit bids by mail or by hand. 
75. 
All  bids shall  be  opened  in public,  and  all  bidders  shall  be afforded  an opportunity  to be 
present (either  in person  or through  their representatives)  at the time of bid opening;  but bidders 
shall not be required to be present at the bid opening. 
i. 
Bid Evaluation and Award 
76. 
No  bid  may  be  rejected  solely  on  the basis  that  the  bid  price  falls  outside  any  standard 
contract  estimate,  or margin,  or bracket  of  average  bids established  by the  borrower  and/or  the 
project executing  agency. 
77. 
Each  contract  shall  be  awarded  to  the  lowest  evaluated  responsive  bidder;  that  is,  the 
bidder who meets the appropriate standards of capability and resources, and whose bid has been 
determined (i) to be substantially responsive  to the bidding documents; and (ii) to offer the lowest 
evaluated  cost. The  winning  bidder  shall  not be  required,  as  a condition  of  award,  to undertake 
responsibilities  for work not stipulated  in the bidding documents  or otherwise to modify the bid as 
originally submitted. 
j.  
ADB Policy Clauses  
78. 
Each contract financed with the proceeds of the Loan shall provide  that the suppliers and 
contractors  shall permit  ADB, at its request,  to inspect  their accounts  and records  relating to the 
performance of the contract and to have said accounts and records audited by auditors appointed 
by ADB. 
79. 
A  provision  shall  be  included  in  all  bidding  documents  (with  national  advertisement)  for 
works and goods contracts  financed by ADB, stating that the borrower shall reject a proposal for 
award  if it determines  that  the bidder  recommended  for award  has,  either directly  or through  an 
agent,  engaged  in corrupt,  fraudulent,  collusive,  coercive,  or obstructive  practices  in competing 
for the contract in question. 
A  provision  shall  be  included  in  all  bidding  documents  for  the  OCB  (with  national 
80. 
advertisement)  for  works  and goods  contracts  financed  by  ADB, stating  that  ADB  will declare  a 
firm  or  individual  ineligible,  either  indefinitely  or  for  a  stated  period,  to  be  awarded  a  contract 
financed  by  ADB,  if  it  at  any  time  determines  that  the  firm  or  individual  has,  either  directly  or 
through an agent, engaged  in corrupt, fraudulent,  collusive,  coercive, or obstructive  practices; or 
any integrity violation in competing for, or in executing, ADB-financed  contract.   
D. 
Consultant’s  Terms of Reference 
Indicative terms of reference for consulting services to be funded by ADB are in Appendix 
81. 
2. 
38 
A. 
Environment   
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
Institutional  arrangements  for environmental  safeguards.  The project is classified by 
82. 
ADB as Category  A for environment.  Environmental  safeguard  assessments  and documents  for 
the  project  comprise  (i) an  environmental  impact  assessment  (EIA),  including  an  environmental 
management  plan  (EMP);  and  (ii)  the  ESMS.  The  EMP  covers  all  project  components,  except 
Output  3:  Eco-compensation  mechanism  for  the  Sayu  River  Basin  established.  Safeguards  for 
the eco-compensation  fund will be managed  under the ESMS.  Appendix  4 includes  draft  ESMS 
to be finalized by the EFMC with prior approval by ADB and the ZCG. The EIA, the EMP, and the 
ESMS have  been prepared  in compliance  with ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy Statement  (SPS,  2009). 
For  all  project  matters  relating  to  environmental  safeguards,  the  EIA,  the  EMP,  and  the  ESMS 
form the basis of the loan and project agreements. 
A-1.  Environmental  Management  Plan 
83. 
Content  of  the  environmental  management  plan.  The  EMP  in  Appendix  3  (also  in 
Appendix  1  of the  EIA)  describes  the  (i)  environmental  safeguard  objectives  for  the  project;  (ii) 
roles  and  responsibilities  for  the  EMP  implementation;  (iii)  mitigation  measures;  (iv)  inspection, 
monitoring, and reporting arrangements; (v) training and institutional  strengthening;  (vi) a project-
specific  grievance  redress  mechanism 
(GRM);  (vii)  public  consultation  during  project 
implementation;  and  (viii)  a  feedback  and  adjustment  mechanism.  The  EMP  identifies  specific 
roles  and  responsibilities  for  all  agencies  that  will  be  involved  in  the  EMP  implementation, 
including  the  ZCG,  the  LCG,  the  ZDG,  contractors,  the  construction  supervision  companies 
(CSCs), and operators of facilities constructed under the project. Mitigation measures are tailored 
to project-specific  conditions  and  risks  identified  in  the EIA.  The  scope  and  content  of the  EMP 
comply  with  ADB’s  SPS  for  environmental  safeguards  and  the  PRC’s  environmental  laws  and 
regulations.  All agencies  involved in the project are required to comply  with the EMP. 
84. 
Environmental  management  plan implementation.  The EMP will be implemented in all 
phases  of  the  project:  design,  pre-construction,  construction,  and  operation.  The  ZCG  will  be 
responsible  for  ensuring  that  facilities  under  the  project  will  be  designed,  constructed, 
decommissioned,  and  operated  in  accordance  with  (i)  the  national  and  local  governments’ 
environmental,  health, and safety  laws, regulations,  procedures,  and  guidelines;  (ii)  ADB’s SPS; 
and (iii) the EIA, including the EMP. The ZCG, through the PMO, holds final responsibility  for the 
compliance  with the EMP. 
85. 
For preparation  of preliminary  designs  for the project,  the PMO will forward the EMP to a 
design institute which will prepare the preliminary designs.42 Environment officers of the PMO and 
the local  PMOs  (LPMOs)  and an  initial project  management  support  consultant  for environment 
will  work  with  the  design  institute  to  ensure  that  safeguard  risks  identified  in  the  EMP  are 
considered  in  the  preliminary  designs;  and  avoided,  minimized,  or  mitigated.  The  EMP  will  be 
updated  based on the preliminary  design,  as needed.  To ensure that contractors  respond to the 
EMP requirements,  the PMO and the LPMOs will prepare and provide the following  specification 
clauses  for  incorporation  into  bidding  documents  and  contracts  for  works:  (i)  a  list  of 
environmental  management  requirements  to  be  budgeted  by  bidders  in  their  proposals;  (ii) 
environmental  clauses  for contractual  terms and conditions;  and (iii) domestic EIA and the  ADB-
version EIA (including  the updated  EMP) for compliance.  All bidders for works will be required to 
42 Preliminary designs  in the PRC are equivalent  to detailed  designs  in other  countries. 
39 
include  and  fully  address  the  EMP  requirements,  especially  the  mitigation  and  monitoring 
measures. 
86. 
Personnel.  The EMP will be coordinated  by the following  personnel:  (i) one full-time and 
qualified environment officer of the PMO appointed by the ZCG, who will be responsible for overall 
coordination  for  the  EMP;  (ii) two  full-time  environment  officers  of  the LPMOs  appointed  by the 
LCG and the ZDG, who will lead daily coordination for the EMP at the site level; and will coordinate 
closely  with the PMO environment  officer.  The environment  officers  of the PMO  and the LPMOs 
will  be  supported  in  their  roles  by  (i)  an  initial  project  management  support  consultant  for 
environment to provide interim support to the PMO and the LPMOs before a project management 
support  consultant  team  is  recruited;  (ii)  a  national  environmental  specialist  in  the  project 
management  support consultant  team; and (iii) an external EMA. The consultants will support the 
environment  officers of the PMO and the LPMOs  in the establishment  and implementation  of the 
EMP,  including  the  assessments  to decide  whether  the  preliminary  designs  are  consistent  with 
the scope of the feasibility study report and the EMP; or whether new safeguard assessments are 
required,  integration  of the EMP  into bidding documents  and contracts  for works,  site visits, and 
liaison  with  contractors  and  the  CSCs;  and  support  for  preparation  of  the  semiannual 
environmental  monitoring  reports  for  submission  to  ADB.  The  external  EMA  will  conduct  the 
environmental  monitoring  listed in the EMP. The indicative terms of reference for the consultants 
and agency are in Appendix 2. 
87. 
Capacity building.  The ZCG, the LCG, and the ZDG do not have previous experience in 
the ADB-funded projects or in ADB’s safeguard requirements. To ensure effective implementation 
of the EMP, a capacity  building  program is included  in the EMP for training  of  relevant agencies 
in  the  EMP  implementation,  mitigation  measures,  supervision,  monitoring,  reporting,  and  the 
GRM. Training will be provided by consultants. Trainees will include the staff of the ZCG, including 
the PMO and the LPMOs, the LCG, the ZDG, the CSCs, and the contractors. 
Procedures  for  feedback  and  adjustment  of  the  environmental  management  plan, 
88. 
in  the  event  of  noncompliance.  Based  on  site  inspections  and  monitoring  reports,  the  PMO 
shall  decide,  in  consultation  with  relevant  consultants  for  environment,  whether  (i)  further 
mitigation  measures  are  required  as  corrective  actions;  or  (ii)  improvements  are  required  for 
environmental management practices. Effectiveness of mitigation measures and monitoring plans 
will  be  evaluated  by  a  feedback  reporting  system.  Adjustment  to  the  EMP  will  be  made,  if 
necessary.  The environment  officers of the PMO and the LPMOs, the initial project management 
support  consultant  for  environment,  and  the  national  environmental  specialist  in  the  project 
management  support  consultant  team  will  play  critical  roles  in  the  feedback  and  adjustment 
mechanism.  If substantial  deviation from  the EMP is observed  during inspection  and monitoring; 
or  any  changes  are  made  to  the  project  that  may  cause  substantial  adverse  environmental 
impacts,  or increase  the number  of affected  people,  then  the PMO will  immediately  consult  with 
ADB;  and  form  an  environmental  assessment  team  to  conduct  additional  environmental 
assessment.  If  necessary,  further  public  consultation  will  be  undertaken.  The  new  or  updated 
domestic  EIA  and  the  ADB-version  EIA  (including  the  EMP)  will  be  prepared  and  submitted  to 
ADB for review, appraisal,  and public disclosure.  The revised EMP will be passed  to contractors, 
the CSCs, and operators  of facilities constructed  under the project for implementation. 
A-2.  Environmental  Assurances 
Project-specific  environmental  safeguard  conditions  are  included  in  the loan  and  project 
89. 
agreements  and include the need for all project agencies to comply with the EMP and the ESMS. 
40 
B. 
Involuntary  Resettlement 
90. 
Category  and  impacts.  The  project  is  classified  as  Category  A  for  involuntary 
resettlement.  The land use  of the project (for  Outputs 1–2)  will include  (i) permanent  acquisition 
of  743.38  mu  of  collective  land,  (ii)  land  user  right  transfer  of  416.49  mu  of  collective  land,  (iii) 
land  use  for  ecological  farming  or  forestry  of  25,765.59  mu,  (iv)  land  use  for  rural  public 
infrastructure  of  15.40  mu,  (v) state-owned  land  occupation  of 1,973.88  mu,  and  (vi) temporary 
land use of 4,828.06 mu. The project will not involve any residential house or structure demolition. 
Permanent  land  acquisition  under  the  project  will  affect  1,257  households  with  4,386  persons, 
and  is  mainly  related  to  widening  or  straightening  of  ecological  embankments  in  some  river 
sections. Households  will not be physically relocated.   
Resettlement plan. A resettlement plan prepared following ADB’s SPS and relevant PRC 
91. 
laws  and  regulations  includes  adequate  measures  for  compensation,  resettlement,  and 
rehabilitation  of  affected  people.  It  is  based  on  surveys  and  consultations  with  affected  people 
during  project  preparation.  A GRM  has been  established  and  incorporated  into  the resettlement 
plan.  The resettlement  plan  also  includes  measures  of (i) the  capacity  building  of  the executing 
and  implementing  agencies  to  implement  the  resettlement  plan  in  compliance  with  ADB’s 
requirements;  and  (ii)  internal  and  external  monitoring  and  reporting  on  the  resettlement  plan 
implementation.   
92. 
Updating resettlement  plan. The resettlement  plan will be (i) updated  based on the final 
design,  detailed  measurement  survey,  and  census of affected  persons,  (ii) disclosed  to affected 
persons,  and  (iii)  submitted  to  ADB  for  review  and  approval  prior  to  the  award  of  civil  works 
contract and commencement  of the LAR.  
93. 
Capacity  building  for  implementation  of  the  resettlement  plan  in  compliance  with 
ADB’s  requirements.  The  ZCG,  the  LCG,  and  the  ZDG  have  the  capacity  to  implement 
domestically  funded  projects.  Their  capacity  will be  strengthened  to implement  the  resettlement 
plan in compliance with ADB’s requirements  through several measures, including (i) the ZCG, the 
LCG, and the ZDG will each appoint a social officer; (ii) a project management  support consultant 
team will include  a national  resettlement  specialist  and  a national  social  development  specialist; 
(iii) relevant staff of the ZCG, the LCG, and the ZDG, the PMO, and the LPMOs will be trained on 
social  safeguard  measures;  (iv)  an  initial  project  management  support  consultant  for  social 
safeguards  and social  development  will provide  training  on  ADB’s  relevant  policy  requirements, 
and  will  assist  the  LCG  and  the  ZDG  to  update  and  finalize  the  resettlement  plan;  and  (iv)  an 
external  agency  will  be  recruited  for  semiannual  external  resettlement  and  social  development 
M&E. 
C. 
Indigenous  People 
94. 
The  Hui,  Miao,  and  Yi  ethnic  minority  groups  in  the  project  area  will  benefit  from  the 
project, including  (i) improved wastewater  and solid waste management,  (ii) pilot development  of 
eco-villages,  (iii) job opportunities  during  construction  and operation,  (iv) livelihood  support  from 
the eco-compensation  fund, and (v) capacity development. A social assessment during conducted 
project preparation revealed that the socioeconomic and livelihood systems of the ethnic minority 
groups  are not  different  from those  of the  Han majority.  However,  they maintain  distinct  cultural 
characteristics,  such  as  distinct  traditional  festivals  and  different  religious  beliefs.  Project 
activities, such as pilot eco-villages development  in the ethnic minority villages, will consider such 
cultural  characteristics.  An  ethnic  minority  development  plan  (EMDP)  was  prepared  following 
ADB’s SPS and relevant PRC laws and regulations.  It includes  both mitigation and enhancement 
41 
measures  for  ethnic  minority  communities.  The  PMO,  with  assistances  from  the  social 
development  specialist  in the project management  support  consultant team,  will conduct  internal 
monitoring  and  report  the  results  of  the  internal  monitoring  to  ADB  through  quarterly  project 
progress  reports.  The  external  agency  recruited  for  resettlement  and  social  development  M&E 
will also cover the M&E of the EMDP implementation.  The project will strengthen capacities of the 
ZCG, the LCG, and the ZDG to implement and monitor the EMDP during project implementation. 
D. 
Environmental  and Social Management  System 
95. 
Content  of  the  ESMS  and  safeguards  selection  criteria.  Draft  ESMS  in  Appendix  4 
describes (i) institutional framework of the ESMS, including legislative and policy framework, roles 
and responsibilities  of each specified position,  and activity  selection criteria; (ii) activities that the 
eco-compensation  fund will  or will not support  (including  activities  listed  under ADB’s  prohibited 
investment  activity list); (iii) implementation  steps for the ESMS; (iv) integration  of the ESMS into 
the  EFMC’s  operational  procedures;  and  (vi)  capacity  building  and  training  for  the  EFMC,  the 
PMO, and the YWPCO to implement the ESMS. For environmental  safeguards, activities that will 
not be supported  by the eco-compensation  fund include (i) activities  which may cause significant 
and irreversible impacts to the environment and are classified as Category A or B for environment 
under  ADB’s  SPS;  (ii)  are  located  in  or  next  to  a  designated  water  source  protection  zone, 
protected  area,  cultural  heritage  site,  or  critical  natural  habitat;  and  (iii)  involve  large-scale 
landscape  alteration  (e.g.,  quarrying,  or terracing  on slopes  greater  than  25  degree).  For  social 
safeguards, activities that will not be supported by the eco-compensation  fund include (i) activities 
involving  involuntary  resettlement  which  meet  the  definition  of  ADB’s  Category  A  or  B  for 
resettlement  safeguards,  and  any  involuntary  resettlement  issues  from  past  land  acquisition  or 
existing  facilities  as  defined  under  ADB’s  SPS;  (ii)  activities  which  have  significant  impacts  on 
vulnerable  ethnic  minorities  (Category  A),  or  any  unmitigated  issues  or  pending  issues  of 
indigenous  peoples  or  ethnic  minority  communities  from  past  activities  or  existing  facilities  as 
defined  under  ADB’s  SPS;  and  (iii)  commercial  activities  involving  natural  or  cultural  resources 
and/or  indigenous  knowledge  rights  in ethnic  minority  communities’  lands  without  their  consent. 
The EFMC  is required  to ensure  that these  requirements  are met during  the screening  of newly 
identified activities  in accordance  with the procedures  stipulated  in the ESMS. 
Establishment of the eco-compensation  fund and its operational procedures. Before 
96. 
the eco-compensation  fund is established,  the EFMC will (a) finalize the draft ESMS in Appendix 
4 with  ADB’s  prior approval;  (b) issue  a formal  directive  to integrate  the  ESMS  into  the  EFMC’s 
operational  procedures  with  ADB’s  prior  approval;  and  (c)  establish  the  EFMC’s  operational 
procedures  integrating  the  ESMS,  including  screening,  selection,  and  approval  procedures  for 
activities,  financial  transfer  mechanisms,  and technical  and  financial  reporting,  with  ADB’s  prior 
approval.  The  EFMC  will  comply  with  and  implement  its  operational  procedures  in  which  the 
ESMS  is  integrated  into,  and  review  and  approve  all  activities  to  be  financed  from  the  eco-
compensation  fund  in  accordance  with  the  EFMC’s  operational  procedures.  The  EFMC  will 
ensure  that  all  users  of  the  eco-compensation  fund  comply  with  the  EFMC’s  operational 
procedures. 
The  EFMC  will  submit  proposed  safeguards  screening  documents  and  safeguard 
97. 
classification  with the description  of the activity to ADB for prior  review and approval,  for the first 
two activities in each type of category. If such proposed safeguards classifications are satisfactory 
to  ADB,  any  subsequent  activities  in  the  same  type  of  category  shall  only  be  subject  to  ADB’s 
post review through semiannual  environmental  monitoring reports and quarterly project progress 
reports, including  the ESMS implementation  progress. 
98. 
Personnel.  The  environment  and  social  officers  of  the  PMO  who  are  responsible  for 
42 
overall  implementation  of  the  project  safeguards  will  also  be  responsible  for  the  ESMS 
implementation.  These  two  officers  will  work  under  the  PMO  for  safeguards  related  to  project 
Outputs  1,  2,  and  4  and  for  the  EFMC  for  project  Output  3  (i.e.,  the  ESMS),  including  the 
finalization  of the  ESMS;  integration  of  the ESMS  into  the EFMC’s  operational  procedures;  and 
daily implementation  of the ESMS procedures for safeguard screening, safeguard  categorization, 
and management  of approved  activities.  
99. 
Implementation  procedures.  The EFMC  will ensure  that  each  approved  activity  meets 
requirements  of  the  ESMS  (i.e.,  screening  procedures  have  been  completed,  the  proposed 
activities  meet  the  ESMS  criteria,  and  proposed  designs  seek  to  maximize  environmental  and 
social  benefits).  To  support  the  design  process,  the  PMO  environment  and  social  officers  and 
applicants  will  consult  with  relevant  government  agencies.  The  PMO  environment  and  social 
officers will also work with relevant consultants, as necessary, for technical feedback and support. 
All  approved  activities  shall  comply  with  ADB’s  SPS.  The  EFMC  shall  submit  to  the  PMO  and 
ADB all records, and documents  as may be requested from time to time. 
100.  Monitoring  and  reporting.  The  EFMC  will  submit  semiannual  safeguard  progress 
reports,  including  progress  of  the ESMS  implementation,  to the  PMO,  which  should  include  the 
number  and  types  of  applications  received,  details  of  approved  activities,  issues  and  lessons 
learned, and supporting safeguard documents for approved activities (copies of relevant domestic 
environmental  and  social  safeguard  approval  documents  and  project-specific  documents).  The 
PMO,  consolidating  these  findings  and  data,  will  prepare  and  submit  to  ADB  the  semiannual 
environmental monitoring reports and quarterly project progress reports, including progress of the 
ESMS  implementation.  Within  12  months  of  establishment  of  the  eco-compensation  fund,  the 
PMO, the EFMC, and ADB will conduct a tripartite  review of progress  of the fund and the ESMS; 
and  will  jointly  agree  on  revisions  and/or  recommendations,  as  needed,  to  resolve  any  issues. 
The  draft  safeguard  progress  reports  will  be  submitted  to  ADB  within  30  days  of  the  reporting 
period. 
E. 
Grievance  Redress Mechanism 
101.  A project-specific  GRM has been developed in compliance  with ADB’s SPS requirements 
to  address  environmental,  health,  safety,  and  social  concerns  associated  with  the  ADB-funded 
projects.  The  GRM  complements  and  builds  upon  existing  PRC  mechanisms  for  environmental 
complaints, including a national environmental complaint hotline. The GRM is designed to achieve 
the following objectives: (i) provide channels of communication  for communities to raise concerns 
about environmental and social-related grievances which might result from the project, (ii) prevent 
and  mitigate  adverse  environmental  and  social  impacts  to  communities  caused  by  construction 
and operation for the project, and (iii) build trust and respect and promote productive relationships 
between  the project  agencies  and local villages  and  communities.  The GRM  is accessible  to all 
members  of  the  villages  and  communities,  including  women,  youth,  minorities,  and  poverty-
stricken  villagers  and  residents.  Multiple  points  of  entry  are  available,  including  face-to-face 
meetings,  written  complaints,  telephone  conversations,  e-mail,  and social  media.  The details  of 
the GRM, including a time-bound  flow chart of procedures,  are described  in the EMP.  
102.  Specific  GRM  procedures  have  been  incorporated  into  the EMP,  resettlement  plan,  and 
the ESMS. The complaint  channels are slightly different  for environmental  and social issues, but 
the  PMO  will  maintain  an  integrated  system  to  document,  follow-up,  and  report  on  all  cases. 
Before  construction  starts,  the  LPMO  and  district  or  county  administration  offices  will  notify  the 
project  design  and  impacts  to  the affected  persons.  The  environment  and  social  officers  of  the 
PMO and the LPMOs will be the lead coordinators for the GRM implementation.  Relevant staff of 
the ZCG, including  the PMO, the LCG, the ZDG, and the LPMOs  will be trained in the GRM. 
43 
F. 
Prohibited  Investment  Activities 
103.  Pursuant  to ADB’s  SPS, the ADB funds  may not be applied  to the activities  described on 
the ADB Prohibited Investment Activities List set forth at Appendix 5 of ADB’s SPS and also stated 
in Appendix  2 of the ESMS in Appendix  4 of this project administration  manual.  
VIII.   GENDER AND SOCIAL  DIMENSIONS 
A. 
Poverty Reduction  and Social Strategy 
104.  The  project  is  classified  general  intervention  for poverty  reduction.  A poverty  and  social 
analysis  was  undertaken  based  on  intensive  stakeholder  consultations  and  socioeconomic 
surveys.  A total  of 127,015   residents  in the  project  area, including  59,697  women  (47.0%)  and 
25,403  low-income  people  (20%),  are  expected  to  directly  benefit  from  the  project  through 
reduced  solid waste  and water  pollution,  improved  river  management,  and better  environmental 
and ecological protection in the Sayu River Basin. Other residents in Zhaoyang District and Ludian 
County of Zhaotong will also benefit indirectly from improved environment.  The project will create 
1,834  jobs  during  project  implementation  and  372  jobs  during  project  operation.  A  social 
development  action plan (SDAP) prepared based on the poverty and social analysis has specific 
targets  for poor and low-income  people (Table  VIII-1). Consultations  were undertaken  with local 
residents and other stakeholders  during project preparation. 
B. 
Gender 
105.  The  project  is  classified  effective  gender  mainstreaming,  following  ADB’s  Guidelines  for 
Gender Mainstreaming  Categories of ADB Projects.43 Gender analysis  indicates that women are 
the  primary  caretakers  of  household  wastewater  and  solid  waste  management,  and  initial 
estimates suggest that project investments will result in an important reduction in time (50%) spent 
on  these  tasks  through  improved  systems.  Migration  is  a  key  livelihood  strategy  in  the  area, 
especially  among  the  young.  However,  nonmigrant  women  expressed  interested  in  job 
opportunities  to be created by the project, which will include skilled and unskilled positions for the 
construction  and  operation  of  facilities.  A  gender  action  plan  (GAP)  has  been  prepared  for  the 
project that will (i) measure results toward gender equality, particularly time savings as a result of 
improved  waste  management  systems  for women  through  baseline  and endline  surveys;  (ii) set 
targets  for  women’s  participation  in  decision  making  and  in  skilled  and  unskilled  employment; 
(iii) set targets to ensure women farmers’ participation in training to facilitate their transition to low-
emission  agriculture;  and  (iv)  set  targets  for  ensuring  the  active  participation  of  women  in  the 
EFMC which is responsible  for screening  and improvement  of activities proposed  to be financed 
from the fund.
43 ADB. 2012.  Guidelines  for Gender Mainstreaming  Categories  of ADB Projects. Manila. 
Budget 
Sources 
Governments’ 
counterpart 
funds and 
loan  fund  
44 
Table VIII-1: Social Development  Action Plan 
Actions 
Targets and Indicators 
Timeframe 
Responsible  Agencies 
A. Output 1: Wastewater management  and pollution  control in the Sayu River Basin strengthened 
2021–2026  ZCG, including  the PMO, 
the LCG, the ZDG, the 
LPMOs, consultants, 
contractors, and  suppliers 
(supported  by town and 
township governments, 
village  committees,  and 
the PAOs) 
A.1 Ensure communities  participate  in and 
benefit  from rural  wastewater management  for 
improved  sanitary conditions 
15,359  households  (including  59,286  people,  of 
which 20% are poor and/or low-income  people) 
connected with wastewater facilities  (2019 
baseline:  0 person)  
A.2 Ensure communities  participate  in and 
benefit  from rural  solid waste management  for 
better  living environment 
Animal  feces collection  tanks installed  for 17,323 
households  (including  66,867  people,  of which 
20% are poor and/or  low-income  people)  (2019 
baseline:  0 person) 
Solid  waste management  facilities developed  for 
30,890  households  (including  118,798  people,  of 
which 20% are poor and/or low-income  people) 
(2019  baseline:  0 household) 
A.3 Ensure communities  participate  in and 
benefit  from pilot  eco-villages construction for 
improved  infrastructure and  living environment 
2,500  people,  of which 20% are poor and/or  low-
income  people,  in the pilot eco-villages  participate 
in activities for and/or  education  on environmental 
protection  (2019  baseline:  NA) 
A.4 Ensure communities  participate  in and 
benefit  from wetlands  construction, soil and 
water conservation, and low-emission 
agriculture  promotion  for reduced nonpoint 
source pollution 
A.5 Ensure community  representatives 
participate  in consultations  on detailed  design 
of relevant project components  and public 
hearings  on solid waste and wastewater tariff 
proposals 
10,489  people,  of which 20% are poor and/or low-
income  people,  benefitted  from constructed 
wetlands (2019  baseline:  NA) 
12,941  people,  of which 20% are poor and/or low-
income  people,  benefitted  from soil and water 
conservation (2019  baseline:  NA)  
33,946  people,  of which 20% are poor and/or low-
income  people,  benefitted  from low-emission 
agriculture  promotion  (2019  baseline:  NA) 
100 representatives  of beneficiaries,  of which 
20% are poor and/or  low-income  people, 
participate  in consultations  on detailed  designs of 
relevant  project components  and public hearings 
on wastewater and solid waste tariff proposals 
(2019  baseline:  NA) 
Actions 
A.6 Ensure community-based  designated 
cleaning  teams and designated  environmental 
supervision groups are established  and 
operated  well in the pilot  eco-villages 
Targets and Indicators 
Timeframe 
Responsible  Agencies 
Designated  cleaning  teams and designated 
environmental  supervision groups established 
and operated  well in each pilot  eco-village  (2019 
baseline:  does not exist) 
45 
Budget 
Sources 
B. Output 2: Water resources  management  in the Sayu River improved 
B.1 Ensure communities  participate  in and 
benefit  from construction of ecological  river 
embankments  for better  ecology and 
environment 
Ecological  river embankments  constructed for 
4,811  people,  of which 20% poor and/or  low-
income  people  (2019 baseline:  NA) 
2021–2026 
B.2 Ensure public  representatives participate 
in consultations  on detailed  design of relevant 
project components 
60 representatives  of beneficiaries,  of which 20% 
poor and/or  low-income  people,  participate  in 
consultations  on detailed  designs of relevant 
project components  (2019  baseline:  NA) 
C. Output 3: Eco-compensation  mechanism  for the Sayu River Basin established 
C.1 Ensure communities  participate  in and 
benefit  from eco-compensation  mechanisms 
for improved environment 
20% of participants  in design and implementation 
of eco-compensation  mechanism  are poor and/or 
low-income  people  (2019  baseline:  NA) 
20% of beneficiaries  from the eco-compensation 
fund are poor and/or  low-income  people  (2019 
baseline:  NA) 
Government 
counterpart 
funds and 
loan  fund 
ZCG, including  the  PMO, 
the  LCG,  the  ZDG, the 
LPMOs,  consultants, 
contractors, and  suppliers 
(supported  by town and 
township governments, 
village  committees,  and 
PAOs) 
2021–2026  ZCG, including  the 
YWPCO and the PMO, 
consultants, uses of the 
eco-compensation  fund 
(supported  by town and 
township governments, 
village  committees,  and 
the PAOs) 
Government 
counterpart 
funds/eco-
compensation 
funds  and  loan 
fund 
Government 
counterpart 
funds  and  loan 
fund 
D. Output 4: Education,  capacity,  and public awareness  for water pollution  management  strengthened 
D.1 Ensure government  staff participate  in 
capacity development  programs  on water 
pollution  management 
Capacity of 200 people  (of which at least 20% are 
poor and/or  low-income  people)  for water 
pollution  management  developed  (2019  baseline: 
0) 
D.2 Ensure students participate  in education 
on water pollution  management 
12,550  students (of which at least 20% are poor 
and/or  low-income  people)  educated  in water 
pollution  management  (2019 baseline:  0) 
2021–2026  ZCG, including  the  PMO, 
the  LCG,  the  ZDG, the 
LPMOs,  schools, and 
consultants, (supported  by 
town and township 
governments,  village 
committees,  and the 
PAOs)   
D.3 Ensure communities  participate  in 
awareness-raising  activities on water pollution 
management 
32,750  people's  awareness of water pollution 
management  (of which at least 20%  are poor 
and/or  low-income  people)  are raised (2019 
baseline:  0) 
E. For All Outputs: Generating Job Opportunities  
E.1 During construction, create a total of 1,834 
temporary  jobs, including  825 skilled and 
1,834  jobs created  during construction,  of which 
20% are provided  to poor  and/or low-income 
2021–2026    ZCG, including  the  PMO, 
the  LCG,  the  ZDG, the 
Government 
counterpart 
46 
Actions 
1,009  unskilled jobs 
E.2 During operation,  create a total  of 372 
jobs, including  360 skilled and 12 unskilled 
jobs (for maintenance  of facilities  and 
landscaping  of rivers and wetlands) 
E.3 Ensure timely  advertisement  of job 
vacancies and give priority to poor and/or low-
income  people  for hiring 
Targets and Indicators 
Timeframe 
Responsible  Agencies 
people  (2019  baseline:  NA) 
372 jobs created during  operation,  of which 20% 
are provided  to poor and/or  low-income  people 
(2019  baseline:  NA)  
LPMOs,  contractors,  and 
consultants  (supported  by 
town  and  township 
governments,  village 
committees,  LSSBs,  and  the 
PAOs) 
Budget 
Sources 
funds  and  loan 
fund 
F. For All Outputs: Comply with labor laws and core labor standards 
F.1 Ensure contractors comply with labor laws 
and core labor standards, including  “no child 
labor”,  minimum  wages, equal  payment  to 
equal  work, and occupational  health  and 
safety 
F.2 Ensure appropriate  service providers 
engaged  by contractors disseminate 
information  on the risks of sexually transmitted 
diseases, including  HIV/AIDS, to the 
employees  of contractors engaged  under  the 
project and to members  of local communities 
surrounding  the project  area   
100%  of contractors comply with labor  laws and 
core labor  standards (2019 baseline:  NA) 
1,834  employees of contractors engaged  under 
the project receive information  on the risks of 
sexually transmitted  diseases, including  HIV/AIDS 
(2019  baseline:  NA) 
524 members  of local communities  surrounding 
the project area receive information  on the risks 
of sexually transmitted  diseases, including 
HIV/AIDS (2019  baseline:  0) 
2021–2026  ZCG, including  the  PMO, 
the  LCG,  the  ZDG, the 
LPMOs,  contractors,  and 
consultants  (supported  by 
town  and  township 
governments,  village 
committees,  and  the  LSSBs) 
Government 
counterpart 
funds  and  loan 
funds   
F.3. Provide separate  toilets and sanitation 
facilities to workers 
100%  of workers have access to separate  toilets 
and sanitation  facilities (2019  baseline:  NA) 
G. For All Outputs: Project implementation  management  support   
G.1 Ensure a social development  specialist is 
included  in a project  management  support 
consultant  team to guide  and assist in 
implementation  of the SDAP and provide 
training  to the PMO, the LPMOs, and other 
government  agencies. 
G.2. Assign a social and gender  focal staff in 
each of the PMO and the LPMOs to ensure 
effective implementation  of the SDAP 
A social development  specialist recruited as a 
member  of the project management  support 
consultant  team to guide  and assist in 
implementation  of the SDAP (2019  baseline:  NA) 
2021–2026 
At least one social and gender  focal person 
assigned in each of the PMO and the LPMOs to 
implement  the SDAP activities (2019 baseline: 
NA) 
ZCG, including  the  PMO, 
the  LCG,  the  ZDG, the 
LPMOs,  and  consultants 
(supported  by town  and 
township  governments, 
village  committees,  and  the 
PAOs) 
Government 
counterpart 
funds  and  loan 
fund 
Actions 
G.3 Provide training  to the PMO, the LPMOs, 
and other  government  agencies on (i) social 
development  policies of the Asian 
Development  Bank; (ii) how to implement  and 
monitor  the SDAP; and  (iii) social issues 
related  to project components  and importance 
of social inclusion  in all project components 
G.4 Collect data  disaggregated  by income 
status 
Targets and Indicators 
Timeframe 
Responsible  Agencies 
Relevant staff of the PMO, LPMOs, and other 
government  agencies  receive the training  (2019 
baseline:  NA) 
47 
Budget 
Sources 
Disaggregated  data by income  status collected 
during  project implementation  (2019 baseline: 
NA) 
AIDS = acquired  immune  deficiency syndrome, HIV = human  immunodeficiency  virus, LCG = Ludian County Government, LPMO = local project management  office, 
LSSB  = labor  and  social  security bureau,  NA = not  applicable,  PAO = poverty  alleviation  office,  PMO  = project  management  office,  SDAP = social  development 
action plan, YWPCO = Yudong  Reservoir Water Resources Protection  Committee  Office, ZCG = Zhaotong  City Government,  ZDG = Zhaoyang  District Government. 
Source: Asian Development  Bank. 
48 
Table VIII-2: Gender Action Plan  
Actions 
Targets and Indicators 
Timeframe  Responsible  Agencies 
A. Output 1: Wastewater management  and pollution control in the Sayu River Basin strengthened 
A.1. Baseline  and endline  survey on women’s 
time spent for wastewater, garbage,  and 
animal  feces collection  and treatment 
conducted at the beginning  and end  of the 
project (2019  baseline:  NA) 
A.2. Quotas for women  are set for skilled and 
unskilled  jobs created under  Output 1 during 
construction and operation. 
A.3. Increase women’s access to sanitation 
services by constructing wastewater facilities 
and animal  feces collection tanks in rural 
areas. 
A.1. By 2026, 60,000  women  with increased time savings for 
wastewater, animal  feces, and solid waste management  (2019 
baseline:  NA)  
2021–2026 
A.2.1. 466  skilled jobs created during  construction, of which at 
least 20% provided  to women  (2019 baseline:  0) 
A.2.2. 360  skilled jobs created during  operation,  of which 30% 
are provided  to women  (2019 baseline:  NA) 
A.2.3. 569  unskilled jobs created during  construction, of which 
40% for women (2019  baseline:  NA) 
A.3.1. 15,359  households  (including  59,286  people,  of which 
47% are women) connected with wastewater  facilities (2019 
baseline:  0 person) 
A.3.2. Animal  feces collection tanks installed  for 17,323 
households  (including  66,867  people,  of which 47% are 
women) (2019  baseline:  0 person) 
ZCG, including  LCG, 
ZDG, PMO, LPMOs, 
consultants, 
contractors, and 
suppliers  (supported  by 
town and township 
governments,  village 
committees, and 
ACWF)   
Budget 
Sources 
Governments’ 
counterpart 
funds and 
loan  fund 
A.4. Improve women’s access to solid waste 
management  services for improved environ-
mental  condition. 
A.4. Solid waste management  facilities  developed  for 30,890 
households  (including  118,798  people,  of which 47% are 
women) (2019  baseline:  0 household) 
A.5. Promote  women’s participation  in 
environmental  protection  activities in the pilot 
eco-villages through  outreach  and education. 
A.5. 2,500  people,  of which 40% are women,  in the pilot eco-
villages participate  in environmental  and education  activities on 
environmental  protection  (2019  baseline:  NA) 
A.6. Support  the transition  to low-emission/ 
low-pollution  agriculture  among  female 
farmers. 
A.6.1. 16,000  female  farmers receive training  and  participate  in 
promotion  of low-emission agriculture  (2019 baseline:  NA) 
A.6.2.12,941  people,  of which 47% are women, benefitted  from 
soil and water conservation (2019 baseline:  NA)  
A.7. Conduct consultations  on detailed  design 
that include  the needs and views from women 
and men,  including  on wastewater and solid 
waste tariff proposals. 
A.7. 100 representatives  of beneficiaries,  of which at least 40% 
are women,  participate  in consultations on detailed  designs of 
relevant  project components  and in public hearings  on 
wastewater and solid waste tariff proposals (2019 baseline:  NA) 
A.8. Establish  cleaning  teams and designated 
environmental  supervision  groups  in the pilot 
eco-villages  with women’s representation. 
A.8. 40% representatives  of the designated  cleaning  teams and 
environmental  supervision groups are women  (2019 baseline: 
NA) 
Actions 
Targets and Indicators 
Timeframe  Responsible  Agencies 
B. Output 2: Water resources  management  in the Sayu River improved 
B.1. Quotas for women  are set for skilled and 
unskilled  jobs created by Output  2 during 
construction and operation. 
B.2. Improve women’s living  conditions by 
constructing ecological  river embankments. 
B.3. Improve women’s access to river and 
water management  and benefit  from improved 
water quality. 
B.4. Conduct consultations  on detailed  design 
that include  the needs  and views from women 
and men, including  of relevant project 
components.   
B.1.1. 440  unskilled jobs created during  construction, of which 
40% are provided  to women  (2019 baseline:  NA) 
2021–2026 
B.1.2. 359  skilled jobs created during  construction, of which 
15% are provided  to women  (2019 baseline:  NA) 
B.2. Ecological river embankments  constructed for 4,811 
people,  of which 47% are women (2019  baseline:  NA) 
B.3. 4,811 people,  of which 47% are women,  benefitted  from 
the intelligent  cloud platform  river information  management 
system; and the smart water integrated  management  platform 
(2019  baseline:  NA)   
B.4. 60 representatives of beneficiaries,  of which at least 40% 
are women (2019  baseline:  NA) 
ZCG, including  LCG, 
ZDG, PMO, LPMOs, 
consultants, 
contractors, and 
suppliers  (supported  by 
town and township 
governments,  village 
committees, and 
ACWF)   
49 
Budget 
Sources 
Government 
counterpart 
funds and 
loan  fund 
C. Output 3: Eco-compensation  mechanism  for the Sayu River Basin established 
C.1. Women represented  in the 
implementation  of the eco-compensation 
mechanism. 
C.1. By 2023,  at least  35% of the eco-compensation  fund 
management  committee members are women (2019  baseline: 
NA) 
2021–2026 
D. Output 4: Education,  capacity,  and public awareness  for water pollution management  strengthened 
D.1. Women are trained  on water pollution 
management. 
D.1.1. 200 people  (of which at least 40% are women)  with water 
pollution  management  capacity enhanced  (2019 baseline:  0 
person) 
2021–2026 
D.1.2. 12,550  students (of which at least 40% are women) 
trained  on water pollution  management  (2019  baseline:  0 
student) 
D.1.3. 32,750  people  with awareness of water pollution 
management  (of which at least 40%  are women)  increased 
(2019  baseline:  0 person)  
E.1. A gender  specialist recruited  as a member  of the project 
management  support consultant team  to guide and  assist in the 
implementation  of the GAP (2019  baseline:  NA) 
2021–2026 
E. For all outputs:  Project management 
E.1. Ensure a gender  specialist is included  in 
the project management  support consultant 
team to guide  and assist in the implementation 
of the GAP and provide  training  to the PMO, 
the LPMOs, and  other government  agencies. 
ZCG, including  the 
Yudong  Reservoir 
Water Resources 
Protection  Committee 
Office and the PMO 
Government 
counterpart 
funds and 
loan  fund 
Government 
counterpart 
funds 
loan  fund 
and 
ZCG, including  LCG, 
and ZDG, PMO, 
LPMOs, schools,  and 
consultants  (supported 
by town and township 
governments,  village 
committees, and 
ACWF)   
ZCG, including  LCG, 
ZDG, PMO, LPMOs, 
and consultants 
(supported  by town and 
township  governments, 
Government 
counterpart 
funds and 
loan  fund 
50 
Actions 
E.2. Assign a social and gender  focal staff in 
each of the PMO and the LPMOs to ensure 
effective implementation  of the GAP. 
E.3. Provide training  to the PMO, the LPMOs, 
and other  government  agencies on (i) gender 
equality  and mainstreaming  policies of the 
Asian Development  Bank; (ii) how to 
implement  and  monitor  the GAP; and (iii) 
gender  issues in relevant  project components. 
E.4. Collect sex-disaggregated  data. 
E.5. Prepare monitoring  reports on the GAP 
implementation. 
Targets and Indicators 
E.2. At least one social and gender  focal person assigned in 
each of the PMO and the LPMOs to implement  the GAP 
activities (2019 baseline:  NA) 
E.3. Relevant staff of the PMO, the LPMOs, and other 
government  agencies  receive training  (2019  baseline:  NA) 
Timeframe  Responsible  Agencies 
village  committees, and 
ACWF)   
Budget 
Sources 
E.4. Sex-disaggregated  data collected  during project 
implementation  (2019 baseline:  NA) 
E.5. Monitoring  reports on the GAP implementation  included  in 
the quarterly  project progress reports and the semiannual 
external  resettlement  and social development  monitoring  and 
evaluation  reports (2019  baseline:  NA) 
ACWF = All China Women’s  Federation,  GAP = gender  action plan,  LCG = Ludian  County Government, LPMO = local project management  office, NA = not applicable,  PMO = 
project management  office, ZCG = Zhaotong  City Government, ZDG = Zhaoyang  District Government. 
Source: Asian Development Bank.
IX. 
PERFORMANCE  MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND 
COMMUNICATION 
A. 
Project Design and Monitoring  Framework 
Impact the Project is Aligned with 
Quality of life and sustainable  aquatic  ecosystem in the Yangtze  River Basin improved (Yangtze  River Economic Belt 
Development  Plan, 2016–2030)a 
51 
Performance  Indicators  with Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources 
and Reporting 
Mechanisms 
Risks 
a. By 2027,  monthly average total  nitrogen  in the Yudong  Reservoir 
meets the Class  III standard  10 times per year (2019 baseline:  9 times)b  
b. By 2027,  monthly average total  phosphorus  in the Yudong  Reservoir 
meets the Class  II standard  10 times per year (2019 baseline:  8 times)c 
a.–b.  Zhatong 
City Water 
Resources 
Bureau’s  data 
Population 
exerts heavier 
pollution  load 
than forecast. 
Changes  in 
administrative 
procedure  or 
budgetary 
process  delay 
the provision 
of counterpart 
funds. 
1a. By 2023, wastewater  treatment  capacity in the Sayu River Basin 
increased  to 2,738  m3/day (2019  baseline:  2,535 m3/day) 
1b. By 2026, 15,359  households  (including  59,286  people,  of whom 
47.0%  are women) in the Sayu River Basin  connected with wastewater 
facilities (2019  baseline:  0 households,  0% women) (OP 5.1) 
1c. By 2023,  138,584  m3/year of animal feces collected  in tanks 
installed  at 17,323  households  (including  66,867  people,  of whom 
47.0%  are women) in the Sayu River Basin  (2019  baseline:  not 
applicable,  0 households,  0 persons,  0% woman)  
1d. By 2024, 84 tons/day  of solid  waste from 30,890  households 
(including  118,798  people,  of whom 47.0%  are women) in the Sayu 
River Basin  treated  (2019 baseline:  25 tons/day,  0 households,  0 
persons,  0% woman)d  
1e. By 2026, 60,000  women with increased  time savings  for 
wastewater,  animal  feces, and solid  waste management 
(2019  baseline:  not applicable)  (OP 2.4.1) 
1f. By 2026, 2,500  people  (of whom 40% are women) in three  pilot eco-
villages  participate  in activities  for and/or education  on environmental 
protection  (2019  baseline:  not applicable)  (OP 2.5.1) 
1g. By 2025, six artificial wetlands  operational  to reduce nonpoint-
source pollution  (2019  baseline:  Not applicable)  (OP 3.1.5) 
1h. By 2026, the quantifiable  soil  and water conservation  model 
tentatively  established  using  available  monitoring  data  (2019 baseline: 
not applicable)e  (OP 3.3.4) 
1i. By 2026, chemical fertilizer nitrogen  loss  reduced to 3.920 kg/ha;  
and phosphor  loss  reduced to 0.077 kg/ha in the low-emission 
agriculture  pilot  areas  (2017 baseline:  5.670  kg/ha [nitrogen]  and  0.110 
kg/ha [phosphor])f 
1j. 16,000  female farmers receive training  and participate  in the 
promotion  of low-emission  agriculture  (2019 baseline:  not applicable) 
(OP 2.2) 
2a. By 2024, data  on water quality  in rivers in the Sayu River Basin 
automatically  sent to mobile devices of the “river chiefs” in real  time 
(2019  baseline:  not applicable)g 
1a. Operation 
reports  of the 
WWT plant and 
44 WWT facilities 
1b.–1c. and  1e. 
Surveys 
conducted by 
village 
committees 
1d. Operation 
reports  of the two 
pyrolysis plants 
1f. and 1j. Project 
progress  reports 
and/or  external 
resettlement  and 
social 
development 
M&E reports 
1g. 
Environmental 
monitoring 
reports 
1h. Surveys by 
consultants 
1i. Reports  of soil 
and fertilizer 
stations  of 
Zhaotong  City, 
Zhaoyang 
District, and 
Ludian  County 
2a. Surveys by 
consultants 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
Condition  of 
water resources 
and environment 
in the Sayu River 
Basin  improved 
Outputs 
1. Wastewater 
management 
and pollution 
control in the 
Sayu River Basin 
strengthened 
2. Water 
resources 
management  in 
the Sayu River 
improved 
52 
Results Chain 
3. Eco-
compensation 
mechanism for 
the Sayu River 
Basin 
established 
Performance  Indicators  with Targets and Baselines 
3a. By 2021, six eco-compensation  agreements  signed  with Longshu, 
Shuimo, and Xinjie  towns  in Ludian  County; and  Leju and Sujia 
townships,  and Sayu Town, in Zhaoyang  District (2019  baseline:  not 
applicable)  (OP 3.3.2) 
3b. By 2026, beneficiaries’  cumulative payment into the eco-
compensation  fund exceeds CNY28.0 million  (2019 baseline:  not 
applicable)  (OP 6.1) 
3c. By 2023,  at least  35% of the eco-compensation  fund management 
committee members are women (2019  baseline:  not applicable)  (OP 
2.3) 
4. Education, 
capacity, and 
public awareness 
for water 
pollution 
management 
strengthened 
4a. By 2026, at least  12,550  students  (of whom at least  40% are 
women) educated  in water pollution  management  (2019 baseline:  not 
applicable)  (OP 2.2) 
4b. By 2026, at least  200 people  (of whom at least  40% are women) 
report enhanced  knowledge  and skills  on water pollution  management 
(2019  baseline:  not applicable)  (OP 2.2) 
4c. By 2026,  at least  32,750  people  (of whom at least  40% are women) 
report enhanced  awareness  on water pollution  management 
(2019  baseline:  not applicable) 
4d. By 2026, garbage  classification  conducted in 20% of households  in 
the Sayu River Basin and upper  Yudong  Reservoir (2019  baseline:  0%) 
4e. By 2026, at least  five other  projects referenced this  project in their 
project documents  (2019 baseline:  0) 
Risks 
Data Sources 
and Reporting 
Mechanisms 
3a. Surveys by 
consultants 
3b.–3c.  Reports 
of the eco-
compensation 
fund 
management 
committee and/or 
the Yudong 
Reservoir Water 
Resources 
Protection 
Committee Office 
4a.–4c. and  4e.  
Surveys by 
consultants 
and/or  project 
progress  reports 
4d. Surveys by 
village 
committees 
Key Activities  with Milestones 
1.  Wastewater management  and pollution control in the Sayu River Basin  strengthened 
1.1  Land  acquisition  and resettlement  for facilities  to reduce water pollution  sources  (Q4 2020–Q1  2022) 
1.2  Procurement for facilities to reduce water pollution  sources (Q4 2020–Q3 2023,  intermittent) 
1.3  Construction  of facilities  to reduce water pollution  sources  (Q2 2021–Q2  2024, intermittent) 
1.4  Technical  assistance  by consultants  in the reduction  of water pollution  sources (Q1 2021–Q2 2026,  intermittent) 
2.  Water resources  management  in the Sayu River improved 
2.1  Land  acquisition  and resettlement  for ecological  embankment (Q4 2020–Q2  2023, intermittent) 
2.2  Procurement for ecological  embankment and  smart water integrated  management  platform (Q2 2021–Q3  2023,  intermittent) 
2.3  Construction  of ecological  embankment and development  of smart water integrated  management  platform (Q4 2021–Q2 
2024,  intermittent) 
2.4  Technical assistance  by consultants  in the establishment  of a river protection  model and  a smart water integrated 
management  platform (Q4 2021–Q3  2026,  intermittent) 
3.  Eco-compensation  mechanism  for the Sayu River Basin established 
3.1  Implementation  of the eco-compensation  agreement  between  Ludian  County and Zhaoyang  District with consulting  services 
(Q2 2021–Q4  2026,  intermittent) 
3.2  Establishment  and  implementation  of new town- and township-level  horizontal  eco-compensation  mechanisms with 
consulting  services (Q2 2021–Q4  2026,  intermittent) 
3.3  Establishment  and  implementation  of an eco-compensation  fund (Q3 2022–Q4  2026,  intermittent) 
4.  Education,  capacity,  and public awareness  for water pollution management  strengthened 
4.1  Training,  workshops,  and domestic and overseas  study visits  and training  for rural water pollution  management and  eco-
compensation  (Q1 2021–Q2  2026, intermittent) 
4.2  Periodical  special  lectures  at schools  and study visits  for students  (Q1 2022–Q2 2026,  intermittent) 
4.3  Public awareness  raising  through  publicity,  handbook,  brochures,  media, internet,  and campaigns.  (Q1 2022–Q2  2026, 
intermittent) 
4.4  Dissemination  and replication  of water pollution  management and  eco-compensation  demonstrated  under  the project to other 
areas  of the People’s  Republic  of China  and other countries  (Q1 2024–Q4  2026,  intermittent) 
53 
Project Management  Activities 
Recruit individual  consultants  for initial  project  management support  (Q3 2020) 
Conduct initial  project  management with individual  consultants’  assistance  (Q3 2020–Q2  2021) 
Recruit a consultant  team for project management  support  (Q3 2020–Q2  2021) 
Conduct project management  with consultant  team’s  assistance  (Q2 2021–Q4  2026) 
Recruit an external environmental  monitoring  agency (Q1 2021) 
Submit semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports  to ADB (Q2 2021–Q2  2024) 
Recruit an external agency for external  resettlement  and  social development  M&E (Q3–Q4 2020) 
Submit semiannual  external resettlement  and social  development  M&E reports  to ADB (Q2 2021–Q4  2025) 
Monitor and evaluate  project impact, outcome, and outputs  using  the project performance management system; and submit 
quarterly  project progress  reports  to ADB (Q1 2021–Q4  2026) 
Submit the project completion  report to ADB (Q4 2026) 
Inputs 
ADB: $100.0  million  (ordinary capital  resources,  regular  loan) 
Government: $134.6  million   
Assumptions  for Partner Financing.   
Not applicable 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CNY = Chinese  yuan, DMF = design  and monitoring  framework, ha = hectare, kg = kilogram, 
m3 = cubic meter, M&E = monitoring  and evaluation,  OP = operational  priority, Q = quarter,  RFI = results  framework indicator, 
WWT = wastewater  treatment. 
a  Government of the People’s  Republic of China. 2016. Outline of the Yangtze  River Economic Belt Development  Plan, 2016–
2030.  Beijing. 
b  The monthly average total  nitrogen  met the Class  III standard  twice in 2017  and three times in 2018.   
c  The monthly average total  phosphorus  met the Class  II standard  four times in 2017 and five times in 2018. 
d  Some 25  tons/day  of solid  waste  is  being  treated  at  four pyrolysis  plants.  However, all  four plants  will  be  closed;  and  by 
2024,  84 tons/day of solid  waste will be treated  by new two pyrolysis  plants  constructed  under the project. 
e  To complete the quantifiable  soil and  water conservation  model,  the effects of afforestation  on soil  and water conservation 
need  to be measured  in the fields for about 10 years.  
f  The chemical fertilizer  nitrogen  (phosphor)  loss  is the  amount of nitrogen  (phosphor)  included  in  the chemical fertilizer  that 
has  not  been  absorbed  by crops  and  remains  in  the  water  and  deep  soil.  Data on  chemical  fertilizer  nitrogen  (phosphor) 
loss  from the soil  and fertilizer stations  in 2017  are the latest  (the stations  do not conduct annual  surveys).   
g  The “river chief” system  was introduced  in  the People’s  Republic  of China  in 2017.  It assigns  each part of a river and  lake 
to a certain official. 
Contribution to Strategy  2030 Operational  Priorities 
Expected values  and methodological  details  for all OP indicators  to which this operation  will contribute  results  are detailed  in 
Contribution  to Strategy 2030  Operational  Priorities  (accessible  from the  list  of linked  documents  in  Appendix  2 of the  report 
and recommendation of the President). {In addition  to the OP indicators  tagged in the DMF, this operation  will contribute  results 
for 
OP 1.3: Poor and vulnerable  people  with improved standards  of living (number) 
OP 3.1.1:  Additional  climate finance mobilized  ($) 
OP 3.3.1:  Pollution  control enhancing  infrastructure assets  established  or improved (number) 
OP 5.1.1:  Rural infrastructure assets  established  or improved (number) 
Source: Asian  Development Bank. 
54 
B. 
Monitoring 
1. 
Project Performance  Monitoring 
In well  advance  of loan effectiveness,  the  PMO will  prepare  a format of  quarterly  project 
106. 
progress  reports  acceptable  to  ADB;  and  make  necessary  arrangements  for  preparation  of  the 
reports, including  a flow of data and information  collection, responsibility  definition  of each of the 
PMO and the LPMOs, and reporting formats (from contractors to the LPMOs, from consultants to 
the  PMO,  from  the  LPMOs  to  the  PMO,  etc.).  Quarterly  project  progress  reports  will  include 
progress  of  the overall  project  and  each component;  status  of consulting  services  and activities 
performed  by  each  consultant;  information  on  training,  workshops,  and  study  visits  conducted; 
status  of  the  LAR  based  on  internal  monitoring;  status  of  the  implementation  of  the  EMDP,  the 
SDAP, and the GAP; records of grievance and complaints;  project performance  (achievement  of 
each performance  indicator against the target); and particular issues. 
2. 
Compliance  Monitoring 
107.  The ZCG, including the YWPCO, the ZDG, the LCG, and the project management  support 
consultants,  will  closely  monitor  the  compliance  of  all  the  covenants  included  in  the  loan  and 
project  agreements.  The  compliance  status  of  the  covenants  will  be  reported  through  quarterly 
progress  reports. ADB will verify the compliance  by reviewing  quarterly project  progress  reports, 
communicating  with the PMO, and/or conducting review missions. 
3. 
Safeguard  Monitoring 
3-1. 
Environment 
108.  The environmental  monitoring program focuses on the environment in the affected project 
areas.  The  environmental  monitoring  program  is  included  in  the  EMP,  including  the  scope  of 
monitoring,  parameters,  time,  and  frequency,  implementing  and  supervising  agencies,  and 
estimated  costs.  Three  types  of  monitoring  will  be  conducted  in  accordance  with  the  EMP:  (i) 
internal  monitoring,  to be conducted  by the LPMOs  and the CSCs; (ii) external monitoring  of air, 
water,  noise,  and  soil  standards,  to  be  conducted  by  an  external  EMA;  and  (iii)  compliance 
monitoring, to be conducted by a national environment specialist in a project management support 
consultant  team, to ensure that the EMP is being implemented.  The monitoring shall comply with 
the  methodology  provided  in  the  relevant  national  environmental  monitoring  standards.  Other 
associated  standards  to be followed are the national environmental  quality standards  of ambient 
air, surface  water, sediment  and noise, and the pollutant  discharge  standards.  ADB  will oversee 
the compliance  based on the semiannual environmental  monitoring  reports provided  by the PMO 
and review missions. 
109. 
Internal  monitoring.  During  construction,  the  CSCs  and the LPMOs  will  be responsible 
for  conducting  the  internal  environmental  monitoring  in  accordance  with  the  monitoring  plan. 
Results will be reported  through the CSCs’ monthly  reports to the LPMOs and the PMO. 
110.  External  monitoring.  The  PMO  will  contract  an  external  EMA  to  conduct  the  external 
environmental  monitoring  described  in Table  EMP-5  in  Appendix  3.  A detailed  cost  breakdown 
will  be  provided  by  the  EMA.  The  external  monitoring  will  be  conducted  during  the  entire 
construction  phase  and  first  full  year  of  operation  of  the  relevant  facility.  The  EMA  will  prepare 
semiannual monitoring reports of the methods and results. The EMA will submit the reports to the 
PMO and the LPMOs at the same time to ensure independence. 
55 
111.  Compliance  monitoring.  The  environmental  specialist  in  the  project  management 
support consultant team will review project progress and compliance with the EMP based on field 
visits,  consultations  with  the  PMO  and  the  LPMO  environment  officers,  contractors,  and  the 
CSCs, and review of the monitoring  reports prepared  by the CSCs and the EMA. The findings of 
the environmental  specialist  will be reported to ADB through semiannual environment  monitoring 
reports. 
112.  Semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports.  The  PMO  will submit  the  semiannual 
environmental  monitoring  reports  to ADB. The reports  will include  (i) progress made  in  the EMP 
implementation;  (ii)  overall  effectiveness  of  the  EMP  implementation  (including  public  and 
occupational  health  and  safety);  (iii)  environmental  monitoring  and  compliance;  (iv)  institutional 
strengthening  and  training;  (v)  public  consultation  (including  the  GRM);  and  (vi)  any  problems 
encountered  during  construction  and operation,  and  the relevant  corrective  actions  undertaken. 
The environmental specialist will help the PMO prepare the reports and submit the English reports 
to ADB for disclosure.  
113.  Environmental  acceptance  reporting.  Following  the  PRC’s  Regulation  on  Project 
Completion  Environmental  Audit  (Ministry  of  Environmental  Protection,  2001),  within  3  months 
after the completion of major subprojects, an environmental acceptance report for each subproject 
shall  be  (i)  prepared  by  the  implementing  agency  (the  LCG  or  the  ZDG)  or  a  capable 
environmental  monitoring institute in accordance with the PRC’s Guideline on Project Completion 
Environmental  Audit  (2017);  and  (ii)  finally  reported  to  ADB  through  semiannual  environmental 
monitoring  reports.  The  environmental  acceptance  reports  will  indicate  the  timing,  extent,  and 
effectiveness  of  completed  mitigation  and  maintenance;  and  needs  for  additional  mitigation 
measures  and monitoring  during operations. 
3-2.  Resettlement  Plan, EMDP, SDAP, GAP, and ESMS (Social Measures) 
Internal and external monitoring of the implementation of the resettlement plan, the EMDP, 
114. 
the  SDAP,  the  GAP,  and the  ESMS  will  be conducted.  For  monitoring  of the  implementation  of 
the resettlement  plan, the EMDP,  and the ESMS,  monitoring  methodologies  are specified  in the 
resettlement  plan, the EMDP, and the ESMS. For monitoring of implementation  of the SDAP and 
the GAP, clear targets and indicators are in the SDAP and the GAP; and some indicators are also 
included in the design and monitoring  framework. 
115.  To ensure implementation  and monitoring of the resettlement plan, the EMDP, the SDAP, 
the GAP,  and  the ESMS,  the resettlement  specialist,  the  social  development  specialist,  and the  
gender specialist in the project management  support consultant team will assist the PMO and the 
LPMOs  by working  with relevant focal  staff of the PMO and the LPMOs  in (i) setting  up effective 
monitoring  systems;  (ii)  internally  monitoring  implementation  of  the  plans;  and  (iii)  reporting  the 
results of the internal monitoring to ADB through quarterly project progress reports and disclosing 
relevant information locally until the project completion. The PMO and the LPMOs will ensure that 
civil  works  contractors  comply  with  applicable  labor  laws  and  core  labor  standards  and  provide 
relevant training to their workers. 
116.  An external  resettlement  and social development  M&E agency will conduct external M&E 
of  the  implementation  of  the  resettlement  plan,  the  EMDP, 
the  SDAP,  and  the  GAP 
semiannually.44  The  cost  of  the  external  resettlement  M&E  will  be  funded  from  the  ADB  loan. 
External resettlement  and social development  M&E reports will be forwarded directly  to ADB. 
44 The M&E of the implementation  of the resettlement  plan  will be  conducted semiannually  during  the implementation 
of the resettlement  plan  and annually  for 2 years after that. 
56 
C. 
Evaluation 
117. 
In  addition  to regular  monitoring,  project  progress  and  performance  will  be  monitored  at 
least  once a  year jointly  by  ADB and  the ZCG  during  ADB’s  review  mission.  ADB  and  the ZCG 
will undertake  a midterm review in the mid-year of the project implementation  period to conduct a 
detailed  evaluation  of  the  project  scope,  implementation  arrangements,  progress  of  the  overall 
project  and each  component,  and  status of achieving  the performance  targets;  and recommend 
appropriate  measures, 
implementation 
in 
arrangements, reallocation of loan proceeds, changes in the ADB financing rations, and extension 
of  the  loan  closing  date.  Promptly  after  physical  completion  of the  project,  but in  any  event  not  
later  than  6 months  thereafter  or  such  later  date  as ADB  may  agree  for  this  purpose,  the  PMO 
will  prepare  and  submit  to  ADB  a  project  completion  report,  in  such  form  and  in  such  detail  as 
ADB shall reasonably request,  on the implementation  and evaluation of the project. 
the  project  scope  and/or 
including  changes 
D. 
Reporting   
118.  The ZCG will provide ADB with (i) quarterly project progress reports in a format agreed by 
ADB;  (ii)  semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports;  and  (iii)  a  project  completion  report 
promptly  after  physical  completion  of  the  project,  but  in  any  event  not  later  than  6  months 
thereafter  or such  later date  as ADB  may agree  for this purpose.  The ZCG  will also ensure  that 
an  external  resettlement  and  social  development  M&E  agency  will  submit  the  M&E  reports  to 
ADB. To ensure that project will continue to be both viable and sustainable,  project accounts and 
the  audited  project  financial  statement  together  with  the  associated  auditor's  report  should  be 
adequately  reviewed. 
E. 
Stakeholder  Communication  Strategy  
119.  Project  information  will  be  disclosed  through  ADB’s  and  the  government’s  websites, 
meetings,  interviews,  focus  group  discussions,  and  community  consultation  meetings  in 
accordance  with the requirements  of ADB’s information  disclosure  policy. Main stakeholders  are 
the  different  agencies  of  the  ZCG,  the  ZDG,  the  LCG,  beneficiaries,  affected  persons,  and 
participants  in  the  project  implementation.  Stakeholder  communication  is  also  part  of  the  EIA, 
including the EMP, resettlement plan, the EMDP, the SDAP, and the GAP; and will be monitored 
accordingly. 
120.  Environment.  Meaningful  consultation,  participation,  and  information  disclosure  was 
conducted  during  project  preparation.  Information  disclosure  and  public  consultation  included 
newspaper  disclosure;  informal  communication  with  key stakeholders,  including  residents,  local 
authorities,  and  sector  specific  institutions  and  authorities;  questionnaire  surveys;  and  wider 
stakeholder  meetings  attended  by  affected  people  and  other  concerned  stakeholders.  A  GRM 
has  been  defined  to  address  community  concerns,  reduce  risks,  and  assist  the  project  in 
maximizing  environmental  and  social  benefits.  Meaningful  consultation  will  continue  throughout 
project implementation,  especially prior to and during civil works. Planning for public consultations 
will ensure that environmental  and social safeguard  requirements  are discussed. 
Involuntary  resettlement.  Affected  villagers  and  households  were  consulted  during 
121. 
project  preparation  and  socioeconomic  surveys.  Local 
in 
resettlement  planning  and  their  concerns  have  been  integrated  into  the  resettlement  plan.  The 
resettlement  plan  has  also  been  posted  on  ADB’s  website.  Resettlement  information  booklets 
were  distributed  locally.  The  grievance  redress  procedures  have  been  established  and 
explanations  have been included in the resettlement  information  booklets. 
representatives  participated 
57 
122.  Ethnic  minority  development,  social  development,  and  gender  action  plans. 
Consultations  with communities  were conducted  and will be continued during the implementation 
of the EMDP, the SDAP, and the GAP. Special attention will be paid to the participation of women, 
the  poor  and/or  low-income  people,  and  ethnic  minority  groups.  Information  from  monitoring 
reports will be disclosed  periodically.  
123.  Public disclosure. ADB and the ZCG, including the YWPCO with the PMO; and the ZDG 
and  the  LCG,  including  the  LPMOs,  will  disclose  relevant  project  information  to  the  public  and 
interested  parties.  This  includes  particularly  the  information  regarding  the  overall  project  and 
environment  and  social  safeguards.  The  information  disclosure  measures 
for  different 
stakeholders  are described in Table IX-2. 
Table IX-2: Public Disclosure  Measures 
Means of 
Communication 
Responsibility 
Audience 
Frequency 
ADB website 
ADB 
Public  
Once 
Information 
Report and 
Recommendation  of 
the President  with links 
to relevant documents 
Project information 
during 
design  and 
construction  phase 
Stakeholder 
consultations  and public 
notice boards 
ZCG, including  PMO, 
LCG, ZDG, and 
LPMOs 
Environmental 
monitoring  reports 
ADB and ZCG websites, 
and public  notice boards 
ZCG, including  PMO, 
LCG, ZDG, and 
LPMOs 
Information on RPs, 
EMDPs, SDAPs, and 
GAP activities  
Stakeholder  consultation, 
ADB and ZCG websites, 
and public  notice boards 
ZCG, including  PMO, 
LCG, ZDG, and 
LPMOs 
External resettlement 
and social 
development  M&E 
reports 
ADB and ZCG websites, 
and public  notice boards 
ZCG, including  PMO, 
LCG, ZDG, and 
LPMOs 
Project 
beneficiaries 
and affected 
people 
Affected people 
and other 
interested 
stakeholders 
Affected people 
and other 
interested 
stakeholders 
Affected people 
and other 
interested 
stakeholders 
Regular  intervals  during 
design  and  construction 
phase 
Semiannually 
Regularly 
For LAR, semiannually 
during  LAR implementation 
and annually  for 2 years 
after LAR completion. 
For social development, 
semiannually  during  project 
implementation 
Audited  project 
financial statements 
ADB website 
Project Information 
Documents 
Project Completion 
Report 
ADB Website 
ADB Website 
ADB 
ZCG, including  PMO 
Audit office 
Public 
Annually 
ADB 
ADB 
Public 
Quarterly 
Public 
Once 
ADB = Asian  Development  Bank, EMDP = ethnic  minority development  plan,  GAP = gender  action plan,  LAR = land 
acquisition  and  resettlement,  LCG =  Ludian  County  Government,  LPMO =  local  project  management  office,  M&E = 
monitoring  and  evaluation,  PMO = project  management  office, RP = resettlement  plan,  SDAP = social  development 
actin plan,  ZCG = Zhaotong  City Government, ZDG = Zhaoyang  District Government.  
Source: Asian  Development Bank. 
124.  Detailed  consultation,  participation,  and  information  disclosure  related  to  social  and 
environmental  safeguards  are included in the EMP, resettlement  plan, and the EMDP. 
58 
X. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
125.  ADB reserves  the right to investigate,  directly  or through  its agents,  any violations  of the 
Anticorruption  Policy  relating  to  the  project.45  All  contracts  financed  by  ADB  shall  include 
provisions  specifying  the  right  of  ADB  to  audit  and  examine  the  records  and  accounts  of  the 
executing agency  and all project contractors, suppliers,  consultants,  and other service providers. 
Individuals  and/or  entities  on  ADB’s  anticorruption  debarment  list  are  ineligible  to  participate  in 
ADB-financed  activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the project.46  
126.  To  support  these  efforts,  relevant  provisions  are  included  in  the  loan  and  project 
agreements  and the bidding documents  for the project.  
XI. 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
127.  People  who  are,  or  may  in  the  future  be,  adversely  affected  by  the  project  may  submit 
complaints  to  ADB’s  Accountability  Mechanism.  The  Accountability  Mechanism  provides  an 
independent forum and process whereby people adversely affected by ADB-assisted projects can 
voice,  and  seek  a  resolution  of  their  problems,  as  well  as  report  alleged  violations  of  ADB’s 
operational  policies  and  procedures.  Before  submitting  a  complaint  to  the  Accountability 
Mechanism, affected people should make an effort in good faith to solve their problems by working 
with  the  concerned  ADB  operations  department.  Only  after  doing  that  and  if  they  are  still 
dissatisfied,  they should approach the Accountability  Mechanism.47 
XII. 
RECORD  OF CHANGES  TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
128.  All revisions and/or updates during the course of implementation should be retained in this 
section  to provide  a chronological  history of  changes  to implemented  arrangements  recorded  in 
the  project  administration  manual,  including  revision  to  contract  awards  and  disbursement  S-
curves.
45 Anticorruption  Policy: https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/32026/anticorruption.pdf 
46 ADB's web site  on anticorruption  and  integrity: https://www.adb.org/site/integrity/main 
47 ADB’s website  on accountability  mechanism. https://www.adb.org/site/accountability-mechanism/main 
Table A1.1: Detailed Project Outputs  and Activities 
Appendix 1 
 59           
Contracts 
Innovativeness 
Remarks 
C1: for Xinjie  Town 
C2: for Shuimo Town 
C3 and  C4: for Longshu  Town 
NBF-C1: construction  of the WWTP 
in Shuimo Town (completed) 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in O&M and related 
institutional  and capacity 
development 
Since the WWTP 
is an associated 
facility, due 
diligence  was 
conducted for 
environment,  LAR, 
and ethnic minority 
development. 
The cost of the 
WWTP (design 
cost, LAR cost, 
construction  cost, 
and O&M cost until 
the completion  of 
this project)  was 
included  in the 
project cost. 
IA 
Output 1: Wastewater management  and pollution control in the Sayu River Basin strengthened 
1.1 
1.1.1 
LCG 
Activities 
Waste management 
Centralized wastewater management  system 
Xinjie Town: Installation  of wastewater 
collection  pipes  and construction  of a 
first-class pump station  (capacity of 
333.86  m3/day for 30 m pumping up) and 
a second-class  pump station  (capacity of 
631.85  m3/day for 40 m pumping up). 
Shuimo Town: Installation  of wastewater 
collection  pipes. 
Longshu Town: Installation  of 
wastewater  collection  pipes  (for self-flow 
by gravity), construction  of a local pump 
station  (capacity of 63.55  m3/day for 15 
m pumping up), and  an existing  WWTP 
where the collected wastewater  will be 
treated. 
The WWTP will be operated  by a 
private company (under  negotiation 
with a private  company for, 
tentatively,  5 years).  
The current capacity of the WWTP is 
2,000  m3/day. The actual  wastewater 
treatment  volume will be 1,899 
m3/day in 2035.  The WWTP has 
adequate  land for additional  capacity 
of 2,000 m3/day.  
The WWTP meets class 1A 
standard.   
The centralized  wastewater 
management  system will cover 
(registered)  14,557  households  and 
56,979  people  against  the 
(registered)  32,905  households  and 
127,015  people  in the Sayu River 
Basin  upper Yudong  Reservoir 
(44.24%  and 44.86%). 
Wastewater  collection  pipes  to the 
14,557  households  will be installed. 
Currently, at the households, 
wastewater  is collected in the toilet. 
Each household  needs  to remodel 
the toilet  (including  installation  of 
connecting  pipes  for wastewater)  so 
that wastewater  will be collected to 
the installed  wastewater  collection 
pipes.  Actual numbers  of households 
and people  from which wastewater  is 
collected will be smaller  than the 
numbers  covered by the centralized 
wastewater  management  system.   
The target  set for 1.1.1  and 1.1.2  is 
that 15,359  households  (including 
IA 
1.1.2 
LCG 
ZDG 
 60 
Appendix  1 
Activities 
Contracts 
Innovativeness 
Remarks 
Distributed wastewater management  system 
Xinjie Town: One existing  treatment 
facility (is ready for operation  [waiting  for 
households  to connect to installed 
wastewater  collection  pipes]), 
construction  of four treatment facilities, 
and installation  of wastewater  collection 
pipes. 
Shuimo Town: construction  of seven 
treatment  facilities and installation  of 
wastewater  collection  pipes. 
Longhshu  Town: construction  of four 
treatment  facilities and installation  of 
wastewater  collection  pipes. 
Sujia Township: 15 existing  treatment 
facilities (but are not being  operated  due 
to lack of wastewater  collection  pipes), 
construction  of 10 treatment facilities, 
and installation  of wastewater  collection 
pipes. 
Sayu Town: Two existing  treatment 
facilities (but are not being  operated  due 
to lack of wastewater  collection  pipes) 
and installation  of wastewater  collection 
pipes. 
Leju Township: One existing  treatment 
facility (but is not being  operated  due to 
lack of wastewater  collection pipes)  and 
installation  of wastewater  collection 
pipes. 
59,286  people,  of which 47.0% are 
women) in the Sayu River Basin 
connected with the centralized 
wastewater  management  system 
(1.1.1)  or the distributed  wastewater 
management  system (1.1.2). 
The treatment  capacities are 2−150 
m3/day  
Existing:  10 m3/day (2), 15 m3/day 
(9), 30 m3/day (5), 40 m3/day (2), and 
150 m3/day (1) 
New: 2 m3/day (1), 5 m3/day (13), 10 
m3/day (6), 15 m3/day (4), 16 m3/day 
(1)  
All the treatment facilities  meet or will 
meet class  1A standard.   
A2O technology  has been  or will be 
applied  to all 44 treatment  facilities.  
Solar panels  have been  or will be 
installed  for 42 out of 44 treatment 
systems (19 existing  and 25 to be 
constructed).   
The distributed  wastewater 
management  system will cover 
(registered)  4,641  households  and 
17,382  people  against  registered 
32,905  households  and 127,015 
people  in the Sayu River Basin upper 
Yudong  Reservoir of 127,015 
(14.10%  and 13.68%). 
Wastewater  collection  pipes  to the 
4,641  households  will be installed. 
Currently, at the households, 
wastewater  is collected in the toilet. 
Each household  needs  to remodel 
the toilet  (including  installation  of 
connecting  pipes  for wastewater)  so 
that wastewater  will be collected to 
Since the 19 
existing 
wastewater 
treatment  facilities 
are associated 
facilities,  due 
diligence  was 
conducted for 
environment,  LAR, 
and ethnic minority 
development. 
The costs for the 
facilities (design 
cost, LAR cost, 
construction  cost, 
and O&M cost until 
the completion  of 
this project)  were 
included  in the 
project cost. 
G1: purchase  and installation  of 
equipment  for the 15 treatment 
facilities in Xinjie,  Shuimo,  and 
Longshu  towns 
C1: installation  of wastewater 
collection  pipes  in Xinjie Town 
C2: installation  of wastewater 
collection  pipes  in Shuimo Town 
C3 and  C4: installation  of 
wastewater  collection  pipes  in 
Longshu  Town 
NBF-G1: purchase  and installation  of 
equipment  for one treatment  facility 
in Xinjie  Town (completed)  
G5: purchase  and installation  of 
equipment  for the 10 treatment 
facilities in Sujia  Township 
C14: installation  of wastewater 
collection  pipes  in Leju and Sujia 
townships  and Sayu Town 
(A design  institute  will design  the 
intelligent  cloud platform information 
management  systems and prepare 
the technical specifications.) 
G4: purchase  of equipment  for the 
intelligent  cloud platform information 
management  systems (procurement 
will be conducted by YWPCO) 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in O&M and related 
institutional  and capacity 
Introduction  of 
distributed 
wastewater 
management 
system which 
has advantages 
to traditional 
centralized 
wastewater 
management 
system in rural 
area (e.g., 
wastewater 
treatment 
tailored  to the 
water quality in 
the location  and 
cost reduction).   
Application  of 
A2O technology 
to small 
wastewater 
treatment 
facilities.   
Use of solar 
energy for 
wastewater 
treatment.   
Intelligent  cloud 
platform 
information 
management 
systems which 
automatically 
IA 
Activities 
the installed  wastewater  collection 
pipes.  Actual numbers  of households 
and people  from which wastewater  is 
collected will be smaller  than the 
numbers  covered by the centralized 
wastewater  management  system.   
The target  set for 1.1.1  and 1.1.2  is 
that 15,359  households  (including 
59,286  people,  of which 47.0% are 
women) in the Sayu River Basin 
connected with the centralized 
wastewater  management  system 
(1.1.1)  or the distributed  wastewater 
management  system (1.1.2). 
The systems automatically  send  data 
on wastewater  treatment to mobiles 
of staff responsible  for facilities 
operation. 
The purpose  is to reduce scattered 
stacking animal  feces in fields  which 
are washed  away by rain and enters 
rivers. 
The capacity of each tank is 5 m3. 
Manure will be used  for farming 
directly or after fermentation.   
The tanks will cover (registered) 
17,323  households  against 
(registered)  32,905  households  in 
the Sayu River Basin upper  Yudong 
Reservoir (52.65%). 
YWPCO 
Establishment  of intelligent  cloud 
platform information  management 
systems for 43 out of 44 treatment 
facilities (excluding  the existing  station  in 
Wangjiapingzi,  Xinjie  Town).  
1.1.3 
LCG 
ZDG 
Animal feces  management 
Xinjie Town: Installation  of manure 
collection  tanks at 2,350  households 
(one tank for each household). 
Shuimo Town: Installation  of manure 
collection  tanks at 3,134  households 
(one tank for each household). 
Longshu Town: Installation  of manure 
collection  tanks at 8,386  households 
(one tank for each household). 
Sujia Township: Installation  of manure 
collection  tanks at 2,329  households 
(one tank for each household). 
Sayu Town: Installation  of manure 
collection  tanks at 628  households  (one 
tank for each household). 
Leju Township: Installation  of manure 
collection  tanks at 496  households  (one 
tank for each household). 
Contracts 
development 
Appendix 1 
 61           
Remarks 
Innovativeness 
send  data on 
wastewater 
treatment  to 
mobiles  of staff 
responsible  for 
facilities 
operation. 
C1: for Xinjie  Town 
C2: for Shuimo Town 
C3 and  C4: for Longshu  Town 
C14: for Leju and Sujia  townships 
and Sayu Town 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in O&M and related 
institutional  and capacity 
development 
Use of glass 
steel  tanks, 
which are more 
economical, 
easier  for 
installation, 
more corrosion 
resistant,  and 
more 
impermeable 
than traditional 
concrete tanks. 
 62 
Appendix  1 
IA 
1.2 Solid waste management 
LCG 
Activities 
Contracts 
Innovativeness 
Remarks 
Xinjie Town: Construction  of a solid 
waste transfer station  (capacity of 20 
tons/day).   
Provision  of bins (39), trash  cans (218), 
compression  trucks (3), detachable 
container  garbage  trucks (4), electric 
tricycles (58), and mobile  compression 
dustbins  (2). 
Shuimo Town: Construction  of a solid 
waste transfer station  (capacity of 20 
tons/day)   
Construction  of a garbage  pyrolysis 
facility (capacity of 70 tons/day) with 
automatic monitoring  and  warning 
system (for SOx, NOx, temperature, 
etc.). 
Provision  of bins (22), trash  cans (433), 
compression  trucks (2), hook-arm 
garbage  truck (1), detachable  container 
garbage  truck (1), electric tricycles (34), 
and mobile  compression  dustbins  (2). 
Longshui  Town: Construction  of a solid 
waste transfer station  (capacity of 35 
tons/day).   
Provision  of bins (72), trash  cans (435), 
compression  truck (2), hook-arm garbage 
trucks (6), detachable  container  garbage 
truck (1), electric tricycles (16), and 
mobile compression  dustbins  (2). 
Garbage  will be classified  to 
recyclable garbage  (papers;  books; 
plastic,  glass,  and metal bottles; 
other metals,  etc.), food waste (will 
be thrown into manure collection 
tanks installed  under  the project and 
will be used  for farming), and  other 
unrecyclable garbage  (will be 
collected,  compressed,  transferred, 
and treated). 
It is assumed  that,  in 2025, 20%  of 
the total  population  covered by the 
two garbage  pyrolysis facilities  will 
conduct garbage  classification;  and 
the garbage  will be reduced by 35% 
in rural areas,  and by 25% in towns 
and villages;  and in 2035, 40% of the 
total  population  covered by the two 
garbage  pyrolysis  facilities will 
conduct garbage  classification;  and 
the garbage  will be reduced by 40% 
in rural areas,  and by 31% in towns 
and villages. 
To ensure  only unrecyclable  garbage 
is collected and  transferred, in each 
village  (the population  is less  than 
1,000),  1−4 certain  persons 
responsible  for garbage  boxes in the 
public place;  and garbage 
classification  and cleaning  of the 
place will be designated. 
G2: purchase  of equipment  for the 
garbage  pyrolysis  facility, including 
the automatic monitoring  and 
warning  system in Shuimo Town 
C5: construction  of the three  solid 
waste transfer stations  and garbage 
pyrolysis facility in Xinjie,  Shuimo, 
and Longshu  towns 
G3: provision  of equipment  for 
garbage  collection,  compression, 
and transfer in Xinjie,  Shuimo, and 
Longshu  towns. 
G6: purchase  of equipment  for the 
garbage  pyrolysis  facility, including 
the automatic monitoring  and 
warning  system in Sujia  Township 
C15: construction  of the solid  waste 
transfer station  and  garbage 
pyrolysis facility in Sujia  Township 
G7: provision  of equipment  for 
garbage  collection,  compression, 
and transfer in Dazhaizi,  Leju,  and 
Sujia  townships;  and Dashanbao 
and Sayu towns 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in O&M (including 
establishment  of comprehensive 
solid  waste management  from 
households  to plants)  and related 
institutional  and capacity 
development.   
Introduction  of 
garbage 
pyrolysis 
facilities with 
shorter 
processing 
cycle, smaller 
floor space, 
maximum 
volume 
reduction,  and 
wider 
application  to 
waste.   
Comprehensive 
solid  waste 
management 
from 
households  to 
plants  (including 
garbage 
classification), 
with institutional 
and capacity 
development. 
IA 
ZDG 
Activities 
Contracts 
Innovativeness 
Remarks 
Appendix 1 
 63           
Sujia Township:  Construction  of solid 
waste transfer station  (capacity of 15 
tons/day).   
Construction  of a garbage  pyrolysis 
facility (capacity of 20 tons/day) with 
automatic monitoring  and  warning 
system (for SOx, NOx, temperature, 
etc.). 
Provision  of bins (5), trash cans (577), 
compression  trucks (3), hook-arm 
garbage  truck (1), detachable  container 
garbage  truck (1), electric tricycles (60), 
and mobile  compression  dustbins  (2). 
Sayu Town: Provision  of trash cans 
(85). 
Leju Township: Provision  of trash cans 
(85). 
Dazhaizi Township: Provision  of trash 
cans (35). 
Dashanbao  Town: Provision  of trash 
cans (80). 
To ensure  that the two garbage 
pyrolysis facilities  will comply with 
applicable  air emission  standards, 
technologies  used  for a successful 
case in Nanning  Municipality will be 
used,  including  selection  of pyrolysis 
technology  and qualified  equipment 
manufacturer. 
The two garbage  pyrolysis facilities 
will cover (registered)  30,890 
households  and 118,798  people 
against  (registered)  32,905 
households  and 127,015  people  in 
the Sayu River Basin upper  Yudong 
Reservoir (93.88%  and  93.53%). 
The new solid  waste management 
system will provide new job 
opportunities  to 343 people  for O&M. 
1.3. Pilot eco-villages 
LCG 
Xinjie Town: Jiufang (administrative) 
Village,  including  Anjasongbao  (natural) 
Village  (132 households,  566  people); 
Xiaohebian  (natural)  Village  (127 
households,  587 people);  and Pojiao 
(natural)  Village  (190 households,  835 
people) 
Shuimo Town: Shuimo (administrative) 
Village.  including  Goutou (natural)  Village 
(129 households,  474 people);  and 
Alukuai (natural)  Village  (335 
households,  1,271  people) 
Longshui  Town: Xinle (administrative) 
Village,  including  Liyuan (natural)  Village 
(805 households,  3,312  people) 
(i) Development  of basic 
infrastructure  (permeable  pavements 
and green  space, drainage  systems, 
public eco-toilets,  ecological 
riverbank, etc.) 
(ii) Training  on garbage 
classification,  recycling, reduction  of 
resource  use and waste stream 
(including  phasing  out of single-use 
plastics  replacing  them with locally 
sourced  reusable  and compostable 
products) 
(iii) Education  at schools  to promote 
garbage  classification,  recycling, 
reduction  of resource use and  waste 
stream (including  phasing  out of 
single-use  plastics  replacing  them  
C6: construction  of basic 
infrastructure  in Xinjie  Town 
C8: construction  of basic 
infrastructure  in Shuimo  Town 
C7: construction  of basic 
infrastructure  in Longshu  Town 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in (i) training;  (ii) 
education  at schools;  (iii) 
development  of environmental  health 
management  system; and (iv) 
publicity 
Piloting  of eco-
villages,  with 
integrated 
approaches, 
including 
innovative  basic 
infrastructure 
(permeable 
pavements  and 
green  space, 
public eco-
toilets, 
ecological 
riverbank, etc.); 
introduction  of 
garbage 
classification; 
promotion  of 
 64 
Appendix  1 
IA 
Activities 
Contracts 
with locally sourced reusable  and 
compostable  products) 
(iv) Development of environmental 
health  management  system, 
including  institutional  development 
(establishment  of designated 
cleaning  teams and designated 
environmental  supervision  groups, 
including  their  training,  establishment 
of awarding  program, etc.). 
(v) Publicity (construction  of cultural 
activity rooms, environmental 
protection  bulletin  boards,  audio 
systems, display  screens,  and other 
publicity facilities)  to promote 
garbage  classification,  recycling, 
reduction  of resource use and  waste 
stream (including  phasing  out of 
single-use  plastics  replacing  them 
with locally sourced reusable  and 
compostable  products)  and to 
introduce  activities  by special 
cleaning  teams and special 
environmental  supervision  groups. 
Remarks 
Innovativeness 
recycling; 
reduction  of 
resource  use 
and waste 
stream;  
education; 
training; 
publicity;  and 
development  of 
environmental 
health 
management 
system with 
institutional 
development. 
1.4 Wetlands  construction  to reduce nonpoint  source pollution 
LCG 
Shuimo Town:  
Construction  of a new wetland  in Xiaohebian  Wetland  partially  in basic farmland 
Process: pond  for sedimentation  → pond  for oxidation  → wetland  for horizontal 
subsurface  flow → wetland for surface flow + membrane treatment facility (water 
quality  needs  to meet class 3 standard) 
New wetland  area: 86.92  mu, out of which 25.29  mu is in basic farmland  
Treatment capacity: 1,577.97  m3/day (wastewater:  136.81  m3/day; rainwater: 
1,441.15  m3/day) 
Longshui  Town:  
Construction  of a new wetland  in Zhongheba  Wetland 
Process: pond  for sedimentation  → pond  for oxidation  → wetland  for horizontal 
subsurface  flow → wetland for surface flow + membrane treatment facility (water 
quality  needs  to meet class 3 standard) 
New wetland  area: 113.76  mu  
Treatment capacity: 3,783.49  m3/day (wastewater:  255.94  m3/day + 2,000 m3/day 
[from WWTP]; rainwater:  1,527.55  m3/day) 
C9: New wetland  construction  in 
Zhongheba  and Dazhaizi  Wetlands 
in Longshu  Town 
C10: New wetland  construction  in 
Xiaohebian  Wetland  in Shumo Town 
and Longxiang  and Longshu 
Wetlands  in Longshu  Town 
C16: New wetland  construction  in 
Xinhe  Wetland  in Leju Township 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in O&M and related 
institutional  and capacity 
development 
Introduction  of 
new artificial 
wetlands  which 
can be 
constructed  in 
basic 
farmlands.  
Introduction  of 
combination  of 
artificial facilities 
(ponds  for 
sedimentation 
and oxidation, 
membrane 
treatment 
facility, etc.) and 
artificial 
Appendix 1 
 65           
Contracts 
Innovativeness 
wetland. 
Remarks 
IA 
Activities 
Construction  of a new wetland  in Longshu  Wetland  in basic farmland 
Process: wetland  for surface flow with aquatic  economic crops 
New wetland  area: 115.02  mu  
Treatment capacity: 1,201.33  m3/day (wastewater:  168.85  m3/day; rainwater: 
1,032.48  m3/day) 
Construction  of a new wetland  in Longxiang  Wetland  in basic farmland 
Process: wetland  for surface flow with aquatic  economic crops 
New wetland  area: 50.81  mu  
Treatment capacity: 941.49  m3/day (wastewater:  112.05  m3/day; rainwater: 
829.44  m3/day) 
Construction  of a new wetland  in Dazhaizi  Wetland  in basic farmland 
Process: wetland  for surface flow with aquatic  economic crops 
New wetland  area: 189.03  mu  
Treatment capacity: 2,773.07  m3/day (wastewater:  310.67  m3/day; rainwater: 
2,462.40  m3/day) 
Leju Township: 
Construction  of a new wetland  in Xinhe Wetland 
Process: pond  for sedimentation  → pond  for oxidation  → wetland  for horizontal 
subsurface  flow → wetland for surface flow  
New wetland  area: 14.93  mu  
Treatment capacity: 980.31  m3/day (wastewater:  153.46  m3/day; rainwater: 
826.85  m3/day) 
ZDG 
1.5 
LCG 
Establishment  of quantifiable  soil and water conservation  model 
Xinjie Town: Afforestation  (economic 
forest: 550.83  mu; ecological  forest: 
2,109.11  mu) which will increase  forest 
coverage in the town from 32.18%  to 
33.72%  by 1.54%,  perennial  herb 
planting  (1,234.08  mu), construction  of 
irrigation  facilities for 498.52  mu 
perennial  herb planting,  and construction 
of ponds  (1,000 m3 x 4 + 1,500 m3 x 2) 
for perennial  herb planting 
Shuimo Town: Afforestation  (ecological 
forest in Maobizi Water Source: 894.16 
mu; ecological  forest in the other areas: 
837.56  mu) which will increase forest 
coverage in the town from 29.51%  to 
29.94%  by 0.43%,  perennial  herb 
planting  (199.55  mu), construction  of 
irrigation  facilities for 127.05  mu 
Afforestation for ecological  forest will 
be conducted in 18 patterns  using 
mainly 10 species. 
Afforestation for economic forest will 
be conducted using  one species.   
For perennial  herb planting,  one 
species  will be used. 
For establishment  of quantifiable  soil 
and water conservation  model, four 
afforestation  patterns  and bare 
ground  were selected  for each of  
15-, 25-, and 35-degree  slopes  (15 
patterns  in total).  For each pattern 
four monitoring  areas  were selected 
(60 monitoring  areas  in total). Effects 
of afforestation on soil  and water 
C11: 3 years contract for purchase, 
planting,  tending,  and  management 
of seedlings  and disease  and insect 
pest  control. 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in (i) establishment  of a 
model to estimate  effects of 
afforestation  on soil and water 
conservation;  (ii) develop  a plan  to 
actually measure  effects of 
afforestation  on soil and water 
conservation  on sites;  (iii) 
measurement  of effects of 
afforestation  on soil and water 
conservation  on sites;  and (iv) 
revision  of the model based  on the 
measured  data 
 66 
Appendix  1 
IA 
Activities 
Contracts 
Innovativeness 
Remarks 
perennial  herb planting,  and construction 
of ponds  (600 m3 x 2 + 1,000  m3 x 1) for 
perennial  herb planting 
Longshui  Town: Afforestation 
(ecological  forest: 235.92  mu) which will 
increase  forest coverage in the town from 
26.40%  to 26.54%  by 0.14%,  perennial 
herb planting  (664.98  mu), construction 
of irrigation  facilities  for 261.14  mu 
perennial  herb planting,  and construction 
of ponds  (600 m3 x 5 + 1,000  m3 x 3 
+1,500 m3 x 2) for perennial  herb 
planting 
1.6 Promotion of low-emission  agriculture 
LCG 
Longshu Town: In the Highland 
Characteristic  Agricultural  Demonstration 
Zone to be established  for the project 
(pilot  area: 1,028.10  mu), development  of 
a formula to estimate  necessary  fertilizer 
volume (based  on crop type, water 
volume, fertilizer type, etc.), integration  of 
water and fertilizer  to reduce fertilizer 
use,  construction  of ecological  drainage 
ditches,a construction  of a gridded 
surface source  pollution  monitoring 
platform,b improvement of soil sampling 
conservation  will be estimated  using 
existing  model. After that, effects of 
afforestation  on soil and water 
conservation  will be actually 
measured  at the 60 monitoring 
areas;  and based  on the measured 
data,  the model will be revised.  It is 
expected to take about  10 years to 
get data adequate  to revise the 
model. However, tentatively 
improved model will be presented  by 
the project completion  or project 
completion  report preparation  at 
latest.     
For compensation  for farmland-to-
ecological  forest conversion, 
2,174.23  mu x CNY600/mu/year  x 15 
years = CNY19,568,070  will be 
needed. 
For compensation  for farmland-to-
perennial  herb area conversion  (for 
3–5 years before the herb grows and 
makes a profit), 2,098.61  mu x 
CNY300/mu/year  x 4 years = 
CNY2,518,331  will be needed. 
These  compensations  will be paid 
from the eco-compensation  fund to 
be established  under the project. 
It is estimated  that CNY18.69 million 
will be used  from the eco-
compensation  fund to be established 
under  the project, agricultural 
experimental  areas  (CNY6.05 
million),  compensation  for fertilizer 
reduction  (CNY5.01 million),  and 
compensation  for pesticide  use 
reduction  (CNY7.56 million). 
C12: Construction  of basic 
infrastructure  in the  Highland 
Characteristic  Agricultural 
Demonstration  Zone and in the 
Vegetable  Industry Demonstration 
Point in Longshu  Town in Ludian 
County 
C13: Construction  of basic 
infrastructure  in the  Zhaotong 
Featured  Potato  Industry 
Demonstration  Point in Shuimo 
Promotion  of 
low-emission 
agriculture  with 
innovative 
technologies 
(ecological 
drainage 
ditches,  gridded 
surface source 
pollution 
monitoring 
platform, 
Appendix 1 
 67           
Remarks 
Innovativeness 
measures  to 
estimate  at 
least  necessary 
fertilizer  volume 
and reduce 
fertilizer  use, 
recycling, etc.) 
and incentive 
(establishment 
of green and 
organic crop 
brand). 
Contracts 
Town and in the High Standard 
Farming Demonstration  Points  in 
Xinjie  Town in Ludian  County 
C17: Construction  of basic 
infrastructure  in the  High Standard 
Farming Demonstration  Points  and 
in the Breeding  and Recycling 
Agriculture  Demonstration  Point in 
Sujia  Township  and basic 
infrastructure  in the  Zhaotong 
Featured  Apple  Industry 
Demonstration  Point in Sayu Town in 
Zhaoyang  District 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in (i) O&M and related 
institutional  and capacity 
development;  (ii) reduction  of 
fertilizer  use, increase  of organic 
and/or  special  fertilizer use  (e.g., use 
of animal feces, composting  of 
vegetables  and straw), etc.; and (iii) 
establishment  of a green and  organic 
apple  brand,  organic vegetable 
brand,  etc. 
IA 
Activities 
and testing,  etc. 
Shuimo Town: In the Zhaotong 
Featured  Potato  Industry Demonstration 
Point to be established  for the project 
(pilot  area: 1,000.00  mu), development  of 
a formula to estimate  necessary  fertilizer 
volume (based  on crop type, water 
volume, fertilizer type, etc.), reduction  of 
pesticides,  improvement of soil sampling 
and testing,  etc. 
Longshu Town: In the Vegetable 
Industry  Demonstration  Point  to be 
established  for the project (pilot  area: 
1,077.17  mu), development  of a formula 
to estimate  necessary fertilizer  volume 
(based  on crop type, water volume, 
fertilizer  type, etc.), integration  of water 
and fertilizer  to reduce fertilizer use, 
increase  of organic fertilizer  application,   
construction  of ecological  drainage 
ditches  (endnote  a), establishment  of 
organic vegetable  brand, improvement of 
soil  sampling  and testing,  etc. 
Xinjie Town, Shuimo Town, Longshu 
Town in Ludian County and Sujia 
Township in Zhaoyang  District: In the 
High Standard  Farming Demonstration 
Points  to be established  for the project 
(pilot  area: 13,106.33  mu), controlled 
fertilizer  release,  increase  of organic and 
special  fertilizer application,  construction 
of ecological  drainage  ditches  (endnote 
a), improvement of soil  sampling  and 
testing,  etc. 
Sujia Township: In the Breeding  and 
Recycling Agriculture  Demonstration 
Point to be established  for the project 
(pilot  area: 580.00  mu), construction  of 
composters,  use of animal feces for 
farming to realize  circular agriculture  and 
ZDG 
 68 
Appendix  1 
IA 
Activities 
Contracts 
Innovativeness 
Remarks 
zero emission,  improvement of soil 
sampling  and testing,  etc. 
Sayu Town: In the Zhaotong  Featured 
Apple  Industry Demonstration  Point to be 
established  for the project (pilot  area: 
564.18  mu), integration  of water and 
fertilizer  to reduce fertilizer  use, increase 
of organic and special  fertilizer 
application,  establishment  of a green and 
organic apple  brand,  improvement of soil 
sampling  and testing,  etc. 
(A design  institute  will design  the 
monitoring  facilities  and smart water 
integrated  management  platform and 
prepare  the technical specifications.) 
G4: purchase  and installation  of 
equipment  for the monitoring 
systems and smart water integrated 
management  platform (procurement 
will be conducted by the YWPCO) 
Smart water 
integrated 
management 
platform, for 
real-time 
monitoring  and 
actions  in the 
event of water 
quality 
deterioration. 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in O&M and related 
institutional  and capacity 
development 
Output 2: Water resources management  in the Sayu River improved 
2.1 Establishment  of smart water integrated  management  platform   
YWPCO 
Smart water integrated  management 
platform will be established,  by 
integrating  these  developed 
monitoring  facilities  and an existing 
irrigation  area information system. 
Installation  of 
(i) three  water quality monitoring  stations 
at the borders  between  the Zhaoyang 
District and the Ludian  County; the 
Shuimo and Xinjie  towns in Ludian 
County; and the Longshu  and Shuimo 
towns in Ludian  County for COD, BOD, 
TP, TN, and NH4-NH3; 
(ii) four water level and video monitoring 
stations  for four rivers: Miaozhai  Small 
River, Liyuan  Ditch, Xin Small River, and 
Daijia  Ditch;  
(iii) four 360-degree  video monitoring 
stations  at newly constructed  wetlands  in 
Xiaohebian  Wetland,  Zhongheba 
Wetland,  Dazhaizi  Wetland,  and 
Longxiang/Longshu  Wetlands  (excluding 
the small new wetland  in Xinhe 
Wetland);c   
(iv) two 360-degree  video monitoring 
stations  at the two constructed  garbage 
pyrolysis facilities  in the Shuimo Town 
and the Sujia  Township  (independent 
from the automatic monitoring  and 
warning  systems installed  in those 
garbage  pyrolysis  facilities);  
(v) one 360-degree  video monitoring 
station  at the existing  WWTP in the 
IA 
Activities 
Contracts 
Innovativeness 
Remarks 
Appendix 1 
 69           
Shuimo Town (independent  from water 
quality  monitoring  system of the WWTP);  
(vi) two 360-degree  video monitoring 
stations  at two of the 44 wastewater 
treatment  facilities (one with the capacity 
of 25 m3/day in Suja in Sujia Township 
and another  with the capacity of 15 
m3/day in Goumenkou in Shuimo Town) 
(independent  from the intelligent  cloud 
platform information  management 
systems established  for the wastewater 
treatment  facilities) (the other 42 
wastewater  treatment  facilities will be are 
covered by [viii] below); 
(vii) three  360-degree  video monitoring 
stations  at the three pilot  eco-villages: 
Jiufang Village,  Shuimo Village,  and 
Xinle  Village;d   
(viii) 60 360-degree  video monitoring 
stations  at river entry points  into the 
Yudong  Reservoir; and   
(ix) seven rainfall stations  for seven main 
rivers flowing into the Yudong  Reservoir.e 
2.2 Establishment  of river protection model 
LCG or ZDG 
Longshu  River Basin  (basin  area: 532.7 
km2) for 68.3  km ecological  restoration  in 
the Longshu,  Shuimo, and Xinjie  towns in 
Ludian  County; and the Dazhaizi  and 
Sujia  townships  in Zhaoyang  District 
Yanjiashan  River small basin  (basin  area: 
7.0 km2) for 1.8 km ecological restoration 
in Sayu Town in Zhaoyang  District 
Guazhai  River small basin  (basin  area: 
20.1 km2) for 4.1 km ecological 
restoration  in Sujia Township  in 
Zhaoyang  District 
Lan River small basin  (basin  area: 29.6 
km2) for 6.1 km ecological restoration  in 
Sujia  Township  in Zhaoyang  District 
Ecological  restoration,  including 
construction  of ecological 
embankments (plants  on the 
embankments protect the river from 
nonpoint  source pollution)  of 98.3 km 
environmentally  sensitive  river 
sections 
C18: Ecological embankment 
construction  in Longshu  River 
tributaries  in Longshu  Town in 
Ludian  County (area 1) 
C19: Ecological embankment 
construction  in Longshu  River 
tributaries  in Longshu  Town in 
Ludian  County (area 2) 
NBF-C4: Ecological  embankment 
construction  in River tributaries  in 
Xinjie  Town in Ludian  County 
(completed) 
NBF-C3: Ecological  embankment 
construction  in River tributaries  in 
Xinjie  Town in Ludian  County 
River protection 
model using  the 
intelligent  cloud 
platform river 
information 
management 
system, which 
will help  river 
chiefs under  the 
PRC’s existing 
river chief 
system. 
 70 
Appendix  1 
IA 
Activities 
Contracts 
Innovativeness 
Remarks 
Buchu River small basin  (basin  area: 
12.4 km2) for 2.2 km ecological 
restoration  in Sujia Township  in 
Zhaoyang  District 
Xin River small basin  (basin  area:  24.0 
km2) for 8.5 km ecological restoration  in 
Leju  Township  in Zhaoyang  District 
Other small rivers (basin  area: 65.1 km2) 
for 7.3 km ecological  restoration  in Sujia 
Township  and  Sayu Town in Zhaoyang 
District 
YWPCO 
Link the existing  river chief system in the 
PRC, a real-time  water quality monitoring 
system (a subsystem  of the smart water 
integrated  management  platform), and 
facilities to protect rivers from pollution 
(e.g., ecological  embankments);  with 
related  institutional  development   and 
capacity development. 
Output 3: Eco-compensation  mechanism  for the Sayu River Basin established 
3.1 Establishment  of eco-compensation  mechanism 
ZDG, LCG, 
and YWPCO 
Implementation  of the eco-compensation 
agreement  between  the Zhaoyang 
District (downstream)  and the Ludian 
County (upstream)f  
ZDG, LCG, 
and YWPCO 
Establishment  and  implementation  of 
new town- and township-level  horizontal 
eco-compensation  mechanisms between 
four towns and  two townships  in the 
Zhaoyang  District and the Ludian  County 
with six agreements.   
NBF-C2: Ecological  embankment 
construction  in Longshu  River 
tributaries  in Shuimo Town in Ludian 
County 
C20: Ecological embankment 
construction  in small rivers in Sujia 
Township  in Zhaoyang  District (area 
1) 
C21: Ecological embankment 
construction  in small rivers in Sujia 
Township  in Zhaoyang  District (area 
2) 
C22: Ecological embankment 
construction  in small rivers in Sayu 
Town and Leju  Township  in 
Zhaoyang  District 
C23: Ecological embankment 
construction  in a Longshu  River 
tributary in Dazhaizi  Township  in 
Zhaoyang  District 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in O&M and related 
institutional  and capacity 
development,  including  collaboration 
with the river chief system  
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in (i) implementing  the 
eco-compensation  agreement 
between  the Zhaoyang  District 
(downstream)  and the Ludian  County 
(upstream);  (ii) establishing  and 
implementing  new town- and 
township-level  horizontal  eco-
compensation  mechanisms between 
four towns and  two townships  in the 
IA 
YWPCO 
Activities 
Contracts 
Innovativeness 
Remarks 
Appendix 1 
 71           
Establishment  and  implementation  of a 
Yudong  Reservoir eco-compensation 
fund (long-term  platform for proactive 
management  of the Yudong  Reservoir 
water quality). Beneficiaries  pay into the 
funds and the government covers up the 
fund. The fund can be used  to leverage 
other financing  sources (philanthropic 
grants,  social  entrepreneurs,  additional 
national  government support,  etc.). 
Zhaoyang  District and the Ludian 
County with six agreements;  and (iii) 
establishing  ad implementing  the 
Yudong  Reservoir eco-compensation 
fund (long-term  platform for proactive 
management  of the Yudong 
Reservoir water quality) 
Output 4: Education,  capacity,  and public awareness  for water pollution  management  strengthened 
4.1 Capacity  development  of government  staff for rural water pollution  management  and eco-compensation 
YWPCO 
Training,  workshops,  and domestic and 
overseas  study visits and  training  (but 
requirements  for implementation  of 
international  training  are becoming strict) 
for rural water pollution  management and 
eco-compensation;  with assistance  from 
consultants  to be recruited during  project 
implementation. 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in planning  and 
implementing  training,  workshops, 
and domestic and  overseas  study 
visits and  training  for government 
staff for rural water pollution 
management  and eco-compensation 
(excluding  those conducted  under 
Outputs  1–3) 
4.2 Education  of students  for rural water pollution management  and eco-compensation 
YWPCO 
Periodical  special  lectures  at schools, 
study visits for students,  etc. 
4.3 Public awareness  raising   
YWPCO 
Public awareness  raising  through 
publicity,  handbook,  brochure, media, 
internet,  campaigns,  etc. (the targets 
include  achievement of garbage 
classification  by 20% of the population  in 
the Sayu River Basin upper  Yudong 
Reservoir in 2025  and 40% in 2035) 
4.4 Dissemination  and replication  of project initiatives    
YWPCO 
Dissemination  and  replication  of water 
pollution  management  and eco-
compensation  demonstrated  under  the 
project to other areas  of the PRC and 
also  other countries,  through  workshops, 
publications,  disclosure  of project 
information on website,  submission  of 
papers  to academic societies,  application 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in 
periodical  special  lectures  at 
schools,  study visits  for students, 
etc. 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in public awareness 
raising  through  campaigns,  publicity, 
handbooks,  brochures,  medias, 
internet,  etc. 
T7: technical assistance  by 
consultants  in dissemination  and 
replication  of water pollution 
management  and eco-compensation 
demonstrated  under the project  to 
other areas  of the PRC and also 
other countries 
 72 
Appendix  1 
IA 
Activities 
Contracts 
Innovativeness 
Remarks 
for a model project for eco-civilization, 
application  for award programs, etc.  
A2O  = anaerobic-anoxic-oxic,  BOD =  biological  oxygen demand,  COD = chemical  oxygen  demand,  CNY = Chinese  yuan,  IA  = implementing  agency,  km = kilometer,  km2 = square 
kilometer, LAR = land acquisition  and resettlement,  LCG = Ludian  County Government, m = meter, m3 = cubic meter, mu = a Chinese  unit of measurement (1 mu = 666.67 square  meters), 
NH3 = ammonia, NH4 = ammonium, NOx = nitrogen  oxides,  O&M = operation  and maintenance,  PRC = People’s  Republic  of China,  SOx = sulfur oxides,  TN = total  nitrogen,  TP = total 
phosphorus,  WWTP = wastewater  treatment  plant,  YWPCO = Yudong  Reservoir  Water Resources  Protection Committee Office, ZDG = Zhaoyang  District Government, % = percent. 
a  Aquatic plants  in the ditches  effectively reduces nitrogen  and phosphorus. 
b  To monitor quality of water from the farmland for immediate actions  in the event of water quality  deterioration. 
c  Water quality  monitoring  for the  five constructed  wetlands  will be conducted by sampling  (not by fixed stations).   
d  Water quality  monitoring  for the  three pilot  eco-villages  will be conducted by sampling  (not by fixed stations). 
e  (i), (ii), and (ix) will be also connected  to the intelligent  cloud platform river information management  system for the establishment  of river protection  model under Output  2.1. 
f  The  agreement  includes  that  (i) the  Ludian  County pays  to the  Zhaoyang  District  CNY0.5 million/month  if the  water quality  is worse  than  the standard;  and  (ii) the  Zhaoyang  District 
pays to the Ludian  County CNY1.0 million/year  if the water quality is better  than the standard  (based  on monthly water quality measurement). 
Source: Asian  Development Bank.    
Appendix 2 
 73           
INDICATIVE TERMS OF REFERENCE  FOR CONSULTING SERVICES  FOR  
PACKAGE  T1: INITIAL PROJECT MANAGEMENT  SUPPORT (PROCUREMENT  AND 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT) 
A. 
Introduction 
1. 
This  document  sets  out  indicative  terms  of  reference  for  consulting  services  needed  to 
ensure  the  smooth  initial  management  of  the  Yunnan  Sayu  River  Basin  Rural  Water  Pollution 
Management  and  Eco-Compensation  Demonstration  Project.  The  direct  client  of the  consulting 
services  is  the  project  management  office  (PMO).  The  PMO  is  under  the  Zhaotong  City 
Government (the executing agency of the project) and physically located in the Yudong Reservoir 
Water  Resources  Protection  Committee  Office  (an  implementing  agency).  The  consulting 
services will be also provided to two local PMOs (LPMOs). One LPMO is physically located in the 
Water  Resources  Bureau  of  the  Zhaoyang  District  Government  (an  implementing  agency)  and 
another  LPMO  is  physically  located  in  the  Investment  Service  Center  of  the  Ludian  County 
Government  (an implementing  agency). 
B. 
Implementation  Arrangements 
2. 
The  consulting  services  will  be  carried  out  by  an  individual  consultant  (national 
procurement  and project management specialist).  The consulting services will be financed by the 
Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB);  and  the  consultant  will  be  recruited  by  the  PMO  according  to 
ADB’s  Procurement  Policy  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),  and  ADB’s  Procurement 
Regulations  for  ADB  Borrowers  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time).  The  consultant  will  be 
selected  using the individual  consultant  selection  method.  The consulting  services  are expected 
to start on 7 September  2020 until on 9 April 2021.  
C. 
Reporting  Requirements 
3. 
By  the  end  of  the  assignment,  the  specialist  will  submit  a  report  on  his/her  activities  to 
ADB and the PMO (a soft copy of the English  version to ADB and soft copies of the English and 
Chinese versions  to the PMO). 
D. 
Detailed Scope of Services and Consultants’  Inputs 
4. 
The individual national procurement and project management specialist will provide a total 
of  3.0  person-months  of  consulting  services.  The  consultant  shall  have  a  university  degree  or 
higher in management,  accounting, or related field. He/she shall be proficient  in English; and has 
at least 10 years of experience in procurement,  consultant recruitment,  and project management 
for  projects  funded  by  ADB  or  other  international  funding  agencies.  Knowledge  on  ADB’s 
Procurement  Policy  (2017,  as amended  from  time  to time),  ADB’s  Procurement  Regulations  for 
ADB  Borrowers  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),  and  other  ADB  procedures  for 
procurement  and consultant recruitment  are required. 
The  specialist  will  undertake  the  following  tasks:  (i)  understand  the  format  of  quarterly 
5. 
project  progress  reports  provided  by  ADB,  and provide  the PMO  with  guidance  on  how  to fill-in 
the format by assisting them in preparing the first report; (ii)  improve internal procedures of routine 
data  collection  and  filling  and  information  exchange  among  the  PMO,  the  LPMOs,  and  other 
agencies  of the  Zhaotong  City  Government,  the  Zhaoyang  District  Government,  and the  Ludian 
County  Government  for smooth project  implementation  and quarterly  project  progress reporting; 
(iii)  assist  the  PMO  in  recruiting  a  consultant  team  for  project  management  support  (package 
74 
Appendix  2 
number  T4),  a competent  external  monitoring  agency  for  external  monitoring  and  evaluation  of 
land  acquisition  and  resettlement  and  social  development  (package  number  T5),  a  competent 
external monitoring agency for environmental monitoring (package number: T6), and a consultant 
team  for  rural  water  pollution  management  and  eco-compensation  (package  number:  T7);  (iv) 
provide  any  supports  to  the  LPMOs  and  a  procurement  agency  engaged  by  the  PMO  for 
procurement  of  works  and  goods,  including  preparation  of  bidding  documents;  (v)  develop 
capacities  of  the  PMO  and  the  LPMOs  for  procurement,  consultant  recruitment,  and  project 
management;  and  (vi)  perform  any  other  tasks  for  project  management,  procurement,  and 
consultant  recruitment during the start-up phase of the project. 
E. 
Cost Estimate 
 Item 
1. 
2.  
3. 
Table A2.1: Cost Estimate 
Total Cost ($'000) 
Consultant 
a. 
Remuneration  and per diem 
National consultant  (3.0 person-months) 
Local travel 
Reports and communications 
b. 
c. 
Miscellaneous  administration  and support costs 
Contingencies 
Total  
24.0 
1.5 
0.1 
1.0 
1.4 
28.0 
Source: Asian  Development Bank estimates. 
Appendix 2 
 75           
INDICATIVE TERMS OF REFERENCE  FOR CONSULTING SERVICES  FOR 
PACKAGE  T2: INITIAL PROJECT MANAGEMENT  SUPPORT (ENVIRONMENT) 
A. 
Introduction 
1. 
This  document  sets  out  indicative  terms  of  reference  for  consulting  services  needed  to 
ensure  the  establishment  of preparatory  administrative  and  technical  work  required  for  efficient 
implementation  of  the  Yunnan  Sayu  River  Basin  Rural  Water  Pollution  Management  and  Eco-
Compensation  Demonstration  Project  in  the  early  stage  of  project  implementation.  The  direct 
client of the consulting  services  is the project  management  office  (PMO). The  PMO is under the 
Zhaotong  City Government  (ZCG,  the executing  agency of the project)  and physically  located in 
the Yudong Reservoir Water  Resources Protection  Committee  Office (an implementing  agency). 
The PMO’s overall responsibility includes implementation  of the environmental  management plan 
(EMP). The consulting  services  will be also provided to two local PMOs (LPMOs).  One LPMO is 
physically  located  in  the  Water  Resources  Bureau  of the  Zhaoyang  District  Government  (ZDG, 
an  implementing  agency)  and  another  LPMO  is  physically  located  in  the  Investment  Service 
Center  of  the  Ludian  County  Government  (LCG,  an  implementing  agency).  The  LPMOs  will 
implement  the project at the field level. 
B. 
Implementation  Arrangements 
2. 
The  consulting  services  will  be  carried  out  by  an  individual  consultant  (national 
environment specialist).  The consulting services will be financed by the Asian Development  Bank 
(ADB)  and  the  consultant  will  be  recruited  by  the PMO  according  to  ADB’s  Procurement  Policy 
(2017,  as amended  from  time to  time)  and ADB’s  Procurement  Regulations  for ADB  Borrowers 
(2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time).  The  consultant  will  be  selected  using  the  individual 
consultant selection  method. The consulting  services are expected to start on 7 September  2020 
until on 9 April 2021, and a project management  support consultant  team (package number: T4), 
including  an  environment  specialist,  will take over  project  management  support  to provide  long-
term support to the PMO and the LPMOs. 
C. 
Reporting  Requirements 
3. 
Upon  completion  of the consultancy,  the specialist  will submit  a written  report describing 
the  work  accomplished,  any  key  challenges  encountered  and/or  technical  concerns  for  further 
consideration,  and  lessons  learned  to  ADB  and  the  PMO  (a soft  copy  of  the  English  version  to 
ADB and soft copies of the English and Chinese versions  to the PMO). 
D. 
Detailed Scope of Services and Consultants’  Inputs 
The individual national  environment  specialist  will provide  a total of 3.0 person-months  of 
4. 
consulting  services.  The  consultant  shall  have  (i) a  master’s  degree  or  higher  in  environmental 
management  or related  field; (ii)  at least 12 years  of experience  in environmental  management, 
monitoring,  and/or  environmental  impact  assessment  (EIA),  including  specific  experience  in 
management  and  monitoring  of  environmental  projects;  (iii)  familiarity  with  ADB’s  Safeguard 
Policy  Statement  (2009),  ADB’s  project  management  requirements,  and national  environmental 
management  procedures; (iv) ability to communicate  and work effectively with local communities, 
contractors,  and  government  agencies;  (v) ability  to analyze  data  and prepare  technical  reports; 
(vi)  willingness  and  good  physical  health  and  fitness  to  regularly  visit  project  sites;  and  (vii) 
proficiency  in spoken and written English. 
76 
Appendix  2 
The specialist will undertake the following tasks: (i) work closely with the PMO, the LPMOs, 
5. 
and  design  institutes  to  ensure  that  relevant  preliminary  design  incorporates  designs  and 
mitigation  measures  described  in  the  EIA,  the  EMP,  and  the  environmental  and  social 
management  system  (ESMS);  (ii)  update  the  EIA,  the  EMP,  and  the  ESMS  based  on  the 
preliminary  design,  as  necessary  (including,  but  not  be  limited  to,  major  changes  in  proposed 
alignments  and/or  locations  of  facilities,  new  subcomponents  requiring  civil  works  and/or 
impacting  environment,  and/or  cancellation  of  components);  prepare  any  new 
impact 
assessments and/or updates, as required; and obtain ADB’s approval of them (the ADB-approved 
documents  cannot be changed  without prior approval of relevant government  agency and ADB); 
(iv) assist  the PMO  and the LPMOs  in establishing  the grievance  redress  mechanism,  including 
procedures  to ensure documentation  and reporting  of complaints,  follow-up  actions,  and results; 
(v) provide  training to staff of the PMO, the LPMOs, and relevant agencies  of the ZCG, the ZDG, 
and  the  LCG  so  that  they  will  understand  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009),  other 
policies,  and  compliance  requirements  for  environmental  management;  national  and  local 
regulations  and  standards  for  environmental  protection,  health,  labor,  and  occupational  safety; 
and the EIA, the EMP, and the ESMS; (vi) assist the PMO, the LPMOs, and relevant agencies of 
the  ZCG,  the  ZDG,  and  the  LCG  in  establishing  an  internal  environmental  monitoring  and 
reporting  system and provide  hands-on  guidance  in preparing  the first environmental  monitoring 
report;  (vii)  assist  the  PMO,  the  LPMOs,  and  relevant  agencies  of  the  ZCG,  the  ZDG,  and  the 
LCG  in  constructing,  operating,  maintaining,  and  monitoring  the  project  facilities  in  strict 
conformity  with  all applicable  laws  and  regulations,  including  national  and local  regulations  and 
standards  for environmental  protection,  health, labor, and occupational  safety; ADB’s Safeguard 
Policy  Statement  (2009);  and  the  EIA,  the  EMP,  and  the  ESMS;  (viii)  assist  the  PMO  and  the 
LPMOs  in  handing  over  relevant  documents  and  files  to  the  project  management  support 
consultant  team engaged  in package number T4 and brief the team, particularly the environment 
specialist in the team, on status and outstanding issues; and (ix) perform any other environmental 
management  related tasks during the start-up phase of the project. 
E. 
Cost Estimate 
 Item 
1. 
2.  
3. 
Table A2.2: Cost Estimate 
Total Cost ($'000) 
Consultant 
a. 
Remuneration  and per diem 
National consultant  (3.0 person-months) 
Local travel 
Reports and communications 
b. 
c. 
Miscellaneous  administration  and support costs 
Contingencies 
Total  
24.0 
1.5 
0.1 
1.0 
1.4 
28.0 
Source: Asian  Development Bank estimates. 
Appendix 2 
 77           
INDICATIVE TERMS OF REFERENCE  FOR CONSULTING SERVICES   
FOR PACKAGE  T3: INITIAL PROJECT MANAGEMENT SUPPORT (LAND ACQUISITION 
AND RESETTLEMENT AND SOCIAL  DEVELOPMENT) 
A. 
Introduction 
1. 
This  document  sets  out  indicative  terms  of  reference  for  consulting  services  needed  to 
ensure  the  smooth  initial  management  of  the  Yunnan  Sayu  River  Basin  Rural  Water  Pollution 
Management  and  Eco-Compensation  Demonstration  Project.  The  direct  client  of the  consulting 
services  is  the  project  management  office  (PMO).  The  PMO  is  under  the  Zhaotong  City 
Government  (ZCG,  the  executing  agency  of  the  project)  and  physically  located  in  the  Yudong 
Reservoir  Water  Resources  Protection  Committee  Office  (an  implementing  agency).  The 
consulting  services  will  be also  provided  to  two  local  PMOs  (LPMOs).  One  LPMO  is physically 
located  in  the  Water  Resources  Bureau  of  the  Zhaoyang  District  Government  (ZDG,  an 
implementing  agency)  and another LPMO is physically  located in the Investment  Service  Center 
of the Ludian County Government  (LCG, an implementing  agency). 
B. 
Implementation  Arrangements 
2. 
The  consulting  services  will  be  carried  out  by  an  individual  consultant  (national  land 
acquisition  and  resettlement  [LAR]  and  social  development  specialist).  The  consulting  services 
will  be financed  by the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB);  and  the  consultant  will be  recruited  by 
the  PMO  according  to  ADB’s  Procurement  Policy  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),  and 
ADB’s  Procurement  Regulations  for ADB  Borrowers  (2017, as amended  from  time to time). The 
consultant  will  be  selected  using  the  individual  consultant  selection  method.  The  consulting 
services are expected to start on 7 September  2020 until on 9 April 2021.  
C. 
Reporting  Requirements 
3. 
By  the  end  of  the  assignment,  the  specialist  will  submit  a  report  on  his/her  activities  to 
ADB and the PMO (a soft copy of the English  version to ADB and soft copies of the English and 
Chinese versions  to the PMO). 
D. 
Detailed Scope of Services and Consultants’  Inputs 
4. 
The  individual  national  LAR  and  social  development  specialist  will provide  a  total  of 3.0 
person-months  of consulting  services.  The consultant  shall have a university  degree or above in 
resettlement,  social,  or  related  field.  He/she  shall  be  proficient  in  English  and  have  at  least  10 
years of experience  in the LAR in the People’s  Republic  of China on  projects funded  by ADB or 
other  international  funding  agencies.  Knowledge  on  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009) 
and ADB’s or other international  funding agencies’  procedures for the LAR are required. 
5. 
The  specialist  will undertake  the following  tasks:  (i) assist  the  PMO and  the LPMOs;  the 
relevant  agencies  of  the  ZCG,  the  ZDG,  and  the  LCG;  and  the  design  institute  in  updating  the 
resettlement  plan  and ethnic  minority  development  plan  (EMDP)  approved  by ADB,  in the  ADB 
formats,  and  based  on  the  preliminary  design,  disclosing  them  to  the  affected  persons  prior  to 
ADB’s  approval;  and  obtaining  ADB’s  approval  of  them;  (ii)  assist  the  PMO  and  the  LPMOs  in 
ensuring  adequate  resettlement  readiness  prior  to  the  LAR  and  social  development  readdress 
(for  implementation  of  the  EMDP,  social  development  action  plan,  and  gender  action  plan);  (iii) 
assist  the  PMO  and  the  local  PMOs  in  establishing  effective  grievance  redress  mechanisms, 
including  mechanisms  to  ensure  reporting  of  complaints;  follow-up  actions;  and  results;  (iv) 
78 
Appendix  2 
provide  training  to  relevant  staff  of  the  PMO  and  the  LPMOs;  and  the  relevant  agencies  of  the 
ZCG,  the  ZDG,  and  the  LCG  so  that  they  will  understand  ADB’s  policies  and  compliance 
requirements  for  the  LAR,  ethnic  minority  development,  social  development,  and  gender;  (v) 
assist the PMO and the LPMOs; and the relevant agencies of the ZCG, the ZDG, and the LCG in 
establishing  an  internal  monitoring  and  reporting  system  for  implementation  of the  resettlement 
plan, the EMDP, social development action plan, and gender action plan; (vi) assist the PMO and 
the  LPMOs  in  handing  over  relevant  documents  and  files  to  the  project  management  support 
consultant team engaged in package number T4; and brief the team, particularly the resettlement 
specialist,  social  development  specialist,  and  gender  specialist  in  the  team,  on  status  and 
outstanding  issues; and (vii) perform any other LAR and social development  related tasks during 
the start-up phase of the project. 
E. 
Cost Estimate 
 Item 
1. 
2.  
3. 
Table A2.3: Cost Estimate 
Total Cost ($’000) 
Consultant 
a. 
Remuneration  and per diem 
National consultant  (3.0 person-months) 
Local travel 
Reports and communications 
b. 
c. 
Miscellaneous  administration  and support costs 
Contingencies 
Total  
24.0 
1.5 
0.1 
1.0 
1.4 
28.0 
Source: Asian  Development Bank estimates. 
Appendix 2 
 79           
INDICATIVE TERMS OF REFERENCE  FOR CONSULTING SERVICES  FOR  
PACKAGE  T4: PROJECT MANAGEMENT SUPPORT CONSULTANT TEAM 
A. 
Introduction 
1. 
This  document  sets  out  indicative  terms  of  reference  for  consulting  services  needed  to 
ensure  the  smooth  management  of  the  Yunnan  Sayu  River  Basin  Rural  Water  Pollution 
Management  and  Eco-Compensation  Demonstration  Project.  The  direct  client  of the  consulting 
services  is  the  project  management  office  (PMO).  The  PMO  is  under  the  Zhaotong  City 
Government  (ZCG,  the  executing  agency  of  the  project)  and  physically  located  in  the  Yudong 
Reservoir  Water  Resources  Protection  Committee  Office  (YWPCO,  an  implementing  agency). 
The consulting services will be also provided to two local PMOs (LPMOs). One LPMO is physically 
located  in  the  Water  Resources  Bureau  of  the  Zhaoyang  District  Government  (ZDG,  an 
implementing  agency)  and another LPMO is physically  located in the Investment  Service  Center 
of the Ludian County Government  (LCG, an implementing  agency). 
B. 
Implementation  Arrangements 
2. 
The consulting  services  for project  management  support  will  be carried  out by a team of 
consultants  through a firm. A total of 59.5 person-months  of international  and national consulting 
services will be required. The consulting services will be financed by the Asian Development Bank 
(ADB); and the consultants  will be recruited by the PMO according  to ADB’s Procurement  Policy 
(2017,  as amended  from time to time),  and ADB’s  Procurement  Regulations  for ADB Borrowers 
(2017, as amended from time to time). The consulting firm will be selected by (i) inviting simplified 
technical  proposals;  and  (ii) using  the quality-  and cost-based  selection  method,  with a  quality–
cost ratio of 90:10. The consulting services are expected to start in 5 April 2021 until 31 December 
2026.  
C. 
Reporting  Requirements 
3. 
The consultant  team will produce  (i) an inception  report within 4 weeks  of the start of the 
consulting  services,  (ii)  an  annual  report  by  the  end  of  each  year  during  2021−2025,  (iii)  draft 
project completion report (PCR) by 31 October 2026, and (iv) a final PCR by 31 December  2026. 
The inception  and  annual reports  and draft  PCR will be subject  to tripartite  reviews  by ADB,  the 
PMO,  and consultants.  All reports  are  to be written  in English  and  translated  into  Chinese.  One 
soft and three  hard copies  of each  report are to be submitted  to ADB (English  version  only) and 
the PMO (both Chinese  and English versions). 
4. 
The inception report will present an approach for the consulting services, including a work 
plan and an implementation  schedule. The annual reports will present activities conducted by the 
consultants,  effects  of  the  consulting  services,  issues  encountered,  and  recommendations  to 
improve  project  management.  The  draft  and final  PCRs  will  include  summary  and  evaluation  of 
project  implementation;  environmental  management;  land  acquisition  and  resettlement  (LAR); 
ethnic minority  development;  implementation  of  the social development  action plan (SDAP) and 
the gender  action plan (GAP);  compliance  to the loan and project covenants;  and achievements 
of  the  project  impact,  outcome,  and  outputs;  as  well  as  lesson  learned  from  the  project 
implementation  and follow-up actions  recommended. 
80 
Appendix  2 
D. 
Other Requirements 
The  consultant  team  will  provide  a fully  qualified  interpreter  to work  with the  consultants 
5. 
on a full-time basis and support the ADB missions.    
E. 
Scope of Services  and Consultants’  Inputs 
6. 
For the international  consultant  position,  (i) possession  of a related  degree,  qualification, 
memberships  of  related  academic  societies,  and/or  participation  in  related  training  courses;  (ii) 
experience in similar positions for projects or technical assistance; and (iii) experience in working 
in  many  countries  and  experience  in  working  in  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  will  be  highly 
evaluated.  For  each  of  the  national  consultant  positions,  (i)  possession  of  a  related  degree, 
qualification,  memberships  of related  academic  societies,  and/or  participation  in  related  training 
courses, (ii) experience in similar positions for projects or technical assistance; and (iii) experience 
in working  with international  organizations  and consultants  will be highly evaluated. 
1. 
Project  Management  Specialist/Team  Leader  (international,  13.00  person-
months [pm]) 
7. 
The specialist  should  have  experience  in project  management  support;  have experience 
in  working  in  several  countries,  including  the  People’s  Republic  of  China;  and  be  proficient  in 
spoken  and  written  English.  Possession  of  memberships  of  related  academic  societies  and/or 
completion  of related training courses  will be highly regarded. 
The specialist  will (i) coordinate all project management  support activities as team leader; 
8. 
(ii) finalize approaches  for project  management  support; (iii) prepare the inception report,  annual 
reports, draft PCR, and final PCR; (iv) assist the PMO in implementing, monitoring, and evaluating 
the  overall  project  and  subprojects;  (v)  assist  the  PMO  in  preparing  quarterly  project  progress 
reports  in a format provided  by ADB;  (vi) assess  needs for capacity  development  for staff of the 
PMO, the LPMOs, and others; and plan, design, organize,  and implement seminars,  workshops, 
and/or  training  for  project  management;  financial  management;  disbursement  arrangements ; 
implementation,  monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the LAR, ethnic minority development, social 
development,  gender  development,  and  environmental  management;  and  project  M&E,  if 
necessary;1  (vii)  monitor  compliance  with  the  loan  and  project  covenants,  assess  key 
implementation issues, and make recommendations  for improvement;  and (viii) conduct any other 
necessary  work for smooth and appropriate  implementation  of the project. 
2. 
Procurement  and Contract Management  Specialist  (national,  4.25 pm) 
9. 
The specialist should have a related degree, qualification,  and/or memberships  of related 
academic  societies  and/or  have  completed  related  training  courses;  have  experience  in 
procurement  and  contract  management 
for  projects,  and  in  working  with  international 
organizations  and consultants;  and be proficient in spoken and written  English. 
The specialist will (i) assist the PMO in recruiting a competent external monitoring  agency 
10. 
for environmental monitoring (package number: T6) and a consultant team for rural water pollution 
management  and  eco-compensation  (package  number:  T7),  as  necessary;  (ii)  monitor 
1  Costs 
for  seminars,  workshops,  and 
training,  excluding  consulting  services  (costs  for  venues,  printing, 
accommodation  and transport  for participants,  etc.), will  be funded  from the  ADB loan  under  the project  separately 
from the contract for the consulting  services. 
Appendix 2 
 81           
procurement  activities  under  the  project  and  assist  the  PMO  in  updating  and  implementing  the 
procurement  plan;  (iii)  assist  the  PMO  in  conducting  management  of  contracts  for  civil  works, 
goods,  and  consulting  services,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  supervision  and  inspection  of 
activities  under  contracts;  payments  to  contractors,  suppliers,  and  consultants;  preparation  of 
withdrawal  applications;  improvement  of  fund  flow  efficiency  by  streamlining  the  preparation  of 
withdrawal  applications;  and  contract  variations;  (iv)  assist  the  project  management  specialist 
and/or team leader in monitoring compliance with the loan covenants,  assess key implementation 
issues,  and  make  recommendations 
from  procurement  and  contract 
management  viewpoint; (v) provide the PMO with support for the preparation  of procurement and 
contract  management  aspects  of  quarterly  progress  reports;  (vi)  provide  support  to  the  project 
management  specialist  and/or  team  leader  for assessing  needs  for  capacity  development;  and 
planning,  designing,  organizing,  and  implementing  seminars,  workshops,  and/or  training  for 
procurement  and  contract  management;  (vii)  provide  support  to  the  project  management 
specialist  and/or  team  leader  for  preparing  the inception  report,  annual  reports,  draft  PCR,  and 
final PCR; and (viii) conduct any other necessary work for procurement and contract management 
assigned by the project  management  specialist and/or team leader. 
improvement 
for 
3. 
Environmental  Specialist  (national,  14.50 pm) 
11. 
The  specialist  should  have  (i)  a  degree  in  environmental  management  or  related  field 
(preferable master’s or higher degree); (ii) experience in environmental  management, monitoring, 
and/or  impact  assessment,  including  specific  experience  in  management  and  monitoring  of 
environmental  projects  (preferably  for  12  years  or  more);  (iii)  familiarity  with  ADB’s  project 
management  requirements  and  the national  environmental  management  procedures;  (iv)  ability 
to  communicate  and  work  effectively  with  local  communities,  contractors,  and  government 
agencies;  (v) ability  to analyze  data and  prepare  technical  reports;  (vi) willingness  and  health to 
regularly visit the subproject sites; and (vii) proficiency  in spoken  and written English. 
For the environmental  management  plan (EMP), (i) before civil works start, the specialist 
12. 
will  (a) ensure  project  environmental  readiness  (including  inclusion  of the  EMP in  all civil  works 
contracts,  compliance  of  all  civil  works  contracts  with  the  EMP,  and  incorporation  of  relevant 
sections of the EMP in plans and contracts for all civil works); (b) assist the PMO and the LPMOs 
in implementing  the grievance  redress mechanism  (GRM) (including  establishment  and publicity 
of  the  GRM  and  collation  and  evaluation  of  grievances  received);  (c)  develop  procedures  to 
monitor  the  EMP  implementation,  (d)  undertake  training  for  relevant  agencies  of  the  ZCG,  the 
ZDG, and the LCG, as required, by the training plan in the EMP; and (e) provide hands-on support 
and on-the-job  training  to the PMO,  the LPMOs, and contractors  on specific  requirements  of the 
EMP,  as required;  and (ii)  during  implementation  of civil  works  and  operation,  the  specialist  will 
(a)  undertake  site  visits  to  the  Zhaoyang  District  and  the  Ludian  County  during  civil  works  and 
operation;  (b)  assist  in  ongoing  public  consultation  process  as  described  in  the  environmental 
impact  assessment;  (c)  conduct  the  EMP  compliance  assessments,  identify  any  environment-
related  implementation  issues,  and propose  necessary  responses  in corrective  action  plans; (d) 
undertake  training  for relevant agencies  of the ZCG,  the ZDG, and the LCG, as required,  by the 
training  plan  in  the  EMP;  (e)  undertake  simple  and  cost-effective  on-site  quantitative 
measurements  to  regularly  check  that  the  civil works  comply  with  the  environmental  monitoring 
standards  and  targets,  especially  for  noise  and  dust,  using  a  basic  hand-held  meter;  (f)  collate 
and evaluate  data required in the environmental  monitoring  program in the EMP; and (g) prepare 
and submit semiannual  environmental  monitoring reports  to ADB. 
13. 
For the environmental  and social management  system (ESMS) for the eco-compensation 
fund to be established  under the project, the specialist  will (i) support the environment  and social 
82 
Appendix  2 
officers  of  the  PMO  to  oversee  implementation  of  the  ESMS;  (ii)  ensure  that  the  steps  of  the 
ESMS  are  incorporated  into  the business  procedures  of the  YWPCO;  (iii) deliver  training  in the 
ESMS  procedures  for  screening,  categorizing,  and  assessing  environmental  impact  and  the 
ESMS  record-keeping  and  reporting;  (iv)  assist  the  YWPCO  in  establishing  and  publicizing  the 
GRM  for  activities  funded  by  the  eco-compensation  fund,  ensuring  that  the  GRM  publicity  is 
appropriate  to  the  scale  and  complexity  of  the  activities;  and  includes,  as  a  minimum,  the 
disclosure of all contact persons for lodging complaints; (v) review the operation of the GRM; and 
revise  GRM  procedures,  as  required;  (vi)  conduct  regular  checks  on  the YWPCO’s  compliance 
with the ESMS; review the ESMS workbooks; undertake site visits, as required; identify problems; 
and propose necessary corrective actions; and (vi) assist the PMO in reporting the implementation 
of the ESMS to ADB through the semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports and the quarterly 
project progress reports. 
14. 
Overall,  the  specialist  will  (i)  work  closely  with  the  PMO,  the  LPMOs,  and  other 
consultants;  and relevant agencies of the ZCG, the ZDG, and the LCG, as necessary, to conduct 
the tasks mentioned  above; and (ii) undertake  any other necessary work assigned  by the project 
management  specialist  and/or team leader.   
4. 
Resettlement  Specialist  (national 8.50 pm) 
The specialist should have a related degree, qualification,  and/or memberships  of related 
15. 
academic  societies and/or  have completed related  training courses;  have experience  in the LAR 
for projects,  and in working with international  organizations  and consultants;  and be proficient in 
spoken and written English. 
16. 
The specialist will (i) if there is a change in the project scope, assist the PMO, the LPMOs, 
and  design  institute  in  updating  the  resettlement  plan  approved  by  ADB,  in  ADB’s  format,  and 
based on the change;  disclose them  to the affected  persons  prior to ADB’s approval;  and obtain 
ADB’s approval  of them; (ii) assist the PMO and the LPMOs;  and relevant agencies  of the ZCG, 
the  ZDG,  and  the  LCG  in  implementing  and  monitoring  the  LAR  in  accordance  with  the 
resettlement  plan  and  the  ESMS;  (iii)  assist  the  LPMOs  and  relevant  agencies  of the  ZDG  and 
the  LCG in  supervising  contractors  to ensure  compliance  with  requirements  of the  resettlement 
plan,  the  ESMS,  applicable  laws  and  regulations,  and  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement;  (iv) 
assist  the  PMO  and  the  LPMOs;  and  relevant  agencies  of  the  ZCG,  the  ZDG,  and  the  LCG  in 
supervising  the  processes  of  the  LAR  by  collecting  and  updating  basic  data;  and  closely 
coordinating between the PMO and the LPMOs; and relevant agencies of the ZCG, the ZDG, and 
the  LCG;  and  an  external  resettlement  and  social  development  monitor;  (v)  review  external 
resettlement  and  social  development  M&E  reports  prepared  by  the  external  resettlement  and 
social  development  M&E  agency;  review  ADB’s  comments  on  the  reports;  monitor  compliance 
with the resettlement  plan and the ESMS; assess  the degree of impacts and key implementation 
issues;  explain  key issues  to the  PMO  and  the  LPMOs;  and  relevant  agencies  of the  ZCG,  the 
ZDG,  and  the LCG;  and  assist  them  in  conducting  follow-up  actions  to  address  the  key  issues; 
(vi) assist the PMO in monitoring compliance with the resettlement plan and the ESMS, assessing 
key  implementation  issues,  and  formulating  remedial  measures;  and  assist  them  in  conducting 
follow-up  actions;  (vii) provide  the PMO  with  support  for  the preparation  of  the LAR  aspects  for 
the  semiannual  internal  resettlement  monitoring  reports  and  the  quarterly  project  progress 
reports;  (viii)  provide  support  to  the  project  management  specialist  and/or  team  leader  for 
for  capacity  development;  and  planning,  designing,  organizing,  and 
assessing  needs 
implementing  seminars,  workshops,  and/or training  for implementation  and the M&E of the LAR; 
(ix)  provide  support  to  the  project  management  specialist  and/or  team  leader  for  preparing  the 
Appendix 2 
 83           
inception report, annual reports, draft PCR, and final PCR; and (x) undertake any other necessary 
work assigned by the project management  specialist  and/or team leader. 
5. 
Social Development  Specialist  (national, 4.50 pm) 
17. 
The specialist should have a related degree, qualification,  and/or memberships  of related 
academic  societies  and/or  have  completed  related  training  courses;  have  experience  in  ethnic 
minority and social development  for projects, and in working with international  organizations  and 
consultants;  and be proficient in spoken and written English. 
18. 
The specialist will (i) if there is a change in the project scope, assist the PMO, the LPMOs, 
and design institute in updating  the ethnic minority development  plan (EMDP) approved  by ADB, 
in ADB format, and based on the change; and obtain ADB’s approval of it; (ii) assist the PMO and 
the LPMOs in implementing and monitoring the EMDP, the ESMS, and the SDAP prepared during 
project  preparation;  (iii)  assist the  PMO and the  LPMOs;  and relevant  agencies  of the  ZCG, the 
ZDG,  and  the  LCG  in  supervising  contractors  to  ensure  compliance  with  requirements  of  the 
EMDP,  the ESMS, and the SDAP;  and applicable  laws and regulations;  (iv) assist  the PMO and 
the  LPMOs;  and  relevant  agencies  of  the  ZCG,  the  ZDG,  and  the  LCG  in  supervising 
implementation  of the  EMDP,  the  ESMS,  and  the  SDAP  by  collecting  and  updating  basic  data; 
and  closely  coordinating  between  the  PMO  and the  LPMOs;  relevant  agencies  of  the ZCG,  the 
ZDG,  and  the  LCG;  and  the  external  resettlement  and  social  development  monitor;  (v)  review 
external resettlement and social development M&E reports prepared by the external resettlement 
and social development monitor; review ADB’s comments on the reports; monitor compliance with 
the  EMDP,  the  ESMS,  and  the  SDAP;  assess  the  degree  of  impacts  and  key  implementation 
issues;  explain  key issues  to the  PMO  and  the  LPMOs;  and  relevant  agencies  of the  ZCG,  the 
ZDG,  and  the LCG;  and  assist  them  in  conducting  follow-up  actions  to  address  the  key  issues; 
(vi)  assist  the  PMO  in  monitoring  compliance  with  the  EMDP,  the  ESMS,  and  the  SDAP, 
assessing  key  implementation  issues,  and  formulating  remedial  measures;  and  assist  them  in 
conducting  follow-up  actions;  (vii)  provide  the  PMO  with  support  for  the  preparation  of  ethnic 
minority  and social  development  aspects  for the quarterly  project  progress  reports;  (viii)  provide 
support to the project management specialist and/or team leader for assessing needs for capacity 
development;  and  planning,  designing,  organizing,  and  implementing  seminars,  workshops, 
and/or  training  for  implementation  and  the  M&E  of  the  EMDP,  the  ESMS,  and  the  SDAP;  (ix) 
provide  support  to  the  project  management  specialist  and/or  team  leader  for  preparing  the 
inception report, annual reports, draft PCR, and final PCR; and (x) undertake any other necessary 
work assigned by the project management  specialist  and/or team leader. 
6. 
Gender Specialist  (national, 8.50 pm) 
19. 
The specialist should have a related degree, qualification,  and/or memberships  of related 
academic  societies  and/or  have  completed  related  training  courses;  have experience  in  gender 
development  for projects, and in working with international  organizations  and consultants; and be 
proficient in spoken and written English. 
The specialist  will (i) assist the PMO and the LPMOs in implementing  and monitoring  the 
20. 
GAP  prepared  during  project  preparation;  (ii)  assist  the  PMO  and  the  LPMOs;  and  relevant 
agencies of the ZCG, the ZDG, and the LCG in supervising contractors to ensure compliance with 
requirements  of  the  GAP;  and  applicable  laws  and  regulations;  (iii)  assist  the  PMO  and  the 
LPMOs; and relevant agencies of the ZCG, the ZDG, and the LCG in supervising implementation 
of the GAP by collecting and updating basic data; and closely coordinating between the PMO and 
the LPMOs;  relevant agencies of the ZCG, the ZDG, and the LCG; and the external resettlement 
84 
Appendix  2 
and social  development  monitor;  (iv) review  external  resettlement  and social  development  M&E 
reports  prepared  by  the  external  resettlement  and  social  development  monitor;  review  ADB’s 
comments  on  the reports;  monitor  compliance  with the  GAP; assess  the  degree  of impacts  and 
key implementation issues; explain key issues to the PMO and the LPMOs; and relevant agencies 
of the  ZCG, the  ZDG, and  the LCG;  and assist  them in  conducting  follow-up  actions  to address 
the  key  issues;  (v)  assist  the  PMO  in  monitoring  compliance  with  the  GAP,  assessing  key 
implementation  issues; and formulating remedial measures; and assist them in conducting follow-
up actions;  (vi) provide  the  PMO  with support  for the  gender  development  aspects  for quarterly 
project  progress  reports;  (vii) provide  support  to the project  management  specialist  and/or  team 
leader  for  assessing  needs  for capacity  development;  and  planning,  designing,  organizing,  and 
implementing  seminars,  workshops, and/or training for implementation  and the M&E of the GAP; 
(viii)  provide  support  to the  project  management  specialist  and/or  team  leader  for  preparing  the 
inception report, annual reports, draft PCR, and final PCR; and (ix) undertake any other necessary 
work assigned by the project management  specialist  and/or team leader. 
7. 
Economist  (national, 2.25 pm) 
21. 
The specialist should have a related degree, qualification,  and/or memberships  of related 
academic societies and/or have completed related training courses; have experience in economic 
analysis  for  projects,  and  in  working  with  international  organizations  and  consultants;  and  be 
proficient in spoken and written English. 
22. 
The  specialist  will (i)  review  background  documents,  including  the  economic  analysis  of 
the  project  undertaken  during  project  preparation;  (ii) conduct  economic  analyses  of the  overall 
project  and  each  subproject  to determine  economic  internal  rate  of return  of the  overall  project 
and  each  subproject  at  the  midterm  of  project  implementation  (in  2023),  and  at  physical 
completion  of the project;  (iii) provide  support  to the project  management  specialist  and/or  team 
leader  for  assessing  needs  for capacity  development;  and  planning,  designing,  organizing,  and 
implementing  seminars,  workshops,  and/or  training  for  economic  analysis,  as  necessary;  (iv) 
provide  support  to  the  project  management  specialist  and/or  team  leader  for  preparing  the 
inception report, annual reports, draft PCR, and final PCR; and (v) undertake any other necessary 
work assigned by the project management  specialist  and/or team leader. 
8. 
Finance Specialist  (national,  4.00 pm) 
23. 
The specialist should have a related degree, qualification,  and/or memberships  of related 
academic  societies and/or have completed  related training  courses; have experience  in financial 
analysis  and  financial  management  assessment  for  projects,  and  in  working  with  international 
organizations  and consultants;  and be proficient in spoken and written  English. 
The  specialist  will (i)  review  background  documents,  including  the  financial  analysis  and 
24. 
financial  management  assessment  of  the  project  undertaken  during  project  preparation;  (ii) 
conduct  financial  analysis  at  the  midterm  of  project  implementation  (in  2023);  and  at  physical 
completion  of  the  project,  including  (a)  financial  sustainability  analysis  to  assess  the  fiscal 
sustainability  and debt  repayment  capacity  of the  ZDG and  the LCG;  and  (b) an  assessment  of 
the  financial  viability  of  the revenue-generating  components,  i.e.,  wastewater  management;  (iii) 
assist  the  PMO  and  the  LPMOs;  and  relevant  agencies  of  the  ZCG,  the  ZDG,  and  the  LCG  in 
establishing  and  implementing  a  financial  management  system;  (iv)  assist  the  PMO  and  the 
LPMOs;  and  relevant  agencies  of  the  ZCG,  the  ZDG,  and  the  LCG  in  preparing  withdrawal 
applications;  and  streamlining  the  preparation  of  withdrawal  applications;  (v)  assist  the  Yunnan 
Provincial  Finance Department,  the Yunnan Provincial  Audit Office, the PMO, and the LPMOs in 
Appendix 2 
 85           
meeting requirements  of the financial management  action plan (Table V-1, project administration 
manual);  (vi)  provide  support  to  the  project  management  specialist  and/or  team  leader  for 
for  capacity  development;  and  planning,  designing,  organizing,  and 
assessing  needs 
implementing  seminars,  workshops,  and/or 
for  financial  analysis  and  financial 
management,  as  necessary;  (vii)  provide  support  to  the  project  management  specialist  and/or 
team leader for preparing  the inception  report, annual reports, draft PCR, and final PCR; and (ix) 
undertake any other necessary work assigned by the project management specialist and/or team 
leader. 
training 
F. 
Cost Estimate 
Table A2.4: Cost Estimate 
 Item 
1. 
Consultants 
a. 
Remuneration  and per diem 
International  consultant  (13.0 person-months) 
National consultants  (46.5 person-months) 
International  travel 
Local travel 
Reports and communications 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Surveys 
Workshops,  training, seminars,  and conferences 
Equipment 
Miscellaneous  administration  and support costs 
Contingencies 
Total  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.  
6. 
Source: Asian  Development Bank estimates. 
Total Cost ($’000) 
296.7 
335.3 
42.5 
45.3 
2.0 
9.0 
6.0 
4.0 
21.1 
40.1 
802.0 
86 
Appendix  2 
INDICATIVE TERMS OF REFERENCE  FOR CONSULTING SERVICES  FOR 
PACKAGE  T5: EXTERNAL RESETTLEMENT AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT  MONITORING 
AND EVALUATION AGENCY 
A. 
Introduction 
1. 
This  document  sets  out  the  indicative  terms  of  reference  for  external  resettlement  and 
social development  monitoring  and evaluation  (M&E) agency  needed to ensure  that the Yunnan 
Sayu  River  Basin  Rural  Water  Pollution  Management  and  Eco-Compensation  Demonstration 
Project will be implemented  in conformity  with the laws and regulations  of the People’s Republic 
of China  (PRC);  and the  Asian Development  Bank’s  (ADB)  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009), 
including  involuntary  resettlement  and  indigenous  people.  The  direct  client  is  the  project 
management  office  (PMO).  The  PMO  is  under  the  Zhaotong  City  Government  (ZCG,  the 
executing agency of the project) and physically located in the Yudong Reservoir Water Resources 
Protection  Committee  Office  (an  implementing  agency).  The  external  resettlement  and  social 
development M&E will be conducted for land acquisition and resettlement (LAR) and social issues 
(implementation  of the ethnic minority  development  plan [EMDP],  the social development  action 
plan [SDAP], and the gender action plan [GAP]) in Zhaoyang  District and Ludian County.  A local 
PMO  (LPMO)  for  Zhaoyang  District  is physically  located  in  the Water  Resources  Bureau  of the 
Zhaoyang  District  Government  (ZDG,  an  implementing  agency)  and  another  LPMO  for  Ludian 
County is physically  located in the Investment  Service Center  of the Ludian County  Government 
(LCG, an implementing  agency). 
B. 
Implementation  Arrangements 
2. 
The  external  resettlement  social  development  M&E  will  be  carried  out  by  a  team  of 
specialists  through  a  competent  external  M&E  agency.  The  M&E  will  be  financed  by  ADB,  and 
the team of specialists will be recruited by the PMO according to ADB’s Procurement Policy (2017, 
as amended  from  time to  time) and  ADB’s  Procurement  Regulations  for ADB  Borrowers  (2017, 
as  amended  from  time  to  time)  through  consultants’  qualifications  selection.  The  PMO  and  the 
LPMOs;  and  relevant  agencies  of the  ZCG,  the ZDG,  and the  LCG will  assist the  M&E  agency, 
particularly  in  the  aspects  of  field  survey,  staffing,  and  logistics.  The  consulting  services  are 
expected to start in December  2020 until April 2026. 
C. 
Reporting  Requirements 
The M&E agency will submit to ADB, the PMO, and the LPMOs external resettlement and 
3. 
social  development  M&E  reports  semiannually.2  For each  report,  the  M&E agency  will submit  a 
soft copy  of the English  version  to ADB; and  soft copies  of the English  and Chinese  versions  to 
each  of  the  PMO  and  the  LPMOs,  not  later  than  30  days  after  the  completion  of  the  field 
investigations. 
4. 
 The M&E agency will take full responsibility  for the content and quality of the reports; and 
if necessary,  must  revise reports  based  on  the comments  of ADB.  Format  of the  reports  will be 
proposed  by  the  M&E  agency  in  the  technical  proposal.  The  M&E  agency  may  seek  guidance 
from  ADB’s  relevant  sourcebooks  on  resettlement,  ethnic  minorities,  gender,  etc.  and  from 
examples  of reports on ADB’s website. 
2  The M&E of the  implementation  of the  resettlement  plan will  be conducted  semiannually  during  the implementation 
of the resettlement  plan  and annually  for 2 years after that. 
Appendix 2 
 87           
D. 
Scope of Services  and Consultants’  Inputs 
5. 
According to ADB’s requirements, the implementation of the resettlement plan, the EMDP, 
the SDAP, and the GAP—besides  internal monitoring  undertaken by the PMO and the LPMOs—
should be monitored by the M&E agency. The M&E agency will monitor the implementation of the 
resettlement  plan, the EMDP, the SDAP, and the GAP; and report progress to ADB semiannually 
(footnote 2). 
The  general  objective  of  the  external  resettlement  and  social  development  M&E  is  to 
6. 
assess the compliance  with principles,  policies,  and requirements  mentioned  in the resettlement 
plan, the EMDP, the SDAP, and the GAP, including  (i) determining and assessing whether or not 
the  relevant  project  activities  are being  carried  out  in  compliance  with  principles,  requirements, 
and  procedures  according  to  the  resettlement  plan,  the  EMDP,  the  SDAP,  and  the  GAP;  (ii) 
reviewing whether or not the objectives  of the resettlement  plan (especially those that improve or 
at  least  restore  affected  persons’  living  standards),  the  EMDP,  the  SDAP,  and  the  GAP  are 
adequately  implemented  and achieved;  and (iii) reviewing shortcomings  in the implementation  of 
the  resettlement  plan,  the  EMDP,  the  SDAP,  and  the  GAP;  and  developing  recommended 
solutions  for  discussion  with  the  PMO  and  the  LPMOs;  and  relevant  agencies  of  the  ZCG,  the 
ZDG, and the LCG. 
7. 
To carry out the M&E, the M&E agency will address  the following  tasks: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Periodic monitoring  and evaluation  of the land acquisition and resettlement. 
For  each  subproject  during  the  implementation  of  the  LAR,  the  M&E  agency  will 
semiannually  monitor and evaluate the implementation  of the resettlement  plan. 
Post monitoring and evaluation of the land acquisition  and resettlement.  For 
each subproject  for 2 years  after the completion  of the LAR, the M&E  agency will 
annually  carry  out  post-LAR  M&E  for  2  years  to  evaluate  the  results  of  the 
implementation  of the resettlement  plan and its impact of the affected persons. 
Social  development  monitoring  and  evaluation.  For  each  subproject  during 
project  implementation,  the  M&E  agency  will  semiannually  monitor  and  evaluate 
the implementation  of the EMDP, the SDAP, and the GAP. 
(iv) 
Participate  with the PMO in ADB’s review missions,  as required. 
8. 
Monitoring  indicators. There are various monitoring indicators on the implementation  of 
the resettlement  plan,  the EMDP, the SDAP,  and the GAP. Once  selected, the M&E  agency will 
have to  present in detail  the monitoring  indicators  to the PMO and  ADB for approval.  Below are 
main monitoring indicators: 
(i) 
For compliance of compensation  payment and support provision 
(a) 
In case of land-for-land  compensation,  whether the replaced  land is equal 
in area and location as well as production,  living conditions  compared with 
the  affected  land;  in  case  of  cash–for-affected 
land,  whether  the 
replacement  cost principle is ensured. 
(b)  Whether  compensation  for  affected  structures  is  equal  to  materials  and 
labor  replacement  cost  according  to  standards  and  specification  of  the 
work;  whether  reused  materials  are  not  deducted  or  discounted;  and 
whether assets are depreciated  based on age. 
88 
Appendix  2 
(c) 
Whether  compensation  for  trees  and/or  crops  takes  into  account  market 
rates. 
(d)  Whether  compensation  is  fully  paid  to  affected  persons;  either  through 
single installment  or multiple installments. 
(e)  Whether other assistance  as specified in the resettlement  plan is provided 
to affected  persons, as required. 
(ii) 
For compliance of information disclosure  and community consultation   
(a)  Whether project documents (resettlement  information booklet and relevant 
documents)  are disseminated  to communities.   
(b)  Whether  information  (results  of  detailed  measurement  survey,  prices 
application, disbursement of payment) is promulgated at public places, and 
whether the process was effective. 
Whether  the  affected  persons  are  fully  consulted  about  issues  of  land 
recovery,  policies  on  compensation,  resettlement,  livelihood  restoration, 
and access to a grievance  redress mechanism  (GRM). 
(c) 
(d)  Whether  the concerns  and  recommendations  of the  affected  persons  are 
resolved during the implementation  of the resettlement  plan; as well as the 
manner by which they have been addressed. 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
For  relocation  plan  and  implementation  (if  applicable  based  on  the  resettlement 
plan updated during project implementation) 
(a) 
Resettlement  methods, participation in relocation planning,  announcement 
of relocation  plan, and support  to relocated  households. 
For  compliance  of  the  implementation  for  the  relocated  affected  persons  (if 
applicable based on the resettlement  plan updated  during project implementation)  
Housing and living conditions in resettlement  sites (such as road, domestic 
(a) 
power,  water  distribution  and/or  drainage  system);  and  restoration  of 
community,  education, and health services. 
(b)  Whether  replacement  housing  was  provided  in  a  complete  and  timely 
manner. 
Any issues related to transitional  housing and/or period. 
(c) 
(d)  Whether  the  new  location  has  had  any  impact  on  the  affected  persons’ 
livelihoods. 
the 
For compliance of income restoration  and support to livelihood stabilization 
(a)  Whether  support  to  income  restoration  is  adequately  provided,  and 
training,  credit 
income  restoration  support 
efficiency  of 
assistance). 
Post-resettlement  life  and  production  stabilization,  and  how  affected 
persons stabilize  their life and production. 
Problems  that  affected  persons  are  facing  during  the  income  restoration 
and life stabilization. 
Compensation  and restoration  of temporary  land occupation.   
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e.g., 
(vi) 
For compliance of the satisfaction  of the affected persons   
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Satisfaction  of the determination  of losses and compensation  valuation. 
Satisfaction  of compensation  payment  and other assistance. 
Satisfaction  of information  disclosure  and consultation. 
Satisfaction  on life stabilization  and income  restoration support activities.   
Appendix 2 
 89           
(e) 
Satisfaction  of  resettlement  site,  relocation  site,  and  completeness  of 
facilities  (if  applicable  based  on  the  resettlement  plan  updated  during 
project implementation). 
(vii) 
For compliance of the GRM of the affected persons   
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Degree of efficiency of the GRM (time, efficiency of resolution). 
Results of complaint resolution  at various levels. 
Satisfaction  of the GRM.  
(viii)  For  social  development,  monitoring  indicators  are  in  the  EMDP,  the  SDAP,  the 
GAP, and the design and monitoring  framework (Table IX-1).  
Methodology of monitoring and evaluation. The M&E agency will apply both qualitative 
9. 
and quantitative methods  during M&E, including the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
 Quantitative  methods 
(a) 
Conduct  baseline survey  for the LAR (prior to start of the LAR) covering  a 
representative  sample  of  affected  persons,  focusing  more  on  those 
seriously affected  and vulnerable  affected persons. 
Conduct  semiannual  and  annual  questionnaire  survey  during  project 
implementation  for  50%  of  severely  affected  households  and  20%  of  all 
other affected households.   
Use the existing statistical data at local levels, and data from district and/or 
county resettlement  bureaus. 
Survey affected businesses  and workers. 
Conduct final M&E of the LAR implementation  (prior to project completion) 
by  conducting  a  sample  survey  on  50%  of  severely  affected  households 
and 20% of all other affected households. 
Collect  quantitative  data  against  targets  and  indicators  in  the  EMDP,  the 
SDAP, and the GAP. 
Qualitative  methods 
(a) 
Review project documents (feasibility study reports and resettlement plan); 
ADB’s  relevant  policies;  and  laws  and  regulations  of  the  PRC,  Yunnan 
Province, Zhaotong  City, Zhaoyang District,  and Ludian County. 
Consult  and  discuss  with  different  stakeholders,  including  the  ZCG,  the 
ZDG,  the  LCG,  and  social  organizations,  through  consultation  meetings, 
in-depth interviews,  and group discussions. 
Undertake  focused  group  discussions,  in-depth  interviews  with  the  target 
affected  persons;  and/or  groups  such  as  severely  affected  households, 
relocated  households  (if  any),  vulnerable  households,  and  women’s 
groups. 
Collect qualitative information on the progress of the EMDP, the SDAP, and 
the GAP. 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(iii) 
Site  visits.  Visit  sites,  including  original  housing  areas  and  resettlement  sites  (if 
any),  as well  as  project  construction  sites;  and  identify  potential  impacts  on local 
people during civil works.  
10. 
All  information  and  data  collected  will  be  processed,  analyzed,  and  included  in  the 
baseline or subsequent  M&E reports. The M&E agency must store the processed data to be used 
90 
Appendix  2 
for the next M&E. These data will belong  to (and  will be the asset of) the PMO and will be made 
available  to  ADB  and the  PMO  on request.  All  documentation  will  be transferred  to the  PMO at 
the completion of the contract. 
Qualification  required  and detailed  tasks of personnel.  The M&E agency should be a 
11. 
registered  social  organization  (research  institution,  design  institute,  consulting  institution,  firm, 
university,  or  nongovernment  organization)  without  direct  administrative  subordination  relations 
with  the  ZCG,  the  ZDG,  and  the  LCG.  The  M&E  agency  should  have  five  or  more  qualified 
technical  staff members.  Professional  staff  members  of the M&E  agency should  have  degree in 
economics,  sociology,  and/or  anthropology,  or  relevant  field  of  social  sciences;  be  familiar  with 
ADB’s  or World  Bank’s  resettlement  and social  development  policies  and procedures;  and have 
previous  experience  in the  M&E  of resettlement  and social  development  for  projects  funded  by 
ADB  or  the  World  Bank.  The  M&E  agency  should  also  have  experience  in  undertaking 
resettlement  and social development  M&E for similar projects in the PRC. 
12. 
The M&E agency will establish an M&E team. The main duties of the team are to (i) carry 
out  the  M&E  on  the  resettlement  plan,  the  EMDP,  the  SDAP,  and  the  GAP  implementation, 
ensuring  that it is in compliance  with the resettlement  plan, the EMDP,  the SDAP, and the GAP; 
(ii) advise  the PMO and the  LPMOs; and  other relevant  agencies  of the ZCG, the  ZDG, and the 
LCG  on  the  implementation  of  the  resettlement  plan,  the  EMDP,  the  SDAP,  and  the  GAP  to 
ensure  that  policies  and  procedures  are  complied  with;  and  (iii)  provide  information  and  data, 
monitoring  results,  and  observations  that  the  team  leader  will  aggregate  into  the  external 
resettlement  and social development  M&E reports. 
All team  members  must  be fluent  in English  as well  as Chinese,  and  reports  to ADB will 
13. 
be in English.  For each of the members,  (i) possession  of a related degree,  qualification,  and/or 
memberships  of related academic  societies;  and/or past participation  in related training courses; 
and (ii) experience in similar positions for projects; and in working with international  organizations 
and/or international  consultants  will be highly evaluated. 
1. 
Resettlement  Specialist  and Team Leader  (national, 9.0 person-months) 
The  specialist  will undertake  the following  tasks:  (i) lead  all the  activities  of the  team; (ii) 
14. 
lead and set up the M&E methodology,  including design of baseline  and tracer surveys;  (iii) work 
and  coordinate  with  relevant  agencies  and/or  bodies  within  the project  to  implement  the  task of 
M&E activities;  (iv) lead and conduct  the M&E activities and required  surveys to collect data and 
information  at  office  and  project  sites,  and  then  analyze  the  findings;  (v)  prepare  external 
resettlement  and  social  development  M&E 
include  conclusions  and 
recommendations;  (vi) discuss  findings  with  the PMO,  the  LPMOs,  and other  relevant  agencies 
of the ZCG, the ZDG, and the LCG to reach agreement  on follow-up  actions; and (vii) participate 
in ADB’s review missions. 
reports  which 
2. 
Social Evaluation  Specialist (national,  9.0 person-months) 
The  specialist  will  undertake  the  following  tasks:  (i)  monitor  the  LAR  (including 
15. 
compensation  payments  and  livelihood  restoration  of  the  affected  persons),  ethnic  minority 
development,  social  development,  and  gender  development  activities  mentioned  in  the 
resettlement  plan, the EMDP,  the SDAP,  and the GAP  to ensure  that they  are being  carried out 
in  compliance  with  principles,  requirements,  and  procedures  according  to  the  plans  and  the 
governments’  laws  and/or  regulations;  (ii) provide  inputs  to  the external  resettlement  and  social 
development  M&E  reports, which  would include  progress,  challenges,  and/or  bottlenecks  during 
Appendix 2 
 91           
implementation;  and  propose  solutions  and/or  recommendations  to  address  these  issues;  (iii) 
participate  in ADB’s  review  missions,  if required;  and (iv)  conduct  any  other  duties  assigned  by 
the resettlement specialist  and/or team leader.  
3. 
Field Surveyors  (national, two positions, 4.5 person-months  each) 
16. 
The surveyors  will  (i) assist the resettlement  and social  evaluation  specialists  in carrying 
out the monitoring on the implementation  of the resettlement plan, the EMDP, the SDAP, and the 
GAP  to ensure  that the  implementation  is in  compliance  with  the  resettlement  plan,  the  EMDP, 
the  SDAP,  and  the  GAP;  (ii)  under  the  guidance  of  the  resettlement  and  social  evaluation 
specialists,  carry  out  field  surveys;  (iii)  analyze  the  data  collected  from  the  field  surveys;  (iv) 
provide assistance  to the resettlement  and social evaluation  specialists for the preparation  of the 
external  resettlement  and  social  development  M&E  reports;  and  (v)  conduct  any  other  duties 
assigned by the resettlement  specialist  and/or team leader.  
E. 
Cost Estimate 
 Item 
1. 
2. 
3.  
4. 
Table A2.5: Cost Estimate 
Total Cost ($'000) 
Consultants 
a. 
Remuneration  and per diem 
National consultants  (27.0 person-months) 
Local travel 
Reports and communications 
b. 
c. 
Surveys 
Miscellaneous  administration  and support costs 
Contingencies 
Total  
188.6 
9.0 
0.5 
4.5 
4.2 
10.2 
217.0 
Source: Asian  Development Bank estimates. 
92 
Appendix  2 
INDICATIVE TERMS OF REFERENCE  FOR CONSULTING SERVICES  FOR 
PACKAGE  T6: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENTAL  MONITORING AGENCY 
A. 
Introduction 
1. 
This  document  sets  out  the  indicative  terms  of  reference  for  external  environmental 
monitoring  to ensure  that the Yunnan  Sayu River Basin  Rural Water  Pollution  Management  and 
Eco-Compensation  Demonstration  Project  will  be  implemented  in conformity  with  the  laws  and 
regulations  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China;  and  the  Asian  Development  Bank’s  (ADB) 
Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009).  The  direct  client  is  the  project  management  office  (PMO). 
The PMO is under the Zhaotong City Government (ZCG, the executing agency of the project) and 
physically  located  in  the  Yudong  Reservoir  Water  Resources  Protection  Committee  Office  (an 
implementing  agency).  The consulting  services  will be also provided to two local PMOs (LPMO). 
One  LPMO  is  physically  located  in  the  Water  Resources  Bureau  of  the  Zhaoyang  District 
Government  (ZDG,  an  implementing  agency)  and  another  LPMO  is  physically  located  in  the 
Investment  Service  Center  of  the  Ludian  County  Government  (LCG,  an  implementing  agency). 
The  project  includes  the  construction  of  two  garbage  pyrolysis  plants,  four  garbage  transfer 
stations, and other facilities. As a part of the loan conditions, an environmental impact assessment 
(EIA)  and  an  environmental  management  plan  (EMP)  have  been  prepared.  The  EMP  requires 
that environmental  monitoring  of the construction  and operation  of the facilities be conducted  by 
an external  environmental  monitoring  agency (EMA). 
B. 
Implementation  Arrangements 
 The external environmental monitoring will be carried out by a team of specialists through 
2. 
a competent  EMA twice a year during  the construction  of the facilities and in the first year of the 
operation of the facilities. The monitoring will be financed by ADB, and the team of specialists will 
be recruited  by the PMO  according  to ADB’s  Procurement  Policy  (2017,  as amended  from  time 
to time)  and  ADB’s  Procurement  Regulations  for ADB  Borrowers  (2017,  as  amended  from  time 
to  time)  through  consultants’  qualifications  selection.  The  EMA  will  work  closely  with  the 
environment  officers  of the  PMO  and  the  LPMOs;  the  Ecological  and  Environmental  Protection 
Bureaus  of the ZCG,  the ZDG,  and the LCG;  and contractors,  consultants,  communities,  and/or 
other  personnel,  as  required.  The  consulting  services  are  expected  to  start  in  April  2021  until 
August 2026. 
3. 
The PMO and the LPMOs; and relevant agencies  of the ZCG, the ZDG, and the LCG will 
provide  assistance  to the EMA,  particularly  in  the aspects  of field  survey,  staffing,  and logistics. 
Specifically,  they  will  (i)  provide  the  EMA  with  hard  and  soft  copies  of  the  EMP,  domestic  and 
ADB-version  EIAs,  domestic  feasibility  study  report,  loan  and  project  agreements,  maps,  and 
other  supporting  materials,  as  necessary;  (ii)  facilitate  and  arrange  meetings  with  key  project 
agencies,  including  contractors  and  construction  supervision  companies  (CSCs);  (iii)  conduct 
overall  coordination,  including  review  of  external  environmental  monitoring  reports;  and  a 
consolidated  external  environmental  monitoring  report;  and  (iv)  take  final  responsibility  for 
submission  of  the  external  environmental  monitoring  reports  and  the  consolidated  external 
environmental  monitoring  report to ADB. 
C. 
Reporting  Requirements 
The  EMA  will  submit  to  ADB,  the  PMO,  and  the  LPMOs  the  external  environmental 
4. 
monitoring  reports  regularly  twice  a  year  during  the  construction  of the  facilities  and  in  the  first 
year of the operation of the facilities; and a consolidated external environmental  monitoring report 
Appendix 2 
 93           
within  2  months  after  the  completion  of  the  project.  For  each  report,  the  EMA  will submit  a soft 
copy of the English version  to ADB and soft copies of the English  and Chinese versions  to each 
of the PMO and the LPMOs. 
The  external  environmental  monitoring  reports  will  include,  but  not  be  limited  to,  (i) 
5. 
description  of  activities  conducted  in  the  reporting  period  and  results;  (ii)  all  cumulative  data 
collected  up  to  the  current  reporting  period;  (iii)  any  cases  of  noncompliance  with  the  target 
standards;  (iv) any  additional  observations  (qualitative  or quantitative);  (iv) lessons  learned;  and 
(f) work schedule  for the next semiannual  monitoring  period. 
6. 
The  consolidated  external  environmental  monitoring  report  will  summarize  the  results, 
conclusions,  lessons  learned,  and recommendations  for the overall  monitoring  program.  All raw 
data will be handed  over to the PMO and the LPMOs in a clear and simple format. The EMA will 
submit to ADB (i) a draft final consolidated external monitoring report for review by ADB, the PMO, 
and the LPMOs;  and (ii) a final report  incorporating  comments  made  by ADB, the PMO, and the 
LPMOs. 
7. 
The  EMA  will  take  full  responsibility  for  the  content  and  quality  of  the  reports;  and  if 
necessary,  must  revise  reports  based  on  comments  of  ADB.  Format  of  the  reports  will  be 
proposed  by the EMA in the technical  proposal.  The EMA may seek  guidance from  examples of 
reports on ADB’s website. 
D. 
Scope of Services 
The  EMA  should  (i)  possess  relevant  domestic  certifications  required  to  conduct 
8. 
environmental  monitoring;  (ii) ensure the provision of all certified  equipment and other resources 
needed for monitoring, analyses, and reporting, including field sampling and laboratory equipment 
and  logistical  resources  (vehicles  etc.);  and  (iii)  assign  qualified  and  experienced  staff  to  be 
directly involved  in site visits, monitoring, analyses,  and reporting activities who  has (a) a degree 
in environmental  management or related field (preferable master’s or higher degree); (b) an ability 
to  communicate  and  work  effectively  with  local  communities,  contractors,  and  government 
agencies;  (c)  experience  in  data  collection  and  analyses  and  report  preparation;  and  (d)  good 
physical health and fitness to visit remote project construction  sites and in different seasons.   
9. 
The EMA will conduct the following tasks.  
Gain  familiarity  with  the  project  sites  and  monitoring  requirements  through  (a)  review  of 
(i) 
the  items  listed as  “external  monitoring”  in  Table  EMP-5  of the  EMP,  as well  as the  overall  EIA 
and EMP; (b) meetings  with the project agencies; and (c) site visits. 
If needed,  recommend  additional  monitoring  variables  and/or  changes  in the  monitoring 
(ii) 
methods  (e.g.,  monitoring  locations  or frequency)  for  the items  listed as  “external  monitoring”  in 
Table  EMP-5  of  the  EMP;  and  provide  a  clear  rationale  for  any  proposed  changes.  Note:  No 
changes  to  the  monitoring  plan  in  Table  EMP-5  will  be  made  without  the  prior  review  and 
endorsement  by the PMO and ADB. 
(iii) 
Design an environmental  monitoring  plan which (a) focuses on specific variables listed in 
Table  EMP-5  of  the  EMP  for  “external  monitoring”;  (b)  includes  a  clear  methodology  and  work 
schedule;  and (c) includes any additional variables  recommended. 
94 
Appendix  2 
Design  and  establish  a simple  database  (e.g.,  in  Excel)  to  store  all collected  data.  Data 
(iv) 
should be entered and stored in a clear and simple format that enables comparison of values over 
time; and ensure  that data is backed  up on at least one external  storage device. 
(v) 
Implement  the monitoring  program. 
(vi)  While  on  site,  provide  demonstrations  to  the  project  agencies  (including  the  PMO,  the 
LPMOs,  the  CSCs,  and  contractors)  in  the  monitoring;  and  emphasize  the  links  between  good 
construction  practices and reduction of environmental  risks. 
(vii) 
Immediately  report  to the LPMOs  any  cases  of noncompliance  with  the EMP  monitoring 
standards  and/or  any  other  environmental  management  issues  that  may  be  observed  while  on 
site. 
Identify any cases of exceedance of values against the project standards, and the reasons 
(viii) 
for such exceedance. 
Prepare and submit external environmental monitoring reports and a consolidated external 
(ix) 
environmental  monitoring  report (paras. 4−7). 
(xi)  Work closely with the PMO, the LPMOs, the CSCs, contractors, consultants, communities, 
and other stakeholders,  as necessary,  to conduct these tasks. 
10. 
Three  (3)  national  specialist  positions  will  provide  a  total  of  14.0  person-months  of 
consulting  services  to  support  extremal  environmental  monitoring.  The  key  responsibilities  are 
proposed  but not limited to the following. 
1. 
Environmental  Specialist/Team  Leader (national,  7.0 person-months) 
11. 
The  specialist  will undertake  the following  tasks:  (i) lead  all the  activities  of the  team; (ii) 
lead and set up the monitoring methodology,  including  design of baseline and tracer surveys; (iii) 
work and coordinate with relevant agencies and/or bodies within the project to implement the task 
of  monitoring  activities;  (iv)  lead  and  conduct  the  monitoring  activities  and  required  surveys  to 
collect data and information  at office and project sites, and then analyze the findings; (v) prepare 
external  environmental  monitoring  reports  which include  conclusions  and recommendations;  (vi) 
discuss findings with the PMO and the LPMOs to reach agreement on follow-up actions; and (vii) 
participate  in ADB’s review missions.  Specifically, the specialist will 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
coordinate  overall monitoring activities  in compliance  with contract requirements; 
develop detailed  work plan and procedures; 
conduct regular site visits for guidance  to local site workers; 
hold regular meetings to review work progress, and propose actions for improvement; 
review monitoring  work plan; 
review and finalize monitoring  reports and consolidated  monitoring  report; 
propose  suggestions  based  on progress,  and  participate  in handling  pollution  accidents; 
and 
review  environmental  sections  contained  in construction  management  plans, and  review 
compliance  of environmental  protection  systems developed  by contractors. 
Appendix 2 
 95           
2. 
Field Surveyors  (national, two positions, 3.5 person-months  each) 
12. 
The  surveyors  will  (i)  assist  the  environmental  specialists  in  carrying  out  external 
environmental  monitoring  to  ensure  that  environmental  management  is  in  compliance  with  the 
EMP; (ii) under the guidance of the environmental  specialists, carry out field surveys; (iii) analyze 
data collected  from  the field surveys;  (iv) provide  assistance  to the environmental  specialists  for 
the  preparation  of  external  environmental  monitoring  reports;  and  (v)  conduct  any  other  duties 
assigned by the environmental  specialist and/or team leader. Specifically,  the surveyors will 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
undertake  field survey and inspection  under the guidance  of environmental  specialist; 
participate  in preparation  of environmental  monitoring  procedures; 
conduct  environmental  monitoring  at  project  sites,  and  evaluate  control  of pollutants  for 
compliance  with relevant  environmental  standards  and regulations; 
identify issues, report them in a timely manner, and propose mitigation  measures; 
arrange  site  meetings  for effective  coordination  with  clients  and  contractors,  and  deliver 
training on a need basis; 
participate  in  handling  pollution  accidents  under  the  guidance  of  the  environment 
specialist; 
prepare  external  environmental  monitoring  reports  and  consolidated  monitoring  report; 
and 
undertake  other tasks assigned  by the environmental  specialist. 
E. 
Cost Estimate 
 Item 
1. 
2. 
3.  
4. 
Table A2.6: Cost Estimate 
Total Cost ($'000) 
Consultants 
a. 
Remuneration  and per diem 
National consultants  (14.0 person-months) 
Local travel 
Reports and communications 
b. 
c. 
Surveys 
Miscellaneous  administration  and support costs 
Contingencies 
Total  
82.6 
3.6 
0.3 
3.5 
2.2 
4.8 
97.0 
Source: Asian  Development Bank estimates. 
96 
Appendix  2 
INDICATIVE TERMS OF REFERENCE  FOR CONSULTING SERVICES  FOR  
PACKAGE  T7: CONSULTANT TEAM FOR RURAL  WATER POLLUTION MANGEMENT 
AND ECO-COMPENSATION 
A. 
Introduction 
1. 
This document sets out indicative terms of reference for consulting services for rural water 
pollution  management  and  eco-compensation  for  the  Yunnan  Sayu  River  Basin  Rural  Water 
Pollution  Management  and  Eco-Compensation  Demonstration  Project.  The  direct  client  of  the 
consulting services is the project management  office (PMO). The PMO is under the Zhaotong City 
Government  (ZCG,  the  executing  agency  of  the  project)  and  physically  located  in  the  Yudong 
Reservoir  Water  Resources  Protection  Committee  Office  (YWPCO,  an  implementing  agency). 
The consulting services will be also provided to two local PMOs (LPMOs). One LPMO is physically 
located  in  the  Water  Resources  Bureau  of  the  Zhaoyang  District  Government  (ZDG,  an 
implementing  agency)  and another LPMO is physically  located in the Investment  Service  Center 
of the Ludian County Government  (LCG, an implementing  agency). 
B. 
Implementation  Arrangements 
2. 
The consulting  services will be carried out by a team of consultants through a firm. A total 
of 12.00 person-months of international and 117.25 person-months of national consulting services 
will be required. The consulting services will be financed by the Asian Development  Bank (ADB); 
and the consultants  will be recruited by the PMO according  to ADB’s Procurement  Policy  (2017, 
as amended  from time  to time), and ADB’s  Procurement  Regulations  for ADB  Borrowers  (2017, 
as  amended  from  time  to  time).  The  consulting  firm  will  be  selected  by  (i)  inviting  simplified 
technical  proposals;  and  (ii) using  the quality-  and cost-based  selection  method,  with a  quality–
cost  ratio  of  90:10.  The  consulting  services  are  expected  to  start  on  May  2021  until  December 
2026.  
C. 
Reporting  Requirements 
3. 
The consultant  team will produce  (i) an inception  report within 4 weeks  of the start of the 
consulting services, (ii) an annual report by the end of each year during 2021−2025, (iii) draft final 
report  by 31 October  2026,  and (iv) a final  report  by 31 December  2026.  The inception,  annual, 
and draft  final reports  will be subject  to tripartite  reviews by ADB,  the PMO,  and consultants.  All 
reports  are to be written  in English  and  translated  into Chinese.  One  soft and  three hard  copies 
of each report are to be submitted to ADB (English version only) and the PMO (both Chinese and 
English versions). 
4. 
The inception report will present an approach for the consulting services, including a work 
plan  and  an  implementation  schedule.  The  annual,  draft  final,  and  final  reports  will  present 
activities  conducted  by  the  consultants,  effects  of  the  consulting  services,  issues  encountered, 
and recommendations. 
D. 
Other Requirements 
The  consultant  team  will  provide  a fully  qualified  interpreter  to work  with the  consultants 
5. 
on a full-time basis and support the ADB missions.    
Appendix 2 
 97           
E. 
6. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Scope of Services  and Consultants’  Inputs 
The consultant team will undertake the following tasks: 
1. 
Output 1: Water pollution sources in the Sayu River Basin reduced 
1.1  Waste management 
Provide relevant agencies of the ZDG and the LCG with technical  assistance in operation 
and maintenance (O&M) and related institutional and capacity development for centralized 
and distributed wastewater  management  and animal feces management. 
1.2 
Solid waste management 
Provide relevant agencies of the ZDG and the LCG with technical assistance in O&M and 
related  institutional  and  capacity  development  for  solid  waste  management  (including 
establishment  of comprehensive  solid waste management  from households to plants with 
institutional  and capacity  development). 
1.3 
Pilot eco-villages  to reduce emission 
Train residents in the pilot eco-villages on garbage classification,  recycling, and reduction 
of  resource  use  and  waste  stream  (including  phasing  out  of  single-use  plastics,  and 
replacing them with locally sourced reusable  and compostable  products). 
Conduct  education  at schools  in the  pilot eco-villages  to promote  garbage  classification, 
recycling,  and  reduction  of  resource  use  and  waste  stream  (including  phasing  out  of 
single-use  plastics  replacing  them  with  locally  sourced  reusable  and  compostable 
products). 
Develop  environmental  health  management  systems  in  the  pilot  eco-villages,  including 
institutional  development 
teams  and  special 
environmental  supervision  groups,  including  their  training,  establishment  of  awarding 
program, etc.). 
(establishment  of  special  cleaning 
Conduct publicity (construction  of cultural activity rooms, environmental  protection bulletin 
boards, audio systems, display  screens, and other publicity  facilities) to promote garbage 
classification,  recycling,  and  reduction  of  resource  use  and  waste  stream  (including 
phasing  out of single-use  plastics,  and replacing  them  with locally  sourced  reusable  and 
compostable  products)  and  to introduce  activities  by special  cleaning  teams  and  special 
environmental  supervision  groups. 
1.4  Wetlands  construction  to reduce nonpoint  source pollution 
(vii) 
Provide relevant  agencies of the ZDG and the LCG with technical assistance  in the O&M 
of  wetlands  constructed  under  the  project  and  related  institutional  and  capacity 
development. 
1.5 
Establishment  of quantifiable  soil and water conservation  model 
(viii)  Establish a model to estimate effects  of afforestation  on soil and water conservation. 
98 
Appendix  2 
(ix) 
Develop  a  plan  to  actually  measure  the  effects  of  afforestation  on  soil  and  water 
conservation  on sites in Ludian County. 
(x) 
Measure effects of afforestation on soil and water conservation  on sites in Ludian County. 
(xi) 
Revise the model based on the measured data. 
1.6 
Promotion  of low-emission  agriculture 
(xii) 
Provide  relevant  agencies  of  the  LCG  with  technical  assistance  in  the  O&M  of  basic 
infrastructures  constructed 
institutional  and  capacity 
in  pilot  areas  and  related 
development. 
(xiii)  Assist  relevant  agencies  of  the  LCG  in  reducing  fertilizer  use;  developing  a  formula  to 
estimate  necessary  fertilizer  volume  (based  on  crop  type,  water  volume,  fertilizer  type, 
etc.); increasing organic and/or special fertilizer application; using animal feces for farming 
to realize circular agriculture and zero emission; and promoting  composting of vegetables 
and straw, etc. 
(xiv)  Assist  relevant  agencies  of  the  LCG  in  establishing  a  green  and  organic  apple  brand, 
organic vegetable  brand, etc. 
2. 
Output 2: Water resources in the Sayu River Basin protected  from pollution 
2.1 
Establishment  of river protection model 
(xv)  Provide staff of relevant agencies of the ZCG (particularly  the YWPCO), the ZDG, and the 
LCG and relevant river chiefs with technical assistance  in the O&M of an intelligent  cloud 
platform  river information  management  system established  under the project  and related 
institutional  and capacity  development,  including collaboration  with river chief system. 
2.2 
Establishment  of smart water integrated management  platform  
(xvi)  Provide  staff  of  relevant  agencies  of  the  ZCG  (particularly  YWPCO),  the  ZDG,  and  the 
LCG  with  technical  assistance  in  the  O&M  of  a  smart  water  integrated  management 
platform established under the project and related institutional and capacity development. 
3. 
Output  3:  Eco-compensation  mechanism  established  for  the  Sayu  River 
Basin 
3.1 
Establishment  of eco-compensation  mechanism 
(xvii)  Assist the ZDG and the LCG in implementing  the eco-compensation  agreement between 
them. 
(xviii)  Assist  four  towns  and  two  townships  in  Zhaoyang  District  and  Ludian  County  in  signing 
and  implementing  six  agreements  between  them  for  new  town-  and  township-level 
horizontal  eco-compensation  mechanisms. 
(xix)  Assist  the YWPCO  in establishing  and  implementing  an eco-compensation  fund  (charge 
of the fund, financing from the fund, etc.). 
Appendix 2 
 99           
4. 
Output  4:  Education,  capacity,  and  public  awareness  for  water  pollution 
management  strengthened 
4.1 
Capacity  development  of  government  staff  for  rural  water  pollution 
management  and eco-compensation 
(xx)  Plan and implement  training, workshops,  and domestic and overseas study visits for staff 
of  the  ZCG,  the  ZDG,  and  the  LCG  for  rural  water  pollution  management  and  eco-
compensation  (excluding  those conducted under Outputs  1–3). 
4.2 
Education of students for rural water pollution management  and eco-
compensation 
(xxi)  Conduct periodical  special lectures at schools, study visits for students,  etc. 
4.3 
Public awareness  raising 
(xxii)  Conduct  public  awareness  raising  through  campaigns,  publicity,  handbooks,  brochures, 
medias, internet,  etc. 
4.4 
Dissemination  and replication  of project initiatives 
(xxiii)  Disseminate  and  replicate  water  pollution  management  and  eco-compensation 
demonstrated  under the project to other areas of the People’s Republic of China and also 
other  countries  through  workshops,  publications,  disclosure  of  project  information  on 
website,  submission  of  papers  to academic  societies,  application  for  a model  project  for 
eco-civilization,  application  for award programs, etc.  
7. 
Each consultant’s  input to each activity is shown in Table A2.7 below. 
100 
Appendix  2 
Table A2.7: Consultants’  Inputs 
Consultants  Inputs 
(person-months) 
Waste 
Management 
Specialists 
Wetland 
SP 
Afforestation 
Specialist   
Associate 
Afforestation 
Specialists 
1 and  2 
Low-
Emission 
Agriculture 
Specialist 
Composting 
Specialist 
Agri-
Business 
Specialist 
River 
Mgmt. 
SP 
Eco-
Compensation 
Specialists 
EDU, 
CD, 
and 
CP 
SP 
INT 
(TL) 
NA 
NA 
NA 
1.946 
1.134 
0.946 
0.485 
1.757 
1.112 
1.879 
0.485 
0.946 
0.485 
1.757 
Activities 
Output  1:  Wastewater  management  and pollution control  in the  Sayu  River  Basin  strengthened 
1.1 Waste  management 
(i)  Technical  assistance in O&M and related 
institutional and CD 
1.2 Solid waste  management 
(ii)  Technical  assistance in O&M and related 
institutional and CD 
1.3 Pilot eco-villages  to reduce  emission 
(iii) Training  of  residents 
(iv) EDU at schools 
(v) Development of  environmental  health 
management  system 
0.818 
(vi) Publicity 
1.4 Wetlands  construction  to reduce  nonpoint  source  pollution 
(vii) Technical  assistance in O&M and related 
institutional and CD 
1.5 Establishment  of quantifiable  soil and  water  conservation  model 
(viii) Establishment of  a model to estimate ef f ects 
of  af f orestation on soil and water conservation 
(ix) Development of  a plan to actually measure 
ef f ects of af forestation on soil and water 
conservation on sites 
(x) Measurement  of  ef f ects of af forestation on soil 
and water  conservation on sites 
(xi) Revision of  the model based on the measured 
data 
1.6 Promotion  of low-emission  agriculture 
(xii) Technical  assistance in O&M and related 
institutional and CD 
(xiii) Reduction of  f ertilizer use, development of  a 
f ormula to estimate necessary f ertilizer  volume, 
increase  of  organic and/or special f ertilizer 
application, use of  animal f eces f or f arming, 
promotion of  composting, etc. 
(xiv) Establishment of  a green  and organic apple 
brand, organic vegetable brand, etc. 
2.375 
4.750 
0.250 
0.250 
0.500 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
INT 
NA 
NA 
0.730 
0.405 
0.876 
1.751 
0.780 
12.000 
1.500 
3.208 
2.000 
3.000 
Waste 
Management 
Specialists 
Wetland 
SP 
Afforestation 
Specialist   
Associate 
Afforestation 
Specialists 
1 and  2 
Low-
Emission 
Agriculture 
Specialist 
Composting 
Specialist 
Agri-
Business 
Specialist 
River 
Mgmt. 
SP 
Eco-
Compensation 
Specialists 
EDU, 
CD, 
and 
CP 
SP 
Consultants  Inputs 
(person-months) 
Activities 
INT 
(TL) 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
INT 
NA 
NA 
Appendix 2 
 101           
Output  2:  Water  resources  management  in the Sayu  River  improved 
2.1 Establishment  of river  protection  model 
(xv) Technical  assistance in O&M and related 
institutional and CD including collaboration with 
the river  chief  system 
2.2 Establishment  of smart  water  integrated  management  platform 
(xvi) Technical  assistance in O&M and related 
institutional and CD 
Output  3:  Eco-compensation  mechanism  for the  Sayu  River  Basin  established 
3.1 Establishment  of eco-compensation  mechanism 
(xvii) Recommend on micro-f inancing 
(xviii) Conduct domestic study visits 
(xix) Disseminate project’s initiatives 
Output  4:  Education,  capacity,  and public awareness  for water  pollution management  strengthened 
4.1 Capacity  development  of  government  staff  for rural water  pollution management  and eco-compensation 
(xx) Planning and implementation  of  training, 
workshops, and domestic and overseas study 
visits 
4.2 Education  of  students  for rural  water  pollution management  and eco-compensation 
(xxi) Periodical special lectures  at schools, study 
visits f or students, etc. 
4.3 Public awareness  raising 
(xxii) Public awareness  raising through 
campaigns, publicity, handbooks, brochures, 
medias, internet,  etc. 
4.4 Dissemination  and replication  of project  initiatives 
(xxiii) Dissemination and replication of  water 
pollution management  and eco-compensation 
demonstrated under  the project 
0.688 
0.188 
1.500 
0.841 
0.473 
0.473 
0.863 
0.354 
0.354 
0.250 
0.772 
0.616 
1.208 
1.313 
1.250 
1.250 
1.104 
1.104 
0.729 
1.729 
1.729 
1.479 
0.146 
0.146 
0.438 
0.125 
0.179 
0.768 
1.334 
0.646 
0.583 
0.375 
0.938 
0.179 
Total 
9.500 
CD  = capacity development, CP  = community participation, EDU  = education, INT  =  international,  mgmt. =  management,  NA  = national,  O&M  = operation and  maintenance,  SP =  specialist, TL  =  team 
leader. 
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of  rounding. 
Source: Asian Development Bank.
12.000 
10.250 
3.000 
5.500 
3.250 
3.750 
6.000 
2.000 
3.250 
7.500 
8.250 
Appendix  2: Indictive  Terms of Reference for Consulting  Services          102 
F. 
Cost Estimates 
Table A2.8: Cost Estimate 
 Item 
1. 
Consultants 
a. 
Remuneration  and per diem 
International  consultant  (12.00 person-months) 
National consultants  (62.25 person-months) 
International  travel 
Local travel 
Reports and communications 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Surveys 
Workshops,  training, seminars,  and conferences 
Equipment 
Miscellaneous  administration  and support costs 
Contingencies 
Total  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.  
6. 
Source: Asian  Development Bank estimates. 
Total Cost ($'000) 
290.4 
440.0 
42.5 
59.4 
2.4 
12.0 
20.0 
68.0 
15.3 
50.0 
1,000.0 
Appendix 3  
103 
ENVIRONMENTAL  MANAGEMENT  PLAN 
FOR THE YUNNAN  SAYU RIVER BASIN RURAL WATER POLLUTION  MANAGEMENT 
AND ECO-COMPENSATION  DEMONSTRATION  PROJECT 
People’s  Republic of China 
Prepared  by the Zhaotong City Government  for the Asian Development  Bank 
This  environmental  management  plan is a  document  of the  borrower.  The views  expressed  herein 
do  not  necessarily  represent  those  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank's  (ADB)  Board  of  Directors, 
Management,  or staff;  and may  be preliminary  in  nature. Your  attention  is  directed  to the “terms  of 
use” section of the ADB website in which the full environmental  impact assessment  is given. 
In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation of 
or  reference  to  a  particular  territory  or  geographic  area  in  this  document,  ADB  does  not  intend  to 
make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any territory or area. 
104 
Appendix  3 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB 
CSC  
DEIA 
EEB 
EIA 
EMA 
EMP 
GRM 
LPMO 
PMO 
PRC 
QA 
QC 
–  Asian Development  Bank 
–  construction  supervision  company 
–  environmental  impact assessment 
–  ecology and environment  bureau 
–  environmental  impact assessment 
–  environmental  monitoring  agency 
–  environmental  management  plan 
–  grievance  redress mechanism 
–  local project management  office 
–  project management  office 
–  People’s Republic  of China 
–   quality assurance 
–   quality control 
CONTENTS 
Objectives 
Organizations and their Responsibilities for EMP Implementation 
Potential Impacts and Mitigation Measures 
Environmental Monitoring, Inspection, and Reporting 
Training and Capacity Building 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Public Consultation and Awareness Raising 
Cost Estimates 
Mechanisms for Feedback and Adjustment 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
Appendix 3  
105 
Page 
106 
106 
110 
121 
126 
127 
130 
131 
134 
106 
Appendix  3 
A. 
Objectives 
1. 
This environmental management plan (EMP) is for the Yunnan Sayu River Basin Rural Water 
Pollution  Management  and  Eco-compensation  Demonstration  Project.  The  EMP  is  to  be 
implemented in all phases of the project—design,  pre-construction,  construction, and operation. The 
EMP aims to ensure project  compliance  with environmental  laws of the People’s Republic  of China 
(PRC)  and  the  Asian  Development  Bank’s  (ADB)  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009).  The  EMP 
describes  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  all project  agencies  to implement  this  EMP;  anticipated 
impacts  and mitigation  measures;  inspection,  monitoring,  and reporting  arrangements;  training  and 
institutional  strengthening;  grievance  redress mechanism  (GRM); and future public consultation.   
2. 
In the detailed  design  stage,  the Zhaotong  City  project management  office  (PMO) will  pass 
this EMP to the design institutes  for incorporating  mitigation  measures into the detailed  engineering 
designs.1  The  EMP  will  be  updated  at  the  end  of  the  detailed  design,  as  needed.  To  ensure  that 
bidders will respond  to the EMP’s  provisions,  the PMO  and the implementing  agencies will prepare 
and  provide  the  specification  clauses  for  incorporation  into  the  bidding  documents:  (i)  a  list  of 
environmental  management  requirements  to  be  budgeted  by  the  bidders  in  their  bids,  (ii) 
environmental  clauses  for  contractual  terms  and  conditions,  and  (iii)  the  component  domestic 
environmental  impact assessment  (DEIA),  and the ADB-version  environmental  impact  assessment 
(EIA) for the project (project EIA), including the updated EMP for compliance. 
B. 
Organizations  and  Their  Responsibilities  for  the  Environmental  Management  Plan 
Implementation 
3. 
The Zhaotong  City Government,  represented  by the Zhaotong  City Yudong Reservoir  Water 
Resources  Protection Committee Office, is the executing agency of the project. At the city-level, the 
Zhaotong City Government has established the project leading group to provide policy guidance and 
coordination;  and  the  PMO  to  manage,  supervise,  and  coordinate  overall  project  implementation. 
The PMO comprises the Director (part-time), four Deputy Directors (all part-time), one chief engineer 
(full-time),  and  21  full-time  staff,  including  an  environment  officer.  Each  of  the  two  implementing 
agencies,  the Zhaoyang  District Government,  and the Ludian County  Government,  has established 
a  local  PMO  (LPMO)  to  implement  their  project  components  and  subprojects.  The  EMP 
implementation  arrangements  and  responsibilities  of  governmental  organizations  are  summarized 
in Table EMP-1. 
Table EMP-1: Institutional  Responsibilities  for the Environmental  Management  Plan 
Implementation 
Agency 
Zhaotong City Project Leading 
Group 
Zhaotong City Government 
Environmental Management Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Ensure timely national, provincial, and inter-agency coordination and 
support for the project, as needed 
•  High-level support to executing agency 
•  Provide advice on project implementation 
•  Review project progress 
•  Project executing agency 
•  Overall accountability and responsibility for project planning, 
management, and implementation 
•  Ensure timely and effective execution of the loan agreements 
•  Coordinate with ADB 
1  In  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  (PRC), preliminary  design  is  equivalent  to  detailed  (engineering)  designs  in  other 
countries. 
Agency 
PMO 
Appendix 3  
107 
Environmental Management Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Supervise and manage daily project implementation 
•  Recruit and manage design institutes, procurement agents, 
consultants, contractors, CSCs, in accordance with government and 
ADB regulations 
•  Submit bidding documents, bid evaluation reports, and other 
documents, as needed, to ADB for endorsement 
•  Supervise construction and monitor quality control 
•  Coordinate with ADB on all aspects of project implementation 
Environment safeguards – all project outputs 
•  Engage environmental specialists (consultants); and the EMA for 
external environmental monitoring 
•  Assign one PMO environment officer and one PMO social officer 
•  Respond to any unanticipated safeguard issues; and take corrective 
actions, as needed 
•  Ensure project compliance with the loan and project agreements 
(including all safeguard provisions), the EMP, and the ESMS 
•  Prepare semiannual environment monitoring reports to ADB 
•  Draft terms of reference for the PMO environment officer are in 
Appendix 2 
Project EIA and EMP—all project outputs except the  
Eco-Compensation Fund (Output 3) 
•  Update project EIA and/or EMP, as needed, especially during the 
stage of detailed engineering designs a 
•  Ensure that the EMP, especially all relevant mitigation measures, are 
included in the detailed engineering designs 
•  Establish the EMP grievance redress mechanism 
ESMS – for Eco-compensation Fund (Output 3) 
•  Support the Zhaotong City Finance Bureau and the fund committee to 
finalize the ESMS, submit the updated draft ESMS to ADB for 
endorsement, and implement the fund and  the ESMS 
•  Facilitate safeguard training for the Zhaotong City Finance Bureau 
and the fund committee 
•  Incorporate monitoring and progress on the ESMS implementation in 
the semiannual environment monitoring reports to ADB 
Zhaoyang District Government,  
Ludian County Government, and  
their respective LPMOs 
(for all civil works) 
•  Implement subprojects, including finance, administration, technical 
and procurement matters, monitoring, evaluation, and safeguards 
•  Coordinate with the PMO for project implementation 
•  Prepare tendering contracts; and submit bidding documents, bid 
evaluation reports, and other documents to the PMO 
•  Recruit design institutes, contractors, and the CSCs; and manage 
contractors and suppliers 
•  Submit the withdrawal applications to finance bureau 
•  Supervise construction and quality control 
•  Assign the LPMO environment officer (one per LPMO), with the draft 
terms of reference in Appendix 2 of the project EIA 
•  Incorporate the EMP into bidding documents 
•  Supervise and monitor the EMP implementation and progress 
reporting to the PMO 
•  Participate in capacity building and training programs 
•  Contract the EMA to conduct environmental monitoring 
108 
Appendix  3 
Agency 
Eco-compensation Fund 
Management Committee (to 
manage the eco-compensation 
fund under Output 3) 
Project Facility Operators: under 
the two implementing agencies 
Project Facility Operators: the city 
agencies, town and/or village 
governments, or district and/or 
county Housing and Urban–Rural 
Development Bureaus, Urban 
Construction and Investment 
Companies, Ecology and 
Environment Bureaus, and Water 
Resources Bureaus 
Initial project management support 
consultant (environment) 
Environmental Management Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Coordinate and nominate the local town and township governments 
that will be responsible for operation and maintenance of the garbage 
transfer stations, wastewater treatment stations, river embankments, 
constructed wetlands  
•  Commission the constructed facilities 
•  Implementing agency for the eco-compensation fund (Output 3) 
•  Establish, manage, and implement the fund and the ESMS 
•  Prepare semiannual environment monitoring reports to the PMO for 
consolidation within progress reports by the PMO to ADB 
•  With the LPMOs, commission the constructed facilities: the garbage 
pyrolysis plants, garbage transfer stations, wastewater treatment 
stations, river embankments, and constructed wetlands  
•  Operate and maintain the completed facilities, including 
environmental management, monitoring, and reporting responsibilities 
•  Short-term national position to support the PMO and the LPMOs with 
start-up support for the EMP and the ESMS establishment; while a 
team of consultants for project management support, including an 
environmental specialist, is being recruited 
•  Assess whether the detailed engineering designs are within the scope 
of the EMP and/or whether new safeguard assessments are required 
•  Help integrate the EMP within the project bidding documents  
•  Assist the PMO to establish the GRM for the EMP and the ESMS 
•  Provide initial training to project agencies for the EMP and the ESMS 
implementation 
Environmental specialist in team 
of consultants for project 
management support 
•  Support the executing and implementing agencies in their tasks to 
coordinate and implement the EMP and the ESMS 
•  Provide ongoing training for the EMP and the ESMS implementation, 
including the EMP capacity building (Table EMP-6) 
•  Review the detailed engineering designs and assess whether the 
project EIA and/or the EMP requires update 
•  Support the update of the project EIA and/or the EMP, as needed 
•  Review bidding documents to ensure that the EMP clauses are 
incorporated 
•  Review site-specific EMPs (prepared by contractors) to ensure 
compliance with the EMP 
•  Conduct site inspections to assess compliance with the EMP 
•  Review environment monitoring reports prepared by contractors 
•  Assist the PMO to prepare the semiannual environmental monitoring 
reports to ADB 
•  Refer to the indicative terms of reference in Appendix 2 
•  Required by ADB for projects that are Category A for environment 
•  Certified agency that will conduct the external environment monitoring 
described in Table EMP-5 
•  Monitor compliance of the identified parameters with the required 
project targets and standards, and identify noncompliance 
•  Submit independent  progress reports to the PMO, the LPMOs, and 
ADB 
External environment monitoring 
agency (intermittent throughout 
project) 
Agency 
Contractors (intermittent 
throughout project) 
Construction supervision company 
(intermittent throughout 
construction) 
ADB 
Appendix 3  
109 
Environmental Management Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Ensure sufficient funding and human resources for full 
implementation of mitigation and monitoring measures in the EMP 
•  Develop site-specific EMPs based on this EMP, including the specific 
contractor performance targets listed in Table EMP-2 
•  Timely and effective implementation of the EMP measures for works 
•  Ensure sufficient funding and human resources for supervising and 
instructing contractors for proper and timely implementation of 
required mitigation and monitoring measures in the EMP 
•  Supervise construction progress and quality 
•  Appoint qualified EHS officer for regular onsite supervision of 
contractors 
•  Supervise the contractor’s EMP implementation performance 
•  Undertake simple and cost-effective on-site quantitative 
measurements to regularly check that construction complies with the 
project environmental monitoring standards and targets, especially for 
noise and air quality (especially during works in urban areas and 
villages), using a basic hand-held meter 
•  Submit monthly EMP monitoring reports to the LPMOs and the PMO 
•  Oversee project administration and timely execution of the loan 
agreements by the executing and implementing agencies 
•  Disburse loan proceeds 
•  Review procurement, consultant recruitment, progress reports, and 
audit reports 
•  Review project compliance and targets against the design and 
monitoring framework, the EMP, the ESMS, social plans, and project 
administration manual 
•  Review and endorse updated project EIA, the EMP, and/or the ESMS, 
as needed 
•  Monitors project progress and conducts review missions 
•  Discloses monitoring reports on ADB’s public website 
ADB  = Asian  Development  Bank,  CSC =  construction  supervision  company,  EIA  = environmental  impact  assessment, 
EMA =  environmental  monitoring  agency,  EMP = environmental  management  plan,  ESMS = environmental  and  social 
management  system,  GRM =  grievance  redress  mechanism,  LPMO =  local  project  management  office, PMO = project 
management  office in the Zhaotong  City Government, project EIA = ADB-version  EIA for the project. 
a  In the People’s  Republic  of China, preliminary  design  is equivalent  to detailed  (engineering)  designs  in other countries. 
Source: Asian  Development Bank. 
4. 
Environment  staff  within  the  PMO  and  the  LPMOs:  One  full-time  PMO  environment  officer 
and  two  district  and/or  county  LPMO  environment  officers  (one  per  implementing  agency)  will  be 
appointed.  These  personnel  will  be  responsible  for  coordination  and  implementation  of  the  EMP. 
The PMO environment  officer will be responsible  for overall EMP coordination.  The officer will work 
full-time  for  the  project  and  will  take  charge  of  (i)  supervising  the  implementation  of  mitigation 
measures  during  project  design,  construction,  and  operation;  (ii)  ensuring  that  environmental 
management,  monitoring,  and  mitigation  measures  are  incorporated  into  bidding  documents, 
construction  contracts,  and  operation  management  manuals;  (iii)  submitting  semiannual  EMP 
monitoring  and  progress  reports  to  ADB;  (iv)  coordinating  the  GRM;  and  (v)  responding  to  any 
unforeseen  adverse  impacts.  The  PMO  environment  officer  will  be  technically  supported  by 
environmental  specialists  (consultants).  Each LPMO will nominate  one environment  officer and one 
social  officer  to  check  the  overall  implementation  of  environmental  management  provisions  of  the 
EMP,  and  work  in  close  coordination  with  the  PMO  environment  officer.  The  PMO  environment 
110 
Appendix  3 
officer  and the  PMO social  officer  will  also be responsible  for implementation  of the environmental 
and social management  system (ESMS), (Appendix  4). 
5. 
Consultants.  The PMO will engage  consultants  for project management  support,  including 
environmental  specialists.  The  environmental  specialists  will  support  the  PMO  to  provide  capacity 
building and coordination  for implementation  of the EMP and the ESMS.  
6. 
Indicative  terms  of  reference  for  the  environmental  specialists  are  included  in  Appendix  2. 
Draft terms of reference for the PMO and the LPMO environment  officers are described in Appendix 
2 of the project EIA. 
C. 
Potential Impacts  and Mitigation Measures 
Tables EMP-2 and EMP-3 list potential impacts of the project components in the project areas 
7. 
during project preparation,  design, construction,  and operation;  and proposed  mitigation  measures. 
The mitigation  measures will be incorporated  into detailed  design, bidding documents,  construction 
contracts,  and operational  management  manuals  by a design  institute  (during detailed  design)  and 
contractors  (during  construction)  under  the  supervision  of  the  PMO  and  the  LPMO  environment 
officers  and  the  construction  supervision  companies  (CSCs),  with  technical  support  from  the 
environmental  specialists  (consultants),  (footnote  1).  The  effectiveness  of  these  measures  will  be 
evaluated based on environmental  inspections  and monitoring  to determine whether  they should be 
continued,  improved, or adjusted. 
Table EMP-2: Potential Impacts and Mitigation Measures during Pre-Construction and Construction Phases 
Potential Impacts/ 
Issues 
Mitigation Measures 
Who 
Implements 
Who 
Supervises 
Item 
A. DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PHASES 
Detailed 
design stagea 
Institutional 
strengthening for the 
EMP implementation 
and supervision 
• At  least  1  month  before  any  construction: (i) reconfirm the  full-time status of  the  PMO 
environment officer; (ii) appoint at least one environment officer in each LPMO. 
• At least 2  months before any  construction, the PMO  engages a  team of  consultants for 
project management support, including an environmental specialist. 
• At least 2 months before any construction, provide training to all environmental staff for  the 
EMP implementation and supervision. 
• Confirm that at least one certified EMA has been recruited for the project at least 2 months 
before any construction. 
• Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) safety management – prescreening ahead of works. 
Establish  early  screening  measures  and  procedures  to  ensure  that  all  new  project 
personnel  are  tested negative before  commencing on-site work. See  also  requirements 
under  occupational  health  and  safety (Construction Phase,  below)  for preparation  of  a 
COVID-19 health and safety plan. 
• Organize  and  conduct  training on  the  project  EMP  for  appropriate  staffs of  the  PMO, 
implementing agencies, the LPMOs, contractors, and the CSCs. 
Updating EMP 
• Update the mitigation measures defined in this EMP, as needed, based on final detailed 
design.  
• Asbestos.  Under  ADB’s List of Prohibited  Investment Activities (SPS 2009),  the  use  of 
asbestos  is  prohibited  except  for  the  “purchase  and  use  of  bonded  asbestos  cement 
sheeting where the asbestos content is <20%” (SPS, 2009: 76). However, (i) in practice, it 
is difficult to assess whether asbestos content is <20%; and (ii) international development 
banks  are  increasingly banning  the  use  of  all  asbestos  from  their  projects. To  ensure 
international best practice for human health and safety for this project: no asbestos of any 
kind will be used in any materials supported by the project. 
• Check with  the  design institute and  the  PMO  to  ensure  the  proposed  materials do  not 
include the use of asbestos. 
• Submit the updated EMP to ADB for review. 
• In case of major changes of project location and/or additional physical components, form a 
DEIA team to conduct additional DEIA and  public consultation. The revised DEIA will be 
submitted to EEBs of Zhaotong City, Zhaoyang District, and Ludian County; and ADB for 
approval and disclosure. ADB will determine if the change is minor or major. 
• Prior to construction, the PMO or the LPMOs will hire an EMA for environmental monitoring. 
• Prepare detailed monitoring plan in accordance with the monitoring plan in this EMP.  
Environmental 
monitoring plan 
Detailed design 
• River embankments will be designed and identified in detail to avoid impacts to local and 
downstream ecosystems. 
Construction 
Preparation 
Appendix 3   111 
PMO, 
LPMOs 
PMO 
PMO, 
consultant 
EEBs, ADB 
PMO, 
LPMOs, 
EMA 
Design 
institute 
PMO, 
LPMOs 
PMO 
112 
Appendix  3 
Item 
Potential Impacts/ 
Issues 
Bidding and contract 
documents 
EMP training 
Mitigation Measures 
• Afforestation  subcomponent  will  be  designed  by  a  combined  team  of  an  ecological 
specialist and forester, not only forestry specialist or infrastructure engineers.  
• Manure collection tanks will be located at a safe distance from waterways and construction 
and operation will avoid any contamination of streams or rivers. 
• Mitigation measures in the EMP are incorporated in all bidding documents. 
• Bidding documents are sent to ADB for review. 
• Prepare environmental contract clauses for contractors. 
• Environmental specialist (consultant or invited) and/or officials from EEBs provide training 
on  construction environmental management,  implementation, supervision, to contractors 
and CSCs, in accordance with the training plan in this EMP. 
Establish GRM 
• Responsibility for GRM implementation is assigned to the PMO and the LPMO environment 
officers and social officers and is included in their terms of reference. 
• The PMO and the LPMO personnel will be aware of, and trained in, the GRM; and will help 
support the environment and social officers, when necessary. 
• Key contact details for the GRM (phone number, WeChat, address, email) will be provided 
on the PMO, implementing agency, and/or EEB public websites and information boards at 
construction sites. 
• Prior to any works, prepare site-specific EMP for individual construction sites 
• Review and ensure that the site EMP complies with the measures in this EMP 
Site EMPs 
B. CONSTRUCTION PHASE 
Topography 
and Soils 
Earthwork, soil erosion, 
soil contamination 
• Coordinate  with  other  utility  service  providers  to  establish  presence  of  existing  utility 
easements and avoid risk of damage and/or repeated excavation/filling  
• All project earthworks located within 50  m of rivers and channels, will only be conducted 
between the calendar months of October to April (the dry season) 
• Plan and implement construction in staged sections (≤500 m), with one section completed 
and stabilized before beginning the next. 
• Define spoil disposal sites and borrow pit locations, in the construction tender documents. 
• Construct intercepting channels to prevent construction runoff entering waterways.  
• Divert runoff from sites to sedimentation ponds or existing drainage. 
• Limit construction and material handling, particularly for the river embankment works, during 
rain (rainy season is May to September) and high winds (April to May). 
• Minimize  open  excavation  areas  and  trenches,  including  for  pipeline  works  and 
embankments to <300 m sections of active works. Use appropriate compaction techniques 
for pipe trenches (sewer pipelaying). 
• Properly  store  petroleum  products,  hazardous  materials,  and  wastes  on  impermeable 
surfaces in secured and covered areas. 
Who 
Implements 
Who 
Supervises 
Design 
institute, 
PMO, 
LPMOs 
Consultant, 
EPD, EEBs, 
ADB  
Consultant  PMO, EEBs 
PMO, 
LPMOs 
Consultant 
Contractor 
PMO, 
LPMO 
Contractor 
CSC 
Consultant 
CSC, 
LPMO, 
PMO, EEB, 
WRB,  
consultant 
Item 
Potential Impacts/ 
Issues 
Mitigation Measures 
• Stabilize all cut slopes, river and wetland banks, tree pits and planting areas, and other soil 
erosion-prone  working  areas  through  terraces, silt  barriers,  sediment  traps,  and  other 
measures, as needed. 
Who 
Implements 
Who 
Supervises 
Appendix 3   113 
• Strip  and  stockpile  topsoil,  and  cover  (by  geotechnical  cloth)  or  seed  temporary  soil 
stockpiles. 
• Provide temporary detention ponds or containment to control silt runoff. 
• Stabilize earthwork areas within 15 days after earthworks have ceased at the sites.  
• Rehabilitate  all sediment,  and  spoil  disposal sites, embankments,  and  revetments, after 
completion. Properly slope or re-vegetate disturbed surfaces, e.g., pipeline  trenches and 
cut banks. Use only native species for rehabilitation and landscaping. 
• Situate construction camps and storage areas to minimize land area required. 
• Remove construction wastes from the site to the approved disposal sites. 
• Establish  emergency  preparedness  and  response  plan  for  spills,  including  cleanup 
equipment at each construction site and training in emergency spill response procedures.  
• Train contractors and crews in emergency spill response procedures. 
• Conduct site inspections and monitoring for soil erosion and contamination. 
• Equip material stockpiles and concrete mixing equipment with dust shrouds. 
• Spray water on construction sites and earth/material handling routes. 
• Cover materials during truck transport. 
• Purchase  pre-mixed  asphalt  for  road  surface paving  after  pipeline  laying; if  asphalt  is 
heated and mixed onsite, asphalt mixers must be located >200 m from villages and other 
sensitive receptors. 
• Store petroleum or other harmful materials in appropriate places. 
• Ensure emissions from vehicle and machinery comply with the PRC standards of GB18352-
2005, GB17691-2005,  GB11340-2005, GB2847-2005, and GB18285-2005. 
• Provide high-horsepower equipment with tail gas purifiers. 
• Conduct  ambient  air  monitoring  including  H2S  caused  by  rubbish  transferring  and 
collection. 
Contractor 
CSC, 
LPMO, 
PMO, 
consultant 
Ambient Air  Dust generated by 
construction activities, 
gaseous air pollution 
(SO2, CO, NOx) from 
construction machinery 
and asphalt pavement 
after pipeline laying 
Noise and 
vibration 
Noise and vibration 
generated from 
construction activities 
• Ensure construction machinery conform to the PRC standard of GB12523-2011. 
• Properly maintain vehicles and machineries to minimize noise. 
• Apply noise reduction devices or  methods where  noisy machinery is operating , such as 
Contractor 
construction of the GTSs, GPPs, and WWTS, within 300 m of sensitive sites. 
• Prohibit operation  of machinery generating high levels of noise, and movement of heavy 
vehicles along urban and village roads between 20:00 and 06:00. 
• Place temporary hoardings or noise barriers around noise sources during construction.  
• Conduct checks for cracks at sites before and after vibration-inducing works. 
• Monitor noise at sensitive areas and consult villagers and/or residents at regular intervals 
(Table EMP-5). If noise standards are exceeded, equipment and  construction conditions 
CSC, 
LPMO, 
PMO, 
consultant 
114 
Appendix  3 
Item 
Potential Impacts/ 
Issues 
Mitigation Measures 
shall be checked, and mitigation measures shall be implemented to rectify the situation.  
• Conduct  interviews with  residents adjacent  to  construction sites to  identify and  resolve 
issues, including adjustment of work hours of noise-generating machinery. 
Who 
Implements 
Who 
Supervises 
• For  about  1,341  households  that will be  within 40  m  of  construction works (project EIA 
Section  VI.C.5),  particular  attention  will  be  provided.  This  will  include  (i)  follow-up 
consultations with these  households  prior to the  start of  any  works to  specify the  exact 
planned  dates  and  schedule  of  works, nature  of  works, equipment  to  be  used,  safety 
measures, and public access during construction; (ii) installation of noise barriers to reduce 
as much of the emissions as possible; and/or installation of additional layers on the windows 
of  the affected homes,  as necessary, based  on  the  assessment of the  most technically 
effective method  and  feedback from the community consultations; (iii) agreement on the 
duration of daily works. 
Soil and water 
pollution 
Impact from 
wastewater pollution 
• Labor camps, fuel storage, machinery maintenance workshop and vehicle cleaning areas 
Contractor 
must be stationed at least 500 m away from waterways. 
• Storage facilities for fuels, oil, and other hazardous materials will be within secured areas 
on impermeable surfaces and provided with bunds and clean-up installations.  
• Prior to any earthworks along rivers and channels, install sediment traps and  curtains to 
CSC, 
LPMO, 
PMO, 
consultant 
minimize sediment runoff. 
• For  embankments,  sewer  pipeline  works  by  riverbanks;  and  afforestation  sites  by 
riverbanks, pump slurry to bank and dispose spoil. 
• Collect construction wastewater in retention ponds and filter tanks to remove silts, oil.  
• Equip machine wash-down sites with water collection basins and sediment traps. 
• Install oil-water separators before the sedimentation tank for oily wastewater treatment.  
• Equip  all  sites for  washing  of  construction equipment  with  water  collection basins  and 
sediment traps. 
• Install  portable  toilets  at  work  sites and  on-site  wastewater  pre-treatment  systems for 
worker camps along with maintenance protocols. 
• Domestic wastewater from worker camps will be disposed in  two ways: (i) for work sites 
accessible to  municipal sewerage  systems, the  wastewater  will be  discharged into  the 
nearest sewerage system; and  (ii) for work sites neither close to  villages nor  sewerage 
systems, temporary  septic  tanks  will  be  constructed  for  the  centralized  treatment  of 
domestic wastewater.  
• Contractors will develop actions for control of oil and other dangerous substances as part 
of their site EMPs. 
• Contractors’ fuel suppliers must be properly licensed. They shall follow proper protocol for 
transferring  fuel  and  the  PRC  standard  of  JT3145-91  (Transportation,  Loading  and 
Unloading of Dangerous or Harmful Goods. revised). 
• Tailings and wastewater from work sites will only be  discharged into the tributaries when 
Item 
Potential Impacts/ 
Issues 
the concentration of SS is less than 20 mg/liter. 
Mitigation Measures 
Appendix 3   115 
Who 
Implements 
Who 
Supervises 
Solid Waste  Solid waste generated 
• Provide appropriate waste collection and storage containers at locations away from surface 
Contractor 
• Water  quality (for  pollutants such  as  SS,  CODCr, NH3-N,  and  petroleum)  in  the  project 
waterways will be monitored by the EMA during construction (Table EMP-5). 
by construction 
activities and from 
workers’ camps 
Biological 
resources 
Protection of flora and 
fauna around 
construction sites 
water or sensitive spots. 
• Arrange with municipal waste collection services for regular collection of waste.  
• Properly remove and dispose residual materials, wastes, and  contaminated soils. Paving 
or vegetating shall be done as soon as the materials are removed to stabilize the soil.  
• Burning of waste is strictly prohibited. 
• Provide sufficient garbage bins at strategic locations and  ensure that they are  protected 
from birds and vermin and emptied regularly by the municipal waste collection systems.  
• Construction  waste.  Construction  waste  will  be  regularly  transported  off-site  by  the 
contractor, for disposal at two designated “Green Building Material Factor ies” (Table V-9; 
Section V.D.f), where the construction spoil (waste concrete, waste bricks and other solid 
waste) will be used for manufacturing building materials (permeable bricks and hollow wall 
material). 
CONTRACTOR PERFORMANCE TARGET: No uncollected waste at close of construction 
activities each day. 
• Prior to construction, demarcate vegetations, e.g., vegetated roadsides, trees, riverbanks. 
• At mainstream of Longshu River and the constructed wetlands, prior to construction, clearly 
demarcate the natural areas to avoid damage to the natural vegetation. 
• For  the  afforestation component,  the  design will be  led  by  a  qualified flora  specialist or 
ecologist, working with other design institute specialists including a forestry specialist. This 
will ensure the  designs avoid risks of monoculture, inappropriate  species selection,  and 
other issues associated with “classic” forestry designs 
• As far as possible avoid clearance of any vegetation. 
• After construction, immediately replant vegetation in any sites subject to clearance.  
• In compliance with the  Yunnan  Regulation for Landscaping Management: (i) the  area  of 
compensatory plantings will be double that of the area of vegetation that is cleared; and ( ii) 
a minimum survival rate of 80% of the planted vegetation is required. Survival rate will be 
monitored by the contractor and the Zhaotong City Forestry Bureau and the contractor will 
maintain and replace plants as needed for at least the first year. 
• All  planting  activities,  including  re-vegetation,  embankment  construction,  wetlands, 
landscaping, and rehabilitation of construction sites, will only use plant species which are 
(i) native (i.e., naturally occurring) to the Sayu River Basin; and (ii) are sourced from local 
stock within Zhaotong City to minimize the risk of spreading invasive species through the 
long-distance transport of soil or materials. 
• In the event that non-native seedlings are required for rapid stabilization of exposed soils 
CSC, 
LPMO, 
PMO, 
consultant 
Contractor 
LPMOs, 
PMO, 
consultant, 
Zhaotong 
City 
Forestry 
Bureau 
116 
Appendix  3 
Item 
Potential Impacts/ 
Issues 
Mitigation Measures 
Who 
Implements 
Who 
Supervises 
Physical 
cultural 
resources 
Socio-
economic 
resources 
Damage to known or 
unknown above or 
below-ground cultural 
relics 
Temporary interruption 
to water supply from 
pipeline or 
embankment 
construction 
Community 
and 
occupational 
health and 
safety 
Community 
consultation, health, 
and safety 
and sites, then only sterile seedlings will be used to prevent the spread of weeds. 
• No plant species will be used that are  classified in the PRC as weeds, as defined by the 
China National Invasive Plant Database (http://www.agripests.cn; 229 species) and by the 
MEE and the Chinese Academy of Sciences (19 species). 
• To  avoid  pollution  of  the  Yudong  Reservoir  and  the  Longshu  River,  no  top-dressing 
fertilizers will be  used for any of the re-vegetation, planting, afforestation, or landscaping 
activities. For all planting activities, fertilizer will be applied at the root mass of each plant.  
• No  pesticides or  agricultural chemicals listed as hazardous  under  Classes I or  II by  the 
World Health Organization or listed as prohibited or strictly controlled use under the PRC’s 
national regulations for pesticide management  will be used for the project activities. This 
includes  the  project  components  for  afforestation,  replanting  for  site  rehabilitation  and 
landscaping, and the pilot farming sites. 
• Establish chance-find procedures for physical and cultural resources. 
• If a new site is unearthed, work shall be stopped immediately and the PMO, the LPMO, and 
cultural relics bureau promptly notified. The construction will resume only after a thorough 
investigation and with the permission of appropriate authority. 
Contractor 
• Use coffer dams and temporary diversion channels to maintain continued water flow while 
Contractor 
works are conducted. 
• Prior to works, re-confirm the planned construction schedule and site EMP actions. 
• Inform residents at least 2 days before any planned water interruptions. 
• Assist residents if requested with community water storage during the interruption period.  
• Interruptions to water supply should not be longer than 1 day. 
• In case of accidental interruption, immediately inform affected communities; and assist with 
water supply until the issue is resolved. 
Community consultations 
• Prior to any works, inform residents and businesses in advance through media, information 
boards,  and  direct  consultations  of  the  construction  activities,  dates,  and  duration  of 
expected disruption. 
• Especially for the communities within 40 m of works and  who will be  subjected to higher 
noise and/or dust levels, conduct meetings with residents prior to any works. 
• Record all community feedback and solutions discussed and agreed. 
• Based on feedback from the community consultations: (i) update  contractor site plans as 
needed  to incorporate the solutions, including revisions in work schedules, daily working 
hours,  construction methods, and/or  mitigation methods;  (ii) revise the  CSC  monitoring 
schedules  and  monitoring  criteria  as  needed  to  reflect  the  updated  contr actor  site 
management plans. 
Community health, safety, and minimizing disruption to daily life 
• Prepare and implement a traffic control plan for approval by the local traffic management 
LPMO, 
consultant, 
cultural relic 
bureau 
CSC, 
LPMO, 
PMO, 
consultant 
Contractor, 
CSC 
CSC, 
LPMO, 
PMO, 
consultant 
Item 
Potential Impacts/ 
Issues 
Appendix 3   117 
Mitigation Measures 
administration before  construction. This will include  scheduling or  div erting construction 
traffic to avoid peak hours, regulating traffic at road crossings, selecting routes to reduce 
disturbance, reinstating roads, and opening them to traffic when construction is completed. 
• For all works involving excavation along roads and easements which already have existing 
subsurface utilities (power cables, sewage pipes, water pipes, telecommunication cables) , 
(i) plan and coordinate the project sewage pipeline construction with the utility managers; 
and  (ii) check  whether  there  are  pending  domestic  projects to  upgrade  these  utilities; 
coordinate works to avoid repeated excavation of the same sections of road or easement; 
and work with utility managers to minimize the risk of damage or disruption to the existing 
utilities. 
Who 
Implements 
Who 
Supervises 
Occupational health 
and safety 
• Install signs at construction sites to inform people  of the project GRM, potential dangers 
(e.g., moving vehicles, hazardous materials, excavations), and safety issues. 
• Install safety barricades around all excavations. 
• Assign personnel to direct pedestrians around dangerous work areas. 
• Ensure that all sites are secure, discouraging access through appropriate fencing.  
• Lock and secure all work sites to prevent unauthorized access. 
• Night-time (8:00 pm – 6:00 am) use of heavy machinery is strictly prohibited. 
• Prepare environmental, health, and safety plan to include (i) clean and sufficient supply of 
fresh water for construction sites, camps, offices; (ii) sufficient latrines and other sanitary 
arrangements at construction sites and work camps; (iii) garbage receptacles and regular 
emptying; and  (iv) provision of safety clothing and  equipment, as needed, in accordance 
with health and safety regulations. 
• Prepare  emergency response  plan  and  submit to  the  PMO  and  the  EEB  for  approval, 
establish emergency phone  links with township hospitals, and maintain a first-aid base in 
each construction camp. 
• Establish a records management  system for occupational accidents, diseases, incidents 
that (i) includes a tracking system to ensure that incidents are followed-up; (ii) can easily 
retrieve records; and (iii) can be used during compliance monitoring and audits. The system 
will be  backed up  on  at least one  external hard  drive to  protect records against loss or 
damage. The records will be reviewed during compliance monitoring and audits. 
• Establish worker camps in conformance with relevant domestic guidelines. 
• Safety  communication.  Publicize  occupational health  and  safety matters to  all  project 
personnel and install on-site signs and give regular training. 
• Train all workers in basic sanitation, health  and  safety matters,  and  work  hazards;  and 
implement awareness and  prevention program for HIV/AIDS and  other diseases —target 
the local community and construction workers. 
• Provide personal protection equipment to workers, as needed, e.g., safety boots, helmets, 
gloves, protective clothing, goggles, ear protection. 
Contractor 
CSC, 
LPMO, 
PMO, 
consultant 
118 
Appendix  3 
Item 
Potential Impacts/ 
Issues 
Mitigation Measures 
• Asbestos. In the event that materials containing asbestos are suspected, (i) the contractor 
will  immediately  inform  the  LPMO,  who  will  inform  the  PMO;  (ii)  the  c ontractor  will 
subcontract the municipal center for hazardous waste, who will be responsible for the safe 
handling,  transport,  and  disposal  of  the  materials; and  (iii) such  materials will  only  be 
disposed in a landfill site certified and designed to receive hazardous materials.  
Who 
Implements 
Who 
Supervises 
• COVID-19. Prepare  and  implement a  coronavirus (COVID-19) health  and  safety plan  to 
address  COVID-19  health  risks.  The  plan  will  be  prepared  in  line  with  government 
regulations and  guidelines on COVID-19 prevention and  control, and  in consultation with 
public  health  agencies in  the  area.  The  plan  should  include (i) measures  to  record  the 
locations that workers have visited and/or lived immediately before and during project work; 
(ii) schedules for disinfecting and/or cleaning offices, yards, stores, and labor camps; (iii) 
measures to implement temperature checks and other health checks on site; (iii) physical 
distancing measures, particularly in worker camps; (iv) requirements for mandatory use of 
personal protective equipment, such as facemasks; and provision of handwashing stations, 
hand sanitizers, and other appropriate protective measures; (v) how workers and residents 
living near project sites will be provided with information to protect themselves from COVID-
19; (vi) procedures to be  adopted  in the event a  worker is suspected to have contracted 
COVID-19; and (vii) other COVID-19 prevention and control measures appropriate for the 
local context. 
CONTRACTOR PERFORMANCE TARGET: Camps clean, emergency response plans in 
place, and 100% of workers aware of emergency response procedures. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank,  CO = carbon monoxide, CODCr = common chemical oxygen demand, COVID-19 = coronavirus disease, CSC = construction supervision company, DEIA 
=  domestic  environmental impact  assessment,  EEB  =  ecology  and  environment bureau,  EIA  =  environmental impact  assessment,  EMA  =  environmental  monitoring agency,  EMP  = 
environmental management plan,  EPD  =  environmental protection department, GRM =  grievance redress mechanism, H2S  = , LPMO  = local  project management office (under project 
implementing agency), m  = meter, MEE  =  Ministry of Ecology  and Environment,  NH3-N  = ammoniacal nitrogen,  NOx =  nitrogen oxides,  mg =  milligram, PMO  = Zhaotong City project 
management office, PRC = People’s Republic of China, project EIA = ADB-version EIA for the project, SO2 = sulfur dioxide, SPS = ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), SS = suspended 
solid, WRB = water resources bureau, WWT = wastewater treatment. 
a 
Source: ADB. 
In the PRC, preliminary design is equivalent to detailed designs in other countries.  
Issue 
Garbage 
pyrolysis plants 
– minimize noise, 
odors, leachate 
leakage, and 
health and safety 
risks 
Table EMP-3: Potential Impacts and Mitigation Measures during Operation 
Appendix 3  
119 
Implement  Supervise 
Operator (to 
be 
identified) 
PMO, 
LPMO, 
EEB 
Mitigation Measure 
Air emissions:  
•  Locate the plants a minimum of 430 m (Sujia) and 700 m (Shuimo) from 
the nearest residences 
•  Maintain  equipment  of  the  plant  in  good  working  condition  through 
adequate training, detailed O&M manual, and regular maintenance, and 
supervision 
•  Ensure that the dust control facilities (bag filter, dust collector, conveying 
pipe),  odor  reducing  ventilating  device,  and  noise-proof  facilities 
(insulation), heat-proof thermal insulation layer, and radiator ventilation 
are in good condition 
•  Ensure flue gas chimney is at least 4.5 m high to assist air dispersion 
•  Implement air quality monitoring program (Table EMP-5) 
Soil and/or water pollution from fly ash, slag, and/or leachate: 
•  Waste subject to magnetic filtering, then crushing and sieving  
•  Metals will be sold or recycled  
•  Sealed treatment system, subject to regular inspection and maintenance 
•  Storage room to be  constructed on impermeable ground with drainage 
capture to prevent leachate contamination 
•  Disposal  of  leachate  through  either  pyrolysis or  (for  large  volumes) 
treatment at the  on-site leachate  treatment plant at the  Yongfeng and 
Jiupu Town Landfill 
•  Flue ash: classified as hazardous in the PRC. The design of the plants 
includes a mixing chamber in which the ash will be mixed with a chelator 
(bonding agent) and  cement, to bond the ash particles and render any 
toxic materials inert. Ash from both plants will be compressed into bricks 
on-site then  transported to  the  Zhaoyang  District Yongfeng and  Jiupu 
Town Landfill for disposal 
•  Slag: Shuimo  – slag will be  converted to construction bricks and sold. 
Sujia  –  slag will  be  disposed  at  the  Zhaoyang  District Yongfeng and 
Jiupu Town Landfill 
•  Implement soil and water monitoring program (Table EMP-5) 
Wastewater from cleaning  the  plant  machinery and  floors, and  domestic 
wastewater (toilets, showers, dishwashing, and laundry):  
•  Wastewater to be treated at on-site to 1A standard. 
•  Discharged onto grounds of the plants for greening. 
Odor: 
•  Stockpile waste in sealed rooms to minimize odors. 
Noise:  
•  Install  low-noise  equipment  with  shock  absorption,  sound  insulation 
cover on the blowers and pumps  
•  Prohibit truck activity between 8:00 pm and 6:00 am. 
Occupational health and safety:  
•  All staff to be equipped with labor protection supplies (including dust and 
gas masks) 
•  All staff shall have a physical examination every 6 months. If any worker 
is found  to be physically abnormal, he/she will be transferred to out of 
the plants in  a timely manner  and  all other staff will immediately have 
check-ups. 
120 
Appendix  3 
Issue 
Mitigation Measure 
•  Newly  recruited  workers  will  undergo  pre-employment  occupational 
Implement  Supervise 
health examination 
Garbage transfer 
station – ensure 
good O&M and 
avoid risks of 
leachate leakage, 
minimize odors 
Longshu WWTP 
– ensure good 
O&M, minimize 
noise disturbance 
WWTFs – ensure 
good O&M and 
avoid risks of 
effluent or sludge 
leakage 
•  Emergency response measures will be prepared as part of the detailed 
engineering designs, so that any leak is quickly detected and staff react 
quickly to protect themselves and if possible directly address the issue.a 
this  component  with  component  on 
environmental education of residents, to maximize recycling and reuse 
prior to solid waste collection 
•  Coordinate  planning  of 
Town or 
township 
government 
EEB 
•  Install >3 m wide buffer zone and greening belt > 2 m wide around  the 
station  (in  accordance  with  the  PRC’s  Technical  Specifications  for 
Domestic Solid Waste Transfer Stations) 
•  Sorting at station to extract items for recycling or on-selling, e.g., metals 
•  Transport vehicles to  have  sealed  containers  to  minimize  odors  and 
leakage 
•  Station to have drainage channels to capture any leachate 
•  Transport leachate  in  sealed  containers to  on-site leachate  treatment 
plant  at  the  Zhaoyang  District Yongfeng  and  Jiupu  Town  Landfill  for 
treatment and disposal 
•  Store solid waste in sealed containers and rooms to minimize odors 
•  Transport compacted rubbish  on  daily  basis to  the  garbage  pyrolysis 
plants 
•  Regular cleaning with disinfectant to reduce odors and disease risk  
•  Train  staff  in  O&M  safety.  All  workers  to  be  equipped  with  labor 
protection supplies, including gloves and strong footwear 
•  Town or township government may contract a 3rd party for O&M, and 
transport and collection of solid waste 
•  Regular  consultation  with  residents  to  identify  potential  issues , e.g., 
odor-related disturbance 
• A 3rd party will be contracted to operate and  maintain the WWTP, e.g., 
Operator (to 
be 
identified) 
EMA (for 
noise 
monitoring) 
PMO, 
LPMOs, 
EEB 
EEB 
Yunnan Water Management Co. 
• Maintain acoustic barriers and sound absorbing materials. 
• Consult nearby residents in first 3 months of operation and assess any 
noise impacts.  
• In the event that effluent exceeds compliance standards, a maintenance 
check of the facility will be conducted; and the problem resolved within 1 
week. Pending the rates of inflow, influent will be temporarily stored while 
the problem is being resolved. 
• Ensure simple emergency response plan is prepared and in place, with 
clear lines of responsibility 
• Semi-annual checks of WWTFs to ensure normal operation 
• Immediately visit the WWTFs after rural power failure, floods, or  other 
extreme weather and inspect for any damage 
Town or 
township 
government 
• Initiate repairs through recruitment of a contractor as needed 
• Ensure  the  water  quality monitoring sensor on  the  discharge outlet  is 
operating normally and that the monitoring data is being received by the 
local EEB and/or the Yudong Reservoir Administration  
• In the event that effluent exceeds compliance standards, a maintenance 
check of the facility will be conducted; and the problem resolved within 1 
week. Pending the rates of inflow, influent will be temporarily stored while 
the problem is being resolved 
• Ensure timely and  safe emptying of sludge in septic tanks (expected to 
be every 3–4 years given the small rural populations). Mobilize township 
personnel  and/or  contractor.  Ensure  personnel  are  wearing  safety 
Appendix 3  
121 
Issue 
Mitigation Measure 
Implement  Supervise 
Embankments – 
maintenance, 
stability 
clothing to avoid hygiene risks 
• Sludge to be  disposed on  nearby fields as fertilizer to maximize reuse 
and avoid costs and risks (e.g., odor, leakage) of transport to landfill  
• Integrate routine  maintenance  activities into  existing work program  of 
county WRB 
• Maintenance (at least monthly in summer) of re-vegetated embankments 
—pruning, weeding, replacement of dead or plants 
• Inspect for signs of  plant  disease and/or  pests and  implement  control 
measures, as necessary 
• At least once a year in May–June (i.e., before rainy season) remove solid 
waste and debris—dispose in municipal landfill 
• Prohibit or remove any illegal structures which are found to maintain free 
water flow 
District or 
county 
WRB 
PMO, 
LPMOs 
Constructed 
wetlands – 
ensure good O&M 
Afforestation and 
agriculture pilot 
activities – 
nonpoint source 
pollution from use 
of pesticides 
and/or top-
dressing fertilizers 
• Implement  annual  (as  a  minimum)  inspections of  all  project  embank -
ments for physical integrity. If signs of failure are discovered, implement 
a repair program immediately 
• Integrate routine  maintenance  activities into  existing work program  of 
town or township government 
• Maintenance  (at  least  semiannual  in  summer)—pruning,  weeding, 
Town or 
township 
government 
Forestry 
Bureau 
replacement of dead or plants, as needed 
• Inspect for signs of  plant  disease and/or  pests and  implement  control 
measures, as necessary 
• Implement annual (as a minimum) inspections to ensure overall condition 
and intactness 
• No  top-dressing  fertilizers will  be  used  for  any  of  the  re-vegetation, 
planting, or landscaping activities. For all planting activities, fertilizer will 
be applied once, at the root mass of each plant, during planting 
Operator  Forestry 
Bureau, 
EEB 
• No  pesticides  or  agricultural  chemicals  listed  as  hazardous  under 
Classes I or II by the World Health Organization or listed as prohibited or 
strictly controlled use under the PRC’s national regulations for pes ticide 
management  will  be  used  for  the  project  activities. This  includes  the 
project components for afforestation, replanting for site rehabilitation and 
landscaping, and the pilot farming sites. 
EEB = ecology and environment  bureau, EMA = environmental  monitoring  agency,  EMP = environmental  management plan,  H2S = 
hydrogen  sulfide,  LPMO  =  local  project  management  office,  m  =  meter,  O&M  =  operation  and  maintenance,  PMO  =  project 
management  office, PRC = People’s  Republic  of China,  WRB  = water  resources  bureau,  WWTF  = wastewater  treatment  facility, 
WWTP = wastewater  treatment plant. 
a  In the PRC, preliminary design  is equivalent  to detailed  (engineering)  designs  in other countries. 
Source: Asian  Development Bank. 
D. 
Environmental  Monitoring,  Inspection,  and Reporting 
8. 
Three  types  of  project  monitoring  will  be  conducted  under  the  EMP:  (i)  internal 
monitoring—to be conducted by the LPMOs and the CSCs; (ii) external monitoring—of  air, water, 
noise  and  soil standards—to  be conducted  by an  environmental  monitoring  agency  (EMA);  and 
(iii)  compliance  monitoring—to  be  conducted  by  a  national  environment  specialist  in  a  project 
management  support consultant  team to ensure the EMP is being implemented. 
9. 
The  monitoring  program  (Table  EMP-5)  describes  the  scope  of  monitoring,  parameters, 
time,  and  frequency,  implementing  and  supervising  agencies,  and  estimated  costs.  The 
monitoring  shall  comply  with  the  methodology  provided  in  the  relevant  national  environmental 
monitoring  standards.  Other  associated  standards  to be followed  are the national  environmental 
122 
Appendix  3 
quality standards  of ambient  air, surface  water, sediment  and noise, and  the pollutant discharge 
standards. 
10. 
Internal  monitoring.  During  construction,  the  CSCs  and the  LPMOs  will be responsible 
for  conducting  the  internal  environmental  monitoring  in  accordance  with  the  monitoring  plan. 
Results will be reported  through the CSC monthly reports  to the LPMOs  and the PMO. 
11. 
External  monitoring.  The  PMO  will  contract  an  external  EMA  to  conduct  the  external 
environmental  monitoring  described  in Table EMP-5.  A detailed  cost breakdown  will be provided 
by the EMA. The external  monitoring  will be conducted  during  the entire  construction  phase and 
first  full  year  of  operation  of  the  relevant  facility.  The  EMA  will  prepare  semiannual  monitoring 
reports  of the methods  and  results. The  EMA will  submit the  reports to the  PMO and  the LPMO 
at the same time to ensure independence. 
12. 
Compliance  monitoring.  The  environmental  specialist  in  the  project  management 
support consultant team will review project progress and compliance with the EMP based on field 
visits,  consultations  with  the  PMO  and  the  LPMO  environment  officers,  contractors,  and  the 
CSCs;  and review  of the monitoring  reports  prepared  by the  CSCs and  the EMA.  The site visits 
will  include  comparison  of  the  works  and  conditions  observed  with  the  EMP  mitigation  and 
monitoring measures in Tables EMP-2, EMP-3, and EMP-5. The site visits will include, but not be 
limited  to,  visual  inspection  of  worker  and  construction  solid  waste  at  worker  camps  and  work 
sites; evidence  of soil erosion,  water pollution,  and sewage;  community  and occupational  health 
and  safety  (camp  hygiene,  availability  of clean  water);  and  evidence  that  emergency  response 
plans are in place and that workers are familiar with them. Frequency for these inspections is not 
set; and the environmental  specialist will make site visits as often as possible within the available 
budget,  focused  especially  on  periods  of  peak  construction.  The  findings  of  the  environmental 
specialist will be reported  to ADB through the semiannual  environment  monitoring reports.  
13. 
Semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports.  The  PMO will submit  these  reports  to 
ADB. They will include (i) progress made in the EMP implementation,  (ii) overall effectiveness  of 
the EMP implementation  (including public and occupational health and safety), (iii) environmental 
monitoring  and  compliance,  (iv)  institutional  strengthening  and  training,  (v)  public  consultation 
(including  GRM),  and (vi) any problems  encountered  during  construction  and operation,  and the 
relevant  corrective  actions  undertaken.  The  environmental  specialist  (consultant)  will  help  the 
PMO  prepare  the  reports  and  submit  the  English  reports  to  ADB  for  disclosure.  A  standard 
reporting template  will be provided by ADB to the PMO to assist in report preparation. 
14. 
Environmental  acceptance  reporting.  Following  the  PRC’s  Regulation  on  Project 
Completion  Environmental  Audit  (Ministry  of  Environmental  Protection,  2001),  within  3  months 
after the completion of major subprojects, an environmental acceptance report for each subproject 
shall be (i) prepared  by the implementing  agency or a capable environmental  monitoring  institute 
in accordance  with the PRC’s Guideline  on Project  Completion  Environmental  Audit  (2017); and 
(ii)  finally  reported 
to  ADB  through  semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports.  The 
environmental  acceptance  reports will indicate the timing, extent, and effectiveness  of completed 
mitigation and maintenance,  and needs for additional mitigation measures  and monitoring  during 
operations. 
Appendix 3  
123 
Quality  assurance  and/or  quality  control  for  compliance  monitoring.  To  ensure 
15. 
accuracy of the monitoring,  quality assurance  (QA) and/or quality control (QC) procedures will be 
conducted  in accordance  with the following  regulations:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Regulations  of  QA/QC  Management  for  Environmental  Monitoring  issued  by  the  State 
Environmental Protection Administration in July 2006;  
QA/QC Manual for Environmental Water Monitoring (Second edition) published by the State 
Environmental Monitoring Centre in 2001; and  
QA/QC  Manual  for  Environmental Air  Monitoring  published  by  the  State  Environmental 
Monitoring Centre in 2001. 
Table EMP-4: Environmental Reporting Plan 
From 
To 
Frequency of Reporting 
Report 
A. Construction Phase 
Internal progress reports 
External reports 
CSC 
EMA 
LPMO 
PMO, LPMOs, 
ADB 
EEB, PMO, 
LPMOs 
ADB 
Monthly 
Semiannually 
Licensed 
institute 
PMO 
Environmental acceptance 
monitoring and audit reports 
Environmental monitoring report 
B. Operation Phase  
EMP progress reports  
ADB = Asian Development  Bank, CSC = construction supervision company,  EEB = ecology  and environment  bureau, 
EMA = environmental  monitoring  agency, EMP = environmental  management  plan,  LPMO = local project management 
office, PMO = project management  office. 
Source: ADB. 
Within 3 months after component 
completion 
Semiannually 
Semiannually 
PMO 
ADB 
Table EMP-5: Environmental Monitoring Program for “Internal” and “External” Monitoring 
See text for description of “compliance monitoring”. 
Subject 
CONSTRUCTION  STAGE 
Parameter 
Location 
Frequency 
Implement  Supervise 
1. Internal monitoring – by the contractors, CSCs, and PMO and LPMO environment officers 
Visual inspection at all 
construction sites 
1 time/week 
Contractor, 
CSC, LPMO 
PMO, 
consultant 
Construction site boundary 
1 time/week minimum 
during peak 
construction levels at 
work sites 
CSC, 
LPMO, 
consultant 
PMO, 
consultant 
Ambient air 
quality 
Noise 
Compliance with dust 
mitigation measures 
(Table EMP-2) 
LAeq: measured with 
hand-held meter 
Contractor 
performance targets: 
(i) noise level meets 
standard at site 
boundary; (ii) for 1,341 
households most at 
risk from the 
construction noise, the 
installed noise barriers 
reduce noise levels by 
at least 80%a  
Solid waste  Garbage and 
construction wastes 
Contractor 
Visual inspection at all 
construction sites and work-
camps 
Daily 
Contractor, 
CSC, LPMO 
PMO, EEB, 
Sanitation 
bureau 
124 
Appendix  3 
Subject 
Soil erosion 
and re-
vegetation 
Parameter 
performance target: no 
uncollected waste at 
end works each day 
Soil erosion intensity and 
survival rate of re-
vegetation 
Occupational 
health and 
safety 
Re-vegetation of 
embankments and other 
areas,  
Camp hygiene, safety, 
availability of clean 
water, EMRs 
Contractor 
performance target: 
camps clean, EMRs in 
place; 100% of workers 
aware of EMR 
procedures 
Location 
Frequency 
Implement  Supervise 
Visual inspection at spoil sites 
and all construction sites, 
especially embankment sections 
of project river sections 
1 time/week; and 
immediately after 
heavy rainfall 
Contractor, 
CSC, LPMO 
PMO, 
consultant 
Visual inspection along 
embankment sections and all 
revegetation areas 
Visual inspection at all 
construction sites and work-
camps 
At least 2 times/year  Contractor, 
CSC, LPMO 
1 time/month  
Contractor, 
CSC, LPMO 
PMO 
PMO 
2. External monitoring – by certified environment monitoring agencies 
pH, SS, NH3-N, CODCr, 
petroleum 
Domestic wastewater discharge 
at work-camps 
2 times/year during 
construction 
EMA 
EEB, PMO 
Quality of 
sewage and 
discharge 
channels at 
work camps 
Construction 
wastewater   
SS, oil, pH 
Ambient air 
quality 
TSP 
Noise 
LAeq 
(i) 100 m upstream and 100 m 
downstream of river embankment 
works, and (ii) at wastewater 
discharge points of all 
construction sites 
All construction sites (at least 1 
point upwind, 1 point downwind) 
and nearby sensitive receivers 
(Section IV of project EIA) 
Boundaries of all construction 
sites and sensitive receivers 
(Chapter V-sensitive receivers 
within project area of influence) 
2 times/year during 
construction 
EMA 
EEB, PMO 
2 times/year during 
construction 
EMA 
EEB, PMO, 
consultant 
2 times/year (twice a 
day: once in day-time 
and once at night-
time, for 2 consecutive 
days) 
EMA 
EEB, PMO, 
consultant 
OPERATION  PHASE – external  monitoring, by certified environment  monitoring  agencies 
Garbage pyrolysis facilities – two 
Ambient air 
quality: flue 
gas emissions 
and/or odorb 
Flue gas emissions: (i) at 
chimney outlet; (ii) 100 m 
downwind of each GPP  
Flue gas emissions: 
NH3, H2S, HCl, CO, Hg, 
Cd, Pb, As, Cr, Cu, Mn, 
Ni, dioxins 
Odor: 
H2S, NH3 
Odor: at boundary of the garbage 
pyrolysis plants 
1 baseline sampling 
before operation (to 
complement the 
project EIA sampling 
in May 2019); then 4 
times/year during 
operation 
2 times/year 
pH, Cd, Hg, As, Cu, Pb, 
Cr, Zn, Ni, dioxins 
Monitor liquid discharge  at inlet 
and outlet 
EMA 
PMO, 
LPMO, EEB 
EMA 
PMO, 
LPMO EEB 
pH, Cd, Hg, As, Cu, Pb,  Three locations per garbage 
1 time/year 
EMA 
PMO, 
Quality of 
leachate 
discharge 
Soil quality 
Location 
Frequency 
Appendix 3  
125 
Implement  Supervise 
LPMO EEB 
Subject 
Parameter 
Cr, Zn, Ni, dioxins 
Groundwater  Cu, Zn, Fe, Mn, Pb, Cd, 
As, Hg, Cr6+, pH, NH3-N, 
total hardness, total 
dissolved solids, CODMn, 
sulfate, nitrate, nitrite, 
chloride, fluoride, volatile 
phenol, total bacterial 
count, total coliform 
group, petroleum 
LAeq 
Noise 
pyrolysis plant: (i) 1 point within 
garbage pyrolysis plant; (ii) 1 
point 5 m outside garbage 
pyrolysis plant; (iii) 2 points within 
farmland between 113 m and 146 
m from garbage pyrolysis plant  
Groundwater near garbage 
pyrolysis plant (same sampling 
sites as those used in May 2019; 
project EIA Section IV.G.b) 
Boundary of garbage pyrolysis 
plant 
Garbage transfer stations – four 
Groundwater  As for garbage pyrolysis 
plants 
Odor 
H2S, NH3 
Noise 
LAeq 
Selected locations close to 
transfer station 
Boundary of garbage transfer 
stations 
Boundary of garbage transfer 
stations 
1 time/year 
EMA 
PMO, 
LPMO EEB 
2 times/year (twice a 
day: 1 in day and 1 at 
night for 2 consecutive 
days) 
EMA and 
operator 
PMO, 
LPMO, EEB 
1 time/year 
4 times/year 
EMA 
EMA 
2 times/year (twice a 
day: 1 in day and 1 at 
night for 2 consecutive 
days) 
EMA and 
operator 
PMO, 
LPMO EEB 
PMO, 
LPMO, EEB 
PMO, 
LPMO, EEB 
CODCr, NH3-N, TN, TP 
1. At inlet of WWTF, to monitor 
influent quality 
Wastewater treatment facilities – spot testing (random selection) among the 44 facilities 
2 times/year. Will 
Effluent from 
complement the auto-
WWTFs 
monitoring by sensors 
installed at discharge 
outlet of each WWTFs  
2 times/year (twice a 
day: 1 in day and 1 at 
night for 2 consecutive 
days) 
2. At discharge outlet of WWTF, 
to monitor effluent quality 
Boundary of WWTFs 
Noise 
LAeq 
EMA  
PMO, 
LPMO EEB 
EMA and 
operator 
PMO, 
LPMO, EEB 
Longshu wastewater treatment plant 
Effluent from 
WWTP 
CODCr, NH3-N, TN, TP  1. At inlet, to monitor influent 
quality 
2. At discharge outlet, to monitor 
effluent quality 
Noise 
LAeq 
Boundary of WWTP 
Constructed wetlands – six 
Water quality 
downstream of 
wetlands 
pH, SS, DO, NH3-N, oil, 
CODcr, Cr6+, BOD5, TN, 
TP, chloride, NO3-N, total 
1. At inlet of wetland 
2. At outlet of wetland 
3. 50 m downstream 
2 times/year. Will 
complement the auto-
monitoring by sensors 
installed at discharge 
outlet of WWTP 
2 times / year (twice a 
day: 1 in day and 1 at 
night for 2 consecutive 
days) 
EMA  
PMO, 
LPMO EEB 
EMA and 
operator 
PMO, 
LPMO, EEB 
4 times/year 
EMA  
PMO, 
LPMO EEB 
126 
Appendix  3 
Subject 
Parameter 
coliforms 
Afforestation sites 
Soil and 
Vegetation 
Plant survival and 
coverage 
Location 
4. 500 m downstream 
All re-vegetated sites 
Frequency 
Implement  Supervise 
Spot check, twice a 
year 
Forestry 
Bureau 
Forestry 
Bureau 
As = Arsenic, BOD5 = 5-day biochemical  oxygen  demand;  Cd = cadmium,  CO = carbon monoxide,  CODcr = common  chemical oxygen 
demand,  CODMn  =  chemical  oxygen  demand  by  potassium  permanganate,  Cr  =  chromium,  Cr6+  =  hexavalent  chromium,  CSC  = 
construction supervision  company,  Cu = copper,  DO = dissolved oxygen, EEB = ecology and environment  bureau,  EIA = environmental 
impact  assessment, EMA  =  environmental  monitoring  agency,  EMP =  environmental  management  plan,  EMR  = emergency  response 
plan, Fe = iron, HCl = hydrochloric acid, Hg = mercury, H2S = hydrogen sulfide,  LAeq = equivalent  continuous A-weighted  sound pressure 
level, LPMO = local project management  office, m = meter,  Mn = manganese,  NH3 = ammonia,  NH3-N = ammonia  nitrogen,  Ni = Nickel, 
NO3-N = nitrate  nitrogen,  Pb = lead,  PMO = project management  office, project  EIA = ADB-version EIA for the project,  SS = suspended 
solids,  TN  = total  nitrogen,  TP =  total  phosphorus,  TSP  =  total  suspended  particle,  WWTF  = wastewater  treatment  facility,  WWTP  = 
wastewater treatment  plant, Zn = zinc. 
a  Compared  by measuring  noise on each side of the noise barrier  with a hand-held  meter. 
b  Parameters  selected to measure potential  odors and/or hazardous air emissions from heavy metals, acids (for flue gas emissions) and 
odors (from  stockpiled waste). There People’s  Republic  of China  currently does not  have national  standards for  measuring  emissions 
from garbage  pyrolysis plants. The monitoring  will help  establish a baseline  as well as detection  of such hazards. 
Notes: In the event that monitoring  detects that standards are exceeded:  (i) this will be immediately  reported  to the PMO and operator  of 
the  project  facility;  (ii)  actions  will  be  taken  within  1  week  to  address  the  issue;  (iii)  compliance  with  standards  will  be  confirmed  by 
immediate  subsequent  testing;  and (iv) all issues will be included  in the environmental  monitoring  reports from the PMO to ADB. 
Source: Asian Development  Bank. 
E. 
Training and Capacity  Building 
16. 
The PMO and the implementing  agencies do not have previous experience  with the ADB-
funded  projects or safeguard  requirements.  The experience  of individual  staff within the city, the 
district  and  county  ecology  and  environment  bureaus  (EEBs)  for  environmental  management 
varies  considerably.  The  DEIA  and  project  approvals  generally  include  limited  mitigation 
measures,  but  there  is  not  yet  a  regulatory  requirement  in  the  PRC  for  the  EMPs  of  the  scope 
required  by  ADB.  Implementation  of  the  current  EMP  represents  a  significant  new  task  for  the 
local  agencies.  During  project  preparation,  preliminary  training  on the  EMP implementation  was 
provided  by  consultants  engaged  for  project  preparation,  including  roles  and  responsibilities  of 
contractors and the CSCs for the EMP implementation,  project impacts, and mitigation measures.   
17. 
During  implementation,  a  capacity  building  program  will  be  implemented  for  safeguards 
and  technical  capacity  for  the  designed  components,  including  (i)  implementation  of  the  EMP, 
including  the  mitigation  measures,  monitoring,  and  reporting;  (ii)  operation  and  maintenance  of 
the constructed  facilities;  and (iii)  management  of the  Yudong  Reservoir,  including  water  quality 
protection,  internal  zoning,  and  watershed  management.  Training  will  be  provided  by  the 
environmental  specialist  (consultant)  and the Zhaotong  City EEB, facilitated  by the PMO and the 
LPMOs.  Trainees  will  include  the  PMO,  implementing  agencies,  the  LPMOs,  contractors,  the 
CSCs, and relevant local bureaus (including  water resources, agriculture,  forestry).  
Training 
Program 
Procurement  and 
contract 
management 
(emphasize  EMP 
implementation)   
Table EMP-6: Project Environmental  Training  Program 
Scope of Training 
Trainer 
Trainee 
Time  Days  Persons 
• ADB procurement guidelines 
• Bidding  document and contract preparation, 
including  the EMP clauses 
• Risk of improper procurement  and mitigation 
measures,  and handling  variation  orders  and 
contract management 
Consultant 
PMO, 
LPMOs, 
EFMC 
2 
2 
50 
Scope of Training 
Trainer 
Trainee 
Time  Days  Persons 
Appendix 3  
127 
• ADB safeguard  policy statement 
requirements  for EMP implementation  and 
progress  reporting 
• Roles,  responsibilities,  monitoring, 
inspection,  reporting  in the EMP 
• Environmental  monitoring  program 
• Odor impact from garbage  pyrolysis  plants 
and garbage  transfer stations  and mitigation 
measures 
• Public consultation  and participation 
• GRM implementation,  coordination,  reporting, 
working with the public 
• Environment,  health,  and safety during 
project construction  and operation  for 
workers and the community 
• Occupational  health  and safety, including  (i) 
prevention  and control  of transmissible 
diseases  and  HIV/AIDS, (ii) implementation 
of COVID-19 health  and safety plan  (see 
Table  EMP-2) 
• Topics to be tailored  to each project 
component 
• Soil erosion  control and afforestation. 
2 
2 
50 
Consultant, 
EEB 
PMO, 
LPMOs, 
EEB, other 
local 
bureaus 
Consultant, 
EEB 
As above 
2 
2 
50 
• Water quality  protection;  point  and nonpoint 
source pollution  control 
Consultant, 
EEB 
As above 
2 
2 
50 
• Land  use planning 
• Internal  zoning 
• Wetlands  and ecology 
• Energy saving and GHG emission  reduction 
• Carbon sink by revegetation  and afforestation 
• International  and domestic experience  and 
technology  in garbage  collection and  disposal 
• Operation,  management,  and maintenance  of 
the garbage  pyrolysis  plants  and garbage 
transfer stations   
Consultant 
• Response  mechanism, e.g., for spills 
• Mitigation  measures  for hydraulic sectors 
• Emergency response  team, procedure, and 
Experts from 
EEBs, 
consultant 
actions 
LPMO, 
operator, 
WRB 
LPMO, 
operator 
PMO, 
operator, 
other 
bureaus 
1 
1 
50 
1 
1 
50 
10 
10 
300 
Training 
Program 
Implementation 
of EMP 
Operation  and 
maintenance  of 
the completed 
project facilities 
Reservoir and 
watershed 
management 
Climate  change 
resilience 
Solid  wastes 
collection  and 
treatment 
Emergency 
preparedness 
and response 
planning 
Total 
ADB  = Asian  Development  Bank, AIDS =  acquired  immunodeficiency  syndrome,  COVID-19  =  coronavirus  disease, 
EEB  =  environmental  protection  bureau,  EFMC  =  eco-compensation 
fund  management  committee,  EMP  = 
environmental  management  plan,  GHG  =  greenhouse  gas,  GRM  =  grievance  redress  mechanism,  HIV  =  human 
immunodeficiency  virus, LPMO = local  project  management  office,  PMO = project  management  office,  WRB = water 
resources bureau. 
Source: ADB. 
F. 
Grievance  Redress Mechanism 
18. 
This  project  GRM  is  a  joint  GRM  for  (i)  the  initial  identification,  documentation,  and 
preliminary  management  of both environmental  and social  safeguard-related  grievances;  (ii) the 
resolving  of environmental  safeguard-related  grievances;  and  (iii)  the resolving  of  and/or  timely 
referral  of  social  safeguard-related  grievances.  Environmental  and  social  safeguard-related 
grievances  may  differ  considerably  in  the  nature  of  grievances  and  agencies,  procedures,  and 
128 
Appendix  3 
timing  required  to  address  them:  the  GRM  provides  a  simple,  time-based  mechanism  to  meet 
project  needs,  as  required.  Social  safeguard  issues  beyond  the  scope  of  the GRM  procedures, 
including  issues related  to land acquisition  or resettlement,  will be referred  to relevant agencies , 
as needed.    
19. 
The PMO environment officer and social officer and LPMO environment officers and social 
officers  will  lead  the  coordination  of  the  GRM.  However,  all  project  agencies  and  staff  will  be 
trained  in  the  GRM  and  are  expected  to  take  an  active  role  for  implementing  the  GRM.  At  the 
PMO  level,  the  PMO  environment  officer  and  PMO  social  officer  will  establish  a  GRM  tracking 
and documentation  system, conduct daily coordination with the LPMO officers, arrange meetings 
and conduct site visits as necessary, maintain the overall project GRM database, and prepare the 
reporting  inputs  for  progress  reports  to  ADB.  At  the  LPMO  level,  the  environment  and  social 
officers  will instruct  contractors  and the CSCs  on the  GRM procedures,  and coordinate  with the 
local EEBs and  other government  divisions,  as necessary.  The PMO and the LPMO staff  will be 
trained and supported by consultants. 
The  contact  persons  for  different  GRM  entry  points,  such  as  the  PMO  and  the  LPMO 
20. 
environment  and social  officers, contractors,  operators  of project  facilities, and the EEBs,  will be 
identified  prior  to  construction.  The  contact  details  for  the  entry  points  (phone  numbers, 
addresses, e-mail addresses) will be publicly disclosed on information boards at construction sites 
and on the websites of the local EEBs. 
21. 
If  a  complaint  is  received  and  filed,  the  PMO  and  the  LPMO  officers  will  identify  if  the 
complaint is eligible for management  under the GRM. Eligible complaints under the GRM include 
those  where  (i) the  complaint  pertains  to the  project;  and  (ii)  the issues  arising  in  the complaint 
fall within the scope of environmental and/or social issues that the GRM is authorized  to address. 
Ineligible  complaints include  those where (i) the complaint  is not project-related;  (ii) the nature  of 
the  issue  is  outside  the  mandate  of  the  GRM  (such  as  fraud  or  corruption);  and/or  (iii)  other 
procedures  would  be  more  appropriate  to  address  the  issue.  Ineligible  complaints  will  be 
documented and provided to the relevant authorities and the complainant will be informed of these 
steps.  The procedure  and timeframe  for the GRM  is as follows  and summarized  in Figure  EMP-
1.  
(i) 
Stage  1  (5  calendar  days).  If  a  concern  arises  during  construction  or  operation,  the 
affected  person  may  submit  a  written  or  oral  complaint  to  the  contractor  (construction 
phase)  or  operator  of  the  project  facility  (operation  phase).  The  contractor  will  (a) 
respectfully  acknowledge  the issue and immediately  stop the causal  activity (e.g., on-site 
construction  causing high noise levels to a nearby household); (b) not resume the activity 
until  the  complaint  has  been  resolved;  (c) inform  the  LPMO  of  the incident  on the  same 
day  of the  incident  occurring  and  how  the  contractor  has  responded  or will  respond;  (d) 
give a clear reply to the affected person within 2 calendar days; and (e) as far as possible, 
resolve  the problem  within 5 calendar  days from  receiving  the complaint.  The contractor 
will keep the LPMO fully informed at all stages. The LPMO will inform the PMO,  the local 
village committee,  and the EEB of the incident within  1 working  day of being informed  by 
the contractor; and subsequently  keep these parties informed at all stages. 
(ii) 
Stage  2 (5  calendar  days).  If the  issue  cannot  be resolved  in Stage  1,  after 5  calendar 
days,  the  LPMO  and/or  the  PMO  will  take  over  responsibility.  Eligibility  of  the complaint 
will be assessed,  and a recommended  solution  given to the complainant  and contractors 
within 2 calendar days. If the solution is agreed by the complainant,  the contractors and/or 
Appendix 3  
129 
facility operators (in operation) will implement  the solution within 5 calendar  days from the 
LPMO or the PMO taking over responsibility of the complaint. Written records will be made 
of all stages and outcomes.  At the expiration  of Stage  2, the PMO will inform ADB  of the 
outcome. 
(iii) 
Stage  3  (15  calendar  days).  If  a  solution  cannot  be  identified  by  the  PMO  and/or  the 
LPMO, and/or the complainant is not satisfied with the proposed solution, the PMO and/or 
the  LPMO  will  organize,  within  7  calendar  days,  a  stakeholder  meeting  (including  the 
complainant, contractor, and/or operator of the facility; the EEB, the LPMO, and the PMO). 
A solution acceptable to all shall be identified including clear steps. The contractors (during 
construction)  and  facility  operators  (during  operation)  will  immediately  implement  the 
agreed  solution.  All  attempts  will  be  made  to  fully  resolve  the  issue  within  15  calendar 
days. Written records will be made of all stages and outcomes.  At the expiration  of Stage 
3, the PMO will inform ADB of the outcome. 
22. 
The  contractor  and/or  LPMO  will  ensure  the  affected  person  is  updated  at  all  times,  in 
each stage, of the progress toward resolving  the grievance.  The GRM does not affect the right of 
an affected  person  to submit their  complaints  to any agency  they wish  to, for example,  the local 
village  committee,  community  leaders,  courts,  the  PMO,  and  the  LPMOs;  governments  of 
Zhaotong  City, Zhaoyang  District, and Ludian County; and/or ADB. 
23. 
The PMO and the LPMOs shall bear any and all costs of implementing  the GRM, including 
meeting, travel, and/or accommodation costs of the project staff or affected person. The GRM will 
be implemented  throughout  project  construction  and  at least  the first  year  of operation  for each 
project facility. 
130 
Appendix  3 
Affected Person(s) 
Stage 1 
5 days 
Complaint 
Solution   
Implemented 
Complaint 
Contractor,  CSC 
Implementing 
agencies local EEB, 
village committee 
Reporting 
Stage 2 
5 days 
Unresolved Complaint  
Forwarded 
PMO and/or LPMO environment 
and/or social officers 
(recording  and coordination) 
Unresolved Complaint  
Forwarded 
Stakeholder  meeting 
PMO 
Action Plan 
Stage 3 
15 days 
Solution implemented 
Reporting by 
 PMO to ADB 
ADB 
Figure EMP-1: Operation  Chart of the Grievance  Redress Mechanism 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CSC = construction  supervision  company, EEB = ecology and environmental  bureau, 
LPMO = local project management office, PMO = project management  office. 
Source: ADB. 
G. 
Public Consultation  and Awareness  Raising 
24. 
Three  rounds  of  public  consultation  were  conducted  during  project  preparation  (project 
EIA  Section  VII).  During  construction,  the  project  will  continue  to  seek  public  consultation  and 
raise awareness  of project activities,  especially those may impact the public such as noise, dust, 
or  odor.  The  public  consultation  plan  is  in  Table  EMP-7  and  includes  public  participation  in 
evaluating  environmental  benefits  and  impacts.  The  PMO environment  officer  and  social  officer 
will be responsible for public participation during project implementation, supported by the LPMOs 
and consultants. 
Appendix 3  
131 
Organizer 
Construction 
PMO, LPMOs, 
consultant 
Operation 
PMO, 
implementing 
agencies, 
operators 
Table EMP-7: Public Consultation  and Participation  Plan  
Approach 
Times/Frequency 
Subjects 
Participants 
Questionnaire 
survey, site visits, 
informal interviews 
Once a year during 
peak construction 
Site-specific basis  At least 1 month 
before the start of 
construction at any 
new site 
Public workshops 
and hearing 
At least once during 
peak construction 
period 
Construction impacts; 
adjusting mitigation 
measures if necessary; 
feedback 
Anticipated risks – 
noise, odor, others; 
Procedures in the event 
of interruptions to water 
and wastewater services 
EMP implementation 
progress; construction 
impacts; adjusting 
mitigation measures if 
necessary; feedback 
Workers, residents 
in construction 
areas 
Residents, affected 
persons, social 
sectors 
Consultation and 
site visits 
At least once in first 
year of operation 
Public workshop 
Public survey 
As needed based on 
consultations 
At least once after 1 
year of operation 
Effects of mitigation 
measures, impacts of 
operation, feedback 
As above 
Affected persons 
and/or agencies 
As above 
Comments and 
suggestions 
Project beneficiaries 
EMP = environmental  management  plan,  LPMO = local project management  office, PMO = project management  office.  
Source: Asian Development  Bank. 
H. 
Cost Estimates 
This  section  provides  an  estimate  of  the  cost  of  the  EMP  implementation.  The  cost 
25. 
comprises  expenses  for  three  categories:  the  mitigation  measures  described  in  Tables  EMP-2 
and EMP-3;  monitoring  (Table EMP-5);  and training  (Table EMP-6).  Costs are presented  for the 
construction  phase of 5 years and the first year of operation,  i.e., a total of 6 years. The costs do 
not include  (i) detailed  design  revisions  and adjustments;1  (ii) internal  monitoring  and  inspection 
of  solid  wastes  disposal,  soil  erosion  and  re-vegetation,  occupational  health,  and  safety  during 
construction,  as  this  will  be  included  in  the  design,  construction,  and  construction  supervision 
contracts;  and  (iii) salaries  of the  PMO  and  the  LPMO  staff.  Costs  for  mitigation  measures  and 
training  are based on estimates  in the DEIA and/or  the experience  of the consultants  from other 
similar projects. All costs were discussed with the DEIA Institute, the PMO, and the implementing 
agencies. 
The  total  estimated  cost  for  the  EMP  implementation  (Table  EMP-8)  only  accounts  for 
26. 
about 1.1% of the total project  investment ($234.61  million including $100.00  million ADB loan).  
1 In the PRC, preliminary design  is equivalent  to detailed  designs  in other  countries. 
132 
Appendix  3 
Table EMP-8. Estimated Cost for the Environmental Management Plan Implementation for 5 Years of Construction and First Year of 
Operation (x CNY10,000) 
(Construction-phase costs will be  paid by the  contractors as part  of their contracts. Operational-phase costs will be paid by  relevant implementing 
agencies). 
Unit 
Cost 
Times 
/Year 
Cost 
/Year  Years  Total Cost 
Item 
Pre-construction phase (Table EMP-2) 
1.1 Public consultation (meetings, surveys, etc.) 
1.2 Consultant 
Subtotal 
Construction phase (Table EMP-2) 
2.1 Soil erosion and contamination  
2.2 Dust and air pollution control 
2.3 Noise and vibration 
2.4 Surface water pollution 
2.5 Solid waste 
2.6 Protection of flora and fauna 
2.7 Community health and safety 
2.8 Occupational health and safety 
Subtotal 
Operational phase (Table EMP-3) 
3.1 Operation of exhausted gases treatment (garbage pyrolysis plants and garbage transfer 
stations) 
3.2 Garbage pyrolysis plant ash transport and disposal 
3.3 Operation of the 26 rural WWTFs 
3.5 Control Noise from pump stations 
3.5 Operation and maintenance of the six constructed wetlands 
3.6 Update and implement EMP 
Subtotal 
4. Monitoring during construction (costs paid by relevant implementing agencies) 
4.1 Surface water quality  
4.2 Construction wastewater including water quality downstream of reservoir 
4.3 Ambient air 
4.4 Noise 
Unit 
CNY 
CNY 
CNY 
CNY 
CNY 
CNY 
CNY 
CNY 
CNY 
CNY 
2.00 
18.00 
776.00 
115.00 
60.00 
186.00 
60.00 
153.00 
50.00 
50.00 
CNY/Year 
120.00 
  120.00 
CNY/Year 
CNY/Year 
CNY/Year 
CNY/Year 
CNY/Year 
5.23 
32.40 
8.00 
10.00 
0.00 
5.23 
  32.40 
8.00 
  10.00 
0.00 
CNY/Time/Year 
CNY/Time/Year 
CNY/Time/Year 
CNY/Time/Year 
2.50 
0.50 
1.80 
0.30 
2 
2 
2 
2 
5.00 
1.00 
3.60 
0.60 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
5 
5 
5 
2.00 
18.00 
20.00 
776.00 
115.00 
60.00 
186.00 
60.00 
153.00 
50.00 
50.00 
1,450.00 
120.00 
5.23 
32.40 
8.00 
10.00 
0.00 
175.63 
25.00 
5.00 
18.00 
3.00 
Item 
Subtotal 
5. Monitoring during operation (costs to be paid by relevant implementing agencies) 
5.1 Garbage pyrolysis plants and garbage transfer stations 
5.1-1 Wastewater 
5.1-2 Exhaust gas 
5.1-2 Odor gas 
5-1-3 Noise 
5-1-4 Soil (garbage pyrolysis plants) 
5-1-5 Groundwater (garbage pyrolysis plants and garbage transfer stations) 
5-1-6 Ambient air 
Subtotal 
5.2 Effluence from the WWTFs  
5.3 Aquatic ecosystem survey (river embankment works)1 
5.4 Soil (Nonpoint source pollution control component) 
5.5 Vegetation survival (wetlands, rivers, and afforestation) 
Subtotal 
Appendix 3   133 
Unit 
Unit 
Cost 
Times 
/Year 
Cost 
/Year  Years  Total Cost 
51.00 
CNY/Time/Year 
CNY/Time/Year 
CNY/Time/Year 
CNY/Time/Year 
CNY/Time/Year 
CNY/Time/Year 
CNY/Time/Year 
0.50 
4.00 
3.00 
0.10 
2.40 
1.00 
4.00 
CNY/Time/Year 
1.80 
CNY/Time/Year  20.00 
CNY/Time/Year 
6.00 
CNY/Time/Year  10.00 
4 
2.00 
4  16.00 
4  12.00 
0.40 
4 
2.40 
1 
4.00 
4 
4.00 
1 
2 
3.60 
1  20.00 
1 
6.00 
1  10.00 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2.00 
16.00 
12.00 
0.40 
2.40 
4.00 
4.00 
40.80 
3.60 
20.00 
6.00 
10.00 
80.40 
1,757.03 
249.17 
  About 1.1% 
Grand Total (x CNY10,000) 
Grand Total (x USD10,000) 
Proportion of Total Investment (%) 
CNY = Chinese  yuan, EMP = environmental  management  plan,  USD = United  States dollar,  WWTF = wastewater treatment  facility,  % = percent. 
1 This survey will be conducted after  the completion  of the river embankment  works and  compared with the baseline  surveys conducted  during  project preparation. 
Source: Domestic environmental  impact assessment. 
134          Appendix  3: Environmental  Management  Plan 
I. 
Mechanisms  for Feedback and Adjustment 
27. 
Based on environmental inspection and monitoring reports, the PMO and the LPMOs shall 
decide, in consultation with the environmental  specialist (consultant), whether (i) further mitigation 
measures  are  required  as  corrective  actions;  or  (ii)  some  improvements  are  required  for 
environmental  management  practices.  The effectiveness  of mitigation  measures  and monitoring 
plans  will be evaluated  by  a feedback  reporting  system.  Adjustment  to the  EMP will  be made,  if 
necessary.  The PMO  environment  officer  and the  environmental  specialist  (consultant)  will play 
critical roles in the feedback and adjustment  mechanism. 
28. 
If during inspection and monitoring, substantial deviation from the EMP is observed or any 
changes  are made  to  the project  that may  cause  substantial  adverse  environmental  impacts  or 
increase  the number  of affected  people,  then  the PMO and  the LPMOs  will immediately  consult 
with  ADB;  and  form  an  environmental  assessment  team  to  conduct  additional  environmental 
assessment.  If necessary,  further  public  consultation  will be  undertaken.  The revised  DEIA  and 
project  EIA,  including  this  EMP,  will  be  submitted  to  the  ADB  for  review,  appraisal,  and  public 
disclosure.  The  revised  EMP  will  be  passed  to  the  contractors,  the  CSCs,  and  operators  for 
implementation. 
Appendix 4  
135 
ENVIRONMENTAL  AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT  SYSTEM 
for 
Eco-Compensation  Fund Management  Committee 
of 
Yunnan Sayu River Basin Rural Water Pollution  Management  and 
Eco-Compensation  Demonstration  Project   
Prepared by the Zhaotong  City Government  for 
Yunnan Sayu River Basin Rural Water Pollution Management  and Eco-Compensation 
Demonstration  Project 
September  2020 
136 
Appendix  4 
ADB 
EEB 
EFMC 
EIA 
EIRF 
EIT 
EMDP 
EMP 
ESMS 
GAP 
GDP 
GRM 
LPMO 
LURT 
PAM 
PMO 
PRC 
SCL 
SDAP 
SPS 
YWPCO 
ZCG 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Asian Development  Bank 
ecology and environmental  bureau 
eco-compensation  fund management  committee 
environmental  impact assessment 
environmental  impact registration  form 
environmental  impact table 
ethnic minority development  plan 
environmental  management  plan 
environmental  and social management  system 
gender action plan 
gross domestic product 
grievance  redress mechanism 
local project management  office 
land use rights transfer 
project administration  manual 
project management  office 
People’s Republic of China 
safeguard  commitment letter 
social development  action plan 
Safeguard  Policy Statement (2009) 
Yudong Reservoir  Water Resources  Protection Committee  Office 
Zhaotong  City Government 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
This environmental and social management system is a document of the borrower. The views 
expressed herein do not necessarily represent those of the Asian Development Bank’s (ADB) 
Board  of Directors,  Management,  or staff,  and may  be preliminary  in nature.  Your  attention 
is directed  to the “terms of use” section on ADB’s website. 
In  preparing  any  country  program  or  strategy,  financing  any  project,  or  by  making  any 
designation  of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, ADB 
does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any territory or area.  
CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
Appendix 4  
137 
Page 
138 
INSTITUTIONAL  FRAMEWORK  FOR ENVIRONMENTAL  AND SOCIAL 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Legislative and Policy Framework 
Definitions of Terms Used 
Roles and Responsibilities  for Environmental  and Social Management 
System 
What the Project will and will not Support 
Pre-readiness  for Establishment  of Environmental  and Social Management 
System 
D. 
E. 
138 
138 
139 
140 
142 
143 
 IMPLEMENTATION  OF ENVIRONMENTAL  AND SOCIAL  MANAGEMENT  SYSTEM 
143 
– SIX STEPS 
ECO-COMPENSATION  FUND MANAGEMENT  COMMITTEE  AND        
SAFEGUARDS 
A. 
Establishment  of Eco-Compensation  Management  Committee and 
Safeguards 
Integrating  Environmental  and Social Management  System within the Fund 
Management procedures 
B. 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM 
CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
PROJECT ASSURANCES 
ESMS-APPENDIX 1: LEGISLATION AND POLICIES 
ESMS-APPENDIX  2: ASIAN DEVELOPMENT  BANK’S LIST OF PROHIBITED   
INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES  
165 
ESMS-APPENDIX  3:  WORKBOOK  FOR  SCREENING  AND  CATEGORIZING  ACTIVITIES 
166 
179 
181 
186 
ESMS-APPENDIX 4: ENVIRONMENTAL SITE INSPECTION CHECKLIST 
ESMS-APPENDIX 5: LAND USE RIGHTS TRANSFER FRAMEWORK 
ESMS-APPENDIX 6: ETHNIC MINORITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN (SUMMARY) 
TO BE FINANCED FROM ECO-COMPENSATION FUND  
153 
153 
154 
154 
159 
160 
161 
138 
Appendix  4 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
1. 
This  document  is  a  draft  environmental  and  social  management  system  (ESMS)  for  an 
eco-compensation  fund  to  be  established  under  the  Yunnan  Sayu  River  Basin  Rural  Water 
Pollution  Management  and  Eco-Compensation  Demonstration  Project.  The project  is supported 
by  a  $100.0  million  loan  from  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  to  the  Zhaotong  City 
Government  (ZCG).  The  project  has  four  outputs:  (i)  water  pollution  sources  in  the  Sayu  River 
Basin  reduced;  (ii)  water  resources  in  the  Sayu  River  Basin  protected  from  pollution;  (iii)  eco-
compensation  mechanism for the Sayu River Basin established;  and (iv) education,  capacity, and 
public  awareness  for  water  pollution  management  strengthened.  The  ZCG  is  the  executing 
agency.  The  implementing  agencies  are  the  Yudong  Reservoir  Water  Resources  Protection 
Committee  Office  (YWPCO)  in  the  ZCG,  the  Zhaoyang  District  Government,  and  the  Ludian 
County  Government.  Environmental  safeguards  for Outputs  1,  2, and 4 are managed  under the 
project  environmental  management  plan  (EMP).  This  draft  ESMS  is  specifically  to  manage 
safeguards  for activities  to be supported  under Output 3.  
2. 
Of the $100 million ADB loan, about $5.0 million will be utilized to establish and implement 
an  eco-compensation  fund  under  Output  3.  The  aim  of  the  fund  is  to  support  improved  water 
quality  protection  and  environmental  management  in  the  Yudong  Reservoir  Basin,  which  is 
located within Zhaoyang  District and Ludian County. The fund will provide grants (not loans). The 
fund  will  be  established  by  and  under  the  YWPCO  and  will  be  managed  by  a  government 
committee, an eco-compensation fund management committee (EFMC), which will be established 
for the project. The EFMC will screen, endorse, and coordinate approved activities that will receive 
grants from the fund. The majority of activities to be supported under the fund are expected to be 
non-structural,  e.g.,  fund  transfers  for  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  facilities  constructed 
under  the  other  project  outputs  (and  for  which  environment  safeguard  measures  are  already 
defined  in  the EMP).  The  beneficiaries  of  the fund  will  be local  government  agencies  and  other 
stakeholders  who  will  receive  grants  in  exchange  for  approved  environmental  services.  The 
anticipated  scope  of  activities  to  be supported  is  summarized  in Section  II.D.  The  fund  and  the 
ESMS structure are described  in Section IV.   
This  draft  ESMS  is for  the  eco-compensation  fund  that  will  only  provide  grants  and  has 
3. 
been  designed  accordingly.  It  is  an  internal  management  system  for  the  EFMC  to  screen  and 
manage  potential  environmental  and social  risks of activities  to be supported  under the fund. All 
activities  to  be  supported  will  be  Category  C  for  environment  and  involuntary  resettlement  and 
Category B or C for indigenous peoples, as defined by ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS).    
4. 
This  is the first time  an ESMS  will  be implemented  in Zhaotong  City.  This draft  ESMS  is 
written  in non-technical  language  and provides  step-by-step  procedures  to assess  and  manage 
potential environmental  and social risks associated with applications under the eco-compensation 
fund.  The  ESMS  will  be  finalized  by  the  EFMC  during  project  implementation,  with  technical 
assistance  from consultants  and ADB; and will be modeled  closely on this template.  
II. 
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK  FOR ENVIRONMENTAL  AND SOCIAL 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
A. 
Legislative  and Policy  Framework 
5. 
The  overall  project,  including  the  eco-compensation  fund  and  the  ESMS,  will  be 
implemented  within  the context  of relevant  policies  and laws  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China 
Appendix 4  
139 
(PRC)  and  policies  of  the  ADB.  Within  the  PRC,  over  40  laws,  regulations,  standards,  and 
guidelines  concerning  natural  resources  management  and agriculture  sector are  relevant  to the 
project  (ESMS-Appendix  1).  For  the  environment,  these  include  environmental  protection, 
planning,  and  impact  assessment,  water  resources  management,  quality  standards  and 
guidelines  for  air,  water,  soil,  and  noise,  disposal  of  solid  waste,  and  protection  of  flora,  fauna, 
and  cultural  resources.  For  social  issues,  these  include  the  management  of the  land  use  rights 
transfer  (LURT),  involuntary  resettlement,  ethnic  minorities,  and  protection  of  the  rights  of 
vulnerable  groups, including women,  the poor, the low-income, and the disabled. 
6. 
The ESMS complies with the requirements of the ADB’s SPS. ADB’s SPS comprises three 
operational policies for the environment, involuntary resettlement, and indigenous peoples. These 
seek to avoid, minimize, or mitigate adverse environmental and social impacts. Under ADB’s SPS, 
the  ESMS  contents  include  environmental  and  social  policies;  screening,  categorization,  and 
assessment; document preparation requirements and review procedures; organizational structure 
and  staffing,  including  skills  and  competencies  in  environmental  and  social  areas;  training 
requirements;  and monitoring and reporting. 
B. 
7. 
Definitions  of Terms Used 
This section provides the definitions of key terms used in the ESMS. 
“Affected  person”  means  a person  directly  or indirectly  affected  by an activity  financed  from the 
eco-compensation  fund. 
“Applicant”  means  an  individual  or  agency  proposing  an  activity  for  funding  under  the  eco-
compensation  fund.  It  is  anticipated  that  proposals  for  most  activities  will  be  led  by  local 
government  agencies. 
“Gender  action  plan”  means  a  plan  for  the  project  with  measurable  indicators  to  strengthen 
gender-inclusive  designs.  The  gender  action  plan (GAP)  is  in the  project  administration  manual 
(PAM).  
“Grievance  redress  mechanism”  means  a  mechanism  to  receive  and  facilitate  resolution  of 
affected  persons’  concerns,  complaints,  and  grievances  about  the  project’s  environmental  or 
social performance  (see Section V). 
“Implementing  agency”  means  an  agency  which  implements  the  project.  For  the  eco-
compensation  fund, the YWPCO in the ZCG is the implementing  agency. 
“Involuntary  resettlement”  is defined  by ADB’s  SPS as physical displacement  (relocation,  loss of 
residential land, or loss of shelter) and/or economic displacement  (loss of land, assets, access to 
assets, income sources, or means of livelihoods), as a result of (i) involuntary acquisition  of land, 
or (ii) involuntary  restrictions  on land use or on access to legally  designated  parks and protected 
areas. 
“Indigenous  people” is defined by ADB’s SPS as a distinct, vulnerable,  social, and cultural group. 
Safeguards  are  triggered  if  a  project  directly  or  indirectly  affects  the  dignity,  human  rights, 
livelihood  systems, culture, or cultural  resources of such groups.1 
1 The  Government  of the  PRC uses  the  term “ethnic  minorities”.  This  may trigger  ADB’s  safeguard  requirements  in 
accordance with the above definition. 
140 
Appendix  4 
“Land use rights transfer” means leasing or renting farmland use rights without any change in the 
land ownership and/or the agricultural  use. 
“Project  administration  manual”  means  a  summary  document  describing  all  administrative, 
financial,  procurement,  and  safeguard  procedures  for  the  overall  project.  The  PAM  and  other 
project documents  are available  on the ADB public website. 
“Project  management  office”  works  on  behalf  of  the  ZCG  to  coordinate  the project.  The  project 
management  office (PMO)  has been established  under the ZCG  and is physically  located in the 
YWPCO (see Section II.C). 
“Environment officer and social officer” means qualified officers appointed by the PMO to lead the 
implementation  of the ESMS (see Section II.C). 
“Social development  action plan” means a plan with measurable  indicators  to strengthen  socially  
inclusive designs.  The social development  action plan (SDAP) is in the PAM. 
C. 
Roles and Responsibilities  for the Environmental  and Social  Management  System 
This  section  identifies  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  agencies  in  implementing  the 
8. 
ESMS. 
Table ESMS-II.1:  Institutional  Responsibilities  for Implementation  of the Environmental 
and Social Management  System 
Agency 
Zhaotong  City Project 
Leading  Group 
Zhaotong  City 
Government 
PMO 
•  Ensure timely national,  provincial,  and inter-agency coordination  and support  for the project,  as 
Roles and Responsibilities 
needed 
•  High-level  support to the Zhaotong  City Government 
•  Provide advice on project  implementation 
•  Review project progress 
•  Executing agency 
•  Overall accountability  and responsibility  for project  planning,  management,  and  implementation 
•  Ensure timely and effective execution of the loan and  project agreements 
•  Coordinate  with ADB 
•  Support  the YWPCO and the EFMC to finalize  the ESMS and implement the ESMS 
•  Submit the updated  draft ESMS to ADB for endorsement 
•  Establish  the GRM for the project 
•  Support  the EFMC to review and strengthen  the environmental  and social  design  of eco-
compensation  applications  before approval 
•  Facilitate  safeguard  training  for relevant  staff of the YWPCO, members of the EFMC, and 
environment  and social officers of the PMO 
•  Prepare  and submit to ADB quarterly project  progress reports (including  internal  resettlement  and 
social development  monitoring  reports) and semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports 
(including  ESMS implementation  progress) 
•  Ensure  project compliance with the loan and project  agreements  (including  all safeguard 
provisions)  and ESMS 
Agency 
Environment  and  social 
officers of the PMO 
Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Work closely with the YWPCO and the EFMC to implement  the ESMS, review proposed  activities 
against  ESMS steps A-F (Section III of the ESMS), and manage  the ESMS database 
Appendix 4  
141 
YWPCO 
EFMC 
•  Implement  the GRM 
•  Facilitate  training  related  to safeguards  and project design 
•  Monitor  the ESMS implementation 
•  Prepare  internal  resettlement  and social development  monitoring  parts of quarterly project 
progress reports and  semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports, including  the ESMS 
implementation  progress 
•  Terms of reference for the PMO environment  officer is in Appendix 2 of the ADB-version EIA for 
the project 
•  Implementing  agency for the eco-compensation  fund 
•  Establish  and manage  the eco-compensation  fund, following the EFMC’s decision 
•  Establish the EFMC 
•  Finalize  the ESMS, following  the EFMC’s decision 
•  Document  the results of Steps A-F for each proposed  activity, in an ESMS database 
•  As a secretariat of the EFMC, prepare  semiannual  safeguard progress reports, including  progress 
of the ESMS implementation,  for the EFMC 
•  Liaise with the ZCG, the PMO, the EFMC, and  other agencies, as necessary, to ensure relevant 
safeguard  approvals and design  considerations are achieved 
•  Make decisions on management  of the eco-compensation  fund  implementing  the ESMS 
•  Integrate  the ESMS within  the EFMC’s operation  procedures 
•  Receive and  review applications  against  the ESMS steps A-F (Section III of the ESMS), working 
with the YWPCO, the PMO, and other  agencies, as necessary 
•  Monitor and report  compliance of eco-compensation  beneficiaries  with the safeguard  conditions 
•  Submit to the PMO semiannual  safeguard  progress  reports,  including  progress  of the ESMS 
implementation 
Applicants 
•  Work with the EFMC to identify  and develop  activities to be supported  under the eco-
Initial  project 
management  support 
consultant 
(environment) 
Environmental, 
resettlement,  and social 
development  specialists 
(project management 
support consultants) 
ADB 
compensation  fund 
•  Implement  and comply with any environmental  or social conditions required  as part of the eco-
compensation  fund 
•  Assist the PMO in establishing  the GRM 
•  Provide initial  training  for the ESMS implementation  to relevant staff of the YWPCO and 
environment  and social officers of the PMO 
•  Assist relevant  staff of the YWPCO, members  of the EFMC, and  environment  and social officers 
of the PMO to establish and implement  the ESMS 
•  Provide ongoing  training  for ESMS implementation  to relevant staff of the YWPCO, members of 
the EFMC, and environment  and social officers of the PMO 
•  Assist the PMO in preparing  quarterly project  progress reports, including  internal  resettlement 
and social development  monitoring  reports and semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports, 
including  the ESMS implementation  progress 
•  Terms of reference are in Appendix  2 of the PAM 
•  Oversee project administration  and timely execution of the loan  and project agreements  by the 
ZCG and the implementing  agencies 
•  Review project compliance  and targets against the design  and monitoring  framework,  the EMP, 
the ESMS, resettlement  plan, the EMDP, the SDAP, the GAP, and the PAM 
•  Review and  endorse updated  ESMS, as needed 
•  Monitor  project progress and conduct review missions 
•  Disclose monitoring  reports on ADB’s public  website, as necessary 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  EFMC  =  eco-compensation  fund  management  committee,  EIA  =  environmental  impact 
assessment,  EMDP = ethnic  minority  development  plan,  EMP =  environment  management  plan,  ESMS  = environmental  and 
social  management  system,  GAP = gender  action  plan,  GRM =  grievance  redress  mechanism,  PAM  = project  administration 
manual,  PMO =  Zhaotong  City  project  management  office, SDAP  =  social  development  and  action  plan,  YWPCO  =  Yudong 
Reservoir Water Resources  Protection  Committee, ZCG = Zhaotong  City Governmetn. 
Source: ADB. 
142 
Appendix  4 
The  relationship  among  the  project  agencies  for  the  ESMS  is  shown  in  Figure 
9. 
ESMS-II.1. 
Figure ESMS-II.1: Organization Chart of Project Agencies for Environmental and Social 
Management System 
Asian  Development Bank 
Zhaotong  City Government 
Yudong  Reservoir Water Resources  Protection  Committee Office 
Consultants 
Technical  
Assistance 
PMO  
Including  Environment  and social officers 
Eco-compensation  Fund  Management Committee 
Activities to be supported  under Eco-
compensation  Fund 
PMO = Zhaotong  City project management  office. 
Source: Asian  Development Bank.   
D. 
What the Project  will and will not Support 
10. 
The ZCG agrees  to the following terms and restrictions  for the eco-compensation  fund. 
(i) 
The eco-compensation  fund will only support activities which: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
have minimal or do not have environmental  impacts;  
have all relevant domestic environmental  approvals and/or land permits, as well as 
for any associated  facilities or operations; 
have a clearly defined geographic  location; 
are  clearly  based  on  participatory  consultation  and  agreement  with  other 
stakeholders,  especially  affected  persons  (for  activities  involving  multiple  parties 
and lands); 
do  not  result  in  changes  to  land  ownership  (e.g.,  from  village  land  to  other 
categories)  or  official land  use category  (e.g.,  from agricultural  to other land  use); 
and 
demonstrate  compliance  with the SDAP and the GAP (see the PAM).  
(ii) 
The EFMC  through  the eco-compensation  fund  will encourage  and  favor activities  which 
demonstrate 
the  sustainable  use  of  natural  resources,  including  (a)  wastewater 
management,  solid  waste  management,  activities  for  pilot  eco-villages,  operation  and 
maintenance  of 
farmland-to-forest 
conversion,  and promotion  of low-emission  agriculture  under Output  1  of the project;  (b) 
operation  of  the  river  protection  model  established  under  Output  2  of  the  project;  (c) 
implementation  of  the  horizontal  eco-compensation  mechanisms  under  Output  3  of  the 
project; and (d) management  of the eco-compensation  fund. 
the  constructed  wetlands,  compensation 
for 
Appendix 4  
143 
(iii) 
The eco-compensation  fund will not fund any activities which: 
• 
are listed in the ADB Prohibited  Investment Activity  List (ESMS-Appendix  2); 
•  may  cause  significant  and  irreversible  impacts  to  the  environment,  and  which  are 
classified as Category “A” or “B” for environment  under ADB’s SPS; 
are located in or next to a designated water source protection zone, protected area, 
cultural heritage site, or critical natural habitat; 
involve  large-scale  landscape  alteration  (e.g.,  quarrying  or  terracing  on  slopes 
greater than 25 degree); 
involve involuntary  land acquisition impacts;   
involve demolition  of residential  or private commercial  buildings; 
involve  involuntary  resettlement  which  meet  the definition  of ADB  Category  “A” or 
“B”  for  resettlement,  and  any  involuntary  resettlement  issues  from  past  land 
acquisition  or existing facilities  as defined under ADB’s SPS; 
have significant  impacts on vulnerable ethnic minorities  (Category  “A”) or issues of 
indigenous  peoples  or ethnic  minority  communities  from  past  activities  or existing 
facilities as defined under ADB SPS;2 and/or 
involve on-lending  to other financial intermediaries  or banking institutions. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
E. 
Pre-readiness  for Establishment  of Environmental  and Social Management  System 
11. 
Prior to establishing  the eco-compensation  fund,  the EFMC shall issue  a formal  directive 
to  integrate  the  ESMS  into  the  EFMC’s  operation  procedures  after  ADB’s  approval  of  it.  The 
directive  shall  (i)  officially  recognize  the  ESMS  as  the  EFMC  policy;  (ii)  instruct  the  EFMC 
personnel  that  the  ESMS steps  are  now part  of the  fund assessment  and  approval  procedures; 
(iii) identify by name and position the managerial and review arrangements for steps and decisions 
taken  while  implementing  the  ESMS;  (iv)  confirm  that  breaches  of  environmental  and  social 
conditions  will  be  treated  promptly  by  the  EFMC  and  that  time-based  corrective  measures  are 
implemented; (v) ensure dissemination of the ESMS documents to the EFMC personnel (including 
copies  of  the  ESMS  Workbook  in  the  ESMS-Appendix  3  to  use  in  the  field);  and  (vi)  require 
personnel  of  the    EFMC  personnel  and  environment  and  social  officers  of  the  PMO  to  attend 
project-supported  training on implementation  of the ESMS. 
12. 
Application  of the ESMS procedures is described in Section III. 
2  The  due  diligence  during  the  preparation  of the  overall  project  has  confirmed that  the  project  area  includes  some 
natural  villages  of ethnic  minority  communities,  for which  an  ethnic  minority  development  plan  has  been  prepared 
following ADB’s SPS requirements  on indigenous  peoples.  The eco-compensation  fund may support  some activities 
in such villages.   
144 
Appendix  4 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL  MANAGEMENT SYSTEM – 
SIX STEPS 
13. 
This section describes  six steps to implement  the ESMS. The steps are conducted  for all 
activities  proposed  for  funding  support  under  the eco-compensation  fund.  The  six  steps  are A–
screening,  B–categorization,  C–improving  design  of  the  activity  for  environmental  and  social 
benefits, D–assessment,  E–safeguard  implementation,  and F–monitoring  and reporting.  Steps A 
to D are conducted as part of the due diligence before a proposed activity is approved for funding. 
Steps E to F are conducted  during implementation  of the activity.  All steps are conducted  by the 
EFMC and the environment and social officers of the PMO, working closely with the YWPCO and 
consultants.  Information  disclosure, public consultation,  and participation  of affected persons are 
key  requirements  under  the  PRC  laws  and  ADB’s  SPS.  Information  disclosure  and  public 
consultation  are included  under Steps D to E. 
The six steps are to be performed by the EFMC and environment and social officers of the 
14. 
PMO, except where stated otherwise.  The steps are summarized  in Figure ESMS-III.2. 
STEP A: SCREEN TO IDENTIFY POTENTIAL IMPACTS 
First filter – compliance  with national and international  laws and regulations 
A.1.  Does the application  include any activities prohibited  under the PRC laws? 
A.2.  Does the application  include any activities  on the ADB Prohibited  Investment  Activity List 
(ESMS-Appendix  2)? 
A.3.  Does  the  applicant  (or  relevant  proposing  agency)  have  existing  or  pending  lawsuits  for 
violation of the PRC laws related to environment  or land? 
A.4. 
If the answer is “yes” to any of the above: reject the application,  or, invite the applicant  to 
re-submit a proposal after it has been re-designed  to meet compliance. 
A.5. 
If the answer is “no” to all of the above, continue with the next steps. 
Second filter – environmental  and social screening 
A.6.  Meet with the applicant  and conduct a site visit, as applicable. 
A.7.  Complete summary information sheets parts 1 and 2 and worksheets 1-4 (for environment, 
land acquisition,  resettlement,  LURT, and ethnic minorities)  in the ESMS-Appendix  3. 
A.8.  Proceed to Step B. Note: do not proceed until Step A is fully completed. 
A.9.  Document  all applications,  whether they pass Step A or not. Report them to the PMO. 
A.10.  The  YWPCO  pays  for  the  cost  of  Step  A (i.e.,  mainly  the  work  time  of personnel  of  the 
EFMC and environment  and social officers of the PMO). 
Appendix 4  
145 
STEP B: CATEGORIZE LEVEL OF POTENTIAL IMPACTS  
B.1.  Use  the  information  in  Step  A  to  identify  the  level  of  potential  environmental  and  social 
impacts and the “impact  category” of the activity, according  to the PRC and ADB criteria. 
First categorization  – environment  (PRC criteria) 
B.2. 
The  PRC  defines  three  classes  of  impact  assessment  and  reporting  (based  on  scale, 
investment  level, and environmental  sensitivity):  environmental  impact  assessment  (EIA) 
report  (high  potential  impacts);  environmental  impact  table  (EIT;  moderate  potential 
impacts),  and environmental  impact  registration  form (EIRF;  low potential  impacts).  See 
definitions  in Table ESMS-A1.2  in ESMS-Appendix  1. 
B.3.  Personnel  of  the  EFMC  and  environment  officer  of  the  PMO  will  (or  will  request  the 
applicant  to)  consult  with  the  local  ecological  and  environment  bureau  (EEB)  for 
preliminary  guidance  on  steps  B.3–B.4  for  environmental  risk  categorization.  First,  the 
applicant  and EEB  should  use Table  ESMS-A1.2  in ESMS-Appendix  1 to  identify  which 
category  the application  is within.  Then, the EEB will apply the national  standards  (Table 
ESMS-A1.3 
level  and  environmental 
categorization  for the proposed  activities.  The applicant  should seek initial guidance from 
the EEB for the  risk categorization  and any comments  and submit  this information  to the 
EFMC and environment  officer. 
in  ESMS-Appendix  1)  to  identify 
the  risk 
B.4.  Proposed  activities  which  will  probably  require  an  EIA  report  will  be  rejected  due  to 
potential risks, or invite the applicant to re-apply after the application has been re-designed 
to meet the EIT or the EIRF class. Activities  classed as the EIT or the EIRF are preferred 
as they are expected to have lower environmental  impacts. 
Second categorization  – environment  (ADB criteria) 
B.5.  ADB applies three impact categories  to projects: A, B, or C. See definitions  in Worksheet 
1 of ESMS-Appendix  3. In Worksheet  1, complete the final column in the table. Assign the 
ranking A, B, or C to each potential impact relevant  to the application. 
B.6.  Using  these  results,  circle  the  summary  impact  category  underneath  the  table.  Clearly 
state the reasons  for this conclusion. 
B.7.  Reject all applications  for activities which are Category A or B, or invite the applicant to re-
apply after the application  has been re-designed  to meet Category C. 
Third categorization  – involuntary resettlement 
B.8.  ADB applies three impact categories to projects: A, B, or C. Screening and categorization 
standards are defined in Worksheets 2 and 3 in ESMS-Appendix 3. Use these worksheets 
to assess  the activity category  as A, B, or C. 
B.9.  Reject  all  applications  for  activities  which  are  Category  A  or  B  or  if  they  involve  any 
involuntary  resettlement  issues  from  past  land  acquisition  or  existing  facilities.  These 
include  activities  which  cause  physical  displacement  and/or  economic  displacement  or 
losses  which  result  from  involuntary  acquisition  of  land  or  involuntary  restriction  of  land 
146 
Appendix  4 
use. 
Fourth categorization  – indigenous  peoples (ethnic minorities) 
B.10.  ADB applies three impact categories to projects: A, B, or C. Screening and categorization 
standards  are  defined  in  Worksheet  4  in  ESMS-Appendix  3.  Use  these  worksheets  to 
assess the activity category as A, B, or C. 
B.11.  Reject  activities  which  are  Category  A  or  involve  any  issues  of  indigenous  peoples  or 
ethnic minority  communities  from past activities or existing facilities.  Otherwise, invite the 
applicant to re-apply after the application  has been re-designed  to meet compliance. 
Fifth categorization  –land use rights transfer1 issues 
B.12.  Any  activities  that  involve  land  with  an  existing  or  proposed  LURT  agreement  will  be 
reviewed  by the EFMC and the PMO social officer.  Use Worksheet  3 in ESMS-Appendix 
3 to determine  whether  there  are any  issues  or pending  disputes.  If the  answer  is “yes”, 
reject  the  application,  or,  invite  the  applicant  to  re-apply  after  all such  issues  have  been 
legally settled and such evidence is provided in accordance with the LURT Framework  in 
ESMS-Appendix  5. 
B.13.  The  YWPCO  pays  for  the  cost  of  Step  B.  This  should  mainly  be  the  work  time  of  the 
personnel of the EFMC social officer of the PMO to meet the applicant  and conduct a site 
visit. 
Endorsement  by ZCG and ADB of the Proposed Risk Categorizations 
B.14.  Report all information in Step B to the PMO and the YWPCO. 
B.15.  For  the  first  two  applications  under  each  new  type  of  activity  category,  submit  the 
screening  documents  and  proposed  risk  categorizations  to  the  PMO  and  ADB  for 
endorsement.  The  PMO  will  provide  the  documents  to  ADB.  Categories  of  activities 
include  but  are  not  limited  to  (i)  wastewater  management,  solid  waste  management, 
activities  for  pilot  eco-villages,  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  constructed  wetlands, 
compensation 
low-emission 
agriculture  under  Output  1; (ii)  operation  of the  river protection  model  established  under 
Output  2;  (iii)  implementation  of  the  horizontal  eco-compensation  mechanisms  under 
Output 3; and (iv) management  of the eco-compensation  fund. 
farmland-to-forest  conversion,  and  promotion  of 
for 
B.16.  Do  not  proceed  with  the  application  until  the ZCG  and  ADB  has  provided  feedback  and 
endorsement  on the application. 
B.17.  Do not proceed to Step C until Step B is fully completed. 
1  See Section II.B for definition  of “land  use rights  transfer”. 
Appendix 4  
147 
STEP C: PROMOTE ENVIRONMENTALLY RESPONSIBLE PRACTICES 
C.1.  Worksheet  5 in ESMS-Appendix  3 identifies  the types  of activities  the eco-compensation 
fund aims to support. Identify those relevant to the fund application. Improve design of the 
proposed activity to achieve  design which meets the practices  in Worksheet 5. Note: This 
step  is  primarily  carried  out  by  the  applicant,  in  consultation  with  the  PMO  environment 
and social officers, consultants,  and local government  bureaus, as necessary. 
C.2.  Personnel of the EFMC and environment  and social officers of the PMO confirm that Step 
C.1 has been conducted. 
C.3.  Report all information in Step C to the PMO and YWPCO. 
C.4.  Do not proceed to Step D until Step C is fully completed. 
STEP D: IMPACT ASSESSMENT, MITIGATION, AND APPROVAL 
Environmental  Assessment 
D.1. 
If the activity is ADB Category  C for environment,  the following  is required:  (i) preparation 
of the relevant  PRC environmental  assessment  (EIT or EIRF; see Step C), if required;  (ii) 
a  brief  environmental  summary  of  the  proposed  activity  and  any  risks;  and  (iii)  a  simple 
environment  checklist  to help manage potential  impacts,  if required.  A sample checklist  is 
given in ESMS-Appendix  4.  
D.2.  Advise  the  applicant:  (i)  it is the  responsibility  of the  applicant  to  arrange  and  pay for  the 
EIT  or  the  EIRF;  (ii)  for  an  EIT  or  an  EIRF,  the  assessment  must  be  prepared  by  an 
accredited  EIA  institute;  (iii) the assessment  will  be submitted  to the EFMC  and  the PMO 
environment  and social officers for review; (iv) for the EIT or the EIRF, the contents will be 
in  Chinese  language  and  will  be  submitted  to the  local  EEB  for approval;  and  (v)  for  the 
environmental  summary  and simple  environment  checklist,  if required,  the content  will be 
in English  language and submitted to ADB for review and approval.  
D.3.  All  domestic  EIA  documents  require  the  review  and  approval  of  the  relevant  bureaus, 
including the EEB. 
D.4.  The  applicant  proceeds  with  preparation  of  the  EIT  or  the  EIRT;  and  environmental 
summary and simple environment  checklist, if required. The applicant is responsible  for all 
costs  of  preparing  the  documents,  including  any  field  surveys,  monitoring,  and  public 
consultation  (see below).  
Social assessments  and preparation  of mitigation  actions 
D.5. 
If the proposed activity involves  the LURT, the applicant must prepare a LURT agreement 
in  accordance  with  the  LURT  Framework  and  submit  a  copy  to  the EFMC  and  the PMO 
social officer.  If the proposed  land  has been the subject of any previous  land transfer,  the 
applicant must submit the LURT agreement  and related evidence to confirm  that there are 
no  pending  disputes.  Such  due  diligence  will  be  done  in  accordance  with  the  LURT 
Framework.    
148 
Appendix  4 
D.6. 
If  activities  involve  any  of  17  ethnic  minority  villages  in  the  project  area,  they  should  be 
implemented  in  accordance  with  the  ethnic  minority  development  plan  (EMDP)  prepared 
for these villages (ESMS-Appendix  6). The activities should be implemented in accordance 
with  the SDAP  and  the  GAP  that are  included  in the  PAM.  For the  actions  in  the EMDP, 
the SDAP,  and the GAP  that are relevant  to the activities,  the EFMC  and the PMO social 
officer  will  ensure  the  applicant  implements  them  and reports  on results,  with  assistance 
from the PMO social  officer and resettlement,  social  development,  and gender  specialists 
(consultants). 
D.7. 
Include  all relevant  requirements  of  the EMDP  (if necessary),  the SDAP,  and  the GAP  in 
the conditions for implementation  of the activity. 
Information  disclosure  and public consultation  and participation 
D.8.  For  all  activities,  regardless  of  impact  category,  check  with  the  applicant  if  they  have 
publicized  the proposed  project within the project area. 
D.9. 
If the answer is “no”, then inform the applicant  that he or she must 
•  publicize  the  basic  project  details  –  location,  activities,  potential  impacts,  contact 
details for the applicant,  the EFMC, and the PMO environment  and social officers;  
•  publicize these  details for at least 10 days to enable the general  public sufficient time 
to submit any verbal or written  comments; 
•  use disclosure materials and media which local communities near the project area can 
access, e.g., signboard  or poster in the village, website; 
•  at the end of the disclosure  period, summarize  any public comments  received (by the 
EFMC, the PMO, and/or applicant); and 
•  address these comments  in line with the EIT, the EIRF, the SDAP, or the GAP. 
D.10.  The applicant pays for the cost of the distribution materials. 
Endorsement  by the ZCG and ADB of the Documents 
D.11.  The  applicant  reports  all  information  on  Step  D  to  the  EFMC  and  the  EFMC  shares  the 
information  with the PMO, and the YWPCO. 
D.12.  The  applicant  obtains  and  verifies  copies  of  relevant  documents  and  approvals  for  the 
application: 
• 
• 
•  ADB’s approval of activities. 
local EEB approval and requirements; 
the EFMC approval of final design of the activity; and 
D.13.  Do not proceed to Step E until Step D is fully completed. 
Appendix 4  
149 
STEP E: IMPLEMENT SAFEGUARD MEASURES 
E.1. 
For  the  approved  activity,  the  EFMC  will  prepare  a safeguard  commitment  letter  (SCL). 
This  will  list  all  measures  to be  implemented  by  the  applicant  for  mitigation,  monitoring, 
and reporting from the EIA, the EMDP, the SDAP, and the GAP as relevant.2 
E.2. 
The applicant begins the activity, including the measures  in the SCL. 
E.3. 
E.4. 
For  any activities  which  involve  hiring  a contractor,  the  SCL  and any  relevant  safeguard 
requirements identified in Step D must be included in (i) the bidding documents; (ii) tenders 
submitted; and (iii) the signed works contract between the EFMC and/or applicant with the 
selected bidder. 
For any activities  which require  infrastructure  works,  such works will be minimal  and of a 
scale consistent with ADB’s Category  C for safeguards.  For such works, if required under 
the  PRC’s  Tentative  Procedure  of  Project  Completion  Environmental  Inspection  and 
Acceptance for Construction Project (2017), within 3 months of completion, the EFMC and 
the  beneficiary  (if  applicable)  will  (i)  assess  if  the  activity  has  been  constructed  in 
compliance  with the  environmental  approval  conditions;  (ii)  submit  related  documents  to 
the  Zhaotong  City  EEB;  and  (iii)  upload  required  information  onto  the  national  project 
completion environmental  acceptance platform. The EEB is responsible for supervision.  If 
the activity is not compliant, the EFMC and/or the beneficiary of the activity will be required 
to  take  corrective  actions.  Without  this,  the  works  will  not  obtain  final  environmental 
approval and cannot become operational. 
E.5.  Support  the  environment  and  social  officers  of  the  PMO  to  implement  the  grievance 
redress mechanism  (GRM) throughout  the implementation  stage (see Section  V). 
E.6.  Any  changes  to  the  design  of  the  activity  that  may  potentially  cause  negative 
environmental  impacts  or  social  issues  will  be  screened  and  assessed  and  additional 
environmental  and  social  monitoring  and/or  mitigation  measures  will  be  developed  as 
needed.  
STEP F: MONITORING AND REPORTING 
F.1.  Monitor whether the applicants  are implementing  the measures in the SCL. 
F.2.  Develop  and  maintain  an  internal  recording  system  for  the results  of Steps  A-F  for each 
eco-compensation  application  and  approved  activity.  This  should  be  a  simple  database 
(e.g., in excel). 
F.3. 
For  environmental  safeguards,  all activities  will  be only  Category  C for environment  and 
are  specifically  intended  to strengthen  environmental  management  and  water resources 
protection in the Yudong Reservoir Basin. Monitoring  for environmental safeguard-related 
impacts is not anticipated to be needed. However, monitoring may be required to measure 
the results of the activity (e.g., reduction in use of chemical fertilizers). Such indicators will 
be  designed  as  needed  between  the  EFMC,  the  PMO  environment  officer,  and  agency 
2  Environmental  impact mitigation  measures  for the other  project  components  (i.e.,  Outputs  1,  2, and  4) are  listed  in 
the  EMP  (Appendix  1  of  ADB-version  EIA  for  the  project).  Some  of  these  EMP  measures  may  be  applicable  to 
activities  under the eco-compensation  fund. Social safeguard  measures  are listed  in Step D.  
150 
Appendix  4 
that will undertake the activity, with technical input from local bureaus and consultants,  as 
needed.  
F.4. 
For social safeguards, the PMO is responsible for monitoring of the EMDP, the SDAP, and 
the GAP implementation  for the overall project. The resettlement, social development, and 
gender specialists in the team of consultants for project management support will help the 
PMO develop the monitoring and reporting mechanism. 
F.5. 
For environment and social safeguards, any monitoring conditions will be listed in the SCL. 
F.6.  During at least the first 2 years of the project, the following agencies meet every 6 months, 
and then at least annually from year 4 onwards: 
• 
the EFMC,  the PMO, and  the YWPCO  meet to review  progress  against the contract 
conditions  in the SCLs for approved activities;  and 
the  EFMC,  the  PMO,  the  YWPCO,  and  relevant  bureaus  meet  to  review  safeguard 
compliance  of all the activities  being supported  and lessons learned. 
• 
F.7. 
F.8. 
The EFMC submits semiannual safeguard  progress reports to the PMO and the YWPCO, 
which includes progress of the ESMS implementation.  A report for January–June  shall be 
submitted by 31 July in the year latest and a report for July–December  shall be submitted 
by 31 January in the next year latest.  
The  PMO  submits  to  ADB  (i)  quarterly  project  progress  reports,  including  internal 
resettlement;  and  social  development  monitoring 
the  ESMS 
implementation  progress;  and (ii) semiannual  environmental  monitoring reports,  including 
the  ESMS  implementation  progress.  A  semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports  for 
January–June  and July–December  shall be submitted  by 15 August in the year latest and 
by 15 February  in the next  year latest (i.e.,  2 weeks after the  EFMC submits  its report  to 
the PMO), respectively. 
including 
reports, 
F.9. 
The reporting procedure  is shown in Figure ESMS-III.1. 
F.10.  The YWPCO pays for the costs of internal ESMS monitoring and reporting and preparation 
of the reports.  
F.11.  Penalties. In the event that agency, firm, contractor, or individual nominated to implement 
the activity does not comply with the conditions in the SCL, then penalties will apply. Such 
penalties  will  be  identified  during  finalization  of  the  ESMS  and  may  include,  but  not  be 
limited to, cancellation  of any relevant  works contract and replacement  of a contractor  (in 
the case of any civil works). 
Appendix 4  
151 
Table ESMS-III.1:  Reporting Plan for Environmental  and Social Management  System 
Timing 
Responsibility 
Report 
Semiannual safeguard 
progress reports, including 
progress of the ESMS 
implementation 
Semiannually.  
For January–June: by 31 July in the year 
For July–December: by 31 January in the next 
year 
EFMC submits to the 
PMO and the YWPCO 
Quarterly project progress 
reports, including internal 
resettlement; and social 
development monitoring 
reports, including the 
ESMS implementation 
progress 
Internal resettlement and social development 
monitoring reports are updated semiannually. 
For January–June: by 15 August in the year 
For July–December: by 15 February in the next 
year 
PMO submits to ADB. 
ADB reviews and 
discloses on ADB’s 
website 
Semiannual environmental 
monitoring reports, 
including the ESMS 
implementation progress 
Semiannually 
For January–June: by 15 August in the year 
For  
July-–December: by 15 February in the next year 
ADB = Asian  Development  Bank,  EFMC  = eco-compensation  fund  management  committee,  ESMS  = environmental 
and  social  management  system, PMO = project  management  office,  YWPCO = Yudong  Reservoir  Water Resources 
Protection  Committee  Office. 
Source: ADB. 
PMO submits to ADB. 
ADB reviews and 
discloses on ADB’s 
website 
Figure ESMS-III.1.  Reporting Procedures  for Environmental  and Social Management 
System 
ADB 
Quarterly project progress  reports  including  internal  resettlement  and social  development  monitoring 
reports,  including  ESMS implementation  progress 
Semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports,  including  ESMS implementation  progress 
Zhaotong  City Government 
Yudong  Reservoir Water Resources  Protection  Committee Office 
PMO 
Environment and  Social Officers 
Assist  as a 
secretariat 
EFMC 
Semiannual  safeguard 
progress  reports, 
including  ESMS 
implementation  progress 
Lead  coordination  for ESMS Steps A−F 
Applicants 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  EFMC  =  eco-compensation 
environmental  and  social management  system, PMO = project management  office. 
fund  management  committee,  ESMS  = 
152          Appendix  4 
Figure ESMS-III.2.  Steps A–F of Environmental  and Social Management  System 
STEP A: SCREEN  TO 
IDENTIFY 
POTENTIAL 
IMPACTS 
First f ilter – compliance with national  and international  laws and 
regulations (A.1−4) 
“Yes”  to any 
or 
“No”  to all 
Reject 
Invite  the applicant 
to re-apply 
The  EFMC meets the applicant and conduct a site visit, as applicable 
Summary  inf ormation sheets parts 1 and 2 and worksheets 1-4 
in ESMS-Appendix 3 completed 
Environment  (PRC) 
IR 
IP 
Should be EIT  or EIRF 
Should be category C 
Should be category B or C 
Environment  (ADB) 
Should be category C 
Any IR  issues f rom the 
past or existing f acilities? 
Any IP issues f rom the 
past or existing f acilities? 
Should be “No” 
Should be “No” 
Any 
issues or 
pending 
disputes 
on 
LURT? 
Should 
be “No” 
Meet all these  criteria? 
“No” 
“Yes” 
The  proposed risk categorizations endorsed by ZCG and ADB (f or the f irst 
two applications under each  new  type of  activity category) 
Reject 
or 
Invite  the applicant 
to re-apply 
The  applicant improves the design of  the proposed activity ref erring to Worksheet 5  in ESMS-Appendix 3 
EIT  or EIRF 
prepared, if  required 
Reviewed  and 
approved by 
relevant  agencies 
including EEB 
(i)  A  brief   environmental 
summary  and (ii)  a simple 
environment  checklist  (if  
required)  prepared 
Reviewed  and approved 
by ADB 
Due diligence 
f or LURT 
(e.g., LURT 
agreement) 
conducted, if  
the activity 
involves 
LURT 
All relevant  requirements 
of  the EMDP (if  the activity 
involves ethnic minority 
villages in the project 
area),  SDAP, and GAP 
included in conditions f or 
implementation of  the 
activity 
The  applicant publicizes basic project details and address public comments received  
The  applicant reports all inf ormation on Step D to the EFMC that shares  it with the  PMO and YWPCO 
The  proposed activity approved by the EFMC and ADB 
The  EFMC prepares a  SCL f or the approved activity 
The  applicant conducts the activity, including measures  in the SCL 
Whether  the applicants are  implementing the measures  in the  SCL monitored and reports prepared and 
submitted as shown in  Figure ESMS-III.1   
STEP B: 
CATRGORIZE 
LEVEL OF 
POTENTIAL 
IMPACTS 
STEP C: PROMOTE 
ENVIRONMENTALLY 
RESPONSIVEL 
PRATICES 
STEP D: IMPACT 
ASSESSMENT, 
MITIGATION,  AND 
APPROVAL 
STEP E: IMPLEMENT 
SAFEGURD 
MEASURES 
STEP F: 
MONITORING  AND 
REPORTING 
ADB = Asian  Development Bank, EEB = environmental  protection bureau, EFMC  = eco -compensation f und management  committee, EIRF  = 
environmental  impact registration  f orm, EIT  =  environmental  impact table, EMDP ethnic  minority development plan,  ESMS  =  environmental 
and  social management  system, GAP  = gender  action plan,  IP  =  indigenous  people,  IR  =  involuntary  resettlement,  LURT  = land  use  rights 
transf er,  PMO  =  project  management  of f ice, PRC  =  People’s  Republic  of   China,  SCL  =  saf eguard  commitment  letter,  SDAP  =  social  
development action plan, YWPCO  = Yudong Reservoir  Water  Resources Protection Committee Of f ice, ZCG = Zhaotong City Government.  
Appendix 4 
153 
IV. 
ECO-COMPENSATION  FUND MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE AND SAFEGUARDS 
A. 
Establishment  of Eco-Compensation  Management  Committee  and Safeguards 
The  ZCG,  including  the  YWPCO,  will  lead  the  establishment  of  the  EFMC.  The  chair  of 
15. 
the  EFMC  will be  the vice  mayor  of the  ZCG and  members  will be  Deputy  Directors  General  of 
about 10 ZCG agencies,  including Development  and Reform Committee,  Finance Bureau, Water 
Resources  Bureau,  the  EEB,  Housing  and  Urban–Rural  Development  Bureau,  Agriculture  and 
Rural Affairs Bureau, Forestry and Grassland  Bureau, etc.  
16. 
The  EFMC  will  conduct  screening  of  activities  proposed  for  financing  from  the  fund  in 
accordance with the ESMS. The YWPCO will manage the fund, following decisions of the EFMC. 1 
An account  under  the Zhaotong  City  Finance  Bureau  will be used  for the fund.  The account  will 
be managed by the Finance Bureau, following decisions of the EFMC. The Zhaotong City Finance 
Bureau  will  disburse  grants  from  the  fund  to  recipients,  based  on the  EFMC’s  decisions  and  at 
the YWPCO’s request through either the Zhaoyang  District Finance Bureau or the Ludian County 
Finance Bureau (and relevant  town or township finance bureau,  as necessary). 
17. 
The  specific  operational  procedures  for  the  EFMC,  including  screening,  selection,  and 
approval  procedures  for  activities,  financial  transfer  mechanisms,  and  technical  and  financial 
reporting, will be established before the eco-compensation  fund is established (scheduled  in July 
2021).  The  safeguard  procedures  described  in  this  draft  ESMS  will  be  integrated  into  the  fund 
operational  procedures  (Section IV.B). 
18. 
The  environment  and  social  officers  of  the  PMO  who  are  responsible  for  overall 
implementation  of the project  safeguards  (including the EMP, the EMDP,  and resettlement  plan) 
will also be responsible for the ESMS implementation. These two officers will work under the PMO 
for safeguards related to Outputs 1, 2, and 4 and for the EFMC for Output 3 (i.e., the ESMS). This 
arrangement  is  optimal  as  (i)  implementation  of  the  eco-compensation  fund  is  not  expected  to 
involve significant environmental or social risks, given the fund’s objectives and scope of activities 
to  be  supported  by  the  fund,  and  the  workload  is  expected  to  be  relatively  small;  (ii)  the  GRM 
(described  in  Section  V  and  the  EMP)  will  be  implemented  for  all  project  activities,  including 
Output 3; and (iii) the composition of the PMO and the YWPCO is similar, and both are subject to 
overall  guidance  under  the  project  leading  group  (Table  ESMS-II.1).  Coordination  of  all  project 
safeguards  by  the  environment  and  social  officers  of  the  PMO  will  ensure  an  integrated  and 
holistic  approach  across  the  four  project  outputs;  minimize  work  duplication;  and  maintain 
awareness  of  the  ESMS  progress  by  the  project  leading  group,  the  ZCG,  the  implementing 
agencies,  and other relevant bureaus. 
During project implementation, the environment and social officers of the PMO will receive 
19. 
technical  support  and  training  from  the  project  management  support  consultant  team  and  ADB 
for the ESMS implementation,  as well as for implementation  of the EMP, the EMDP, resettlement 
plan, and the GRM. 
20. 
Safeguard monitoring will be conducted by the environment and social officers of the PMO 
to ensure compliance with the safeguard conditions, if any, in the SCL for each approved  activity. 
1  Fifteen  full-time  staff of the  YWPCO who manages  an  existing  fund for ecological  restoration  and  remediation  will 
manage the new eco-compensation  fund. 
154          Appendix  4 
The  officers  will  conduct  site  visits  and  meetings  with  the  agency  to  conduct  the  activity,  as 
needed. The EFMC and applicants for the fund will facilitate meetings,  as needed. 
21. 
The PMO, the YWPCO,  the EFMC, and ADB will review implementation  progress for the 
eco-compensation  fund as part of overall project  progress monitoring,  including in reports (Table 
ESMS-III.1).  In  the  final  year  of  project  implementation,  the  PMO  and  ADB  will  assess  overall 
success of the fund and the ESMS; and if required, identify next steps for continuation of the fund 
and the ESMS after project completion.   
B. 
Integrating  Environmental  and  Social  Management  System  within  the  Fund 
Management  procedures 
To  integrate  the  ESMS  into the  EFMC  operational  procedures,  the  ZCG or  the YWPCO 
22. 
will  issue  a  formal  directive  prior  to  establishing  the  eco-compensation  fund  (scheduled  in  July 
2021). This directive will 
(i) 
(ii) 
officially recognize  the ESMS as part of the EFMC operational  structure; 
identify  by name and position  the personnel  arrangements  for steps  and decisions  taken 
for implementing  the ESMS; 
establish procedures in the event that any safeguard conditions for approved activities are 
not complied with; 
confirm the working relationship  between the EFMC, the YWPCO,  and consultants; 
ensure dissemination  of the ESMS document  to the EFMC and the YWPCO personnel; 
instruct  the  personnel  of  the  EFMC  and  the  YWPCO  and  the  environment  and  social 
officers of the PMO to print copies of the ESMS Workbooks  (ESMS-Appendix  3) to use in 
the field and for filling out as part of their duties; and 
commit  to  the training  plan  in the  ESMS  by  facilitating  attendance  of  the EFMC  and  the 
YWPCO personnel  at training courses,  as required. 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
The  design  of the eco-compensation  fund  and the  ESMS  operational  procedures  will be 
23. 
finalized and approved by the EFMC and ADB prior to the establishment  of the eco-compensation 
fund.  
In this time,  the environment  and social  officers  of the PMO  and personnel  of  the EFMC 
24. 
and the YWPCO  will be trained in the ESMS implementation. 
Upon commencement  of the eco-compensation  fund, the EFMC and the environment and 
25. 
social  officers  of  the  PMO  will  commence  the  ESMS  procedures  Steps  A–F  (Section  III  of  this 
ESMS). 
26.  Where  design  of  an  activity  needs  to  be  improved  (Step  C),  personnel  of  the  EFMC, 
environment  and  social  officers  of the  PMO,  and  applicant  will consult  with  technical  personnel 
as needed (e.g., agricultural extension staff of the local agriculture bureau) to guide the re-design. 
After  re-design,  the  application  will  progress  step  by  step  through  the  ESMS  procedures  as 
before. 
V. 
GRIEVANCE  REDRESS  MECHANISM 
Grievance  redress  mechanism  for  overall  project  implementation.  The  project 
27. 
includes  a  GRM  to identify,  address,  and  resolve  any  public  concerns  for environmental  and/or 
social issues of the project activities.  The GRM will be implemented  for the life of the project and 
Appendix 4 
155 
will be applied to all project activities  under all outputs, including  the eco-compensation  fund and 
the ESMS. The GRM comprises a series of steps to receive, document, and address the concerns 
of any affected  persons. The GRM is accessible  to all members  of the community.  Multiple entry 
points are available, as well as multiple ways to convey issues and/or grievances,  including face-
to-face meetings,  written complaints,  telephone conversations,  e-mail, and social media.  
28. 
The  environment  and  social  officers  of  the  PMO,  supported  by  other  environment  and 
social officers of the local PMOs (LPMOs) under implementing  agency, will lead the coordination 
of  the GRM.  However,  all  project  agencies  and staff,  including  the  EFMC,  will  be trained  in the 
GRM  and are  expected  to take  an active  role for implementing  the  GRM. At  the PMO  level, the 
environment  and  social  officers  of  the  PMO  will  establish  a  GRM  tracking  and  documentation 
system;  conduct daily coordination  with the other environment  and social officers  of the LPMOs; 
arrange  meetings  and  conduct  site  visits,  as  necessary;  maintain  an  overall  project  GRM 
database; and prepare reporting inputs for quarterly project progress reports to ADB. At the LPMO 
level,  the  environment  and  social  officers  will  instruct  contractors  and  construction  supervision 
companies  on the  GRM procedures;  and  coordinate  with the  local  EEBs and  other  government 
agencies,  as  necessary.  The  PMO  and  the  LPMO  staff  will  be  trained  and  supported  by  the 
environmental,  resettlement  and social development  specialists (consultants). 
The contact  persons  for different  GRM  entry points,  such  as the  environment  and  social 
29. 
officers of the PMO and the LPMOs, contractors,  operators of project facilities, and the EEBs, will 
be  identified  prior  to  construction.  The  contact  details  for  the  entry  points  (phone  numbers, 
addresses, e-mail addresses) will be publicly disclosed on information boards at construction sites 
and on the websites of the local EEBs. 
30. 
If a  complaint  is  received  and  filed,  the  environment  and  social  officers  of the  PMO  and 
the  LPMO  will  identify  if  the  complaint  is  eligible  for  management  under  the  GRM.  Eligible 
complaints  under  the GRM  include  those where  (i) the complaint  pertains  to the project;  and (ii) 
the issues arising in the complaint fall within the scope of environmental  and/or social issues that 
the GRM  is authorized  to address.  Ineligible  complaints  include  those where  (i) the complaint  is 
not project-related;  (ii) the nature  of the issue is outside  the mandate  of the GRM (such as fraud 
or  corruption);  and/or  (iii)  other  procedures  would  be  more  appropriate  to  address  the  issue. 
Ineligible  complaints  will  be  documented  and  provided  to  the  relevant  authorities  and  the 
complainant  will  be  informed  of  these  steps.  The  procedure  and  timeframe  for  the  GRM  are 
summarized  in  Figure  EMP-1  for  environmental  issues  and  in EMDP  and  resettlement  plan  for 
specific social issues. 
Grievance  redress  mechanism  for  environment  safeguards.  The  following  are  the 
31. 
GRM steps for environmental  safeguards: 
(i) 
Stage  1  (5  calendar  days).  If  a  concern  arises  during  construction  or  operation,  the 
affected  person  may  submit  a  written  or  oral  complaint  to  the  contractor  (construction 
phase)  or  operator  of  the  project  facility  (operation  phase).  The  contractor  will  (i) 
respectfully  acknowledge  the issue and immediately  stop the causal activity  (e.g., on-site 
construction  causing high noise levels to a nearby household);  (ii) not resume the activity 
until  the complaint  has been  resolved;  (iii)  inform  the LPMO  of the  incident  on the  same 
day  of the  incident  occurring  and  how  the contractor  has responded  or will  respond;  (iv) 
give a clear reply to the affected person within 2 calendar days; and (v) as far as possible, 
resolve  the problem  within  5 calendar  days from  receiving  the complaint.  The contractor 
will keep the LPMO fully informed at all stages. The LPMO will inform the PMO, the local 
156          Appendix  4 
(ii) 
(iii) 
village committee,  and the EEB of the incident within  1 working  day of being  informed by 
the contractor; and subsequently  keep these parties informed at all stages. 
Stage  2 (5  calendar  days).  If the  issue  cannot  be resolved  in Stage  1, after  5 calendar 
days,  the LPMO,  and/or  the PMO  will take  over  responsibility.  Eligibility  of the complaint 
will be assessed,  and a recommended  solution  given to the complainant  and contractors 
within 2 calendar days. If the solution is agreed by the complainant, the contractors, and/or 
facility operators (in operation) will implement  the solution within 5 calendar days from the 
LPMO or the PMO taking over responsibility of the complaint. Written records will be made 
of all stages and outcomes.  At the expiration  of Stage  2, the PMO  will inform ADB of the 
outcome. 
Stage 3 (15 calendar days). If no solution can be identified by the PMO and/or the LPMO; 
and/or  the  complainant  is  not  satisfied  with  the  proposed  solution,  the  PMO  and/or  the 
LPMO  will  organize  within  7  calendar  days  a  stakeholder  meeting  (including  the 
complainant,  contractor,  and/or  operator  of the facility;  and  the EEB,  the LPMO,  and the 
PMO).  A  solution  acceptable  to  all  shall  be  identified,  including  clear  steps.  The 
contractors  (during construction)  and facility operators  (during operation) will immediately 
implement  the agreed  solution.  All attempts  will be  made to fully resolve  the issue  within 
15  calendar  days.  Written  records  will  be  made  of  all  stages  and  outcomes.  At  the 
expiration  of Stage 3, the PMO will inform ADB of the outcome. 
32. 
The GRM does not affect the right of an affected person to submit their complaints  to any 
agency  they  wish  to,  for  example,  the  local  village  committee,  community  leaders,  courts,  the 
PMO,  and  the  LPMOs;  governments  of  Zhaotong  City,  Zhaoyang  District,  and  Ludian  County; 
and/or ADB. 
The PMO and the LPMOs shall bear any and all costs of implementing  the GRM, including 
33. 
meeting, travel, and/or accommodation costs of the project staff or affected person. The GRM will 
be implemented  throughout  project  construction  and  at least  the first  year  of operation  for each 
project facility. 
Figure ESMS-V.1:  The Grievance Redress  Mechanism  for Environmental  Safeguards 
Appendix 4 
157 
Affected person(s) 
Stage 1 
5 days 
Complaint 
Solution   
Implemented 
Complaint 
Contractor,  CSC 
Implementing  agencies, 
 local EEB, 
village committee 
Reporting 
Stage 2 
5 days 
Unresolved Complaint  
Forwarded 
PMO and/or LPMO environment 
and/or social officers 
(recording  and coordination) 
Unresolved Complaint  
Forwarded 
Stakeholder  meeting 
PMO 
Action Plan 
Stage 3 
15 days 
Solution implemented 
Reporting by 
 PMO to ADB 
ADB 
ADB  = Asian  Development  Bank,  CSC  = construction  supervision  company,  EEB =  ecology  and  environmental 
bureau,  LPMO = local project management  office, PMO = project management  office. 
Source: ADB. 
34. 
The GRM does not affect the right of an affected person to submit their complaints  to any 
agency  they wish to; for example, the local  village committee,  community  leaders,  the PMO, the 
ZCG, district and/or county governments,  and/or ADB. At any time in the GRM, affected persons 
may also contact the local courts and/or ADB’s East Asia Department.  The GRM does not affect 
public  rights  under  the  PRC’s  Regulations  on  Letters  and  Visits  (ESMS-Appendix  1),  which 
requires  a  complaint  acceptance  mechanism  at  all  levels  of  government  and  protects 
complainants  from  retaliation.  If  the  complaint  is  still  unresolved  after  all  stages,  the  affected 
person and/or PMO may refer to the ADB Accountability  Mechanism.2 
All stages of the GRM are time-bound with maximum periods set for advising, finding, and 
35. 
implementing  corrective  actions.  All complaints  and processes  are documented  and reported  to 
2 See: www.adb.org/  accountability-mechanism 
158          Appendix  4 
ADB  through  quarterly  project  progress  reports,  including  internal  resettlement  and  social 
development  monitoring  reports and semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports. 
Land use  right transfer  issues (four  stages). For grievances  involving  the LURTs, the 
36. 
following steps will be taken:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Stage 1. Complaints  are submitted to the village committee. In case of an oral appeal, the 
village  committee  shall  make  a  written  record.  The  village  committee  shall  decide  to 
resolve the problem within 15 days. 
Stage 2. If the affected person is dissatisfied  with Stage 1, they may file an appeal  to the 
township  government.  The  township  government  shall  decide  to  resolve  the  problem 
within 15 days. 
Stage 3. If the affected person is dissatisfied  with Stage 2, they may file an appeal  to the 
county and/or district government,  who shall resolve the issue within 20 days. 
Stage 4. If the affected person  is dissatisfied  with Stage 3, they may  file for arbitration  in 
the Rural Land Use Rights Transfer Disputes Tribunal  for final resolution.   
At each stage, the receiving agency will report the complaint,  and progress resolving it, to 
37. 
the PMO.  Relevant  agencies  will  send consolidated  reports  on the  GRM activity  to the  PMO for 
semiannual  reporting. 
Based  on the  PRC’s  Law on  Mediation  and Arbitration  of Rural  Land  Contract  Disputes, 
38. 
charges for disputes arbitration of rural land contracts are not allowed. Reasonable expenses will 
be paid by the local government. 
Ethnic  minority  safeguard  issues  (four  stages).  For  grievances  involving  ethnic 
39. 
minorities,  the following  steps will be taken: 
(v) 
(vi) 
Stage 1. If the affected persons are dissatisfied with the project, they can make either oral 
or  written  complaint  to  the  village  committee  or  cultural  leaders;  and  if  they  use  verbal 
complaints,  the  community  committee  or  cultural  leader  should  handle  and  record  it. 
Complaints  will be addressed within 15 days. 
Stage  2.  If the  complainant  is  not  satisfied  with  the  result  of  the  first phase,  he/she  can 
appeal  to  the  township  government  after  receiving  the  result;  and  the  township 
government  should decide within 15 days. 
(vii) 
Stage  3. If the complaint  is not satisfied  with  the result of  the second  phase, he/she  can 
appeal to the PMO after receiving the result; the PMO should decide within 30 days. 
(viii)  Stage  4. If the complainant  is not satisfied  with the results  of any  above  phases,  he/she 
can  appeal  to  the  government  departments  applying  for  administrative  reconsideration 
after receiving the result.  
Figure ESMS-V.2:  Grievance  Redress Mechanism  for Social Safeguards 
Social related  complaints  by affected persons 
Appendix 4 
159 
Village  Committee 
Township Government 
County/district  government  and PMO 
County Rural Land Dispute Arbitration Tribunal 
Solution resolved 
PMO = Zhaotong  City project management  office. 
VI. 
CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING 
The project includes a training program (Table ESMS-VI.1)  to build capacity of the EFMC, 
40. 
the  PMO,  including  the  environment  and  social  officers;  and  the  YWPCO  for  efficient 
implementation  of the eco-compensation  fund  and the ESMS.  Most training  will occur  within the 
first 2 years  of the project.  Training  will be conducted  by the environmental,  resettlement,  social 
development,  and gender specialists (consultants),  (Appendix  2 of the PAM), supported  by other 
consultants. 
Table ESMS-VI.1:  Five-Year Training Program for Environmental  and Social Management 
System  
Trainees 
EFMC, 
PMO,  and 
YWPCO 
Training 
Maintain  and implement the ESMS 
Maintain  and implement the GRM 
Implement  ESMS  Steps  A–F  (screening, 
design,  categorization,  impact assessment); 
and inclusion  of safeguards  into contracts for 
the activity (mitigation,  monitoring,  reporting, 
the SDAP, the GAP, land  transfer) 
ESMS  monitoring  and  reporting–spread-
sheet  data,  reporting  to the EFMC; reporting 
by the PMO to ADB 
to  environmental  and  social 
Introduction 
impact  assessment  in  the  waste  manage-
ment and  water resources  protection   
Trainer 
Year 
1 
Times per Year 
Year
Year
Year
4 
3 
2 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
Consultants  OJT 
tbc 
tbc 
OJT 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
OJT  OJT 
Cost 
(CNY 
x10,000) 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
Year
5 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
OJT 
2 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
OJT 
4 
2 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
160          Appendix  4 
Trainees 
Training 
Introduction 
for  waste 
to  best  practices 
management and water resources protection 
Midterm  review  of  the  ESMS  –  progress, 
challenges,  lessons  learned 
Trainer 
Year 
1 
Times per Year 
Year
Year
Year
4 
3 
2 
tbc 
tbc 
OJT  OJT 
tbc 
Year
5 
tbc 
Cost 
(CNY 
x10,000) 
tbc 
In-kind 
support 
ADB  = Asian  Development  Bank,  CNY  = Chinese  yuan,  EFMC  = eco-compensation  fund  management  committee, 
ESMS  =  environmental  and  social  management  system,  GAP  =  gender  action  plan;  GRM  =  grievance  redress 
mechanism, OJT = on the job training,  PMO = Zhaotong  City project management  office, SDAP = social  development 
action plan,  tbc = to be confirmed, YWPCO = Yudong  Reservoir  Water Resources  Protection Committee Office. 
Source: ADB. 
VII. 
PROJECT ASSURANCES 
41. 
The  EFMC,  the  PMO,  and  the  YWPCO  will  be  subject  to  project-specific  assurances  to 
support  efficient  and  timely  project  management.  Refer  to  the  loan  and  project  agreements  for 
the final wording  of the assurances. 
ESMS-APPENDIX  1: LEGISLATION AND POLICIES 
Table ESMS-A1.1:  Laws and Regulations  of the People’s  Republic of China on 
Environmental  and Social Issues Relevant  to the Environmental  and Social Management 
System 
Appendix 4 
161 
Laws, Regulations, and Standards 
Environmental Protection and Planning and Land Use Management 
Environmental Protection Law (2015, 
amended) 
Land Administration Law (2004, amended) 
Relevance to Project 
Subprojects avoid any significant environmental impact. 
Noise Pollution Prevention and Control Law 
(2018, amended) 
Water Pollution Prevention and Control Law 
(2018, amended) 
Air Pollution Prevention and Control Law (2018, 
amended) 
Solid Waste Pollution Prevention and Control 
Law (2016, amended) 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
Environmental Impact Assessment Law (2018, 
amended) 
Management Regulation on Environmental 
Impact Assessment Categories of Construction 
Projects (2018) 
Regulation on Public Participation of 
Environmental Impact Assessment (2017) 
Provisional Methods of Management of 
Projects Financed by International Financial 
Institutions and Foreign Governments (2005) 
Technical Guideline for Environmental Impact 
Assessment: General principle (HJ 2.1-2016) 
Technical Guideline for Environmental Impact 
Assessment: Surface Water (HJ/T 2.3-2018) 
Technical Guideline for Environmental Impact 
Assessment: Atmospheric Environment (HJ2.2-
2018) 
Technical Guideline for Environmental Impact 
Assessment: Acoustic Environment (HJ2.4-
2009) 
Technical Guideline for Environmental Impact 
Assessment: Ecological Impact Assessment 
(HJ19-2011) 
Technical Guideline for Environmental Impact 
Assessment: Groundwater Environment (HJ 
610-2016) 
Water 
Water Law (2016) 
Environmental Quality Standard for Surface 
Subprojects comply with provincial, county, and local 
land use plans, which are made to protect and develop 
land resources. 
Noise during construction and operation of the proposed 
subprojects to be mitigated or avoided. 
Water pollution during construction and operation of the 
proposed subprojects to be mitigated or avoided. 
Air pollution during construction and operation of the 
proposed subprojects to be mitigated or avoided. 
Solid waste pollution during construction and operation 
of the proposed subprojects to be mitigated or avoided. 
Overarching law for the EIA, setting out procedures for 
the EIA and approvals needed before construction. 
Defines assessment and reporting requirements for 
three EIA classes, based on scale, investment level, and 
environmental sensitivity: comprehensive EIA report; 
environmental impact table; and environmental impact 
registration form. See Table ESMS-A1.2. All subprojects 
are expected to require environmental impact table or 
lower. 
Guideline and requirement for conducting public 
participation and consultation during the EIA of a project 
Project funds are sourced from an international 
organization (ADB), the provisions of this method apply 
for aspects of the EIA.  
Guideline for conducting the EIA preparation. Provides 
information on the scope and content of the EIA.  
Guideline for surface water pollution prediction and 
analysis for projects where wastewater discharge is a 
potential impact. 
Guideline for air pollution prediction and analysis for 
projects where gaseous emissions are a potential 
impact. 
Guideline for noise level prediction and analysis for 
impact assessments. 
Guideline for ecological impact prediction and analysis 
for impact assessments. 
Guideline for groundwater pollution prediction and 
analysis for impact assessments. 
Regulation and management of water resources.  
Assigns a water quality class to waterbodies according 
162          Appendix  4 
Laws, Regulations, and Standards 
Water (GB 3838-2002) 
Environmental Quality Standard for 
Groundwater (GB/T14848-2017) 
Water Pollution Prevention and Control Law 
(2018, amended) 
Regulation on Pollution Prevention of Drinking 
Water Source (2010) 
Measures on Monitoring of Pollutant Discharge 
Outlets Entering Rivers (2015, amended) 
Integrated Wastewater Discharge Standard 
(GB 8978-2002) 
Water Quality Standard for Sewage Discharged 
into Municipal Sewers (CJ343-2010) 
Relevance to Project 
to their use. There are five classes, ranging from I 
(drinking water) to V (industrial use only). Waterbodies in 
subprojects will be classed to assess the permitted use 
of the water and discharge of wastewater.  
Standards for groundwater quality which must be 
maintained. 
Enabling legislation for rules and regulations preventing 
water pollution. 
Sets aside areas adjoining drinking water sources to 
protect water quality. Subprojects should not be within or 
bordering these zones. 
Environmental monitoring in the wastewater discharge 
outlet may be required for the subproject, if necessary. 
Requirements for wastewater discharge. 
Wastewater should not be discharged to municipal 
wastewater treatment station if indicators exceed the 
limits in this standard. 
Subprojects need to obtain water resource extraction 
permission from local water resources bureau before 
accessing water resources. 
Provisions to combat soil erosion and land degradation 
in construction and agriculture.  
Regulations for Water Extraction Permitting 
and Collection of Water Resource Fees (2017, 
amended) 
Soil 
Water and Soil Conservation Law (2010, 
amended 2011) 
Air 
Air Pollution Prevention and Control Law (2018, 
amended) 
Emission Standards for Odor Pollutants (GB 
14554-1993) 
Integrated Emission Standard for Air Pollutants 
(GB 16297-1996) 
Technical Guidelines for Fugitive Emission 
Monitoring of Air Pollutants (HJ/T 55-2000) 
Ambient Air Quality Standard (GB3095-2012)  Standards for ambient air quality of an area (urban, rural, 
industrial) 
Limits for air pollutants emission from enterprises and 
activities. 
Guidance on how to predict and measure air pollutants 
for the EIAs. 
Enabling legislation for rules and regulations preventing 
air pollution. 
Limits for odors from enterprises and activities. 
Solid Waste 
Solid Waste Pollution Prevention and Control 
Law (2016, amended) 
Classification and Assessment Standards for 
Municipal Solid Waste (CJJ/T 102-2004) 
Flora, Fauna, and Cultural Resources 
Wild Animal Protection Law (2018, amended)  Protection of listed fauna and flora. Subprojects must 
ensure they do not threaten any animals on the lists. 
Procedures to record, protect any relics found during 
construction. 
Requirements for solid waste handling and disposal. To 
be used for management measures in subprojects. 
Solid waste quality and contamination limits for a range 
of permissible disposal options. 
Cultural Relics Protection Law, 2011 
Social Development/Safeguards 
Law on Protection of the Rights and Interests of 
Women (2018, amended) 
Decree 431– Regulation on Letters and Visits 
(2005); Decree 34 – Measures on 
Environmental Letters and Visits (2006) 
Protection of employment, welfare, occupational health, 
and workplace equality of women; equal rights for 
allocation of farmland and approval of housing sites in 
rural areas. These rights endure after marriage or 
divorce. 
Codifies a complaint acceptance mechanism at all levels 
of government and protects the complainants from 
retaliation. 
Appendix 4 
163 
Laws, Regulations, and Standards 
Land 
Land Contract Law for Rural Areas (2019, 
amended) 
Law on Arbitration and Dispute over 
Management of Contracted Rural Land (2009) 
Administration Methods on Rural Land Use 
Rights Transfer, Ministry of Agriculture, 2005 
Arbitration Rules of Disputes over Management 
of Contracted Rural Land, Ministry of 
Agriculture and State Forestry Administration, 
2010 
Provincial, county, and local land use plans 
Relevance to Project 
Legislative requirements covering all land contract 
signing. 
Enabling law setting up an arbitration system for 
disputes in land transfers. 
Land use right transfers to follow this guideline. 
Provides rules and procedures for resolving disputes in 
cases of land use right transfer. 
Plans to be consulted to ensure that proposed 
subprojects are not prohibited or constrained in the site 
locality and do not cause land use conflicts with 
adjoining uses. 
EIA = environmental  impact assessment. 
Table ESMS-A1.2: Environmental Impact Assessment Requirements in the People’s Republic of China  
Type of Subproject 
Environmental  Impact 
Assessment  Report 
Agricultural  reclamation  Not applicable  (N/A) 
Environmental  Impact 
Table 
Affecting an environmentally 
sensitive  area 
Environmental  Impact 
Registration  Form 
Others 
Agricultural  base  project 
(including  medicinal 
herb base) 
Economic forest base 
project 
N/A 
N/A 
Affecting an environmentally 
sensitive  area 
Others 
Involving raw material forest  Others 
Park development 
Tourism development 
Very large-scale  and  large-
scale theme park 
Construction  of cable car or 
cableway in environmentally 
sensitive  area; maritime 
entertainment,  sports,  and 
landscape  exploitation.   
Others 
Others 
City park and  botanic garden 
N/A 
Source:  Directory  for  the  Management  of  Different  Categories  of  Construction  Project  Environmental  Impact 
Assessment  (2018).   
Table ESMS-A1.3: Risk Thresholds for the Different Categories of Environmental Impact 
Assessment in the People’s Republic of China 
Project Type 
EIA Report 
(approximately equivalent to 
ADB’s Environment Category A) 
EIA Form 
(approximately 
equivalent to 
ADB’s 
Environment 
Category B) 
No EIA 
(approximately 
equivalent to 
ADB’s 
Environment 
Category C) 
Sensitive Areaa 
Pharmaceutical 
All activities 
Biochemicals/ 
chemicals 
Only formulate  N/A 
Herb processing  Has extraction process 
N/A 
Medi material 
Textile and garment 
Has dyeing, finishing, scouring, 
un-gluing, or silk reeling processes 
Has wet printing or dyeing, or 
washing processes 
Fabric 
manufacture 
Garment 
manufacture 
Not applicable 
(N/A) 
All 
Others 
All 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Others 
Knitting, weaving   
Others 
New factory >1 
million piece/year 
164          Appendix  4 
Project Type 
Number of farm 
livestockb 
Livestock farms 
Slaughtering 
EIA Report 
(approximately equivalent to 
ADB’s Environment Category A) 
Husbandry 
>3,000 pigs; or >600 beef 
cattle, >500 cows; or >5,000 
sheep; or >100,000 poultry; or in 
sensitive areas 
>5,000 pigs or equivalent, or in 
sensitive areas 
Agroprocessing 
>100,000 pigs/year, >10000 
cattle, >150,000 sheep, or >10 
million poultry 
Hide processing  Tanning, curing 
Dairy 
Vegetable oil 
production 
Other agro-
production 
Juice, etc. 
production 
Garment 
Processing >200,000 tons/year 
(about 700 tons/day) 
>300,000 tons/year press 
or >100,000 tons/year refinery 
Monosodium glutamate, lemon 
acids, starch, lysine 
Extract raw juice from fruits and 
vegetable 
dyeing, wet printing, rinsing 
Grain, folder 
processing 
>250,000 tons/year or has 
fermentation 
Water and sanitation 
Industrial WWTP All new or expansion of 
centralized industrial wastewater 
treatment 
EIA Form 
(approximately 
equivalent to 
ADB’s 
Environment 
Category B) 
No EIA 
(approximately 
equivalent to 
ADB’s 
Environment 
Category C) 
Others 
N/A 
Sensitive Areaa 
(1), (3), or 
eutrophicated 
waters under (2) 
NA 
<5,000 pigs 
As above 
Others 
N/A 
Others 
Others 
N/A 
N/A 
Others 
Mix and bottling 
others 
Mix and bottling 
Others 
>1 million 
pieces/year 
Others 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Others 
N/A 
Sewage WWTP  All new or expansion to and above 
100,000 m3/day 
Energy sector 
Others 
N/A 
Thermal power  All including CHP except gas-fired  gas-fired 
From garbage and sludge 
Biomass CHP 
Installed capacity >1 megawatt, 
Hydropower 
pumped storage, involve sensitive 
areas 
Coal/oil-fired >65 steam tons/hour  others 
others 
others 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
(1), (2) 
Heat only 
ADB = Asian  Development  Bank,  CHP = combined  heat  and  power,  EIA  = environmental  impact  assessment, m3  = 
cubic meter,  N/A = not applicable,  WWTP = wastewater treatment  plant. 
a  Sensitive areas  include  (i) natural  reserve, scenic area,  world natural  and  cultural  heritage  sites, and  drinking  water 
protection zone; (ii) basic farmland,  basic grassland, forest park, geo-park, key wetland, natural forest, natural habitats 
for  rare  and  endangered  wild  species, natural  spawning,  feeding,  wintering  and  migrating  ground  for  key aquatic 
species, natural  fishing ground, water scarcity area, key area to control water and soil erosion, closure area to combat 
desertification,  closed  or semi-closed  sea area,  and  eutrophication  waters;  and  (iii)  area  dominated  by residential, 
office,  educational,  academic,  and  health  facilities  or  functions,  designated  cultural  relics,  or  protected  area  with 
special historical, cultural,  scientific, and ethnic significance.   
N/A 
b  If  the  current  thresholds  are  considered  by  the  executing  agency  and  ADB  to  be  inadequate  for  the  project 
categorization  purposes,  this will  be discussed; and  the  environmental  and  social management  system procedures 
will be modified,  as needed. 
Source: ADB. 
Appendix 4 
165 
ESMS-APPENDIX  2: ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK’S LIST OF PROHIBITED 
INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES 
The use of Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB) funds  is strictly prohibited  for the following  activities 
(ADB Safeguard  Policy Statement, 2009): 
1.  Production  or activities involving harmful or exploitative  forms of forced labor1 or child labor.2 
2.  Production  of  or  trade  in  any  product  or  activity  deemed  illegal  under  host  country  laws  or 
regulations or international  conventions  and agreements or subject to international  phase-outs or 
bans, such as (i) pharmaceuticals,3  pesticides, and herbicides;4 (ii) ozone-depleting  substances;5 
(iii)  polychlorinated  biphenyls6  and  other  hazardous  chemicals;7  (iv)  wildlife  or  wildlife  products 
regulated under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora;8 and (v) transboundary  trade in waste or waste products.9 
3.  Production  of or trade in weapons and munitions, including  paramilitary  materials. 
4.  Production  of or trade in alcoholic beverages,  excluding beer and wine.10 
5.  Production  of or trade in tobacco. 
6.  Gambling,  casinos, and equivalent enterprises. 
7.  Production  of  or  trade  in  radioactive  materials,  including  nuclear  reactors  and  components 
thereof. 11 
8.  Production  of,  trade  in,  or  use  of  unbonded  asbestos  fibers.12  Note:  See  project-specific 
assurance (Section VII of the environmental and social management  system) for use of asbestos.   
9.  Commercial  logging  operations  or  the  purchase  of  logging  equipment  for  use  in  primary 
tropical moist forests or old-growth forests. 
10.  Marine  and  coastal  fishing  practices,  such  as  large-scale  pelagic  drift  net  fishing  and  fine 
mesh net fishing, harmful to vulnerable  and protected species  in large numbers  and damaging to 
marine biodiversity  and habitats. 
1  All work or services not voluntarily performed, i.e., extracted from individuals  under threat of force or penalty. 
2  Employment  of  children  whose  age  is  below  the  host  country’s  statutory  minimum  age  of employment,  or  in 
contravention  of the International  Labor  Organization  Convention  No.  138 “Minimum Age Convention” (www.ilo.org). 
3  A list of pharmaceutical products subject  to phaseouts  or bans  is available at http://www.who.int. 
4  A list of pesticides  and herbicides  subject  to phaseouts  or bans  is available  at http://www.pic.int. 
5  A list  of the  chemical compounds  that react  with and  deplete  stratospheric  ozone,  resulting  in the  widely  publicized 
ozone  holes,  is  listed  in  the  Montreal  Protocol,  together  with  target  reduction  and  phaseout  dates.  Information  is 
available  at http://www.unep.org/ozone/montreal.shtml. 
6  A  group  of highly  toxic  chemicals. Likely  to  be  found  in  oil-filled  electrical  transformers, capacitors,  and  switchgear 
dating  from 1950 to 1985. 
7  A list of hazardous  chemicals is available  at http://www.pic.int. 
8  A list  is available  at http://www.cites.org. 
9  As defined by the Basel  Convention; see http://www.basel.int. 
10Does not apply to  project sponsors  who  are  not  “ substantially  involved” in these activities, i.e., the activity concerned 
is ancillary to a project sponsor's  primary operations. 
11Does  not  apply  to the purchase of medical equipment, quality control (measurement) equipment,  and  any equipment 
for which ADB considers the radioactive source to be trivial and adequately  shielded. 
12Does not apply to purchase  and use of bonded asbestos  cement sheeting  where the asbestos  content is <20%. 
166          Appendix  4 
ESMS-APPENDIX  3: WORKBOOK  FOR SCREENING  AND CATEGORIZING  ACTIVITIES TO 
BE FINANCED FROM ECO-COMPENSATION  FUND 
This  workbook  comprises  one  summary  information  sheet  and  five  technical  worksheets  for 
environmental  and social  screening.  The  summary  worksheet  is to  be filled out  by the applicant 
for  the  use  of  the  eco-compensation  fund. The  technical  worksheets  are  to  be  filled  out  by  the 
environment  and  social  officers  of  the  project  management  office  and  staff  of  the  eco-
compensation  fund management  committee  (EFMC) in consultation  with the applicant. 
The workbook can be printed out and carried into the field by the environment  and social officers 
of  the project  management  office  and  staff of  the  EFMC,  for  site  assessments  and  discussions 
with applicants. The workbook is retained by the EFMC in their records for each application. 
Each  activity  to  be financed  from  the eco-compensation  fund  should  be  recorded  in a separate 
workbook.  Complete the details below. 
SUMMARY  INFORMATION  SHEET 
 {Applicable only if the applicant produces something} 
{Applicable for private companies only} 
PART 1 – To be filled in by applicant  for the use of the eco-compensation  fund 
BASIC INFORMATION 
Name of applicant: 
Year started/registered: 
Location/full address: 
Nature and scope of business: (e.g., 
sales, production, research, and 
development) 
Designed production capacity:  
(Per year and/or per day. If not applicable, 
explain here) 
Actual production capacity or scale: 
(Per year and/or per day. If any difference 
with the designed capacity, explain here) 
Main production process(es): 
(Provide simple flowchart to show main 
input of materials, water, energy [heat, 
steam, or fuels], output of intermediate and 
final products, and wastes [gaseous, liquid, 
or solid]) 
Main product(s): 
Briefly describe name, main usage, 
chemical, or biochemical composition 
{Applicable only if the applicant produces something} 
{Applicable only if the applicant produces something} 
{Applicable only if the applicant produces something} 
Male  
Female   
Total 
Profile of employees  
Other information 
(Provide any other information as relevant) 
PROPOSED APPLICATION 
Location of proposed activity: 
(Include: site name and full address; village; 
county; geographic coordinates of site) 
Amount of fund requested (CNY): 
Intended use of the fund: 
Area of production base (mu): 
(Write “not applicable” if the application 
does not involve a specific area of land) 
Designed (production) capacity:  
(Per year and/or per day. If not applicable, 
explain here) 
Technical process(es): 
(If applicable, provide simple flowchart to 
show main input of materials, water, energy 
[heat, steam, or fuels], output of 
intermediate and final products.) 
Main product(s) of sale or research and 
development: 
(Briefly describe name, main usage, 
chemical or biochemical composition) 
List the types of wastes the activity will 
generate, as relevant: 
(Estimate the amounts per year or per day 
if possible). 
Planned method of waste management 
and disposal 
Number of beneficiaries: 
Appendix 4 
167 
{Not applicable if the fund is not used to produce anything} 
{Not applicable if the fund is not used to produce anything} 
{Not applicable if the fund is not used to produce anything} 
{Not applicable if the fund is not used to produce anything} 
Gaseous emissions 
Wastewater 
Solid waste 
Hazardous waste 
Noise 
Gaseous emissions 
Wastewater 
Solid waste 
Hazardous waste 
Farmer households 
Farmers 
Poverty households 
Poverty people 
Ethnic minority households 
Ethnic minority people 
Names of ethnic minority groups   
Women 
Other relevant information  
(Provide any other information as relevant) 
Name and Signature of Fund Applicant:                                                                                      
Date:  
PART 2 – To be filled in by the Eco-Compensation  Fund Management  Committee 
Existing Business and Facilities (if applicable) of the Applicant 
Is the existing business and facilities of the applicant 
involved in activities and/or sectors which are prohibited, 
phased out, or discouraged by national, provincial, or local 
policy? 
Is the existing business and facilities of the applicant 
involved in activities and/or sectors which are prohibited, 
phased out, or discouraged according to the EFMC 
internal criteria? 
What environmental clearances or permits does the 
applicant have for the existing business and facilities (e.g., 
environmental impact assessments)? When were they 
obtained?  
Validity period and the issuing authority of environment 
related clearance, approval, and permits 
Validity Period:  
Authority:  
168          Appendix  4 
Activity for which financing is Requested 
What environmental clearance and permits are required 
domestically?  
Status of such clearance /permit: 
If received, provide validity and issuing authority 
What environmental documents were prepared for 
domestic clearance? Has the EFMC received a copy? 
Other relevant information 
Not started yet          In process      Received 
Validity period:  
Authority:  
Name and Signature of the EFMC staff and/or the PMO environment or social officer  
Date:  
EFMC = eco-compensation  fund  management  committee,  PMO = project management  office. 
Appendix 4 
169 
WORKSHEET 1: Rapid Environmental  Assessment  Checklist 
Answer the first question  (“Will it happen?”) assuming  that no mitigation  measures will 
1. 
be conducted.  The purpose is to identify potential impacts. 
If the answer is “Yes” then fill out the next two columns, “is it irreversible?”  and “can it be 
2. 
minimized?” 
3. 
If the answer is “No” then place a “C” in the final column.  
The first three columns (“Will it happen?”, “Is it irreversible?”,  “Can it be minimized?”) 
4. 
should be filled out by discussions  with the applicant  and a site inspection. 
The final column  refers to the ADB categories  “A”, “B”, or “C” for environmental  impacts. 
5. 
They are defined  below. Use these definitions  to decide on the category. 
Category  A. Activities  likely  to  have  significant  adverse  environmental  impacts  that  are 
irreversible,  diverse,  or  unprecedented.  Impacts  may  extend  beyond  the  sites  for  the  activities. 
Environmental  impact  assessment,  including  environmental  management  plan  is  required. 
Examples: conversion  of wetlands; activities in or next to protected areas; large-scale pollution of 
water resources. 
Category B. Potential adverse environmental impacts are site-specific, few if any are irreversible. 
In most cases, mitigation  measures  can be designed  more readily than for Category A activities. 
Initial  environmental  examination,  including  environmental  management  plan,  is  required. 
Examples:  crop  farming  on  land  already  used  for  the  same  crop  type;  farming  which  does  not 
result in increased  pressure on water resources. 
Category C. Activities likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts. Environmental 
impact assessment  or initial environmental  examination  not required.  Environmental  implications 
need  to  be  reviewed.  Examples:  construction  of  small  offices,  financing,  training,  or  planning 
activities. 
If YES 
Will it 
happen? 
Y/N 
Is it 
irreversible? 
Y/N 
Can it be 
minimized? 
Y/N 
ADB 
Category 
Screening and Impact Questions 
Siting 
Is the activity in or next to (i) a cultural heritage site, (ii) 
a protected area, (iii) wetland, or (iv) special area for 
protecting biodiversity? 
If “nearby” any of these sites, state the distance (km) to 
the site boundary 
Is siting of the activity likely to be affected by climate 
conditions, including extreme weather-related events 
such as floods, droughts, storms, landslides?  
Potential Environmental Impacts 
Will the activity cause… 
•  Damage to historical and/or cultural areas or physical 
cultural resources? 
•  disturbance to precious ecology (e.g., sensitive, or 
protected areas)? 
If YES 
Will it 
happen? 
Y/N 
Is it 
irreversible? 
Y/N 
Can it be 
minimized? 
Y/N 
ADB 
Category 
170          Appendix  4 
Screening and Impact Questions 
•  alteration of surface water hydrology of waterways 
resulting in increased sediment in streams affected 
by increased soil erosion at construction site? 
•  deterioration of surface water quality due to silt runoff 
and sanitary wastes from worker-based camps and 
chemicals used in construction? 
•  increased air pollution due to project construction and 
operation? 
•  noise and vibration due to project construction or 
operation? 
•  generation of solid waste and/or hazardous waste? 
•  use of chemicals? 
•  generation of wastewater during construction or 
operation? 
In land leveling and other earthworks as necessary, will 
there be 
•  construction dust and erosion?  
•  loss of micro-habitat for local biodiversity? 
•  changes to local drainage? 
In the upgrade or establishment of irrigation system, 
including wells, canals, pipes, and installation of quota 
irrigation systems; will there be 
•  unsustainable use of local water resources? 
•  water use conflicts? 
•  cumulative impacts on limited water resources? 
For construction of livestock pens and other livestock 
structures, will there be problems with 
•  location (too close to residences and/or waterways)? 
•  construction impacts – dust, noise? 
•  operational impacts – noise, odor 
In electricity use for machinery, greenhouses, pumps, 
ventilation; will there be 
•  GHG emissions from electricity use? 
•  GHG emissions and flue gas emissions from on-site 
electricity generator? 
In the establishment of on-site wells to process water 
and drinking water, will there be 
•  unsustainable use of local water resources? 
•  water use conflicts? 
•  cumulative impacts on limited water resources? 
For handling, transport, and storage of materials and 
inputs of seeds, seedlings, fertilizers, and chemicals; 
will there be 
•  application of chemicals and fertilizer not carefully 
managed - increased volumes enter soil and water? 
•  noise, dust, pollution from haulage, handling, and 
storage of materials? 
•  extensive residue of plastic mulch material in soil and 
water? 
Appendix 4 
171 
If YES 
Will it 
happen? 
Y/N 
Is it 
irreversible? 
Y/N 
Can it be 
minimized? 
Y/N 
ADB 
Category 
Screening and Impact Questions 
•  loss of crop diversity and self-sustaining household 
plots? 
In the collection, treatment, disposal, and/or reuse 
processes built as part of the facilities; will there be 
•  pollution of land and rivers from wastewater disposal 
or via land application as liquid fertilizer? 
ADB = Asian Development  Bank, GHG = greenhouse  gas, N = no, Y = yes. 
Source: ADB. 
Overall Conclusion  on Environment  Category (circle one): 
A 
B 
C 
Reason for conclusion: 
Notes 
172          Appendix  4 
WORKSHEETS  2 – 4: Land Acquisition,  Involuntary Resettlement,  Land Use Rights, 
Ethnic Minorities 
Does the activity to be financed form the eco-compensation  fund involve physical changes to the 
land  or  changes  to land  user  rights  (land  adjustment  within  the  group  or formal  land  use  rights 
transfer  to a third  party)?  If no, skip to Worksheets  4 and 5. If yes,  proceed  to Worksheets  2, 3, 
and 4. 
Yes    
No   
What is the current status of land ownership  and land use rights of the land to be used? 
Ownership:  state-owned  farm  ; collective  land   
User rights: enterprise ; cooperative  ; village and/or group ; or household   
WORKSHEET 2: Land Acquisition  and Involuntary  Resettlement  Checklist 
Involuntary  Resettlement  Issues from Past Acquisition  or Existing  Facilities 
Appendix 4 
173 
Involuntary Issues 
Are  there  any  involuntary resettlement issues from 
past land acquisition? 
Are  there  any  involuntary  resettlement issues from 
existing facilities? 
a  If “Yes”, such activity should  be excluded,  e.g.,  if there  are  outstanding  land  acquisition  and/or  resettlement  issues 
If “Yes”, Give Information 
Yesa 
No 
that would  present legacy issues or risks to the project.   
New Land Acquisition  under Activity to be Financed  from Eco-Compensation  Fund 
No 
If “Yes”, give number of affected 
persons and households 
Yes 
Probable Involuntary Resettlement Effects 
Will there be land acquisition for the activity?a 
Will there be loss of land use rights due to change 
in  land  use  resulting  from  the  activity  (e.g., 
expanded village road)? 
Will there  be  residential house  demolition  causing 
loss of shelter to people  due  to land acquisition or 
construction activities? 
Will there be any temporary occupation of land that 
affects  the  land,  housing,  assets,  or  livelihoods 
and/or business of people? 
Will  there  be  losses  of  crops,  trees,  graves, and 
fixed assets? 
Will  people  lose  access  to  natural  resources, 
communal facilities, and services? 
If land use is changed, will it have an adverse impact 
on social and economic activities? 
to 
Will  access 
communally or by the state be restricted? 
a  Check if there will be land acquisition per local development  planning  (especially urban development  planning). 
resources  owned 
land  and 
Overall Conclusion  on Involuntary Resettlement  Category (circle one): 
A 
B 
C 
Note: An activity to be approved for Output 3 should be category C and any due diligence for prior land 
acquisition should confirm there are no remaining issues. 
Reason for conclusion: 
Notes: 
174          Appendix  4 
WORKSHEET 3: Land Use Rights Transfer Impact Checklist 
Will  the  activity  to  be  financed  from  the  eco-compensation  fund  require  land  use  rights  transfer 
(LURT) or is there a pre-existing LURT agreement?  If yes, complete the forms below.  If no, leave 
the forms blank. 
Types of 
Activitya 
Cooperatives 
Involved 
Enterprises 
Involved 
Production Bases 
Involved 
HHs 
Involved 
Farmland Area 
(mu) 
Total 
HH = household. 
a Cropping, animal  processing, etc.  
Land Use Rights Transfer Agreement 
Yes  No 
If No, Explain 
New LURT Agreement  
Has the agreement been prepared in accordance 
with the LURT Framework in ESMS-Appendix 5? 
Has third party due diligence been conducted? If 
yes, give results. 
Has the agreement been endorsed by the 
Township Agriculture Station or higher authority? 
Has the agreement been signed by all affected 
households? 
Has the agreement been signed by at least 70% of 
spouses? 
If No, Explain 
Yes  No 
Pre-Existing LURT Agreement 
Was the agreement prepared in accordance with 
the LURT Framework in ESMS-Appendix 5? 
Has third party due diligence been conducted?  If 
yes, give results. 
Was the agreement endorsed by the Township 
Agriculture Station or higher authority? 
Has the agreement been signed by all affected 
households? 
Has the agreement been signed by at least 70% of 
spouses? 
Are there any outstanding issues?  If yes, give 
details. 
ESMS = environmental  and social management  system, LURT = land use right transfer. 
Appendix 4 
175 
Overall Conclusion  on the Land Use Rights Transfer Agreement 
Agreement  is in place and acceptable  (in accordance  with the LURT Framework)   
Agreement  requires further due diligence   
Agreement  requires resolution  of outstanding  issues   
Agreement  is not acceptable (not in accordance  with the LURT Framework)    
Reason for conclusion: 
Notes: 
176          Appendix  4 
WORKSHEET 4: Ethnic Minorities Impact Checklist 
Will  the  activity  to  be  financed  from  the  eco-compensation  fund  involve  any  ethnic  minority 
communities? If yes, complete the forms below. If no, leave the forms blank. 
Name of ethnic minority:  
Include  consideration  of  (i) magnitude  of impact  (including  customary  rights  for  use  and  access 
to  land  and/or  resources,  socioeconomic  status,  cultural  and  communal  integrity,  health, 
education,  livelihoods, social security, indigenous  knowledge); (ii) the vulnerability  of the affected 
community. 
Ethnic Minority Issues  from Past Activity or Existing  Facilities 
Involuntary Issues 
Are  there  any  ethnic  minority  issues  from  past 
activities? 
Are  there any  ethnic minority issues from existing 
facilities? 
*If “Yes”, such  activity should  be excluded, e.g.,  if there are outstanding  ethnic minority  community-related  issues that 
would present legacy issues or risks to the project.  
If “Yes”, Give Information 
Yes* 
No 
New Impacts to Ethnic Minority Community  under Activity to be Financed  from 
Eco-Compensation  Fund 
Yes/
No 
If Yes, Give Information about 
Affected Ethnic Minority Community 
Potential Impacts to Ethnic Minorities 
Will the activity directly or indirectly benefit or target the 
EM community? 
Will the activity affect the livelihood systems of the EM 
community? (e.g., food production, natural resources 
management, crafts, trade, employment) 
Is there commercial development of the cultural 
resources and knowledge of the EM? 
Is there commercial development of natural resources 
(e.g., forests, river, reservoir) in customary lands under 
use that would impact the livelihoods or cultural, 
ceremonial, and/or spiritual uses by the EMs? 
Will the activity involve a pre-existing or new land use 
rights transfer agreement that are owned by the EM 
communities? 
No. of EM 
Communities 
EM 
Population 
Beneficial and/or Adverse Impacts 
No. of 
Villages 
Proposed Activities 
1.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
EM = ethnic minority,  No. = number. 
Appendix 4 
177 
Overall Conclusion  on Indigenous Peoples  Category (circle one): 
A 
B 
C  
Note:  The  overall  project  should  be  categorized  based  on  due  diligence  during  the  project 
preparation. Category A activities are not expected. Only Category B or C activities are expected. 
Reason for conclusion: 
Notes: 
178          Appendix  4 
WORKSHEET 5: Types of Activities  Eco-compensation  Fund Aims to Support 
This  worksheet  aims  to  improve  the  technical  design  and  operation  of  activities  to  be  financed 
from  the  eco-compensation  fund.  The  eco-compensation  fund  management  committee  will 
the  following  activities:  (i)  wastewater  management,  solid  waste 
encourage  and  favor 
management,  activities  for  pilot  eco-villages,  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  constructed 
wetlands,  compensation  for  farmland-to-forest  conversion,  and  promotion  of  low-emission 
agriculture  under  Output  1 of the  project;  (ii) operation  of the  river protection  model  established 
under  Output  2  of  the  project;  (iii)  implementation  of  the  horizontal  eco-compensation 
mechanisms  under Output 3 of the project; and (iv) management  of the eco-compensation  fund.  
Use the worksheet  to identify which features below are most suitable for the activities. Instruct the 
applicant  to  work  with  personnel  of  the  eco-compensation  fund  management  committee  and 
environment  and social  officers  of the project  management  office  to include  these  as relevant  in 
the design of the activities. 
Type of Activities 
Output 1: Water pollution sources  in the Sayu River Basin reduced 
Wastewater  management 
Solid  waste management 
-  O&M of wastewater  treatment plant  and facilities  constructed  under the project 
-  Garbage  collection and O&M of garbage  pyrolysis facilities  constructed under  the 
Details 
Activities for pilot  eco-
villages 
O&M of constructed 
wetlands 
Compensation  for farmland-
to-forest conversion 
Promotion  of low-emission 
agriculture 
- 
- 
- 
- 
project 
Payments to designated  cleaning  teams and designated  environmental  supervision 
groups 
Educational  subsidies  to help outstanding  students  effectively continue  their studies 
and provide  rewards to outstanding  middle  school students  to help them attend 
high-quality  schools 
Training  on garbage  classification,  recycling, reduction  of resource use  and waste 
stream 
Education  at schools  to promote garbage  classification,  recycling, reduction  of 
resource  use and waste stream 
-  O&M of artificial wetlands  constructed  under  the project 
-  Compensation  for farmland-to-ecological  forest conversion  and compensation  for 
- 
- 
farmland-to-perennial  herb area conversion 
Training  and  education  of famers for reduction  of fertilizer and pesticide 
Subsidies  to farmers to offset costs  of more expensive high-efficiency and 
environment-friendly  fertilizers 
-  Demonstration  of special  and slow-release  fertilizers 
- 
Experimental  tests  of disease-resilient  crops; non-chemical physical pest  control 
measures;  new low-toxicity organic  pesticides;  and biological  control measures, 
including  subsidies  to farmers who allow  some portion  of their  fields to serve  as the 
experimental  sites 
Experimental  cropping to demonstrate  a better  use of climatic, soil,  and light 
conductions  to reduce fertilizer  and improve crop resiliency to pest outbreaks  and 
extreme climate conditions   
- 
- 
Output 2: Water resources in the Sayu River Basin protected  from pollution 
Operation  of the river 
protection  model 
Output 3: Eco-compensation  mechanism  for the Sayu River Basin established 
Implementation  of the 
horizontal  eco-
compensation  mechanisms 
Payments to river wardens  to patrol  rivers  
-  Water quality  monitoring  at three water quality monitoring  stations  constructed 
under  Output 2 of the project to judge  whether (or not) the water quality  targets  set 
in the agreements  were achieved 
-  Rewards based  on achieved water quality 
Management  of the eco-compensation  fund 
Management  of eco-
compensation  fund 
O&M = operation  and maintenance,  YWPCO = Yudong  Reservoir Water Resources  Protection  Committee Office. 
Payments to the YWPCO to support  its management  of the  eco-compensation  fund 
- 
Appendix 4 
179 
ESMS-APPENDIX  4: ENVIRONMENTAL  SITE INSPECTION CHECKLIST 
Note: This  form is designed  for use by the environment  officer  of the project management  office 
and staff of the eco-compensation  fund management  committee during site inspections and may 
not  be  exhaustive.  Modifications  and  additions  may  be  necessary  to  suit  individual  subproject 
activities and to address  any specific  environmental  issues. 
Location:   
_____________________________________________ 
Inspection  Date:  _____________________________________________ 
Inspection  Time:  _____________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________ 
Inspection  by: 
Remarks 
(i.e., problem observed, possible cause 
of problem, and/or proposed corrective 
and/or preventative actions) 
Yes  No  N/A 
 (i) 
 (ii) 
 (iii) 
 (iv) 
2. 
Inspection Item 
1.  Has contractor appointed a construction 
supervisor and is the supervisor on-site? 
Is information pertaining to construction 
disclosed at construction site (construction 
period, contractor information, etc.)? 
3.  Are chemicals and/or hazardous products 
and waste stored on impermeable 
surfaces in secure, covered areas? 
Is there evidence of oil spillage?  
4. 
5.  Are chemicals stored and labeled 
6. 
7. 
properly? 
Is construction equipment well 
maintained? (any black smoke observed) 
Is there evidence of excessive dust 
generation?   
8.  Are there enclosures around the main 
dust-generating activities?  
9.  Does contractor regularly consult with 
residents to identify concerns? 
10.  Is there evidence of excessive noise? If 
yes, describe location and equipment.  
11.  Any noise mitigation measures adopted 
(e.g., use noise barrier and/or enclosure)? 
12.  Is construction wastewater and domestic 
wastewater discharged to sewer systems 
(if possible), or are on-site treatment 
facilities (e.g., septic tank, portable latrine) 
provided? 
13.  Is there any wastewater discharged to soil 
or surface water?  
14.  Is the site kept clean and tidy? (e.g., litter 
free, good housekeeping) 
15.  Are separated labeled containers and/or 
areas provided for facilitating recycling and 
waste segregation? 
Remarks 
(i.e., problem observed, possible cause 
of problem, and/or proposed corrective 
and/or preventative actions) 
Yes  No  N/A 
 (v) 
 (vi) 
 (vii) 
 (viii) 
 (ix) 
180          Appendix  4 
Inspection Item 
16.  Are construction wastes and/or recyclable 
wastes and general refuse removed off 
site regularly? 
17.  Have hazardous wastes been identified 
(such as asbestos, polychlorinated 
biphenyl)?  
18.  Is safe supply of clean water and an 
adequate number of latrines provided for 
workers? 
19.  Is personal protection equipment provided 
for workers? 
20.  Are clear information and warning signs 
placed at construction sites? 
21.  Are construction sites secure to 
discourage access? 
22.  Are fire extinguishers and/or fighting 
facilities properly maintained and not 
expired? Escape not blocked and/or 
obstructed? 
23.  Is there any evidence of damage to 
vegetation, habitats, or streams? 
24.  Are disturbed areas properly re-vegetated 
after completion of works? 
25.  Any other problems identified or 
observations made? 
N/A = not applicable. 
_______________________________________ 
Date / Name and Signature 
Appendix 4 
181 
ESMS-APPENDIX  5:  LAND USE RIGHTS TRANSFER FRAMEWORK 
A. 
Main Principles 
This land  use rights  transfer  (LURT) framework  aims  to help the  eco-compensation  fund 
1. 
management  committee  implement  the  eco-compensation  fund  and  qualified  grantees  to 
mitigate,  monitor,  and  report  potential  negative  impacts  caused  by  the  LURT.  The  LURT 
framework  guiding principles are below. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Equality, voluntary, legal procedure, and fair compensation. Equality means both of parties 
have  equal  legal  status.  Voluntary  means  the  transfer  of  land  contracting  management 
right must be completely  voluntary  for both parties,  and one party shall not force  another 
party to transfer or accept transfer of land. Legal procedure means that the LURT must be 
concluded  per  legal  procedure  with  legal  agreement.  Fair  compensation  means  the 
transferred  land shall be compensated  at negotiated  market price.   
Unchanged  ownership  and  agricultural  use  of  transferred  land.  The  LURT  means 
transferring  use  right,  not  ownership;  and  therefore,  ownership  of  transferred  land  shall 
remain  unchanged.  Yet, future users  of transferred  land shall not change  the agricultural 
land use nature,  i.e., shall not convert transferred land for non-agricultural  uses. 
Priority  to  fellow-community  members.  Under  the  same  conditions,  priority  shall  be 
given to members of the collective economic  organization  (community) to obtain land use 
rights through transfer. 
Government’s  direction  and  administration.  Department  of  agriculture  of  county 
government  shall direct and administrate  legal transfer of rural land. 
Conflict  resolution  through  grievance  redress  mechanism.  The  grievance  redress 
system  of  the  city,  district,  and/or  county  in  the  project  area  shall  be  used  to  resolute 
complaints  and conflicts,  if any. 
B. 
Legal Framework 
2. 
All  subprojects  must  comply  with  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  (PRC)  Rural  Land 
Contract  Law  and Rural  Land Management  Right Transfer  Management  Method,  other relevant 
policies of the  Province and local governments,  and the Asian Development  Bank’s (ADB) good 
practice on voluntary land use agreements.  Key laws and policies are as follows. 
(i) 
(ii) 
Law of the PRC on Land Contract in Rural Areas – no change of collective ownership and 
no change of agricultural  land use (not allowed to convert farmland into construction  land 
for establishment  of permanent  structures). 
Administration  Methods  on Rural Land Use Rights Transfer,  Ministry of Agriculture  of the 
PRC  and  relevant  regulations  of the  Yunnan  Province  and Project  district  and/or  county 
governments – the LURT duration without the land contract period, negotiated settlements 
between  transferor  and  transferee,  the  LURT  transfer  per  legal  procedures,  standard 
contract  with  endorsement  by  a  third  party  if  transferor  and  transferee  feel  necessary, 
official  registration  and  documentation  for  LURT;  and  if  necessary,  endorsement  of  the 
contracts by the township  agricultural  station. 
182          Appendix  4 
(iii) 
(iv) 
The  PRC’s  Law  on  the  Mediation  and  Arbitration  of  Rural  Land  Contract  Disputes,  and 
relevant  implementation  methods  of Yunnan  provincial  and  Project district  and/or  county 
governments  –  mediation  and  arbitration  of disputes  per  a bottom-up  grievance  redress 
mechanism  (GRM). 
ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009)  –  requirements  on  involuntary  resettlement 
does  not  apply  to  the  LURT.  The  good  practice  on  voluntary  agreements  include 
meaningful  consultations,  negotiated  agreements,  establishment  and  functioning  of  a 
GRM, record-keeping,  and external monitoring. 
In addition, the best practices in the project area also have good applications for the LURT 
3. 
under the project. Such practices include  
(i) 
(ii) 
the LURT period of 5–10 years, within the land contraction  period (1998–2028); 
the LURT  rate  (or land  rental rate)  calculated  in  equivalent  output  value  of grain  (wheat, 
rice), and this protects transferees  from price fluctuations;  and 
(iii) 
endorsement  of the LURT contract by the township  agricultural station. 
C. 
Legal Procedures  of Land Use Rights Transfer 
4. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Legal procedures  are as follows (also the following  chart): 
Information  collection.  Farmers  with intention  to transfer land present  the details of the 
land, like  location,  area, usage,  and reference  price to village  committee,  which  will then 
report  to  the  township  agricultural  station.  They  can  also  entrust  the  contracted  or 
intermediary  organizations  to  transfer  their  land;  and the  letter  of attorney  will be  issued 
by  land  transferee,  illustrating  the  entrusted  matters,  authority,  and  deadlines,  etc.,  with 
the signature of the principal. 
Information  disclosure.  Township  agricultural  station,  after collecting  data, will  sort out 
information  about  the  LURT  of  different  villages  and  establish  a  database.  The  sorted 
information  will  be  disclosed  timely  by  means  of  network,  radio,  newspapers,  board, 
electronic  display,  etc.  The  township  agricultural  station  will  also  report  to  the  county 
(district) agriculture  bureau for updating the LURT databases. 
Negotiation  between  transferor  and  transferee.  With  the  arrangement  of  township 
agricultural  station,  both  sides  negotiate  about  the  LURT  conditions  and  price  based  on 
the principle of equality,  voluntariness,  and mutual  benefiting. 
Signing  the  land  use  right  transfer  contract.  When  both  parties  agree  on  conditions 
and  price,  township  agricultural  station  provides  4–5  copies  of  a  standard  contract  (the 
fifth  copy  for  endorsement,  if  needed),  for  both  parties  to  sign.  Township  agricultural 
station also endorses the contract. 
(v) 
Endorsing  the  land  use  right  transfer  contract.  The  township  agricultural  station 
endorses the contract. 
Appendix 4 
183 
(vi) 
Registration  for the land use right transfer.  Township  agricultural  station  registers the 
LURT  information  timely  and  exactly  and  submits  the  relevant  materials  to  the  county 
agriculture  bureau for documentation. 
(vii)  Documentation.  County  agricultural  bureau  documents  all  relevant  materials  for  the 
LURT. 
(viii)  Supervising  contract  implementation.  Both  parties  should  perform  the  contract 
positively,  and township  agricultural  station  supervises  the contract  execution.  In case of 
conflicts  or disputes,  the township  station will  timely report  to the county  station;  and the 
latter will inform relevant  agencies synchronously. 
Land Use Rights Transfer Procedure  Chart 
D. 
Institutional Arrangement  and Responsibility 
According  to  relevant  laws  and  regulations,  county  agriculture  bureau  and  township 
5. 
agricultural  stations should manage and guide the rural LURT in their administrative  areas.  
(i) 
Responsibilities  of municipal  agriculture  bureau. (a) publicity  rural LURT policies; (b) 
direct  the  LURT  legally  and  orderly;  (c)  guide  disputes  arbitration  and  resolution;  (d) 
strengthen  and standardize  the rural LURT; and  (e) propose solutions  to problems  in the 
LURT, and develop  a new mechanism for the LURT. 
184          Appendix  4 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Responsibilities  of  county  agriculture  bureau.  (a)  direct  rural  LURT  and  contracting; 
(b)  set  up  a  service  center  for  the  LURT,  and  establish  information  network  platform  on 
line trading  and/or  open trading  of land to be transferred;  (c) accept,  manage,  and guide 
the  application  from  rural  LURT  agencies;  (d)  settle  the  disputes;  and  (e)  provide 
consultation  services for the LURT policies. 
Responsibilities  of township  agricultural  station.  (a)  information  collection,  analysis, 
and  disclosure,  the  LURT  can  be  conducted  by  county  or  township;  (b)  providing  a 
standard  contract  for parties  who  have  reached  agreements  on  contract  conditions  and 
terms,  and  assisting  them  to  sign  contract  signing;  (c)  functioning  as  a  third  party  to 
endorse  the signed  contract, if requested  by the LURT  or and transferee;  (d) formulating 
a  system  for  registering  the  rural  LURT,  and  record  the  relevant  information  timely  and 
exactly; (e) documenting  the LURT materials;  (f) investigating and rectify illegal LURT; (g) 
settling  disputes  about  rural  LURT;  (h)  guide  and  administrate  the  LURT  legally;  and  (i) 
provide consultancy  services. 
Responsibilities  of  village  committee.  (a)  information  collection  and  classification  on 
the  LURT  to  be  reported  to  township  agricultural  station;  and  (b)  assisting  township  in 
settling disputes. 
Responsibilities  of district and/or county PMO. (a) supervising contract execution; and 
(b)  participating  in  conflict  and/or  dispute  resolution  at  county  level,  if  not  resolved  at 
township level. 
E. 
Land Use Rights Transfer Contract 
6. 
The  LURT  contract  shall  include  the  following  clauses:  (a)  names  and  domiciles  of  two 
parties; (b) location, borders, area, and quality of the land for transferring;  (c) term of transfer and 
dates of beginning and completion; (d) ways of transfer; (e) usage of land; (f) rights and obligations 
of two parties;  (g) the LURT expense and method  of payment;  (h) handling of appurtenance  and 
relevant  facilities  after  expiry  of  contract;  (i)  liabilities  for  breach  of  the  contract;  (j)  method  of 
conflict resolution;  (k) other clause that both parties thought necessary; (l) stamping of endorsing 
agency; and (m) date of contract conclusion. 
Contract  used  in  the  project,  as  well  as  in  Yunnan  Province,  is  normative,  which  is 
7. 
prepared by the Yunnan Provincial  Department  of Agriculture  and Animal  Husbandry. 
F. 
8. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Measures  to Safeguard  Interests of Contract Parties 
The following measures  will be taken to safeguard  the interests of contract parties: 
In  case  of  severe  damage  of  transferred  land  due  to  natural  disasters  or  force  majeure 
during  the  contract  term,  both  parties  can  terminate  or  change  the  contract  through 
negotiation; and the land shall be returned to the original users for cultivation. When there 
are specific contract provisions  on severe damage  of land, the provisions  prevail. 
Contract  agreement  regarding  policy  subsidies  to  farmers  for  grain  production  and 
production  masteries.  
At least 70% of the land leasing contracts will be signed by both husband and wife in case 
of involving  individual households. 
Appendix 4 
185 
(iv) 
Contract endorsement  by township per request of contract  parties, free of charge. 
(v) 
(vi) 
According  to  the  PRC’s  Rural  Land  Contract  Law  and  Rural  Land  Management  Right 
Transfer  Management  Method  and  other  relevant  LURT  laws  and  regulations  of  the 
Yunnan  Province  and  districts  and/or  counties,  the  LURT  duration  shall  be  negotiated 
equally by both parties;  but within the limit of the rural land contract. 
The LURT rate will be ensured  according to land type, feasibility,  grade,  and condition of 
referential  corps;  or  even  the  price  of  LURT  in  nearby  villages.  Taking  farmer’s  interest 
into  consideration,  both  transferor  and  transferee  should  set  a  time  to  renegotiate  land 
price  in case  of  the  LURT  for over  5  years.  It is  recommended  to  adjust  the  rate  after  5 
years. 
G. 
Grievance  Redress Mechanism  for Social Safeguards 
9. 
Where  the  LURT  contract  is  based  on  negotiations  and  mutual  agreement,  complicated 
disputes are unlikely to occur. However, there might be some unexpected issues during and after 
land  being  transferred.  According  to  Law  of  the  PRC  on  the  Mediation  and Arbitration  of  Rural 
Land  Contract  Disputes,  the  project  has  set  up  a  transparent  and  efficient  grievance  redress 
procedure  to settle such disputes and defaults after the LURT. The GRM for social safeguards is 
described  in Section V of the environmental  and social management  system. 
186          Appendix  4 
ESMS-APPENDIX  6: ETHNIC  MINORITY DEVELOPMENT  PLAN (SUMMARY)1 
A. 
Introduction 
This  ethnic  minority  development  plan  (EMDP)  has been  prepared  to ensure  that  ethnic 
1. 
minority people in the project area (Hui, Miao, and Yi) are able to participate in and benefit directly 
from  the  Yunnan  Sayu  River  Basin  Rural  Water  Pollution  Management  and  Eco-compensation 
Demonstration  Project, and that any adverse impacts that might affect them are either avoided or 
mitigated. The EMDP is based on relevant laws and regulations of the People’s Republic of China 
(PRC), and in accordance with the Asian Development Bank’s (ADB) Safeguard Policy Statement 
(2009).  
The  Government  of  the  PRC  has  requested  ADB  to  provide  financial  support  for  the 
2. 
proposed project. The objective of the project is to reduce pollutant emission in the upper reaches 
of  the  Sayu  River  Basin;  and  improve  eco-environment  in  the  basin  through  collection  and 
treatment  of  rural  wastewater  and  solid  waste,  control  of  nonpoint  source  pollution  due  to 
agricultural  activities;  establishment  of  pilot  eco-villages;  and  a  long  term  eco-compensation 
mechanism;  as  well  as  enhancing  environmental  protection  education  and  raising  public 
awareness  in the  project  area.  A total  of 17  ethnic  minority  natural  villages  in  10  administrative 
villages  are  involved  in  the  project.  Two  ethnic  minority  natural  villages  are  included  in  the 
construction of pilot eco-villages: a Yi village and a Miao village. The EMDP is developed, focusing 
on the potential impact on the ethnic minority natural villages. 
B. 
Project Description   
3. 
The project has the following four major outputs  or components:  (i) Output 1: wastewater 
management  and  pollution  control  in  the  Sayu  River  Basin  strengthened,  including  (a)  waste 
management; (b) solid waste management;  (c) pilot eco-villages to reduce emission; (d) wetlands 
construction  to reduce nonpoint  source pollution;  (e) establishment  of quantifiable  soil and water 
conservation  model;  and (f) promotion  of low-emission  agriculture;  (ii) Output  2: water resources 
management  in  the Sayu  River  improved,  including  (a)  establishment  of river  protection  model; 
and  (b)  establishment  of  smart  water  integrated  management  platform;  (iii)  Output  3:  eco-
compensation  mechanism  for  the  Sayu  River  Basin  established;  and  (iv)  Output  4:  education, 
capacity, and public awareness  for water pollution  management  strengthened.   
The project will be implemented  in two towns (Dashabao  and Sayu) and three townships 
4. 
(Dazhaizi,  Leju,  and  Sujia)  of Zhaoyang  District  and  three  towns (Longshu,  Shuimo,  and  Xinjie) 
of Ludian County of Zhaotong City of the PRC. The Miao natural village is located in Shuimo Town 
and the Yi natural village located in Xinjie Town of Ludian County. 
C. 
Socioeconomic  Characteristics   
5. 
The primary economic  activity of the households  in the Sayu River Basin is agriculture. A 
significant  number  of  households  in  the  project  area  are  dependent  on  agriculture,  including 
planting and limited livestock (i.e., cattle and pigs) and poultry (i.e., chicken and ducks). The main 
products  include  potato  and  corn,  and  apple  in  some  villages.  The  Miao  and  Yi  residents  also 
1  A full EMDP is available  in the following  link: https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/prc-52025-001-ipp 
Appendix 4 
187 
plant potato  and corn and raise  some pigs and cattle.  The cattle are mostly  used for agricultural 
production.   
6. 
In addition  to farming,  migration  of young  people  from villages  within the project  areas is 
high.  Almost  each  household  has  one  member  working  outside  the  village  or  township  due  to 
more job opportunities  with higher wages in big cities and towns.  They work in factories,  offices, 
private companies,  and business establishments.   
The  leading  sources  of  income  of  the  household  heads  based  on  the  baseline 
7. 
socioeconomic  survey  conducted  in  July  2019  include  the  following:  1st  rank  is  farming  (37%), 
followed  by  temporary  non-farm  jobs  (29%);  3rd  rank is wage  with  relatively  steady  jobs  (12%); 
4th is from government subsidies (4%) or relatives’ support (4%); and 5th is self-employment such 
as operation  of small shops and/or businesses  (4%).  
8. 
At  the  regional  level  in  2018,  Yunnan  Province  has  a  total  population  of  47.71  million 
people, and rural population of 25.59 million people. The per capita gross domestic product (GDP) 
was Chinese yuan (CNY)37,136, per capita disposable income of urban residents in the province 
was CNY33,488,  and the per capita net income of rural residents  was CNY10,768.   
Zhaotong  City has  a total  population  of 5.54  million  people,  and  rural  population  of 3.69 
9. 
million  people.  The  per  capita  GDP  was  CNY15,910,  per  capita  disposable  income  of  urban 
residents  in  the  city  was  CNY27,632,  and  the  per  capita  net  income  of  rural  residents  was 
CNY9,474.   
10. 
Zhaoyang  District  has  a  total  population  of 0.845  million  people,  and  rural  population  of 
0.439 million people. The per capita GDP was CNY30,544, per capita disposable income of urban 
residents  in  the  district  was  CNY31,870,  and  the  per  capita  net  income  of  rural  residents  was 
CNY10,520. 
11. 
Ludian County has a total population of 0.419 million people, and rural population of 0.301 
million  people.  The  per  capita  GDP  was  CNY13,559,  per  capita  disposable  income  of  urban 
residents  in  the  county  was  CNY26,299,  and  the  per  capita  net  income  of  rural  residents  was 
CNY9,553. 
12. 
Shuimo  Town, where  a Miao natural  village will be engaged  as a pilot eco-village  by this 
project,  has  a  total  land  area  of  270.94  square  kilometers.  The  town  governs  10  village 
committees,  82 natural villages,  169 village groups, and 8,523 households  with 35,267 people of 
Han, Miao,  and Yi nationalities.  The  highest altitude  of the town is 3,315  meters, and  the lowest 
altitude is 1,680 meters. There are 89,265 mu of arable land, and 2.5 mu of arable land per capita; 
the  forestry  land  area  of  the  town  is  88,635  mu.  Shuimo  Town  is an  agricultural  town,  and  the 
main  grain  producing  area  and  animal  husbandry  town  in Ludian  County.  The  main  agricultural 
products are corn, potato, alfalfa seeds, and oats; and the livestock industry has cattle and pigs. 
Xinjie Town, where a Yi natural village will be engaged as a pilot eco-village by this project, 
13. 
has  a  total  land  area  of  113.1  square  kilometers,  with  33,508  mu  of  arable  land;  15,000  mu  of 
pasture  grass;  3,734.1 mu  of garden land;  and 85,000  mu of forest  area. The  highest  altitude is 
2,976  meters,  and  the lowest  altitude  is  2,078  meters.  The  town  has  jurisdiction  over  5  villager 
committees,  94  villager  groups,  4247  households  with  18,896  people,  and  is  inhabited  by  four 
ethnic groups: Han, Hui, Miao, and Yi. The main agricultural products are corn, rice, and potatoes, 
188          Appendix  4 
supplemented  by  a  small  amount  of  oats  and  soybeans;  and  the  livestock  industry  has  yellow 
cattle and pigs. 
14. 
The  out-migration  rate  is  high  in  the  project  areas,  especially  among  the  younger  and 
productive  ages  (especially  40 years  and below).  The  younger  generations  are  not  attracted  to 
farming  as  the  primary  source  of  income.  They  prefer  to  work  or  look  for  jobs  in  factories  and 
shops and/or commercial  and manufacturing  establishments  located in urban areas.  
Participation  of women in economic activities within the project areas in various sectors is 
15. 
high.  Women  are  active  in  farming  (corn,  potato,  apple,  etc.);  and  raising  livestock  and  poultry, 
working as cleaners in the townships and villages; and other kinds of unskilled labor. Women also 
work  in  government  agencies  and  organizations.  There  are  more  men  employed  in  higher 
positions compared  to women.  However, the number of women in various sectors is high.  
D. 
Poverty and Social Assessment  in the Project Areas  
In the project area, the total poor population in the target poverty alleviation system (2015) 
16. 
was about 86,174 rural persons, accounting  for 32.25% of total population.  By end of 2018, more 
than  70,000  of the  poor people  got rid  of poverty.  The  remaining  poor,  accounting  for less  than 
6%, will get rid of by end 2020.  
17. 
Main reasons which caused the rural poverty include (i) unbalance  development between 
urban  and  rural  areas,  (ii) plateau  area  with  limited  agricultural  production,  (iii)  mountain  areas 
with poor transportation,  and (iv) low productivity  due to low skill and technique  ability. 
18. 
According  to the  survey, the  poverty  situation  of the ethnic  minority  people in the  project 
area is similar to that of the total residents.  Poor ethnic minority  residents  account for 5%–6% of 
all ethnic minority  residents.  All policies related  to poverty alleviation  to ethnic  minority residents 
are the same to Han people.  
19. 
In  long  history  of  Zhaotong  City,  generally,  the  Han  people  live  on  plain  lands;  the  Hui 
people on both sides of roads; the Yi people on mountain slope area; and the Miao people on the 
top of mountains.  The livelihood  means and income  levels  vary among these  ethnic groups  due 
to the geographic  conditions  and living environment.  Therefore, in general comparison,  the Miao 
people  have  the lowest  living  standards;  and  followed  by the  Yi people.  In many  cases,  the Hui 
people’s  living  standards,  who are  good  at business,  are better  than  the Han  people.  The  Miao 
people  have  rich folk oral  literature,  such  as ancient  songs,  poems,  love songs,  and  so on. The 
Miao people also dance well, and the reed dance is the most popular. 
E. 
Additional  Social Assessment  in the Project Areas  
20. 
During the on-site survey and the conversation  with the leaders of the village and the Miao 
and Yi natural villages,  it was found that the sanitary conditions  of the public places in the village 
are relatively poor. Some residents’  houses  are close to pigpen and cowshed,  and chickens and 
ducks are free-range.  Solid waste in villages are not collected  and treated  well, and small ponds 
and  rivers  near  the  villages  are  dirty.  Ethnic  minority  residents  expressed  their  support  on  the 
project  for  improvement  of  sanitary  environment  of  communities  and  water  environment  near 
villages.  They said the current environment  is not good  for their health,  especially  for elders and 
children.  They  like  to  do some  work  for  the project  to increase  their income.  Consultations  with 
ethnic  minority  residents  were  conducted  during  the  social  survey  and  project  design,  and 
Appendix 4 
189 
measures to solve sanitary environment and water environment of the villages were incorporated 
into the project design.  
F. 
Project Benefits  and Impacts   
21. 
The project will be aligned with the following impact: quality of life and sustainable  aquatic 
ecosystem  in  the  Yangtze  River  Basin  improved  (Yangtze  River  Economic  Belt  Development 
Plan, 2016–2030).  The project will have the following outcome:  condition of water resources and 
environment  in the Sayu River Basin improved. 
22. 
The  project  implementation  will  improve  the  current  collection  and  management  of 
household  waste in the ethnic minority communities.  The domestic sewage  will also be collected 
and treated.  The  feces of  livestock  raised by  the local families  can  also be treated  in a hygienic 
manner,  which  will  improve  the  overall  living  environment  and  sanitation  environment  of  ethnic 
minority communities.   
Through the pilot ecological construction  in a Miao natural village and a Yi national village, 
23. 
the  infrastructure  of  the  two  villages  will  be  improved  comprehensively,  including  water  supply; 
sewage  treatment;  domestic  garbage  management;  and  streets,  cultural  activity  center,  village 
appearances,  etc.  In  addition,  by  strengthening  the  communication  and  education  of ecological 
environmental  protection,  the  environmental  protection  awareness  of  community  residents  and 
students  will  be improved;  and  the  ecological  and  environmental  protection  will  be  sustainable. 
The construction  of an ecological  pilot village will improve  the living environment  of the residents 
of these two ethnic minority villages and improve the quality of life. 
24. 
During the project implementation,  local residents  need to be hired to conduct necessary 
civil  works.  Therefore,  ethnic  minority  families  with  surplus  labor  force  have  opportunities  to 
participate  in the project construction;  and thereby, increasing  household income.  For those who 
do temporary work outside the home, they can also increase their income locally by participating 
in the project construction, without going out to work. After the project is completed, it is necessary 
to  recruit  workers  to  operate  and  maintain  the  facilities  built  by  the  project.  Therefore,  ethnic 
minority  residents  have opportunities  to  obtain  stable  employment  positions  and  increase  wage 
income. 
25. 
In the construction of the ecological  pilot village, certain design and construction contents 
with ethnic minority characteristics  can be considered.  For example, in the construction  of streets 
and  village  appearances,  the  traditional  cultural  characteristics  of  the  ethnic  minority  and  the 
content related to the intangible  culture inheritance can be considered.  It will be conducive  to the 
construction  and development  of ecological villages and will also have positive help for the future 
development  of tourism  in ethnic minority villages. 
26. 
The  project  will  compensate  or  provide  subsidies  to  residents  who  have  potentially 
impacted by the project due to agricultural  farming structure changes and aquaculture production 
in  construction  of  water  conservation  zones  through  the  construction  of  sustainable  eco-
compensation  mechanisms.  This  may  also  cause  a  certain  loss  of  agricultural  income  due  to 
ecological protection for ethnic minority families in the project area. Such losses to ethnic minority 
families  were  fully  assessed,  and  necessary  measures  were  incorporated  into  the  eco-
compensation mechanisms to provide timely compensation  and/or subsidy during the preparation 
of resettlement  plan for the project. 
190          Appendix  4 
The  project  construction  will  require  permanent  land  acquisition,  temporary  land 
27. 
occupation,  or occupation  of cultivated  land through land use right transfer,  etc. If ethnic minority 
families  are  involved,  it  may  result  in  a  decrease  in  household  income.  The  scope  and 
compensation  standards  and  measures  for  land  use  impacts  have  been  described  in  details  in 
the  resettlement  plan  of  the  project;  and  any  land  acquisition  and  land-related  losses  of  the 
residents,  including  ethnic  minorities  in  the  project  area,  will  be  compensated  in  line  with  the 
principle of full replacement  value as described in the resettlement  plan. 
The project area has begun to collect fees for household waste management  since 2018. 
28. 
The fees paid  by ethnic minority  families  are the same as those  of Han families,  and there is no 
special  subsidy  to  the  ethnic  minority  residents.  Any  change  in  the  standard  of  garbage  fees 
(usually an increase  in the charge fees) and the possibility of collecting sewage  treatment fees in 
the  future  will  increase  the  living  expenses  of  ethnic  minority  families.  Therefore,  in  any  public 
hearing meetings about the fees, representatives  of ethnic minority residents  will be present; and 
their opinions will be considered. 
The project  construction  will involve  changes  in agricultural  cultivation  methods,  such as 
29. 
replacing  chemical  fertilizers  with organic  fertilizers  or soil-based  formula  fertilizers;  or adjusting 
planting  structures,  which  may affect  the  farmers’  planting  skills;  or  increase  cost  of agricultural 
production.  Therefore,  it  is  agreed  to  provide  skills  training  for  these  farmers,  including  ethnic 
minority farmers. All involved farmers (including ethnic minority labors) shall have the opportunity 
to participate  in such training; and such training shall be free to farmers.   
G. 
Consultation  and Disclosure   
30. 
The ethnic minorities, including the Miao and Yi people in two natural villages of pilot eco-
villages  under the project,  have been  consulted  about the likely  positive  and adverse  impacts of 
the project. They expressed  their support  and are willing to participate  in the project so that they 
can benefit directly.  Further consultation  and community  mobilization  activities  will be conducted 
during  project  implementation.  The  EMDP  is  uploaded  to  the  ADB  website  and  distributed  to 
ethnic minority natural villages.   
Various methodologies  were used in data gathering and in conducting  consultations  with various 
stakeholders.  Public  consultations  and  meetings  with  the  townships  and/or  village  officials, 
women,  farmers,  ethnic  minorities,  and other  stakeholders  were conducted  in the project  areas, 
starting  April to July 2019.  Consultants  engaged  for project preparation  have conducted  several 
consultations  with concerned  government  agencies  and/or  bureaus  in Zhaotong  City, Zhaoyang 
District, and Ludian County; township governments, village leaders, women, farmers, and farmers 
collectives;  and  the  Hui,  Miao,  and  Yi  ethnic  minority  groups.  The  ethnic  minority  consultations 
were conducted by the consultants for resettlement, social development, and gender engaged for 
project preparation  (national and international  consultants). 
H. 
Action Plan  
31. 
The action plan for ethnic minority villages is summarized in Table 9 in the EMDP, showing 
the  activity,  indicators  and/or  targets,  responsible  implementing  agency,  timing,  and  budget 
source.  
Appendix 4 
191 
I. 
Implementation  Arrangement   
32. 
The  Zhaotong  City  project  management  office  (PMO)  will  be responsible  for supervising 
and monitoring  the EMDP implementation.  The Zhaoyang District and Ludian County LPMOs will 
be responsible for implementing the EMDP with assistance from the social development specialist 
in  the  project  management  support  consultant  team  to  be  hired  by  the  PMO  during  project 
implementation.  The Zhaotong  City  Ethnic Minority  and Religious  Affairs  Office and its township 
offices will provide support, coordinate, advise, and review progress of the EMDP implementation. 
Implementation  arrangements  for  the  EMDP  are  integrated  into  the  specific  project  activities. 
Other  key  agencies  for  implementation  include  the  Development  and  Reform  Committee;  the 
ecology  and  environment,  education,  and  finance  bureaus;  the  All  China  Women’s  Federation; 
and other concerned agencies.   
J. 
Cost and Financing  Sources   
The costs of the EMDP actions  are either included  as (i) part of the project budget,  or (ii) 
33. 
part  of  routine  administrative  expenses  of  respective  authorities.  A  total  of  cost  is  about 
CNY26,126,000. 
K. 
Monitoring  and Evaluation   
34. 
Internal  monitoring  of the EMDP  is  required  to ensure  the  plan is  implemented  properly. 
The objective  of the monitoring  is to assess  whether the EMDP  actions have  been implemented 
effectively.  The EMDP will be monitored  and reported to ADB through quarterly  project progress 
reports.  The  social  development  specialist  in  the  project  management  support  consultant  team 
will  work  with  the  PMO  to  set  up  an  appropriate  internal  monitoring  system  and  assist  with  the 
preparation  of reports. 
35. 
In addition,  external  monitoring  and evaluation  (M&E) will be performed  semiannually  by 
an  external  agency  (together  with  the  external  M&E  of  land  acquisition  and  resettlement)  until 
project  completion.  External  M&E reports  (for ethnic  minority  development,  land  acquisition  and 
resettlement, social development, and gender development) will be submitted semiannually to the 
PMO and ADB. 
