Tranche Report 
Project Number: 43253-026 
MFF Number: 0085 
August 2019 
India: Karnataka Integrated and Sustainable Water 
Resources Management Investment Program 
(Tranche 2) 
Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been  approved by the Board of Directors. 
Following such approval, ADB will disclose the document to the public in accordance with ADB's 
Access to Information Policy. 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(as of 18 July 2019) 
Currency unit 
₹1.00 
$1.00 
– 
= 
= 
Indian rupee (₹) 
$0.015 
₹68.81 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB 
EMP 
ha 
IWRM 
MFF 
TOCR 
VNC 
Asian Development Bank 
environmental management plan 
hectare 
integrated water resources management 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–  multitranche financing facility 
– 
– 
Tungabhadra Otter Conservation Reserve 
Vijayanagara Channels 
NOTE 
In this report, "$" refers to United States dollars. 
Vice-President 
Director General 
Director 
Team leader 
Team members 
Peer reviewer 
Shixin Chen, Operations 1 
Hun Kim, South Asia Department (SARD) 
Mio Oka, Environment, Natural Resources and Agriculture Division, 
SARD 
Lance Gore, Principal Portfolio Management Specialist, SARD 
Brando Angeles, Associate Environment Officer, SARD  
Randall Jones, Senior Economist, SARD 
Princess Lubag, Project Analyst, SARD 
Katrina Magpatoc, Operations Assistant, SARD 
Douglas Perkins, Principal Counsel, Office of the General Counsel 
Rebekah Ramsay, Social Development Specialist, SARD 
Rajesh Yadav, Senior Project Officer, SARD 
Frank Radstake, Principal Water Resources Specialist, Central and 
West Asia Department 
In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation 
of  or  reference  to  a  particular  territory  or  geographic  area  in  this  document,  the  Asian 
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any 
territory or area. 
CONTENTS 
TRANCHE AT A GLANCE 
I. 
II. 
PROPOSAL 
BACKGROUND 
III. 
DUE DILIGENCE ON ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT 
IV. 
RECOMMENDATION 
Page 
1 
1 
2 
2 
Project Classification Information Status: Complete
TRANCHE AT A GLANCE
1. Basic Data
Project Name
Country
Borrower
.
Karnataka Integrated and Sustainable Water 
Resources Management Investment Program - 
Tranche 2
India
Government of India
2. Sector
Agriculture, natural
resources and rural
development
Subsector(s)
Irrigation
Rural water policy, institutional and capacity 
development
Water-based natural resources management
Subcomponents
Pillar 2: Access to economic opportunities, 
including jobs, made more inclusive
Global and regional transboundary 
environmental concerns
Natural resources conservation
Components
Civil society participation
Institutional systems and political economy
Organizational development
Pilot-testing innovation and learning
Civil society organizations
Implementation
Private Sector
Regional organizations
3. Strategic Agenda
Inclusive economic
growth (IEG)
Environmentally
sustainable growth
(ESG)
4. Drivers of Change
Governance and
capacity development
(GCD)
Knowledge solutions
(KNS)
Partnerships (PAR)
.
Department/Division
SARD/SAER
Project Number: 43253-026
Executing Agency
Advanced Centre for 
Integrated Water 
Resources Management, 
Karnataka Neeravari Nigam
Limited
     ADB Financing ($ million)
54.60
18.20
18.20
91.00
Medium
13.80
Total
Climate Change Information
Climate Change impact on the 
Project
ADB Financing
Adaptation ($ million)
.
Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
Effective gender mainstreaming 
(EGM)
5. Poverty and SDG Targeting
No
No
Yes
Geographic Targeting
Household Targeting
General Intervention on 
Poverty
SDG Targeting
SDG Goals        
Yes
SDG1, SDG2, SDG5, SDG6, SDG10, SDG12, 
SDG13
Location Impact
 Rural
 Urban
.
6. Risk Categorization:      Complex
.
7. Safeguard Categorization Environment: A   Involuntary Resettlement: C   Indigenous Peoples: C
.
8. Financing
Modality and Sources
ADB
    Sovereign MFF-Tranche (Regular Loan): Ordinary capital resources
Cofinancing
    None
Counterpart
    Government 
Currency of ADB Financing: USD 
Total
Amount ($ million)
High
Low
91.00
91.00
0.00
0.00
39.00
39.00
130.00
.
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.
09082019161423650161
Generated Date: 21-Aug-2019 13:23:07 PM
Date of Receipt by ADB of PFR: 8 July 2019
.
9. Country Operations Business Plan
Tranche Number: 2
TRANCHE AT A GLANCE
CPS
COBP
.
10. Tranche Summary
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/363331/cps-ind
-2018-2022.pdf
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/448116/india-c
obp-2019-2021-27-aug-18-president-approved.pdf
.
The investment program will
improve water availability in selected river basins in Karnataka by implementing integrated water
resources management (IWRM). Output 1 of Project 2 will: (i) prepare the middle Krishna Basin Plan; (ii) expand the state water
resources information system; and (iii) continue strengthening WRD staff with IWRM training. Output 2 will modernize the
Vijayanagara Channels subproject to: (i) reduce irrigation water consumption; and (ii) improve water delivery service to allow
farmers to increase cropping intensities. Under Output 2, the project will also establish and strengthen 30 water user cooperative
societies and provide gender sensitization training to WRD staff and WUCS.
Impact: (i) Sustainable water security in selected river basins in Karnataka improved; and (ii) Water use efficiency in irrigated
agriculture improved
Outcome: IWRM successfully implemented in selected river basins in Karnataka
Outputs: (i) State and basin institutions for integrated water resources management strengthened, (ii) VNC irrigation system
infrastructure and management modernized,  and (iii) Program management systems operational
Implementation Arrangements: Advanced Centre for Integrated Water Resources Management and Karnataka Neeravari Nigam
Limited will be the executing agencies.
Project Readiness: Project readiness is high. The first of two works packages under Project 2 was awarded on 8 March 2019. The
bidding document for the second works package is being finalized. The Program Support Consultant (Tranche 1) will
initially
continue to support the PMU and PIO in implementing Project 2 through a contract amendment while the Program Support
Consultant (Tranche 2) is recruited. Environmental and social safeguards were assessed following ADB's Safeguard Policy
Statement, 2009. An environmental impact assessment for Project 2 has been disclosed on ADB's website on 4 July 2018. A social
safeguards due diligence report has also been prepared to confirm that no land acquisition is expected under Project 2.
.
.
.
.
11. Significant Developments in the MFF and Previous Tranches
As of 31 December 2018, the overall performance of the investment program is on track. However, the rating for timelines is rated
at-risk because the last financing tranche was not executed as planned in August 2015. The MFF availability period was extended
from 7 to 10 years with completion date of 24 September 2024. The investment program's roadmap comprises six key IWRM
themes: (i) integrated river basin management; (ii) institutions and policies for IWRM; (iii) data,
information and knowledge
management; (iv) IWRM based irrigation management; (v) improving water use efficiency and water productivity; and (vi)
stakeholder participation. Under Output 1 of Project 1, progress is being made against all six themes and will continue throughout
the investment program. In particular, a State IWRM Strategy and a draft State Water Resources Policy have been prepared. The
policy document
facility-level
undertakings set out in the framework facility agreement that are currently required to be complied with, including the requirement to
implement the sector road map and other sector-related commitments. Tranche 1 (Loan 3172) for $31 million was approved on 17
October 2014, committed on 7 May 2015 and became effective on 13 July 2015. Tranche 1 is rated on track. Partial cancellation of
$5 million became effective on 6 May 2019. As of 5 August 2019, contract awards amounted to $25.5 million and disbursement
amounted to $19.8 million. All particular loan covenants are being complied with, including all safeguards-related covenants.
is now under consideration by key stakeholders. The government
is in compliance with all
.
12. Milestones
Estimated Approval
30 September 2019
13. Linked Documents
Estimated Completiona
31 March 2024
-
MFF
Weblink:
Tranche
Weblink:
Required Document 
Report and Recommendation of the President
http://www.adb.org/projects/documents/karnataka-integrated-and-sustain
able-water-resources-management-investment-program-rrp
Disclosure Date
06-OCT-2014
Draft Periodic Financing Request Report
http://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDocs/?id=43253-026-DraftPFRR
The Final PFR 
Report is disclosed 
upon approval
(i) Environment
EIA - Environmental Impact Assessment
Weblink:
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/ind-43253-026-eia-0
27-JUN-2019
EIA - Environmental Impact Assessment
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/ind-43253-026-eia
04-JUL-2018
(ii) Involuntary resettlement RF - Resettlement Framework
Weblink:
-
.
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/ind-43253-026-rp
10-JUL-2018
.
a For Tranches, this refers to the financial closing date.
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.
09082019161423650161
Generated Date: 21-Aug-2019 13:23:07 PM
I. 
PROPOSAL 
1. 
Conversion of $91 million into a tranche to finance the second project of the Karnataka 
Integrated  and  Sustainable  Water  Resources  Management  Investment  Program  in  India  is 
proposed for Board consideration. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The  investment  program  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  will  improve  water 
2. 
availability to meet competing water demands in selected river basins in the State of Karnataka 
by implementing integrated water resources management (IWRM). By strengthening water use 
efficiency  in  irrigated  agriculture,  it  will  help  provide  economic  opportunities  and  improve  rural 
incomes. 
3. 
On 25 September 2014, the ADB Board approved the provision of loans to India under a 
multitranche financing facility (MFF) of up to $150 million equivalent to be implemented between 
October 2014 and September 2024.1 Each tranche of the MFF has the following outputs:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
State  and  basin  institutions  for  IWRM  strengthened.  The  program  will 
strengthen the state’s water governance by (a) developing and implementing river 
basin  plans  to  manage  water  resources  better;  (b)  building  capacity  for  and 
ensuring  certification  of  Water  Resources  Department  staff  in  IWRM;  and 
(c) establishing a state water resources information system. 
Irrigation  system  infrastructure  and  management  modernized.  Three 
irrigation  systems  in  the  Upper  Krishna  Basin  will  be  modernized:  (a)  Gondi 
(4,600 hectares [ha]) is being modernized under the first tranche; (b) tranche 2 
will finance the modernization of the Vijayanagara Channels (VNC, 11,150 ha);2 
and (c) tranche 3 will finance the partial modernization of the Tungabhadra Left 
Bank Canal system (the total system covers 144,000 ha, of which at least 40,000 
ha  will  be  financed  under  the  MFF).  This  output  will  also  operationalize  asset 
management and operation and management systems for each irrigation system. 
Program management systems operational. This output will ensure delivery of 
the investment program’s outputs on time and within budget. 
The tranche 2 project (Project 2) will finance the modernization of the VNC’s main irrigation 
4. 
infrastructure,  construction  of  farmer  irrigation  canals,  and  on-farm  extension  services  to  help 
farmers improve their agricultural and water application practices. The main works components 
involve repairing 12 anicuts (dams) in the Tungabhadra River; intake structures; and about 442 
kilometers of main, distributary, and minor canals. Project 2 will also establish and strengthen 30 
water user cooperative societies in the project area, which will then be responsible for improving 
their  farmer  irrigation  canals.  The  tranche  2  periodic  financing  request  report  summarizes  the 
background to and status of the investment program. It also presents a summary of the Project 2 
activities, and a review of due diligence, approval process, and recommendations.3  
1  ADB. 2014. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Multitranche Financing 
Facility to India for the Karnataka Integrated and Sustainable Water Resources Management Investment Program. 
Manila. An extension to the MFF from 30 September 2021 to 24 September 2024 was approved on 26 July 2019. 
2   The  Vijayanagara  Channels was  initially  constructed between 1336  and 1646  during  the  Vijayanagara  Empire to 
irrigate about 11,150 hectares of arable land along both sides of the Tungrabhadra River near Hospet. 
3   Periodic Financing Request Report (accessible from the tranche at a glance).  
2 
III. 
DUE DILIGENCE ON ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT 
5. 
The proposed safeguard categorization for Project 2 is A for environmental impact under 
ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009). An environmental impact assessment was prepared 
and disclosed on ADB’s website on 4 July 2018.4  
6. 
The  environmental  impact  category  A  is  proposed  because  several  VNC  anicuts  and 
canals are in the Tungabhadra Otter Conservation Reserve (TOCR) along Tungabhadra River 
and in the Hampi World Heritage Area. According to the environmental impact assessment, the 
main receptors of the impacts are (i) the river wildlife, (ii) cultural heritage structures, (iii) ambient 
air and surface water, and (iv) nearby habitations. The measures detailed in the environmental 
management plan (EMP) will mitigate all adverse environmental impacts on the TOCR; the Hampi 
World Heritage Area; and other non-sensitive areas during project implementation. The project’s 
activities may temporarily hamper the movement of otters, but EMP measures such as temporary 
bunding will preserve their habitat. Once completed, the project will have improved the availability 
of water throughout the year and will provide favorable conditions for the otters and other aquatic 
wildlife. The project has received clearance from the Hampi World Heritage Area Management 
Authority  for  undertaking  the  works  within  the  Hampi  heritage  areas.  The project  is  awaiting 
clearance from the state and national wildlife boards for working within the TOCR; no works will 
start in the reserve until clearance has been obtained. 
7. 
The first formal consultation, held in April 2018, was attended by various state and central 
stakeholders, including Archaeological Survey of India, Hampi World Heritage Area Management 
Authority,  State  Archaeological  Department,  Karnataka  Forest  Department,  Karnataka  State 
Pollution Control Board, and urban local bodies. A second public consultation was held in May 
2018 and attendees comprised project beneficiaries, including farmers from different water user 
cooperative  societies,  nongovernment  organizations,  and  government  stakeholders. 
The consultations  covered  the  project’s  scope  and  implementing  arrangements,  particularly 
clarifications about the TOCR and the Hampi heritage areas. The public expressed strong support 
for the project because of the benefits from better water availability in the project area.  
8. 
Karnataka  Neeravari  Nigam  Limited,  the  executing  agency  for  Project  1,  will  also  be 
responsible  for  executing  Outputs  2  and  3  of  Project  2.  Project  1  was  categorized  B  for 
environmental  impacts.  The implementation  of  Project  1  is  on  track,  and  compliance  with  the 
environmental  safeguard  requirements  is  being monitored  in  line  with ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy 
Statement  (2009).  No  major  issues  arose  during  implementation.  Examples  of  monitoring  and 
mitigation activities were: (i) monitoring the quality of air, water, and noise; (ii) convening regular 
workshops  on  occupational  health  and  safety;  (iii) maintaining  all  necessary  documentation  in 
compliance  with  the  EMP;  and  (iv) preparing  a  closure  plan  for  all  burrow  pits.  Karnataka 
Neeravari  Nigam  Limited  demonstrated  that  it  can  manage  the  environmental  safeguards 
satisfactorily. An independent environmental monitor consultant will be engaged for Project 2.  
IV. 
RECOMMENDATION 
9. 
The President recommends that the Board authorize the conversion of $91 million into a 
tranche  to  finance  project  2  of  the  Karnataka  Integrated  and  Sustainable  Water  Resources 
Management Investment Program in India. 
4 Environmental Impact Assessment (accessible from the list of appendixes in the Periodic Financing Request Report). 
