Tranche Report  
Project Number: 44167-015 
MFF Number: 0082 
July 2021 
Bangladesh: Flood and Riverbank Erosion Risk 
Management Investment Program (Tranche 2) 
Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been  approved by the Board of Directors. 
Following such approval, ADB will disclose the document to the public in accordance with ADB's 
Access to Information Policy. 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(as of 15 June 2021) 
Currency unit 
Tk1.00 
$1.00 
– 
= 
= 
taka (Tk) 
$0.011804  
Tk84.71650 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB 
BWDB 
COVID-19 
EIA 
EMP 
km 
MFF 
–  Asian Development Bank 
–  Bangladesh Water Development Board 
–  coronavirus disease 
– 
– 
– 
– 
environmental impact assessment 
environmental management plan 
kilometer 
multitranche financing facility 
NOTE 
In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars. 
Vice-President 
Director General 
Director 
Shixin Chen, Operations 1 
Kenichi Yokoyama, South Asia Department (SARD) 
Mio Oka; Environment, Natural Resources and Agriculture Division 
(SAER); SARD 
Team leader 
Team members 
Olivier Drieu, Senior Water Resources Specialist, SAER, SARD 
Mikael Andersson; Financial Management Specialist; Portfolio, 
Peer reviewer 
Results and Quality Control Unit; SARD 
Brando Angeles, Associate Environment Officer, SAER, SARD 
Angelique Dawn Badelles; Strategy and Policy Officer; Strategy, 
Policy and Business Process Division; Strategy, Policy and 
Partnerships Department 
Pamela Barrameda, Associate Operations Officer, SAER, SARD 
Cynthia Pancracia Ceniza, Senior Operations Assistant, SAER, 
SARD 
Orna Joyce, Social Development Specialist, SAER, SARD 
Marie L’Hostis, Water Resources Specialist, SAER, SARD 
Soma Misra; Procurement Specialist; Procurement Division 1; 
Procurement, Portfolio and Financial Management Department 
Douglas Perkins, Principal Counsel, Office of the General Counsel 
Sumit Pokhrel, Environment Specialist, SAER, SARD 
Md. Sohel Rana, Project Analyst, Bangladesh Resident Mission 
(BRM), SARD 
Nasheeba Selim, Senior Social Development Officer (Gender), 
BRM, SARD 
Pushkar Srivastava, Project Management Specialist, BRM, SARD 
Rabindra Osti; Senior Water Resources Specialist; Environment, 
Natural Resources and Agriculture Division; East Asia 
Department 
In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation 
of  or  reference  to  a  particular  territory  or  geographic  area  in  this  document,  the  Asian 
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any 
territory or area.  
Page 
1 
1 
2 
2 
CONTENTS 
TRANCHE AT A GLANCE 
PROPOSAL 
BACKGROUND 
DUE DILIGENCE ON ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT 
RECOMMENDATION 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
Project Classification Information Status: Complete
TRANCHE AT A GLANCE
1. Basic Data
Project Name
Country
Borrower
Country Economic 
Indicators
Portfolio at a Glance
.
2. Sector
Agriculture, natural
resources and rural
development
Flood and Riverbank Erosion Risk 
Management Investment Program - 
Tranche 2
Bangladesh
People's Republic of Bangladesh
https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDo
cs/?id=44167-015-CEI
https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDo
cs/?id=44167-015-PortAtaGlance
Subsector(s)
Rural flood protection
Rural water policy, institutional and 
capacity development
3. Operational Priorities
Addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequalities
Accelerating progress in gender equality
Tackling climate change, building climate and disaster resilience,
and enhancing environmental sustainability
Promoting rural development and food security
Strengthening governance and institutional capacity
Sustainable Development Goals
SDG 1.5
SDG 5.5
SDG 6.b
SDG 9.1
SDG 10.3
SDG 13.a
4. Risk Categorization:      Complex
.
Department/Division
SARD/SAER
Project Number: 44167-015
Executing Agency
Bangladesh Water 
Development Board
     ADB Financing ($ million)
136.59
20.41
Total
157.00
Climate Change Information
GHG reductions (tons per annum)
Climate Change impact on the 
Project
ADB Financing
Adaptation ($ million)
Mitigation ($ million)
Cofinancing
Adaptation ($ million)
Mitigation ($ million)
.
Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
Effective gender mainstreaming (EGM)
Poverty Targeting
Geographic Targeting
0.000
High
47.40
0.00
0.00
0.00
5. Safeguard Categorization Environment: A   Involuntary Resettlement: A   Indigenous Peoples: C
.
6. Financing
Modality and Sources
ADB
    Sovereign MFF-Tranche (Concessional Loan): Ordinary capital resources
Cofinancing
    Government of the Netherlands - MFF-Tranche (Grant) (Full ADB Administration)
Counterpart
    Government 
Currency of ADB Financing: US Dollar 
Date of Receipt by ADB of PFR: 7 March 2021
.
7. Country Operations Business Plan
Total
Tranche Number: 2
Amount ($ million)
157.00
157.00
17.89
17.89
37.91
37.91
212.80
CPS
COBP
.
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/198831/cps
-ban-2016-2020.pdf
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/632696/cob
p-ban-2021-2023.pdf
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.
08072021224546358965
Generated Date: 09-Jul-2021 8:23:57 AM
TRANCHE AT A GLANCE
.
8. Tranche Summary
The multitranche financing facility (MFF)
Management Investment Program was approved in 2014 to improve the livelihoods in the project
Padma, and Ganges rivers in central Bangladesh.
through structural and nonstructural interventions, and institutional and knowledge-based strengthening. It will
implement three
subprojects comprising climate-resilient flood embankments protecting critical riparian productive areas in central Bangladesh
and capacity building initiatives. It will extend successful riverbank protection technologies of the ADB-financed Jamuna-Meghna
River Erosion Mitigation Project to other areas, with necessary improvements.
to the People's Republic of Bangladesh for the Flood and Riverbank Erosion Risk
area along the Jamuna,
It will reduce flood and riverbank erosion risks in priority erosion reaches
At the government's request
tranche (Tranche 2). Tranche 2 will be a continuation of
achievements of Tranche 1.
the originally envisaged Tranches 2 and 3 of
the works carried out
the MFF will be combined into a single and final
build upon the
under Tranche 1 and will
.
Impact: Livelihood in the project area improved. 
Outcome: Flood and riverbank erosion risks in the subproject areas reduced.  
.
Outputs: (i) Flood and riverbank erosion risk mitigation functioning at priority reaches improved, (ii) Institutional system for flood 
and riverbank erosion risk management strengthened,  and (iii) Program management systems operational
.
Implementation Arrangements: Bangladesh Water Development Board will be the executing agency.
.
Project Readiness: The institutional strengthening and project management consultant who assisted the executing agency in
implementing Tranche 1 will be engaged through the single source selection method for Tranche 2,
ensuring a smooth and
timely implementation of Tranche 2 from its onset.
.
9. Significant Developments in the MFF and Previous Tranches
(ii) assisting in setting up a river management
The road map focuses on long-term stabilization of the main rivers, increasing climate resilience, and reducing disasters. Project
1 significantly contributed to progressing the road map by:
Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) aligned with the adaptive delta management approach of the Bangladesh Delta
Plan 2100;
(iii) supporting the Department of
Disaster Management with implementing community-based flood risk management activities; (iv) piloting new technologies and
construction principles; and (v) expanding the knowledge base with systematic data collection and development of information
and asset management systems. Project 1 used innovative and cost-effective approaches for riverbank erosion management
and progressive knowledge development. Project 1 financed:
(i) 18 kilometers (km) of riverbank erosion protection, and
construction or renovation of 21 km of embankments; (ii) community-based flood risk management activities in 40 villages; and
(iii) a pilot of new wave protection technology with jute along 4 km of
embankment and riverbank slopes. The newly built
infrastructure performed well after completion.
stabilization approach approved by the
specialized office in the BWDB;
(i) preparing a river
.
10. Milestones
Estimated Approval
30 August 2021
11. Linked Documents
-
Estimated Completiona
26 June 2024
MFF
Weblink:
Tranche
Weblink:
Required Document 
Report and Recommendation of the President
http://www.adb.org/projects/documents/flood-and-riverbank-erosion-risk
k-management-investment-program-rrp
Disclosure Date
01-JUL-2014
Draft Periodic Financing Request Report
http://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDocs/?id=44167-015-DraftPFRR
The Final PFR 
Report is disclosed 
upon approval
(i) Environment
EIA - Environmental Impact Assessment
Weblink:
(ii) Involuntary
resettlement
Weblink:
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/ban-44167-015-eia
06-AUG-2020
EIA - Environmental Impact Assessment
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/ban-44167-015-eia-0
EARF - Environmental Assessment and Review Framework
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/ban-44167-013-earf
RF - Resettlement Framework
24-MAY-2021
08-JUN-2021
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/ban-44167-015-rf
24-MAY-2021
RP - Resettlement Plan
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/ban-44167-015-rp
02-OCT-2020
RP - Resettlement Plan
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/ban-44167-015-rp-0
24-MAY-2021
.
.
a For Tranches, this refers to the financial closing date.
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.
08072021224546358965
Generated Date: 09-Jul-2021 8:23:57 AM
I. 
PROPOSAL 
1. 
Conversion of $174,890,000 into a tranche to finance project 2 of the Flood and Riverbank 
Erosion  Risk  Management  Investment  Program  in  Bangladesh  is  proposed  for  Board 
consideration.1 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The investment program of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) will improve livelihoods in 
2. 
the project area along the Jamuna, Padma, and Ganges rivers in Bangladesh by reducing flood 
and  riverbank  erosion  risks  in  priority  erosion  reaches  through  structural  and  nonstructural 
interventions, and institutional and knowledge-based strengthening. The investment program will 
implement three subprojects comprising  climate-resilient flood  embankments  protecting  critical 
productive riparian areas in central Bangladesh, as well as capacity building initiatives. 
3. 
On  26  June  2014,  the  Board  approved  a  multitranche  financing  facility  (MFF)  to 
Bangladesh of up to $270.3 million equivalent to be implemented between  July 2014 and June 
2023.  The  MFF  comprises  the  provision  of  regular  and  concessional  ADB  loans  and 
administration  of  cofinancing  to  be  provided  by  the  Government  of  the  Netherlands  and  other 
development partners.2 Each of the two tranches of the MFF has the following outputs: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Flood  and  riverbank  erosion  risk mitigation  functioning  at  priority  reaches 
improved. The investment program will combine structural and nonstructural flood 
and  riverbank  erosion  risk  mitigation  measures,  including  riverbank  revetments, 
flood  embankments,  community  capacity  development,  and 
livelihood 
enhancement for project-affected people. 
Institutional  system  for  flood  and  riverbank  erosion  risk  management 
strengthened.  This  output  will  improve  the  knowledge  base  and  institutional 
capacity  of  the  Bangladesh  Water  Development  Board  (BWDB)  (the  executing 
agency), and the Department of Disaster Management (an implementing agency) 
in sustainable asset and strategic management of the main rivers. 
Program management systems operational. This output will ensure the delivery 
of the investment program’s outputs on time and within budget. 
4. 
The tranche 2 project (project 2) is a continuation of the works carried out under project 1, 
and will continue the long-term stabilization of the main rivers beyond emergency responses to 
critical erosion. Project 2 will finance (i) 30 kilometers (km) of riverbank protection combined with 
nature-based solutions for channel closure,  (ii)  40 km  of  riverbank  protection  adaptation  works 
and 6 km of emergency works, (iii) 7.9 km of climate-resilient flood embankment, (iv) an offtake, 
and  (v)  two  regulators  with  fish  passes  to  improve  drainage.  Project  2  will  also  establish  160 
community disaster management units and develop their capacity, and will strengthen 40 existing 
disaster  units  on  disaster  preparedness  and  emergency  response  with  a  focus  on  women’s 
participation. The tranche 2 periodic financing request report summarizes the background to and 
status  of  the investment  program. It  also  presents  a  summary  of the  project  2  activities,  and  a 
review of the due diligence, approval process, and recommendations.3 
1  Comprises a concessional loan of $157.0 million from ADB’s ordinary capital resources and a grant of $17.89 million 
from the Government of the Netherlands to be fully administered by ADB. Innovations further developed under project 
1,  such  as  sustainable  low-cost  geotextile  bag  revetments  set  underwater  with  global positioning  system,  will  be 
expanded under project 2 by combining them with dredging, bioengineering and nature-based solutions. 
2  ADB. 2014. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Multitranche Financing 
Facility  to  the  People’s  Republic  of  Bangladesh:  Flood  and  Riverbank  Erosion  Risk  Management  Investment 
Program. Manila. An extension of the MFF availability period to 26 June 2024 was approved on 16 April 2021. 
3  Periodic Financing Request Report (accessible from the tranche at a glance). 
2 
III. 
DUE DILIGENCE ON ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT 
The proposed safeguard categorization for project 2 is A under ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
5. 
Statement  (2009).  The  draft  environmental  impact  assessment  (EIA)  was  disclosed  on  ADB’s 
website on 6 August 2020, and the final EIA on 24 May 2021.4 
6. 
The environmental category A classification is triggered as, without mitigation, project 2 
interventions could  have  direct impacts  on  biodiversity  habitat that  are  significant, long-lasting, 
and cumulative. The main works are confined to riverbanks outside protected areas. Significant 
potential negative impacts include (i) the reduction in width of a 15 km long channel whose outer 
riverbank is being severely eroded and of its inside wetland resulting from the reclamation of char 
land;5 and (ii) risks to wildlife habitat induced by altered flow patterns, reduced river and floodplain 
connectivity,  and  flood  embankment  construction.  Key  mitigation  measures  detailed  in  the 
environmental management plan (EMP) of the EIA include (i) establishing sanctuaries and buoys 
to reduce fishing pressures, (ii) constructing regulators with fish passes, (iii) increasing dry season 
flow in a distributary, and (iv) coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic-related protocols. Other 
impacts, such as increased sediments, water contamination, air and noise pollution, and health- 
and safety-related concerns linked to construction activities, are local, temporary, and mitigable 
with  best  practice  measures  included  in  the  EMP.  The  BWDB  obtained  an  environmental 
clearance for the project from the Department of Environment in December 2020, and will submit 
semiannual environmental monitoring reports to ADB and engage an external monitoring expert. 
7. 
Three rounds of stakeholder consultations were conducted between 2013 and 2017, with 
the most  recent focused  on  project  2 interventions.6 Although  COVID-19  restrictions  prevented 
any  more  recent  consultations, 7  in  late  2020,  the  population  was  consulted  through 
questionnaires mainly aimed at providing updated information on the forthcoming interventions. 
Further, in May 2021, the BWDB distributed a brochure in Bangla to the population, outlining the 
project  interventions  as  well  as  the  resettlement  process  and  entitlements.  Stakeholders 
expressed strong support for the project. Consultation will continue during project implementation. 
8. 
Project  1  was  categorized  A  due  to  potential  impacts  on  wetland  habitats  induced  by 
reducing flooding areas, hydrological connectivity, and water quality deterioration. Implementation 
of  the  project 1 is  on  track. It complies  with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement  environmental 
safeguard  requirements,  and  no  major  issues  arose  during  implementation.  Mitigation  and 
monitoring  activities  included  (i) dredging  timed  to  avoid  impacts  on  aquatic species,  (ii) waste 
management, (iii) health and safety measures, and (iv) maintaining documentation in compliance 
with the EMP. The BWDB showed adequate capability to manage the environmental safeguards. 
IV. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The President recommends that the Board authorize the conversion of $174,890,000 into 
9. 
a tranche to finance project 2 of the Flood and Riverbank Erosion Risk Management Investment 
Program in Bangladesh.8 
4  Environmental Impact Assessment (accessible from the tranche at a glance).  The EIA disclosed on 6 August 2020 
was updated in May 2021 to reflect reduction of the scope of the project agreed with the government in February 
2021  to  remove  40  km  of  flood  embankment  construction;  there  were  no  other  substantive  changes  in  the  EIA 
disclosed on ADB’s and the executing agency’s websites on 24 May 2021. 
 The wetland currently in the river channel due to two decades of erosion of the riverbank will be restored under the 
project as char land; chars (accretions in a river) are valuable to the national economy as additional cultivable areas.  
6  Consultations included  the BWDB;  the  Departments  of  Environment,  Agriculture,  and  Fisheries; local  institutions; 
and public representatives, residents, squatters, tenants, erosion-affected people, farmers, fishers, and businesses. 
5 
7   The last round of consultation for social safeguards included information relevant to environmental matters. 
8  See footnote 1.  
