Tranche Report 
Project Number: 47381-005 
MFF Number: 0088 
November 2017  
Sri Lanka: Mahaweli Water Security Investment 
Program (Tranche 2) 
. 
Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been approved by Management. Following 
such  approval,  ADB  will  disclose  the  document  to  the  public  in  accordance  with  ADB's  Public 
Communications Policy 2011. 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(as of 10 October 2017) 
Currency Unit 
SLRe1.00 
$1.00 
– 
= 
= 
Sri Lanka rupee/s (SLRe/SLRs) 
$0.0065  
SLRS153.38 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB 
EIA 
km 
MDP 
MFF 
NWPCP 
UECP 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Asian Development Bank 
environmental impact assessment 
kilometers 
Mahaweli Development Program 
multitranche financing facility 
North West Province Canal Project 
Upper Elahera Canal Project 
NOTES 
In this report, "$" refers to United States dollars. 
Vice-President 
Director General 
Director 
Team leader 
Team members 
Peer reviewers 
Wencai Zhang, Operations 1 
Hun Kim, South Asia Department (SARD) 
Mio Oka, Environment, Natural Resources and Agriculture Division, 
SARD 
Lance Gore, Senior Water Resources Specialist, SARD 
Nishanti Manjula Amerasinghe, Project Management Specialist, SARD 
K.M. Palitha Bandara, Senior Project Officer (Natural Resources and 
Environment), SARD 
Randall Jones, Senior Natural Resources and Agriculture Economist, 
SARD 
Young Seo, Senior Counsel, Office of the General Counsel 
Dewi Utami, Principal Safeguards Specialist, SARD 
Eric Quincieu, Water Resources Specialist, Southeast Asia 
Department 
In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation 
of  or  reference  to  a  particular  territory  or  geographic  area  in  this  document,  the  Asian 
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any 
territory or area. 
CONTENTS 
I. 
II. 
III. 
PROPOSAL 
BACKGROUND 
DUE DILIGENCE ON ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT 
Page 
1 
1 
2 
2 
RECOMMENDATION 
IV. 
APPENDIX 
List of Linked Documents 
                                3 
I. 
PROPOSAL 
Conversion  of  $210  million  into  a  tranche  to  finance  project  2  of  the  Mahaweli  Water 
1. 
Security Investment Program in Sri Lanka is proposed for Board consideration. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
2. 
The  investment  program  will  accelerate  economic  activities  in  Sri  Lanka’s  northern  dry 
zone region by transferring surplus water from the Mahaweli river basin for irrigation, drinking and 
commercial purposes.1 It will develop bulk water conveyance and storage infrastructure planned 
under the  North  Central Province  Canal  Program,  a  high-priority  government  program  that  will 
support completion of the Mahaweli Development Program (MDP), which started in 1973 but its 
completion  was  delayed  due  to  conflict. 2  After  the  conflict  ended  in  2009,  the  government 
prioritized completion of the MDP by initiating the  North Central Province Canal Program. The 
investment program supports the following government objectives: ensuring water availability to 
water  users;  providing  water  in  adequate  quantities  with  improved  management;  enhancing 
productivity and water user efficiency; addressing the spatial variation of water availability; and 
addressing  climate  change  and  disaster  vulnerability,  as  described  in  the  Public  Investment 
Programme 2017–2020.3 The outcome will be secured access to water resources for agricultural 
and drinking purposes in project areas.   
3. 
On  24  June  2015,  the  Board  approved  the  provision  of  loans  to  Sri  Lanka  under  a 
multitranche financing facility (MFF) of up to $453 million equivalent to be implemented between 
July  2015  and  December  2024.  The  MFF  comprises  three  tranches  and  uses  the  time-slicing 
approach  to  achieve  the  outputs:  (i)  new  and  improved  water  conveyance  and  storage 
infrastructure  constructed;  (ii) systems for  improving  water resources management  productivity 
developed that will formulate future investments to improve water and crop productivity of existing 
irrigation  systems  within  the  investment  program  beneficiary  areas;  and  (iii) multidisciplinary 
investment  program  management  operational  to  timely  and  economical  implementation  of  the 
MFF. Output 1 of the MFF is implementing three physical projects:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
the Upper Elahera Canal Project (UECP), comprising about 101 kilometers (km) 
of water conveyance infrastructure linking the existing reservoirs at Kalu Ganga, 
Moragahakanda,  Huruluwewa,  Eruwewa,  and  Mahakanadara,  which  supply 
existing irrigation and town supply schemes; 
the North Western Province Canal Project  (NWPCP), which will construct about 
91 km of new and rehabilitated conveyance channels and two new reservoirs at 
Mahakithula  and  Mahakirula  to transfer  water from the  Dambula  Oya  River  and 
Wemedilla reservoir to supply existing irrigation and town supply schemes; and  
the Minipe Left Bank Canal Rehabilitation Project, which will increase storage in 
its  head  reservoir  and  rehabilitate  about  74  km  of  existing  canals  to  improve 
conveyance  and  reliability  of  service  to  existing  farmers.  This  project  is  fully 
financed under tranche 1.  
4. 
 Tranche 2 will have two outputs: (i) completion of new and improved water conveyance 
1   ADB.  2015.  Report  and  Recommendation  of  the  President  to  the  Board  of  Directors:  Proposed  Multitranche 
Financing  Facility  to  the  Democratic  Socialist  Republic  of  Sri  Lanka  for  the  Mahaweli  Water  Security  Investment 
Program. Manila. 
2   Key components were completed in the 1980s, notably several irrigation systems and large dams for hydropower. 
3   Ministry of National Policies and Economic Affairs. 2017. Public Investment Programme, 2017–2020. Colombo.  
2  
and storage infrastructure increased; and (ii) multidisciplinary investment program management 
operational.  Output  1  includes  construction  of  about  21  km  (out  of  101  km)  of  conveyance 
channels under the UECP and the continuation of construction activities under the NWPCP.4 The 
tranche  2  periodic  financing  request  report  summarizes  the  background  to  and  status  of  the 
investment  program.  It  also  presents  a  summary  of  the  tranche  2  activities  and  review  of  due 
diligence and relevant approval processes and recommendations.5 
III. 
DUE DILIGENCE ON ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT 
5. 
The proposed tranche project is classified under environmental impact category A under 
ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009)  (footnote  1).  Separate  environmental  impact 
assessments  (EIAs)  were  prepared  for  the  UECP  and  the  NWPCP.  An  initial  environmental 
examination was prepared for the Minipe Left Bank Canal Rehabilitation Project. 
6. 
The UECP EIA was prepared in 2014 and was disclosed on ADB’s website in January 
2015 prior to Board approval of the MFF. About 95% of the channel trace under tranche 2 falls 
within the jurisdiction of either the Department of Wildlife Conservation or the Forest Department. 
The  main  impacts  include  (i)  generation  of  waste  material  comprising  tunnel  spoil  requiring 
disposal (about 27 hectares); (ii) land clearance for construction of access and ventilation shafts 
to the tunnels, and temporary and permanent access roads; and (iii) other construction-related 
impacts such as vibration, noise and dust. The tunnel spoil can be reused for road construction; 
nevertheless, temporary disposal sites are required. Due to design changes made during detailed 
design conducted under tranche 1, there is a slight increase in tunnel spoil as compared to that 
documented in the EIA. Thus, new spoil disposal sites have been identified and additional access 
roads are planned, including widening or rehabilitation of 12 km of existing roads and construction 
of 2 km of new access roads. The environmental impacts of these design changes are addressed 
in an addendum to the EIA, which included additional ecological surveys. The EIA addendum, 
with updated environmental management plans, was disclosed on ADB’s website on 11 October 
2017.6 The semi-annual environmental safeguard monitoring reports are also publicly disclosed. 
7. 
Under  tranche  1,  all  environmental  safeguard requirements  are  being  addressed  in the 
designs of the new infrastructure, and are being monitored during implementation, including by: 
(i) constructing tunnels in lieu of cut-and-cover canals to minimize impacts on forest and wildlife 
reserves,  (ii)  applying  contract-specific  environmental  management  plans,  (iii)  holding  several 
training and awareness programs for the executing agency and contractor’s environmental staff, 
and  (iv) identifying  and  translocating  priority  species  based  on  detailed  ecological  surveys. 
Stakeholders  have  been  consulted  during  planning  and  design  of  the  project,  no  safeguards-
related  complaints  have  been  received  to  date,  and  the  grievance  redress  mechanism  in 
operation  under  tranche  1  will  continue  under  tranche  2.  Environmental  safeguards  are  being 
managed  satisfactorily  under  tranche  1,  and  the  Ministry  of  Mahaweli  Development  and 
Environment  has  demonstrated  it  can  manage  the  environmental  safeguards  satisfactorily.  An 
independent environmental monitor also has been engaged. 
IV. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The President recommends that the Board authorize the conversion of $210 million into a 
8. 
tranche to finance project 2 of Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program in Sri Lanka.  
4   Specifically, tranche 2 will finance (i) partial construction of a 28 km tunnel; (ii) partial construction of about 8.8 km of 
new  tunnels  and  channels;  (iii)  continuing  construction  of  the  Mahakithula  and  Mahakirula  Reservoirs,  and 
Mahakithula Inlet Tunnel that will be initiated under tranche 1; and (iv) project management recurring costs. 
5   Periodic Financing Request Report (accessible from the list of linked documents in the appendix). 
6   Environmental Impact Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in the appendix). 
Appendix 
3 
http://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDocs/?id=47381-005-MFF Tranche Report 
LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS 
Periodic Financing Request Report 
Environmental Impact Assessment: Upper Elahera Canal Project  
1. 
2. 
