The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and 
Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila 
Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Main report and appendices  
Document Date:  28-Apr 2017 
2000001142 
Project No. 
4346-AO 
Report No.  
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
iii 
iii 
iv 
vi 
vii 
x 
1 
1 
4 
6 
6 
8 
9 
14 
17 
17 
18 
23 
24 
25 
25 
26 
26 
26 
29 
30 
Contents 
Currency equivalents 
Weights and measures 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Map of the project area 
Executive Summary 
Logical Framework 
I. 
Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
B.  Rationale 
II.  Project description 
A.  Project area and Target group 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
C.  Project Outcomes and Components 
D. 
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
III.  Project implementation 
A.  Approach 
B.  Organisational and Implementation Framework 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
D. 
E. 
Financial management, procurement and governance 
Supervision 
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.  Project costs 
B.  Project financing 
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
D.  Sustainability 
List of Figures 
Figure 1: Problem Tree Analysis and Theory of change 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Phasing of implementation (in Huila and Cuanza Sul provinces covered by IFAD) 
Table 2: Mains risks and mitigation measures  
Table 3: Components Project Cost Summary  
Table 4: Financing Plan  
i 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendices 
31 
37 
51 
55 
73 
81 
83 
93 
101 
107 
117 
119 
131 
132 
141 
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Detailed project description 
Poverty, targeting and gender 
Country and rural context background 
Country performance and lessons learned 
Appendix 1: 
Appendix 2: 
Appendix 3: 
Appendix 4: 
Appendix 5: 
Appendix 6: 
Appendix 7: 
Appendix 8: 
Appendix 9: 
Appendix 10: 
Appendix 11: 
Appendix 12: 
Appendix 13: 
Appendix 14:   Mainstreaming Nutrition in the SADCP-C&H-SAMAP 
Draft Project implementation manual 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Contents of the Project Life File 
Project cost and financing 
SECAP Review Note 
Procurement 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 15:    Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
ii 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
US$1.0 
= 
= 
Angolan Kwanza (AOA) 
165 AOA 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
iii 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Angola Fisheries and Aquaculture Project 
African Development Bank 
Angolan Kwanza 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Banco nacional de Angola (Central Bank of Angola) 
Business Plan 
Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research 
Climate smart agriculture 
Anti-poverty Strategy 
Estacões de Desenvolvimento Agrário (IDA office at municipal level) 
Economic Internal Rate of Return 
National Strategy for Food and Nutrition Security 
Environmental and Social Management Framework  
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Farmer Field School 
Financial Institutions Law 
Farmers’ organization 
Gender Action Learning System 
Good Agricultural Practice 
Gross Domestic Product 
Gabinete de Estudos, Planificação e Economia (Dep. Of Planning and Statistics) 
Gross National Income 
Government of Angola 
Human Development Index 
Human Development Report 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank Group) 
Instituto de Desenvolvimento Agrário (Agricultural Development Institute) 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Instituto de Investigação Agronómica (Agricultural Research Institute) 
Integrated nutrient management 
AFAP 
AfDB 
AOA 
AWPB 
BNA 
BP 
CGIAR 
CSA 
ECP 
EDA 
EIRR 
ENSAN 
ESMF 
ESMP 
FAO 
FFS 
FIL 
FO 
GALS 
GAP 
GDP 
GEPE 
GNI 
GOA 
HDI 
HDR 
HIV/AIDS 
IBRD 
IDA 
IFAD 
IIA 
INM 
MINAGRI  Ministry of Agriculture 
MINFAMU  Ministry of Family Affairs and for the Promotion of Women  
MOSAP 
MSME 
NAPA 
NDP 
NPV 
PAPAGRO  Programa de Adquisição de Produtos Agropecuarios (Agricultural and Livestock 
Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 
National Adaptation Programme of Action 
National Development Plan 
Net Present Value 
PCC 
PDO 
PFI 
PGC 
PGC 
PHL 
PIM 
PISC 
PIU 
PPCC 
PPIU 
PPP 
Products Purchase Programme) 
Project Coordination Committee 
Project Development Objective 
Partner Financial Institution 
Provincial  Governance Committee 
Provincial Governance Committee 
Post-harvest losses 
Project Implementation Manual 
Project Implementation Sub-Committee 
Project Implementation Unit 
Provincial Project Coordination Committee 
Provincial Project Implementation Units 
Public Private Partnership 
iv 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
R&D 
RIMS 
SADCP 
SECAP 
SSI 
SADCP-
C&H-
SAMAP 
SADCP-
WB 
WHO 
Research and Development 
Results and Impact Management System 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project 
Social Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Small-scale Irrigation 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Development  and  Commercialization  Project–Cuanza  Sul 
and Huila Provinces 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project – World Bank 
World Health Organization of the United Nations 
v 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Map of the project area 
vi 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Executive Summary1 
A. 
Rationale 
i. 
The Government of Angola (GOA) requested IFAD and the World Bank (WB) to support, under 
parallel financing, the Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (SADCP). 
The SADCP represents a significant scaling up of support to a greater number of smallholder farmers, 
from 50,000 farm families under  the Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture  Project (MOSAP) to at 
least  235,000  farmers  under  the  SADCP,  covering  five  provinces  as  compared  to  three  under 
MOSAP. As requested by the GOA, SADCP will be implemented in two separate regions, each clearly 
assigned to one development partner.  
ii. 
SADCP  is  designed  to  address  two  critical  constraints  to  agricultural  development  in Angola. 
First, it will increase institutional capacity through capacity building, both nationally and in the project 
areas. Second, it will upgrade smallholder agricultural production and improve market linkages. It will 
address critical bottlenecks in the agricultural supply and value chains, including extension, irrigation, 
productivity  enhancement,  conservation  agriculture  and  climate  change  adaptation,  post-harvest 
management,  value  addition,  and  market  linkages  of  selected  crops. All  of  these  initiatives  build  on 
the experience gained under MOSAP.  
B. 
Intervention Area, Target Group and Targeting Strategy 
iii. 
The  WB-funded  SADCP  (SADCP-WB)  will  be  implemented  in  Bie,  Huambo,  and  Malanje 
Provinces.  The  IFAD-funded  SADCP  (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP)  will  support  Cuanza  Sul  and  Huila 
Provinces.  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  will cover  ten municipalities  in  two  new provinces, namely  Cuanza 
Sul and Huila. The SADCP-C&H-SAMAP mirrors the SADCP-WB. 
iv. 
The core target group consists of 60,000 rural households, representing about 300,000 people, 
including  50,000  farmers  who  will  benefit  through  farmers’  field  schools  (FFS)  and  10,000  who  will 
benefit from participation in FFS combined with investment support (of which 1,000 farmers will also 
benefit from irrigation development). The target group consists of: (i) small farmers with access to less 
than  two  hectares  of  land  with  potential  for  production  and  productivity  increases,  and  (ii)  groups  of 
women  and  youth  who  will  be  involved  in  processing,  marketing  and  service  provision.  Women  will 
comprise at least 50% and youth for 30% of the target group.  
v. 
The targeting strategy is based on: (a) geographic targeting; (b) self-targeting; and (c) targeting 
tools  to  ensure  inclusiveness.  These  tools  include:  (a)  facilitation  and  empowering  measures;  (b) 
gender approaches; and (c) activities to reach out to youth. 
C. 
Project Development Objective, Outcomes and Components  
vi.  The  Project  Development  Objective  (PDO)  is  to  “increase  smallholder  agriculture  productivity, 
production and marketing for selected crops in the Project areas”. 
vii.  Component  1:  Capacity  Building  and  Institutional  Development  (US$  15.5  million).  This 
component  will  strengthen  smallholder 
technical,  organisational  and  managerial 
farmers’ 
competencies  and  support  a  more  conducive  policy  and  enabling  environment  for  smallholder 
agriculture.  Support  to  government  will  ensure  that  adequate  capacity  is  built  for  farming  as  a 
business  and  enhance  commercialization  and  value  addition.  The  component  consists  of  three 
1  Design  missions  composed of:  Abla  Benhammouche,  IFAD  Country  Director  for  Angola  and  Mission  Leader; 
Paxina  Chileshe,  IFAD  Climate  Change  Adaptation  Specialist;  Marc  Lacharme,  FAO  Agronomist  consultant; 
Robert Creswell, IFAD Financial Management Specialist; Marc Fantinet, Senior Economist and TCI/FAO Team 
Leader (final design mission); Michael Hamp, IFAD Lead Technical Specialist - Inclusive Rural Finance Services, 
Lead  Adviser  for  Angola;  Carmen  Lahoz,  FAO  Targeting,  Gender  and  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  consultant; 
Sophia  Lyamouri,  FAO  Nutrition  consultant;  Diogo  Machado,  IFAD  Economist  consultant;  Biswa  Bandhu 
Mohanty,  IFAD  Rural  Finance  Consultant;  Miguel  Nogueira,  FAO  Value  Chain  Consultant;  Simon  Rietbergen, 
TCI/FAO  Team  Leader  (first  and  second  design  missions);  Waseem  Khan,  IFAD  Procurement  Management 
Specialist. Richard Batamanye, IFAD Financial Management Consultant, Custodio Mucavel, Country Programme 
Officer  IFAD,  Oscar  Atiim  Annadumba,  IFAD  Consultant,  Hélène  Ní  Choncheanainn,  Programme  Assistant, 
Angola, and Meya Zimba, Administrative Assistant, Zambia. 
vii 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
subcomponents: (a) Strengthening Capacity of Smallholder Farmers and Farmers' Organisations (FO) 
through Farmers' Field Schools (FFS).  The project will undertake an  independent evaluation of FFS 
performance  under  MOSAP.  Lesson  learnt  will  be  integrated  into  the  project  FFS  implementation 
arrangements.  FFS  implementation  will  be  sub-contracted  to  FAO  as  envisaged  under  the  SADCP-
WB  project;  (b)  Strengthening  Institutional  Capacity  of  Local,  Provincial,  and  National  Units  of 
MINAGRI;  and  (c)  Strengthening  Capacity  and  Global  Knowledge  to  Address  Emerging  Research 
Problems.  The  component  will  achieve  three  outcomes:  (i)  Strengthened  smallholder  farmers  and 
FOs’ technical, organisational and managerial competence; (ii) a more conducive policy and enabling 
environment  for  smallholder  agriculture;  and  (c)  enhanced  government  capacity  to  support 
smallholder agricultural production and commercialization.  
viii.  Component  2:  Support  for  Increased  Production  and  Commercialization  (US$14.7 
million). This component will strengthen smallholder capital and market linkages  through support on 
a  priority  basis  for  investment  sub-projects  for  farmers’  organisations  (FOs)  to  improve  their 
agricultural production and productivity. For market access and commercialization the project will first 
develop  business  models  and    test  pilot  them  before  any  rolling  out  activities  as  of  third  year  of 
implementation.  The  project  will  promote  provision  of    matching  grants  and  short  and  medium  term 
credit  to  be  extended  by  PFIs  (banks  and  non-bank  microcredit  institutions).  The  project  will 
sustainably link smallholders and their FOs to buyers, input suppliers and PFIs. This will be achieved 
through two sub-components: (i) provision of technical support to be  provided  by contracted service 
providers; and (ii) investment support including the mobilization of PFIs. As for the SADCP-WB three 
main types of investments will be  provided: (a) rehabilitation of small scale irrigation (SSI) schemes; 
(b)  agricultural  production  and  productivity  improvements;  and  (c)  post-harvest  and  value  addition 
investments  including  storage,  processing  and  marketing  facilities.  The  expected  outcome  is 
“Investments in agricultural production and post-harvest management increased”.  
ix.  Component  3:  Programme  Management  (US$8  million).  This  component  is  comprised  of 
two  subcomponents:  (i)  Project  management;  and  (ii)  Monitoring  &  Evaluation.  It  will  support  IDA  in 
managing  the  project  effectively  and  in  accordance  with  its  objective,  procedures  and  fiduciary 
guidelines  and  M&E  system-to  be  established.  The  Project  will  use  the  same  governance  and 
oversight bodies as SADCP-WB, both at the national and the provincial levels. This will strengthen the 
complementarities  and  synergies  between  the  two  parallel-funded  projects,  ensure  coherence  and 
enhance government efforts for achieving economies of scale and sustainable results and impact. A 
separate Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established in Luanda under IFAD funding.  
D. 
Adherence to IFAD policies and SECAP 
x.  The  project  is  aligned  with  IFAD’s  Policies  for  Targeting;  Gender  Equality  and  Women’s 
Empowerment; and IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). The 
project  is  also  aligned  with  IFAD’s  Environmental  and  Natural  Resource  Management  Policy  and 
Climate Change Strategy. The project  nutrition focus  is aligned  with  IFAD’s commitment to nutrition-
sensitive interventions and mainstreaming nutrition.  
xi.  The  environmental  and  social  category  for  the  project  is  B,  as  most  of  the  potential  negative 
impacts of the sub-projects under Component 2 are site-specific and mostly reversible, or mitigation 
measures  can  be  articulated  as  part  of  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plans  (ESMPs).  All 
irrigation  schemes  to  be  rehabilitated  are  small  scale.  The  climate  risk  classification  for  SADCP  is 
moderate.  This  is  based  on  the  fact  that  the  agricultural  production  is  predominantly  rain-fed,  and 
also,  the  evident  variability  in  duration,  distribution  and  quantity  of  rainfall  as  well  as  increasing 
temperatures that are adversely impacting productivity. 
fully 
integrated 
Implementation Arrangements 
E. 
xii.  Project  oversight  and  coordination.  MINAGRI  will  be  the  executing  agency  and  delivery 
Implementation 
systems  will  be 
arrangements will build on the mechanism employed by MOSAP and the SADCP-WB. MINAGRI/IDA 
will  be  responsible  for  administration  and  coordination.  MINAGRI  will  be  supported  by  the  Project 
Coordination Committee (PCC) which will be chaired by the Minister of Agriculture. At provincial level, 
there  will  be  a  Provincial  Project  Coordinating  Committee  (PPCC)  which  will  be  chaired  by  the 
Provincial Vice Governor for Economic Affairs and composed of the Provincial Agriculture Director, the 
IDA  provincial  Chief,  NGOs,  representatives  of  beneficiaries  and  of  private  sector  operators.  To 
into  decentralised  government  structures. 
viii 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
ensure  that  the  decisions  of  PCC  are  executed  in  a  timely  manner,  the  PCC  will  appoint  a  Project 
Implementation Sub-Committee (PISC) consisting of the MINAGRI/IDA Director  General, the Project 
Manager and the Financial Manager.  
F. 
Project Management Structures.  
xiii.  A  Project  Implementation  Unit  (PIU)  will  be  established  in  Luanda;  it  will  be  staffed  by  a 
coordinator,  a  financial  management  specialist,  a  procurement  specialist,  an  M&E  and  knowledge 
management  specialist  and  support  staff.  In  each  participating  province,  there  will  be  a  Provincial 
Project Implementation  Unit (PPIU)  which  will  be staffed  by  an  area coordinator, an accountant  and 
key-support  staff.  Both  the  PIU  and  the  two  PPIUs  will  be  entrusted  with  the  day-to  day 
implementation  of  the  project  including  management,  technical  supervision,  planning,  fiduciary 
management, reporting, etc.  
Cost and Financing 
G. 
xiv.  Total  Project  costs  of  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP,  over  the  seven-year  implementation  period, 
including  physical  and  price  contingencies,  are  estimated  at  US$38.2  million.  Component  1 
represents 40% of total cost, Component 2 represents 39% of total cost and Component 3 represents 
21% of total cost.   
Project financing 
H. 
xv.  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  will  be  funded  by:  (i)  an  IFAD  loan  of  US$28.8 million  (75.5%  of  total 
project cost); (ii) a Government contribution equivalent to US$8.2 million (21.6% of total cost), to cover 
duties and taxes as well as some operational costs of the public extension and agricultural research 
services;  and  (iii)  a  beneficiary  contribution  equivalent  to  US$1.1 million  (3%  of  total  cost)  to  co-
finance sub-projects under subcomponent 2.2 
Benefits and Impact 
I. 
xvi.  The Project will improve the livelihoods and nutrition status of 60,000 beneficiary, households, 
create employment at farm/FOs level and facilitate the development of agricultural value chains.  
xvii.  The main benefits  will be: (i) increased agricultural production and productivity stemming from: 
adoption  of  improved  technologies;  enhanced  access  to  and  efficiency  of  water  use;  (ii) increased 
cash income for participating smallholders; (iii) improved food security and nutrition and reduction in 
the vulnerability to external shocks, notably climate change; (iv) reduced  transaction costs and post-
harvest  losses  through  bulking  and  marketing  by  FOs  and  other  value  chain  actors  and  enhanced 
access of smallholders to finance; (v) increased value added by smallholders and FOs; (vi) enhanced 
bargaining  power,  understanding  of  markets  and  management  capacity  of  smallholders  and  their 
organisations; (vii) improved natural resources conservation, enhanced bio-diversity and resilience to 
climate change; and (viii)  improved institutional capacity of MINAGRI,  IDA at central,  provincial  and 
municipality levels.  
ix 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Logical Framework  
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Results Hierarchy 
Goal: To diversify the economy, 
generate revenue and improve 
livelihoods and food security of poorer 
households 
Development Objective: To increase 
smallholder agriculture productivity, 
production and marketing for selected 
crops in the Project areas.  
Outcome 1: Smallholder farmers’ 
technical, organisational and 
managerial competence improved 
Output 1.1:  Smallholder farmers’ 
technical, organisational and 
managerial competence improved 
Output 1.2: Supported smallholder 
farmers’ organisations and 
cooperatives (FOs) functioning 
Name 
1. 
Increased asset index for 
60,000 households 
2. 
Decrease in chronic 
malnutrition among children under 5 
years 
Number of beneficiaries 
3. 
reached  
3a. of which women (%) 
3b. of which youth (%)  
3c. of which FFS beneficiaries 
receiving nutrition education 
4.  Average crop yields  
Maize (MT/ha) 
Beans (MT/ha) 
Onion (MT/ha) 
Irish potato (MT/ha) 
Cassava (MT/ha) 
5.  Proportion of targeted smallholder 
production marketed (%) 
Number of farmers having 
6. 
completed FFS training (of which 50% 
women/ 30% youth) 
7. 
operational 
Percentage of FOs 
Baseline 
Baseline 
data 
Cuanza 
sul 
(34.3%); 
Huila 
(33.7%) 
0 
Baseline 
data 
0.5 
0.3 
8.0 
9.0 
7.0 
15 
0 
0 
Mid-term 
(YR4) 
10% 
increase 
(from 
baseline) 
2.5% 
reduction 
from 
baseline 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Baseline, mid-term and 
end of project surveys  
Yr1, Yr4, 
Yr7 
Service provider 
Baseline survey, 
nutritional assessments 
Yr1, Yr4, 
Yr7 
Service provider 
25% 
increase 
(from 
baseline) 
5% 
reduction 
from 
baseline 
20.000 
60.000 
Reports of implementing 
entities and IDA records 
6-monthly 
PIU, 
PPIU, IDA, 
service providers 
50% 
30% 
30% 
1.0 
0.55 
12.0 
10.0 
9.0 
20 
50% 
30% 
60% 
2.1 
0.9 
14.0 
12.0 
13.0 
25 
Surveys of the FFS/FBS 
participants and sub-
project beneficiaries 
Yr1, Yr4, 
Yr7 
PIU 
IDA, service 
provider 
Surveys  of  the  FFS/FBS 
participants  and 
sub-
project beneficiaries 
Yr1,  Yr4, 
Yr7 
PIU 
IDA, 
provider 
service 
20,000 
60,000 
IDA records 
6-monthly 
IDA, service 
provider 
30% 
60%  
Reporting service 
provider 
6-monthly 
PIU, IDA 
x 
Assumptions (A) / Risk s 
(R) 
Substantial policy, 
governance and 
macroeconomic risks (R) 
Weak institutional capacity 
of project implementation 
(R) 
Delays in setting up PIU 
and PPIUs and signing of 
contracts with service 
providers  
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Outcome 2: More conducive policy 
and enabling environment for 
smallholder agriculture  
Appropriate smallholder 
8. 
agricultural policies included in national 
& sectoral development plans 
Output 2.1: MINAGRI staff that 
benefitted from training 
9. 
Number of MINAGRI/IDA/ICA 
staff having completed training course 
Output 2.2: Registration of farmers’ 
associations and cooperatives 
(including Water User Associations) 
streamlined and supported 
Outcome 3: Government capacity to 
support climate resilient smallholder 
agricultural production and 
commercialization enhanced 
Output 3.1: Institutional capacity of 
national and provincial-level agricultural 
research system strengthened 
Output 3.2: Number of climate 
resilience technologies demonstrated in 
project area 
Outcome 4:  Investments in 
agricultural production and post-
harvest management increased  
Output 4.1:  Sub-projects 
(SP)/Business plans (BP)’ technical, 
economic, financial, social, 
environmental and climate resilience 
feasibility proven  
Output 4.2: Financial products for 
farmers organisations and rural 
businesses introduced 
10. 
No. of registered entities (with  
membership  data  disaggregated  by 
gender) 
Percentage of beneficiaries of 
11. 
FFS that adopted at least 2 new 
technologies 
Number  of 
12. 
recommended 
technology  packages  for  project  crops 
and target groups developed 
13. 
resilience technologies applied  
Number  of  adapted  climate 
Number of SPs/BPs approved 
14. 
for financing and implemented, of 
which:  
SP for production enhancement 
SP for value addition and 
commercialization2 
15a.  Number of farmers accessing 
project financial services  
15b.  Amount  of  PFI  credit  mobilized 
(USD million) 
0 
0 
0 
1 
3 
150 
100 
50 
National Development 
Plans/sector Strategy 
Reports/ Surveys of the 
FFS/FBS participants  
Reporting service 
provider 
Yr1, Yr4, 
Yr7 
PIU, IDA, service 
provider 
Slow  start-up  of  activities 
® 
6-monthly 
PIU, IDA 
Weak  capacity  of  public 
service®(R) 
165 
Registrar 
Annual 
MINAGRI 
0% 
80% 
80% 
Ex-post evaluation 
Yr7 
PIU 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
8 
50 
40 
3 
10 
IIA & IDA 
Annual 
20 
Reporting IDA 
6-monthly 
IDA 
150 
IDA reporting 
Annual 
PPIUs 
120 
  30 
1,000 
5,000 
PFI & IDA reporting 
Annual 
PIU 
0.3  
1.2 
PFI reporting 
Annual 
PIU 
Weak capacity of public 
services  (R) 
Sufficient  capacity  of  IIA& 
IDA to prepare technology 
kits (A) 
Slow start-up of activities 
(R) 
2 SPs mainly dealing with marketing/commercialisation will be tested and piloted during the first two years before taken to scale.  
xi 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
xii 
SS Irrigation developmentFinancial literacy trainingImproved post-harvest managementSeed selection and multiplicationImproved financial servicesImproved value additionImproved policy frameworkTransport, storage facilities and spot improvement Proposed SolutionsImproved technology packages for farmersPrivate sector partnershipsImproved diagnostic servicesof any other needed rural infrastructureCC adaptation/CSA/INM/CAFarmer friendly commercial environmentResearch and demos FFS/FBSExtension improvementMainstream nutrition in FFSTA and trainingDevelopment ProblemUnderlying CausesLimited knowledge & skills of farmersPoorly developed financial institutionsPoor access to marketsWeak research and extensionPoor roads and marketsLow level of technology usedLow levels of Financial literacyLimited knowledge about marketsWeak farmer organisationsLack of storage and transport facilitiesLimited ability to adapt to CCLack of marketing infrastructureWeak agricultural policy frameworkBasic CausesLimited access to affordable inputsBottlenecks in value chainsLong-term neglect of agricultural sectorlow levels of literacy among farmersPoor post-harvest managementPost-conflict recovery situationSubsistence orientationLimited value additionSmall landholdingsPoorly developed infrastructureLimited development of irrigationWeak private sectorUndeveloped value chain linkagesRepublic of Angola: Smallholder Agricultural Commercialisation and Development Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila provinces Figure 1: Problem Tree Analysis and Theory of changeInstitutional capacity  building  and improved stakeholder satisfaction with policy frameworkRural markets development Low agricultural productivity,  production and poor consumptionPoorly developed rural infrastructureWeak policy and institutional frameworkWeak linkages between farmers and marketsLimited access to financial services in rural areasHighlevels of rural poverty, food and nutrition insecurity 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
I.  Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
1. 
The  Republic  of  Angola  is  one  of  Africa’s  most  resource-rich  countries,  representing  sub-
Saharan Africa’s second largest oil producer, and the world’s fourth largest producer of diamonds. The 
country  also  possesses  a  wealth  of  other  natural  resources,  including  minerals,  water,  arable  land, 
forests and fisheries. The country covers an area of 1,247,000 km2 and is the third largest country in 
sub-Saharan Africa. The 2014 census estimated its population at 24.3 million people of whom some 
38%  are  living  in  rural  areas.3  After  four  decades  of  civil  war,  much  of  the  country’s  economy 
collapsed,  infrastructure  destroyed  and  institutions  weakened.  Since  the  return  of  peace  about  14 
years  ago,  the  Government,  together  with  its  national  and  international  partners  have  made 
substantial  progress  in  re-establishing  the  foundation  needed  to  address  these  problems.  This  has 
resulted in the development and implementation of programmes aimed at restoring order and security, 
revitalising the economy, restoration of basic social services and the rehabilitation of infrastructure. 
2. 
Although the agriculture sector contributes on average only 5.5% to GDP, 44% of the employed 
population  works  in  the  sector  according  to  the  recent  census.  Moreover,  46%  of  households  were 
engaged  in  some  agricultural  activity  and  6%  were  engaged  in  fishing.  The  Food  and  Agriculture 
Organisation (FAO) estimates that almost 68% of economically active adults worked in the agriculture 
sector  in  2014.  More  than  half  of  Angola’s  poor  are  located  in  rural  areas  and  depend  almost 
exclusively on agriculture for their livelihood. Almost a third of agricultural households are headed by 
women. Women are responsible for 70% of traditional subsistence agriculture and 24% of commercial 
agriculture. 
3. 
Oil prices declined by over 72% between 2014 and 2016. This led to important changes in the 
economy  including:  (i)  emergence  of  a  current  account  deficit  -  the  first  since  the  financial  crisis  of 
2008–2009;  (ii)  a  scarcity  of  foreign  currency;  and  (iii)  local  currency    depreciation  and  inflationary 
pressures, with annual inflation currently around 26%. The drop in oil prices also drastically reduced 
government  revenues,  leading  to  large  cuts  in  expenditures,  including  the  virtual  elimination  of  fuel 
subsidies,  the  cancelation  of  capital  expenditures,  and  a  reduction  in  acquisitions  of  goods  and 
services.  
These changes prompted the government to accelerate efforts to diversify the economy. Angola 
4. 
depends  heavily  on  food  imports.  The  Government  Strategy  to  Exit  the  Crisis  places  a  strong 
emphasis  on  agriculture  as  an  immediate  way  to  increase  domestic  production  and  reduce  imports. 
Particularly,  the  government  is  facilitating  private  sector  involvement  in  the  agriculture  sector  and  is 
encouraging  national  financial  institutions  to  support  the  sector  more  deeply.  Increased  agricultural 
production (particularly cereals and vegetables) and productivity have the potential to ease the current 
account pressures and the foreign exchange scarcity.    
5. 
Poverty  and  inequality.  Angola  partially  met  its  Millennium  Development  Goals  targets  in 
2015. Angola ranks low on both human development and business environment indicators. Its overall 
institutional  capacity  has  not  been  rehabilitated  since  the  return  of  peace  and  bureaucratic  hurdles 
inhibit  private  sector  growth.  Performance  related  to  social  indicators  is  mixed:  good  progress  has 
been made in poverty reduction, primary education, and gender equality since 2002, but other social 
indicators  remain  very  poor.  For  example,  maternal  mortality  is  450  per  100,000  births,  and 
malnutrition is acute with 30% of children less than five years of age suffering from stunting and 16% 
underweight. 
The overall poverty rate declined from 62% in 2001 to about 37% in 20094. This was a major 
6. 
achievement,  but  much  more  needs  to  be  done  to  reduce  poverty  as  part  of  the  shared  prosperity 
agenda. Major disparities in the poverty rate exist across different provinces as well as between rural 
and urban areas. The rural poverty rate is almost 58%, in contrast with an urban poverty rate of less 
than  30  percent.  In  the  capital  city  (with  a  population  of  about  five  million),  the  poverty  rate  is  only 
3 Government of Angola (2016), “Censo 2014. Resultados definitivos do recensamento geral da populaçao e de habitaçao de 
Angola 2014”, Instituto Nacional de Estatística.  
4 IBEP 2008-2009. 
1 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
about  9%.  Smallholder  agricultural  production  and  productivity  development  and  commercialization 
are hence critical to reduce rural poverty. 
Continuing  rural-urban  migration.  Angola  experienced  rapid  urbanisation,  with  62%  of  the 
7. 
population  currently  living  in  urban  areas  compared  to  15%  in  1970.  This  was  exacerbated  by  the 
armed  conflict.  A  massive  migration  of  rural  people  in  search  for  a  more  secure  environment  took 
place during the armed struggle. The population of Luanda grew from less than half a million in 1970 
to  an  estimated  over  6  million  in  2014.  After  the  civil  war,  low  agricultural  productivity,  limited 
availability  of  social  services  and  infrastructure  and  the  scarcity  of  job  opportunities  prevented  rural 
people from returning to their areas of origin. These same factors continue to be the main drivers of 
rural–urban migration, which affects mainly young people.  
Other  indicators  reflecting  current  human  development  conditions  include:  (i)  56%  of  the 
8. 
population (78%  in rural areas) do not have access to safe water sources;  (ii) only  24%  of  the rural 
population (63% in urban areas) have access to government health facilities within a 2 km radius; (iii) 
life  expectancy  at  birth  is  estimated  at  52.3  years  (HDR  2015),  among  the  lowest  in  the  world;  (iv) 
despite  major  efforts  at  educational  reform,  adult  illiteracy  is  still  widespread  in  rural  areas  (59%) 
compared  to  urban  areas  (20%);  (v)  youth  unemployment  is  pronounced  at  46%,  against  a  general 
unemployment rate of 24%; (vi) Angola ranks 121 out of 142 countries in the Gender Gap Index 2014. 
9.  Women.  While  efforts  have  been  made  to  reach  gender  parity  in  net  enrolment  for  primary 
schooling, girls continue to have less access to secondary education. Illiteracy rates are substantially 
higher  for  women  (47%)  than  among  men  (20%).  Moreover,  the  combination  of  limited  access  to 
vocational  training  and  education  opportunities  relegates  women  to  sectors  such  as  subsistence 
agriculture and informal trade. Women and men participate in unequal terms in the management and 
control  over  assets  and  in  decision-making,  both  at  household  and  community  level.  Over  23%  of 
households  are  headed  by  women. The  Ministry  of  Family Affairs  and  for  the  Promotion  of Women 
(MINFAMU) developed a National Gender Policy and Implementation Strategy. Despite the approval 
of the Family Law and the Law Criminalising Domestic Violence, the use of customary law, strongly 
favouring men, is still widespread. 
10.  Youth.  The  government  defines  youth  as  people  aged  15  to  35.  They  represent  32.4%  of  all 
citizens  in the country.  Migration levels among  youth  peaks at 24.5% for the age group between 25 
and 35 years. The youth in rural areas are faced with the challenge of wanting to explore alternative 
livelihood opportunities to subsistence farming while having little formal training to equip them to face 
the  labour  market.  School  completion  rates  decrease  after  the  primary  level  and  progressively  drop 
along the education pathway. Poverty is lower among the 15 – 35 year old range group than any other 
age group. A large number of households are youth headed. It is more frequent for the youth aged 20 
–  24  years  to  have  promiscuous  sexual  behaviour,  placing  this  particular  group,  their  partners  and 
their unborn children at greater risk of HIV. 
11.  Child and women’s malnutrition. Stunting, wasting, and underweight are all considered to be 
of  “medium”  public  health  significance.  Child  stunting  is  a  public  health  concern  in  the  country. 
Furthermore, adolescent girls or women who were stunted during childhood are more likely to have an 
obstructed labour or experience other complications during delivery, subsequently heightening the risk 
of  maternal  mortality.  Chronic  malnutrition is  29%  prevalent,  acute  malnutrition  is  8%  prevalent  and 
underweight  for  age  is  16%.  Causes  of  malnutrition  are  highly  complex.  They  feature  not  only 
immediate causes such as poor infant feeding and caring practices, and low dietary diversity; but also 
a diverse set of underlying causes. The latter include poor consumer knowledge and literacy, limited 
affordability of food due to inflated food prices, large post-harvest losses due to the near-absence of 
conservation and processing infrastructure, among others. 
12.  Agricultural sector. Although Angola used to be a major agricultural exporter, a large share of 
the food consumed in the country is currently imported, with the exception of roots and tubers. Almost 
36 percent of cereal consumption (about 1.1 million tons) is met through imports. This is due in part to 
the destruction of the agricultural production and marketing infrastructure during the civil war, and in 
part  to  the  improvements  in  terms  of  trade  that  came  from  high  oil  prices  and  increased  oil  exports 
volume. The fall in oil price registered in the last two years and the consequent currency devaluation 
is a natural incentive for domestic production to increase and substitute part of the imports. However, 
the  extent  to  which  this  incentive  will  materialise  depends  on  other  factors  such  as  adequate 
2 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
macroeconomic framework, improvements in the business climate, infrastructure and labor skills. The 
government  is  in  the  process  of  implementing  policies  that  will  increase  revenue  and  reduce 
expenditure. At the same time, the government is striving to improve the business climate to promote 
economic  development,  diversification  of 
the  non-oil  economy  (including  agriculture),  and 
competitiveness. 
13.  Angola  has  an  estimated  35  million  ha  of  arable  land,  of  which  less  than  4  million  ha  are 
currently  under  cultivation.  Overall,  agricultural  productivity  and  crop  yields  are  extremely  low.  The 
soils are generally fertile in the north and the central highlands (Bié, Huambo, and Malanje provinces) 
and  average  rainfall  exceeds  1,000  mm  per  year.  The  country  has  enormous  potential  to  increase 
cropped  area,  raise  crop  yields,  and  exploit  the  potential  of  its  diverse  agro-climatic  regions  to 
increase production. Inclusive growth in the agriculture sector can reduce rural poverty, diversify the 
economy, accelerate economic growth, increase food security, improve social indicators in rural areas, 
and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. The proposed Smallholder Agriculture Development 
and  Commercialization  Project  (SADCP)  aims  to  provide  a  major  impetus  to  the  agriculture  sector, 
which will improve the lives of rural poor people. 
14.  Market  opportunities.  Until  the  recent  decline  of  oil  prices  the  rural  economy  and  the 
agricultural  sector  has  received  insufficient  attention  in  the  rapidly  evolving  economy.  Agriculture, 
essentially subsistence-based, is typified by low yields, low prices and low returns to labour and land. 
Only  a  limited  part  of  agricultural  production  reaches  the  market.  Poorly  developed  infrastructure 
(especially  roads  and  electricity),  limited  access  to  financial  services,  poor  agricultural  research  and 
extension  services,  and  limited  availability  of  agricultural  inputs  represent  the  major  constraints  to 
growth in the sector. Market demand is high for most food crops and opportunities exist for expanding 
smallholders’  production.  However  market  outlets  in  rural  areas  are  insufficient  and  marketing 
systems  that  were  severely  disrupted  during  the  civil  war,  are  yet  to  be  strengthened.  Farmers’ 
organisations (FOs) can play an efficient role in bulking the production of smallholders and linking with 
traders and markets in urban areas.  
15.  The  Market  Oriented  Smallholder  Agriculture  Project  (MOSAP)  was  implemented  in  a  post-
conflict situation in which most smallholder agricultural production focused on subsistence agriculture.  
This  situation  still  prevails  for  the  target  households  in  the  new  Project  provinces,  where  most 
subsistence  farmers  remain  net  food  buyers.  As  the  households  participating  in  the  FFSs  (under 
Component 1) advance to the stage where they can begin the transition from subsistence to market-
oriented  production,  the  Project  will  support  sub-project  proposals  (under  Component  2)  from  more 
advanced associations and FOs that focus on post-harvest value addition in concert with productivity 
and production. The approach will be guided by a number of lessons learned from MOSAP in linking 
smallholder farmers with markets. 
16.  Rural  Finance  Sector.  The  financial  sector,  comprising  27  commercial  banks,  non‐banking 
financial institutions, and microfinance institutions (MFIs), has been meeting the evolving demands of 
the economy and contributing to economic diversification and reducing dependency on the oil sector. 
Though  competitive,  the  banking  sector  is  highly  concentrated,  with  five  banks  holding  over  75 
percent of market share. It has been expanding throughout the country but the scope of products and 
services  offered  are  mostly  focused  on  traditional  mass-market  banking  products.  The  banks  have 
sound  and  highly  liquid  balance  sheets  and  adequate  financial  resources  to  support  economic 
diversification, employment generation and sustainable poverty reduction. This notwithstanding, loans 
are concentrated in a few sectors in Luanda province. A few banks have microfinance portfolios, but 
loans are mostly extended under government or donor-supported programmes.  
17.  The  share  of  agriculture  in  the  loan  portfolio  of  banks  is  minimal  and  mainly  short  term.  The 
development of new products and services for agriculture and formal credit/deposit insurance is not in 
vogue. The central bank, Banco Nacional de Angola (BNA), is a principal member of the Alliance for 
Financial Inclusion and committed to implement a financial inclusion policy and strategic framework. 
BNA has also made good progress in strengthening its banking supervision framework. It has issued 
regulations  covering  governance,  risk  management,  external  audit,  consumer  protection,  etc.  The 
recently  approved  Financial  Institution  Law  (FIL)  provides  a  framework  for  deposit  guarantee,  the 
Bank  Resolution  Fund  and  inter-institutional  National  Council  of  Financial  Stability.  The  banking 
sector‘s liquidity remains high at about 0.75% of GDP. Angola’s non-bank financial sector is small, but 
3 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
it  is  likely  to  grow  with  the  passing  of  the  FIL  in  December  2015,  which  stipulates  the  creation  of  a 
host of non-bank financial institutions. 
18.  GOA and BNA have focused, in recent years, on economic diversification, deepening financial 
inclusion,  developing  rural  financial  systems,  microfinance  and  financing  agriculture  and  agri-
business, with specific attention on family farming. The financial sector is yet to give due attention to 
these emerging areas, and there is still a long way to go to achieve a diversified economy  with more 
inclusive,  sustainable  and  robust  growth. The  current  economic  environment  has  provided  a  unique 
opportunity  to  refocus  policies,  re-engineer  systems  and  processes,  foster  structural  transformation, 
and  bring  about  institutional  development  and  upscale  innovations  for  agriculture  and  rural 
development. Both public and private institutions, including the banking sector, have to work closely to 
increase  production  and  productivity  of  smallholder  farmers  by  facilitating  access  to  finance, 
technology and markets.  
19.  Current Policy Framework. A key policy in Angola’s National Development Programme, 2013-
2017,  is  the  promotion  of  economic  growth  and  increased  employment.  Government  envisions  the 
intensification  of  economic  diversification  supported  through  investment  in  rehabilitation  and 
development  of  new  infrastructure.  In  addition,  the  government  targets  the  development  of 
macroeconomic  policies  to  stimulate  private  investment  and  the  creation  of  a  more  efficient  and 
flexible  public  institutional  structure.  The  latter  would  include  restructuring  of  the  central  and  local 
administrative bodies for purposes of rationalisation of resources and increased efficiency.  
20.  The  government  is  fighting  poverty  on  various  fronts  including:  (i)  the  2005  Anti-poverty 
Strategy  (ECP);  (ii)  the  2009  National  Strategy  for  Food  and  Nutrition  Security  (ENSAN);  (iii)  the 
Integrated  Municipal  Program  for  Rural  Development  and  the  Fight  Against  Poverty  (PMIDRCP), 
which resulted from the 2010 merger of the ECP and ENSAN; and (v) the National Development Plan 
(NDP) 2013-2017. Government continues to allocate more than 30% of its budget to improving social 
conditions; a figure that is projected to increase over the next five years. The main priorities identified 
in the ECP are: (i) the reconstruction of infrastructure; (ii) increased access to education, health, and 
other  basic  services;  and  (iii)  decentralisation  of  governance  structures.  The  ECP  highlights  rural 
development,  with  a  focus  on  the  improvement  of  food  security  and  the  revitalisation  of  the  rural 
economy.  
21.  The  PMIDRCP  aims:  “to  reduce  levels  of  extreme  poverty  in Angola  and  in  particular  in  rural 
areas,  promoting  access  to  basic  public  services  and  turn  Angola  into  a  prosperous  country  with 
social  justice.”  This  programme  is  implemented  countrywide  and  led  by  the  Secretariat  of  Social 
Issues of the Presidency. PMIDRCP includes several social programmes, such as Pro-ajuda (“help for 
work” aiming at the social inclusion of the more vulnerable households), Agua para todos (Water for 
all), Cartão Kikuia (provision of 10 thousand kwanzas to cover basic living expenses) and Programa 
de  Aquisição  de  Produtos  Agrícola  (PAPAGRO)  aiming  at  purchasing  agricultural  products  from 
smallholder farmers.  
22.  Climate change (CC). Climate models predict Angola will experience higher temperatures (1.2 
to  3.2°C  by  the  2060s),  more  extreme  weather  events,  an  expansion  of  arid  and  semi-arid  regions, 
seasonal shifts in rainfall, localised floods, increased wildfires, sea level rise, increased rainfall in the 
northern parts of the country, changes in river flows as well as changes in sea and lake temperatures 
(NAPA,  2011).  The  agriculture  sector  is  particularly  vulnerable  to  the  impacts  of  hazards  such  as 
drought and flood, as well as changes in the onset and duration of the growing season. Other possible 
changes are likely to include reduced duration of the growing season in southern and coastal regions, 
and a shift from two growing seasons to one in the northern regions (Lotz-Sistika and Urquhart, 2014). 
Potential  impacts  include:  crop  failures  due  to  heat  and  drought  stress,  production  losses  due  to 
unpredictable onset of rains, reduced planting area due to consumption of seed stores, and increased 
susceptibility to pests and disease. These are expected to adversely affect productivity as most of the 
agricultural production is rain-fed. 
B.  Rationale 
Theory of Change 
23.  Following  decades  of  civil  war  and  neglect,  Angola’s  smallholder  farmers  face  multiple 
challenges which have perpetuated their struggle to escape poverty. The problem tree and theory of 
4 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
change  shown  in  Figure  1  identifies  four  major  causal  factors:  (i)  low  agricultural  productivity  and 
production;  (ii) limited  access  to  appropriate  financial  services;  (iii)  weak  linkages  between  farmers 
and  markets;  and  (iv) weak  policy  and  institutional  framework.  Each  of  these  causal  factors  has  a 
number of contributory elements which need to be tackled by the Project in order to address the core 
problem  of  persistently  high  levels  of  rural  poverty,  food  and  nutrition  insecurity.  Climate  change 
amplifies the impact of all of these causal factors. The theory of change indicates how the Project will 
pursue  its  objective  increasing  smallholder  productivity,  production  and  access  to  markets  through 
four major outcomes:  
  Smallholder  farmers'  technical,  organisational  and  managerial  competence  improved. 
This  will  be  achieved  by  strengthening  the  capacity  of  smallholder  farmers  and  their 
organisations  through  Farmer  Field  and  Business  Schools  (FFBS)  in  order  to  improve  their 
technical, organisational, commercial and managerial skills. 
  More conducive policy and enabling environment for smallholder agriculture. This will be 
delivered through strengthening local, provincial and national units of the Ministry of Agriculture 
and  associated  institutions,  notably  in  the  fields  of  agricultural  statistics,  agricultural  policy 
analysis,  irrigation  development,  and  enhanced  delivery  of  extension  and  business  advisory 
services. It will be complemented by the WB to strengthen the policy framework in country. 
  Government  capacity 
to  support  climate  resilient  smallholder  production  and 
commercialization enhanced. This will be achieved by strengthening the capacity and global 
knowledge  of  national  research  institutions  to  address  emerging  research  issues  pertinent  to 
smallholder agriculture. 
 
 Investments  in  agricultural  production,  productivity  and  post-harvest  management  for 
value  addition  increased.  This  will  involve  technical  and  financial  support  to  smallholders  to 
expand  the  area  under  small-scale  irrigation  and  drainage  and  co-finance  smallholders’ 
investments  for  increased  productivity,  production,  access  to  markets,  value  addition  and 
enhanced access to appropriate financial services.  
24.  SADCP builds on a previous World Bank and IFAD-supported project - MOSAP - approved in 
July  2008  and  implemented  over  seven  years.  MOSAP  was  designed  to  increase  agricultural 
production  through  the  provision  of  improved  agricultural  services  and  investment  support  to 
smallholder  farmers.  Activities  implemented  under  MOSAP  included:  (a)  training  of  over  50,000 
smallholder farmers in the use of improved agricultural technologies to increase crop production (the 
training was provided by service providers and FAO to over 25,000 producers on family farms through 
FFSs5; (b) training more than 60 agricultural technicians within MINAGRI; (c) providing support to over 
10,000  smallholder  beneficiaries  by  financing  approximately  280  sub-projects6;  and  (d)  building  the 
capacity of ADI staff in targeted provinces and municipalities. In addition to capacity building, MOSAP 
contributed  to:  (a)  an  increase  in  agricultural  production;  and  (b)  the  adoption  of  improved 
technologies for maize, beans, cassava, and Irish potatoes in the project areas.  
25.  The overall SADCP, which will be parallel funded by IFAD and the World Bank, will scale up the 
geographic  focus  of  MOSAP  in  order  to  reach  additional  beneficiaries  in  more  municipalities  and 
communes  within  five  provinces:  Bié,  Huambo,  Cuanza  Sul,  Huila  and  Malanje7. Additionally,  it  will 
include  rehabilitation  of  small-scale  gravity-fed  irrigation  schemes  as  a  pilot  programme  for 
smallholders.  Building  on  lessons  learned  from  MOSAP,  SADCP  strongly  emphasises  capacity 
building,  institutional  development,  linking  smallholders  to  markets,  by  strengthening  MINAGRI’s 
capacity  for  statistics,  policy  analysis,  market  information,  irrigation  development,  and  agricultural 
to  mainstream  environmental 
extension.  Also  building  on 
learned,  SADCP  aims 
lessons 
5 The FFS is a group-based learning process introduced in Angola by FAO and implemented under MOSAP to train smallholder 
farmer beneficiaries. An independent evaluation carried out in 2015 found a strong positive impact of FFS training on the crop 
management practices and crop yields of participating farmers.  
6 Subprojects are demand-based and supported in the form of matching grants provided by the project to rural communities and 
smallholder groups for small-scale agricultural infrastructure, production, processing, and marketing. 
7 SADCP-WB will be implemented in Bie, Huambo and Malanje provinces while SADCP-C&H (IFAD funding) will be in Cuanza 
Sul and Huila provinces.  
5 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
considerations  and  climate-smart  agriculture  (CSA)  practices.  Through  investments  in  more  efficient 
use of water resources, soil conservation, and integrated natural resource management. In addition, 
SADCP will explore new avenues to blend matching grants and equity contributions  of beneficiaries, 
with loans to support their investments, gradually crowding-in formal partner finance institutions.  
26.  The  Angola  NAPA,  elaborated  in  2011,  identifies  agriculture  and  fisheries  as  the  most 
vulnerable, sectors and prolonged drought, flooding and soil erosion as major threats. The adaptation 
measures  prioritised  in  the  NAPA  were  further  elaborated  in  the  Intended  Nationally  Determined 
Contributions (INDC, 2015). SADCP will address the priorities identified by NAPA for agriculture and 
food  security  (sustainable  land  and  water  management,  controlling  soil  erosion,  and  more  climate 
resilient  farming  systems),  through  the  FFS  extension  method,  small-scale  irrigation,  and  technical 
and  financial  support  to  smallholders  and  FOs.  The  FFS  curriculum  used  under  MOSAP  already 
includes  techniques  to  assist  climate  change  adaptation,  e.g.  conservation  agriculture  and 
composting, and  will be further  improved. These capacity  building efforts will also benefit IDA’s field 
technicians, who will be trained as FFS Master Trainers. A climate vulnerability analysis in the project 
area  was  undertaken  during  the  design  phase  (see  appendix  15)  and  illustrates  that  several  crops 
targeted  by  SADCP,  including  cassava,  sweet  potato,  maize,  millet  and  sorghum,  coffee  are  well 
suited  to  the  current  conditions  and  the  expected  climate  change  impacts  in  Huila  and  Cuanza  Sul 
provinces. 
27.  SADCP is aligned with the three Strategic Objectives of IFAD 10. The Project will increase poor 
rural  people’s  productive  capacities  and  nutrition  (SO1)  by  providing  training  on  good  agricultural 
practices  for  farmers  using  rainfed  or  irrigation  agriculture.  The  Project  will  increase  target 
beneficiaries’  access 
in  agribusiness 
development  and  marketing,  by  brokering  market  linkages  and  by  providing  low-cost  post-harvest 
training  and  assets.  Finally,  the  Project  will  strengthen  the  environmental  sustainability  and  build 
climate  resilience  of  target  beneficiaries’  economic  activities  (SO3),  by  promoting  climate  smart 
agriculture  practices  and  sustainable  diversification  of  farming  systems  for  improved  livelihood 
strategies and nutrition and making them less susceptible to climatic extremes. 
to  markets  (SO2)  by  providing  broad-based 
training 
II.  Project description 
A.  Project area and Target group 
Project intervention area 
28.  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP will cover in about 10 municipalities in Cuanza Sul and Huila provinces8. 
Most of this area is located on the North and South-Western periphery of the central highlands, which 
is  well-endowed  with  natural  resources,  including  water  and  fertile  soils  though  some  areas  have 
acidic  soils.  The  highlands  have  a  bi-modal  rainy  season  with  an  October  onset  and  peak  in 
December, before a second ‘late’ rain in March-April. The project should be afforded with flexibility to 
link it with ARRP on the area of resilience activities in Huila Province. 
Target group9  
The  core  target  group  will  be  60,000  smallholder  households  benefitting  from  FFS  or  investment 
support10. This  core  target  group  will  include:  (i)  small  subsistence  farmers  with  access  to  less  than 
2.0  hectares  with  a  potential  for  production  and  productivity  increases,  (ii)  small  and  stable  family 
farms  of  2-5  hectares  with  some  level  of  organisation,  mainly  through  associations,  producing  at 
subsistence level with the potential to graduate into a market-oriented level; and (iii) groups of women 
and  youth  who  will be  involved  in processing, marketing  and service provision activities. Women, in 
particular  heads  of  household,  widows  and  young  women,  will  account  for  at  least  50%  and  youth 
between 18 and 35 years old for 30% of the primary target group. SADCP-C&H-SAMAP will consider 
extending  assistance  to  FOs  that  were  mobilised  by  former  MOSAP  but  are  still  vulnerable  and  in 
8 The World Bank-supported parallel SADCP-WB will cover 26 municipalities in the provinces of Bie, Huambo and Malanje.  
9 Appendix 2 summarises the major challenges faced by the target group. 
10  50,000  farmers  benefitting  from  FFS  only  and  10,000  farmers  benefitting  from  FFS  combined  with  investment  support  (of 
which 1,000 farmers who will also benefit from irrigation development). 
6 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
need of further support. Such support will be provided by the project if none will be planned under the 
SADCP-WB.  
29.  A  secondary  target  group  includes  public  and  cooperative  sector  beneficiaries  (IDA  technical 
staff,  cooperatives  and  associations),  agro-dealers,  wholesale  traders  and  commercial  farmers,  that 
are  key  for  the  development  of  value  chains. Among  the  secondary  target  group  such  as  IDA  Staff, 
cooperatives and associations are regarded as direct beneficiaries and will be provided with support 
from  the  project.  Such  support  will  include  inter  alia  training,  improved  working  conditions  in  the 
participating  municipalities  and  improved  mobility.  While,  agro-dealers,  wholesalers  and  commercial 
farmers will benefit from market information systems and access to some training, and establishment 
of economic partnerships with smallholder farmers graduating from FFSs.  
Targeting strategy 
30.  The project will use three targeting mechanisms to ensure the participation of poor households, 
while  not  being  exclusive  of  other  households.  The  mechanisms  will  include:  (i)  geographical 
targeting, (ii) self-targeting; and (iii) empowering measures. 
31.  Geographical targeting. The project will target  poor  municipalities and communes in the two 
intervention  Provinces.  The  main  selection  criteria  will  be:  (i)  a  high  population  density  and  total 
population  so  as  to  be  able  to  reach  the  project  targets;  (ii)  provincially-focused  municipalities  for 
poverty reduction; (iii) poverty incidence above country average; (iv) suitability for promoting market-
oriented production of crop and livestock products; (v) lack of supply chains for agricultural inputs; and 
(vi) geographical contiguity to maximise efficiency of project operations. 
32.  Self-targeting. The FFS approach will ensure self-targeting. After receiving information on the 
FFS approach, smallholder  farmers in the selected  municipalities  and communes  can decide if they 
want  to  become  member  of  a  FFS.  The  project  will  support  the  establishment  of  as  many  FFS  as 
requested  by  the  farmers.  For  a  second  target  group,  namely  organised  groups  of  farmers,  with 
particular attention to women and youth groups, the project will undertake a participatory assessment 
to ensure that interventions are demand-driven and respond effectively to needs of the farmers taking 
into account the maturity of the organisation.  
Targeting Tools to Ensure Inclusiveness  
33.  Empowering  measures.  Within  the  selected  municipalities  and  communes,  the  project  will 
promote the participation of women, youth and poor smallholder farmers by using empowerment and 
capacity  building  measures  to  encourage  their  participation.  Empowering  measures  will  include:  (i) 
information and mobilisation campaigns using local information meetings and media; (iii) agribusiness 
linkages and input supply through FOs, also for the vulnerable groups; (iv) inclusive FFSs; (v) a broad 
range  of  skills  training  activities;  and  (vi)  monitoring  of  inclusiveness.  In  addition  to  developing 
technical  skills,  the  project  will  support  beneficiaries  to  develop  skills  in  household  nutrition,  basic 
literacy and numeracy, business and leadership.  
34.  Gender  approaches.  Gender  will  be  mainstreamed  with  a  focus  on  supporting  women  to 
overcome constraints including access to assets, training and inputs.  SADCP will help women to: (i) 
become member of FFSs; (ii) enhance their skills in farming, with particular reference to  vegetables 
and  irrigated  crops;  (iii)  enhance  women’s  representation  of  at  least  30%  in  decision-making 
structures  of  FFSs  and  FOs,  and  strengthening  of  their  leadership  capacity;  (iv)  access  financial 
services  through  financial  institutions;  (v)  access  to  labour-saving  technologies;  and  (vi)  nutrition-
sensitive agriculture and home gardens for women. The project will apply the Gender Action Learning 
System  (GALS),  which  is  an  innovative  approach  deepening  project  impact  by  strengthening 
communication  and  win-win  collaboration  between  vulnerable  and  more  powerful  actors.  GALS  is 
based  on  action-learning  exercises  that  are  used  with  different  stakeholder  groups  (e.g.  men  and 
women farmers, middlemen and traders) at both the individual and collective levels. Multi-stakeholder 
platforms  will  be  organised  to  identify  and  plan  win-win  strategies.  In  addition,  the  gender  approach 
will  be  based  on:  (a)  quotas  if  required,  at  least  50%  of  women  among  beneficiaries  of  the  various 
activities; (b) monitoring of women’s participation in activities; and (d) gender training for programme 
implementers. 
35.  The gender strategy for the Project aims to provide equal opportunities for women and men 
to participate in and benefit from project activities. Women are targeted to account for at least 50% of 
7 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
the  FFS  facilitators  and  50%  of  women  beneficiaries  -  from  which  women-headed  households  will 
account for 30%  of FFS members; and one target  group comprises  young  women. Women headed 
households and women in male-headed households will be empowered to engage in farming-related 
activities. The use of GALS will ensure that women are fully part of decision-making in the household 
and  regarding  project  activities.  Their  participation  in  FFSs  will  be  used  to  encourage  their 
membership  and  leadership  in  FOs,  apex  organisations  and  policy  engagement.  A  gender  study  is 
foreseen  at  the  onset  of  project  implementation  to  identify  the  factors  that  impede  women  gaining 
access to value chains as producers as well as processors and managers. The  study's findings and 
recommendations  will  guide  the  project  in  facilitating  the  full  participation  of  women.  Climate-smart 
investments  will  support  the  use  of  labour-saving  technologies,  such  as  rainwater  harvesting, 
conservation  agriculture  and  fuel  saving-stoves.  GALS  will  stimulate  discussions  at  the  household 
level regarding workloads which are expected to result in a more equitable allocation of tasks between 
household members.  
36.  Gender  Equality  and  Women’s  Empowerment  Policy.  The  Project  will  bring  an  innovative 
feature to the FFS by  integrating the GALS. This will lead to: (i) and equitable  share of participation 
and  benefits  for  women  and  men;  (ii)  improved  decision-making  capacities  at  household  and 
community  levels;  and  (iii)  an  equitable  share  of  workloads  in  farming  and  domestic  activities.  In 
addition, SADCP-C&H-SAMAP will foster economic empowerment of women in the rural economy.  
37.  Youth  Participation.  The  Project  interventions  will  create  rural  labour  opportunities,  in 
particular  for  rural  youth  in  upstream/downstream  agribusiness  development.  The  project  will:  (i) 
prioritise  young  people  for  training  in  areas  related  to  the  development  of  skills  in  post-harvest 
handling  and  marketing;  (ii)  promote  junior  FFSs  to  attract  participation  of  youth,    and  the  training 
curricula will be developed to ensure their full and active participation; and (iii) support the creation of 
youth-led enterprises. As a measure to support young people and youth groups the IFAD Youth Desk 
will support linkages of the youth target groups with initiatives promoted by IFAD partners working with 
youth in the region (e.g. Global Youth Innovation Network (GYIN), Young Professionals for Agricultural 
Development  (YPARD)  etc.).  Equality  between  young  men  and  young  women  will  be  respected  in 
their selection and participation, and implementers will be trained in approaches for reaching out and 
involving youth, especially young women who may face additional constrains compared to their male 
counterparts11.  
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
38.  The Project Development Objective (PDO), common to the SADCP-WB and the SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP  is  “to  increase  smallholder  agriculture  productivity,  production  and  marketing  for  selected 
crops in the Project areas”. The proposed PDO indicators are: 
(i) 
the  average  yields  of  selected  crops  in  the  project  area  (including  cassava,  maize,  beans, 
Irish potatoes, and most important horticultural crops); 
(ii) 
the proportion of production marketed by smallholder farmers; and 
(iii) 
the number of direct beneficiaries (of which female, youth, and FFS beneficiaries receiving 
nutrition sensitization). 
39.  As per the IFAD Strategic  Framework 2016-21, the ultimate goal is “to diversify the economy, 
generate revenue and improve livelihoods and food security of poorer households”, to be measured 
through  two  indicators  in  the  Huila  and  Cuanza  Sul  provinces:  (a)  decrease  from  2.5%  to  5%  in 
chronic  malnutrition  (stunting)  among  children  under  five  years-old  with  variations  across  targeted 
regions;  and  (b)  increase  in  asset  index  for  60,000  households  (50%  women  and  30%  youth) 
receiving project services.  
40.  The  strategy  is  to  build  upon  the  outcomes  achieved  under  MOSAP  to  increase  productivity, 
production,  and market linkages over a  larger project area. This  will be achieved by: (a) building on 
synergies with ongoing agricultural programmes; (b) maximising opportunities for quick-win results by 
focusing on farmers who received training under MOSAP or other programmes; (c) strengthening the 
knowledge  and  skills  of  smallholder  farmers  and  their  associations  as  well  as  agricultural  extension 
11 Anna Robinson-Pant (2016): Learning knowledge and skills for agriculture to improve rural livelihoods,  UNESCO. 
8 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
staff  and  service  providers;  (d)  recapitalising  productive  agricultural  systems  and  infrastructure, 
including  irrigated  agriculture;  and  (e)  providing  access  to  demand-driven  agricultural  services  and 
markets.  Investments  will  be  based  on  a  flexible,  participatory,  demand-driven  and  nutrition-  and 
gender-sensitive approach.  
C.  Project Outcomes and Components12  
Component  1  –  Capacity  Building  and 
(US$7.7 million from IFAD and US$7.8 million equivalent from GOA) 
Institutional  Development  –  US$15.5  million 
41.  The objective of this component is to improve the technical, institutional, managerial, marketing 
and  business  skills  of  beneficiaries  and  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  government  agricultural 
extension  services,  agricultural  research  institutions,  and  private  agricultural  service  providers.  The 
expected  results  are:  (a) smallholder  farmers'  organisations  established  and  strengthened;  (b) 
technical and managerial competence of smallholder farmers improved; and (c) government capacity 
to support smallholder agricultural production and commercialization enhanced.  
42.  This  component  consists  of  three  subcomponents:  (a)  Strengthening  Capacity  of  Smallholder 
Farmers  and  Farmers'  Organisations  through  FFS;  (b)  Strengthening  Institutional  Capacity  of  Local, 
Provincial, and National Units of MINAGRI; and (c) Strengthening Capacity and Global Knowledge to 
address emerging research problems. 
Sub-component  1.1:  Strengthening  Capacity  of  Smallholder  Farmers  and  Farmers’ 
Organisations  through  Farmer  Field  Schools  –  US$6.7  million  (US$4.5  million  from  IFAD  and 
USD2.2 million equivalent from GOA)  
43.  The  objective  of  this  subcomponent  is  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  smallholder  farmers  and 
FOs  through  FFS.  The  expected  outcome  is  “smallholder  farmers’  technical,  organisational  and 
managerial competence improved”. This will include: (a) supporting the establishment of smallholder 
FOs;  (b) strengthening  the  knowledge  of  farmers  on  Good  Agricultural  Practices  (GAPs),  climate 
change  adaptation,  marketing  and  business  opportunities,  use  of  quality  seed/planting  materials  of 
improved  varieties,  timely  planting  and  weeding,  etc.;  (c)  increasing  levels  of  financial  literacy  and 
strengthening  the  functional  literacy  and  numeracy  of  farmers;  (d)  improving  dietary  diversity 
awareness among households as well as knowledge about infant feeding and infant caring practices; 
(e) improving soil fertility through integrated nutrient management (INM), integrated pest and disease 
management (IPDM) and water/nutrient use efficiency; (f) promoting conservation agriculture; and (g) 
building the capacity of staff at the municipal level through training-of-trainers and on-the-job training. 
44.  The FFS training  is expected to benefit  60,000 smallholder farmers in the two  provinces. The 
FFS methodology empowers smallholder farmers to set their own agenda and take steps to improve 
their  agricultural  knowledge  and  economic  situation.  In  order  to  adequately  target  rural  youth  and 
especially  with  most  vulnerable  youth  (orphans,  heads  of  households,  HIV-positive  youth,  etc.),  the 
project will also support Junior Farmer Field and Life Schools (JFFLS), an effective approach that has 
been already piloted in other African countries by FAO (e.g. Kenya). 
45.  For  effective  implementation  of  the  FFS  approach,  the  government  will  ensure  that  each 
commune  has  at  least  three  agricultural  extension  specialists  at  each  EDA.  The  Project  expects  to 
cover all communes in the 10 targeted municipalities by the end of the third year. This will ensure that 
all farmers in the target group benefit from at least one full FFS training cycle. In order to improve the 
effectiveness and implementation of the FFS approach an in-depth evaluation of the performance of 
FFS established under MOSAP will be carried out at the onset of implementation, possibly jointly with 
the World Bank. This evaluation will be undertaken by an independent entity.  
Sub-component 1.2: Institutional Strengthening of Local, Provincial and National Units of the 
Ministry of Agriculture – US$7.7 million (US$3 million from IFAD and US$4.7 million from GOA)  
46.  The second subcomponent aims at strengthening the capacity of local, provincial, and national 
units  of  MINAGRI  in  the  areas  of  irrigation,  extension,  market  information,  statistics,  and  policy 
12 A short description of the project components is given below and focuses on activities to be supported by the IFAD-funded 
SADCP in two provinces (Hila and Cuanza Sul); more details are provided in Appendix 4.  
9 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
analysis.    The  expected  outcome  is  a  “more  conducive  policy  and  enabling  environment  for 
smallholder agriculture”.  
47.  Project financing will be provided for: (i) Data and statistics: Support to expand data collection 
for  crop  production  (including  forecasts)  and  post-harvest  surveys,  through  training,  data  collection, 
data processing and analysis and backstopping to produce regular production statistics and contribute 
to  the  national  agricultural  census;  (ii)  Market  information  systems:  Development  of  market 
information  systems  benefitting  farmers  and  traders  including  training,  equipment,  data  collection, 
processing  and  analysis,  consultancies  and  support  to  data  dissemination;  (iii)  Agricultural  policy 
analysis: Agricultural policy training, annual sector review processes, possibly with a link to Angola’s 
commitment  under  the  CAADP,  studies  and  policy  development  on  climate  change  adaptation  and 
resilience, and policy dialogue processes – in conjunction with the World Bank and other actors (e.g. 
FAO); (iv) Small-scale irrigation (SSI): Technical training on gravity-fed irrigation systems at provincial 
and  municipal  levels  to  enhance  ADI  staff  supervision  skills,  policy  support  such  as  preparation  of 
WUA regulations, and inventory of potential irrigation schemes to rehabilitate; (v) Extension services: 
Construction  and  rehabilitation  of  agricultural  extension  facilities,  e.g.  office-residential  complexes  in 
selected  communes  and  provision  of  equipment  for  extension  staff;  (vi)  Implementation  support  to 
IDA, 
technical  assistance, 
establishment  of  the  management  information  system,  update  of  the  Environment  and  Social 
Management  Framework  (ESMF),  and  annual  external  audit;  and  (vii)  Environmental  education: 
equipment of the ecological education centre in Huambo operated by the ministry of environment and 
expertise for demonstrations and training.  
to  ensure  project  performance  such  as  short 
term  specialised 
48.  Under  this  subcomponent  IFAD  financing  will  mainly  focus  on  the  provision  of  adequate 
extension  facilities  and  equipment  in  the  Huila  and  Cuanza  Sul  provinces  and  complement  the 
SADCP-WB for other activities listed above, particularly at the local/provincial level. 
Sub-component  1.3:  Strengthening  Capacity  and  Global  Knowledge  to  Address  Emerging 
Research Issues - US$1.0 million (US$0.2 from IFAD and US$0.8 million equivalent from GOA) 
49.  The  third  subcomponent  aims  to  strengthen  the  institutional  capacity  of  Angola’s  agricultural 
research  system  to  enhance  smallholder  access  to  agricultural  innovations  and  technologies  that 
address  emerging  issues  in  the  productivity,  production,  and  value  chains  of  priority  crops.  This  will 
include  increasing  the  availability  of  improved  technologies  for  farmers,  and  introducing  new 
knowledge  and  technologies  that  may  be  available  within  the  region  or  globally.  The  expected 
outcome is: “government capacity to support climate resilient smallholder agricultural production and 
commercialization enhanced”. 
50.  The  main  activities  to  be  financed  under  this  sub-component  include:  (a)  supporting  the 
multiplication  of  improved  seeds  and  planting  material  (including  drought  tolerant  varieties);  (b) 
developing  climate  resilience  technology  packages  for  selected  crops;  (c)  improving  soil  diagnostic 
services; (d) building the technical capacity of the research and extension system; and (e)  scaling up 
the  testing  and  demonstration  of  improved  technologies.  IFAD-financing  would  mainly  be  used  to 
strengthen the institutional capacity at provincial level. 
Component  2  –  Support  for  Increased  Production  and  Commercialization  -  US$14.7  million 
(US$13.6 from IFAD, and US$1.1 million equivalent from beneficiaries) 
51.  The  objective  of  this  component  is  to  strengthen  smallholder  capital  and  market  linkages 
through:  (i) supporting  investments  of  FOs  to  improve  agricultural  productivity,  production,  market 
access  and  value  addition  through  a  combination  of  own  resources  of  promoters,  a  matching  grant 
and  credit  extended  by  Partner  Financial  Institutions  (PFIs)  (banks  and  non-bank  microcredit 
institutions);  (ii) linking  smallholders  and  their  FOs  to  buyers,  input  suppliers  and  PFIs.  The 
beneficiaries  will  mainly  be  FOs  composed  of  farmers  trained  through  FFS  (under  MOSAP,  the 
SADCP, or any other training programme) and/or existing FOs that have the capacity to manage and 
implement such investments. Three main types of investments will be supported: (a) rehabilitation of 
small-scale  irrigation  schemes;  (b) agricultural  production  and  productivity  improvements;  and 
(c) post-harvest and value addition investments. To access financing support, eligible FOs will submit 
subproject proposals/business plans (BPs). The adaptation options that could be supported under this 
component are elaborated in Annex 2 of Appendix 12. Overall, the expected outcome is “investments 
in agricultural production and post-harvest management increased”. 
10 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Sub-component 2.1: Provision of Technical Support - US$6.5 million (US$6.5 from IFAD) 
52.  This  sub-component  will  support  capacity  building  and  technical  assistance  for  enabling  sub-
projects promoters to emerge and good sub-project proposals to be prepared, ensuring an informed 
decision about their feasibility; while the financial support to approved sub-projects/BPs is embedded 
in sub-component 2.2.  
53.  The  sub-component  will  be  implemented  by  a  competitively  recruited  main  service  provider, 
comprising a team of highly qualified technicians located in the targeted provinces and municipalities, 
equipped with adequate transport and operational budget and working very closely with IDA staff, that 
will  assist  promoters  in  preparing  and  analyzing  their  subproject  proposals/business  plans  and  in 
following  up  the  implementation  of  approved  sub-projects  under  sub-component  2.2  below..  In 
coordination  with  the  provincial  and  municipal  IDA  offices  and  the  PPIU,  the  provision  of  technical 
support  will  address  the  following  activities:  (a) information  and  sensitisation;  (b)  assessment  of 
actors,  supply  and  demand  in  the  target  value  chains  and  selection  of  beneficiaries;  (c)  facilitating 
market  linkages  and  access  to  financial  institutions;  (d) support  to    sub-projects/business  plans 
preparation,  appraisal,  implementation,    monitoring  and  evaluation;  and  (e)  support  to  independent 
review,  oversight  and  due  diligence  mechanisms  to  ensure  transparency,  avoid  elite  capture  and 
comply with IFAD anti-corruption and anti-fraud policies.  
54. 
Information  and  sensitisation  activities  will  be  carried  out  by  IDA  and  the  main  service 
providers to inform potential beneficiaries about the conditions to participate focusing on component 2 
implementation  mechanisms.  This  would  include  preparation,  editing  and  printing  of  messages  by 
consultants, organisation of sensitisation workshops at provincial and municipal level targeting actors 
of  the  value  chains/FOs,  radio  and  television  communications,  etc.  In  addition,  the  required  value 
chain studies would be is carried out. 
55.  Assessment  of  actors,  supply  and  demand  in  targeted  value  chains,  facilitation  of 
market  linkages  and  beneficiary  selection.  This  would  include  assessment  of  existing  FOs  and 
other  value chains actors, market and technical  studies, screening  and organisational audits  of FOs 
proposing  sub-project  ideas  before  embarking  on  business  plan  preparation,  establishment  of 
partnerships  with  buyers/input  suppliers,  organisation  of  partnerships  meetings,  dialogue  platforms 
and study tours. An assessment of value chain actors and  a market study  will  be jointly undertaken 
with SADCP-WB at the onset on implementation, and will cover  the IFAD target area. It will allow to 
map existing actors, identify market opportunities and priorities for investments. It will also ascertain 
the willingness of larger commercial farmers and agribusinesses to consider partnering with FOs and 
consider smart-subsidies in the form of cost-sharing and contract farming arrangements.  
56.  Support  to  sub-projects/business  plan  preparation,  implementation,    monitoring  and 
evaluation. The project will support the following activities: (a) organise a training of trainers on the 
participatory  preparation  and  analysis  of  business  plans  using  the  Rural  Invest  methodology  and 
software; (b) assist eligible beneficiaries in  identifying and preparing sub-projects for increasing crop 
productivity and production as well as post-harvest value addition and marketing that meet the criteria 
for  investment  support  under  Component  2;  (c)  assist  the  discussion  of  business  plans  (BPs)  with 
PFIs and pre-negotiating credit commitments; (d) assist the appraisal and review of BPs and approval 
of matching  grants;  (e)  support  an  oversight  mechanism  to  ensure  transparency  and  fairness  in  the 
selection of beneficiaries, preparation and appraisal of BPs, approval then disbursement of approved 
matching grant; (vii) Under the leadership of the PDGs, the Oversight Agent mandate is as follows: " 
independent  review  of  the  beneficiary  selection,  SP/BP  preparation  and  appraisal  process,  grant 
approval processes etc. by an Oversight Agent to ensure that all procedures, criteria were applied in a 
fair and transparent manner in order to ensure transparency and avoid elite capture; and (f) supervise 
the implementation of approved sub-projects/BPs. In addition, the service provider will train selected 
MINAGRI/IDA/EDA  staff  in  project  implementation.  It  is  extremely  important  that  this  subcomponent 
only supports sub-projects/BPs that are viable and sustainable. 
Sub-component  2.2:  Provision  of  Investment  Support  -  US$8.3  million  (US$7.2  from  IFAD  and 
US$1.1 million equivalent from the beneficiaries) 
57.  This subcomponent will support beneficiaries to carry out their selected BPs and crowd-in PFIs 
to  extend  loans  to  co-finance  the  investments.  Sub-project  proponents  will  be  required  to  make  a 
11 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
minimum  contribution  (in-kind  or  cash)  to  ensure  ownership  and  commitment.  For  FOs,  such  a 
contribution  will  be  at  least  10%,  but  may  vary  between  10%  and  30%,  depending  of  the  type  of 
investment.  Sub-projects/BPs  will  be  identified,  appraised,  and  approved  based  on  the  procedures 
and criteria summarised in Appendix 4. An Oversight Agent (specialised firm) will be recruited to work 
closely with the Provincial Governance Committee (PGC) in each participating province, conduct  due 
diligence on the process before any submitted subproject approval is finalised. This agent will review 
how  selection  criteria  were  applied  at  all  stages  of  SP  proponents  identification,  selection,  BP 
preparation and review,  in  order to ensure transparency  and  avoid elite capture. The agent  will  also 
support  the  PGCs  to  address  complaints/grievances  and  feedback  received  from  any  FO,  SP 
proponent  or  third  party  and  report  accordingly  to  the  Project  Coordination  Committee  (PCC)  and 
IFAD for decision making. A full set of criteria, procedures, and eligible expenditures will be defined in 
the  Project Implementation Manual (PIM). While the  menu of investment options will be flexible,  the 
eligibility criteria and the subject preparation and appraisal procedure will be strictly followed. Although 
the  disbursement  mechanisms  and  advances  may  vary,  taking  into  consideration  the  type  of  sub-
project, the eligible expenditures are for goods, works, and services. 
Investment  support  for  small-scale  irrigation  and  related  infrastructure.  Development  of 
58. 
irrigation  will  focus  on  rehabilitation  of  small-scale  gravity-fed  irrigation  (SSI)  schemes  that  could  be 
rehabilitated at modest cost, covering an estimated 500 hectares13. At the onset of implementation a 
survey  will  be  conducted  to  map  existing  schemes  that  would  fit  the  eligibility  criteria  and  assess 
whether this minimum target could be exceeded. At mid-term review the implementation performance 
of  SSI  rehabilitation  will  be  fully  assessed  and  a  decision  to  expand  the  acreage  will  be  taken 
accordingly. SSI development will be done through a participatory planning and development process, 
including the establishment of WUAs to ensure sustainability and to avoid conflicts. Different steps will 
be followed including prefeasibility studies, feasibility  studies,  detailed  design (including construction 
drawings,  tender  documents  and  operation  and  maintenance  (O&M)  manual),  and  environment 
assessment. Findings and recommendations will be discussed with stakeholders and support will be 
subject to commitment from beneficiaries in scheme development and O&M. The works will consist of: 
(a)  upgrading  of  the  area  around  the  intake  and  the  main  canal;  (b)  construction  of  water  collecting 
structures  and/or  rehabilitation  of  damaged  embankments;  (c)  installation  of  control  structures  like 
water gates; (d)  upgrading of the main canals and  lining critical stretches  of the distribution system; 
and  (e) use  of  local  plants/grass  to  control  canal  erosion.  SADCP  will  use  a  mix  of  construction 
methods,  including  machinery-based  and  labor-based  construction  methods.  No  infrastructure 
investments  will  be  made  before  the  local  authorities  confirm  the  beneficiaries’  land  user  rights  and 
water  rights.  Criteria  for  selecting  irrigation  schemes  are  detailed  in  Appendix  4  and  will  notably 
include  technical  and  environmental  aspects,  market potential,  rehabilitation  costs  and  financial  and 
economic considerations. 
Investments in agricultural production. This includes financial support to sub-projects aiming 
59. 
mainly at a sustainable increase of agricultural productivity and production. The economic rationale for 
agricultural production investment support is that: (a) the agriculture sector was decapitalised during 
the civil war and productivity remains low; (b) adoption and use of improved agricultural practices and 
technology  are  limited;  and  (c)  access  to  capital  and  financial  services  are  very  limited  for 
smallholders.  
60.  Eligible  investment  items  financed  under  such  sub-projects  are  demand-based  agricultural 
technology  packages,  at  both  household  level  (members  of  FOs)  and  collective  (FO)  level.  It  would 
include  improved seeds  and planting material,  fertilisers and approved pesticides, draft animals and 
animal  traction  equipment,  mechanisation  tools  and  equipment,  biological  and/or  physical  soil  and 
water  conservation  methods,  small-scale  storage  equipment  and  facilities,  etc.  (see  details  in 
Appendix 4) as well as associated capacity building of FOs and implementation support to ensure the 
sub-projects success, and environmental and social impact assessments where required. Indicatively, 
the  project  would  support  about  120  sub-projects  which  represents  80%  of  investment  subprojects 
mainly dealing with investments in primary production, farm production and productivity assets.  
13 In the Bié, Huambo and Malanje provinces covered by the SADCP-WB, a detailed study funded by MOSAP identified 15,000 
ha of inactive SSI schemes, of which 5,500 ha could be rehabilitated at a cost lower than US$1,500-2,000 per hectare. The 
average size of these schemes was 32 ha. The MINAGRI Irrigation Division confirmed that schemes with similar characteristics 
could be found in the Cuanza Sul and Huila provinces. 
12 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
61. 
Investments in post-harvest and value addition. The objective is to promote investments in 
value  addition,  reducing  post-harvest  losses,  and  strengthening  market  linkages.  The  economic 
rationale  for  supporting  sub-projects  pursuing  this  objective  is  that:  (a)  crop  losses  are  high  and 
appropriate  packaging,  storage,  and  small-scale  processing  and  market  infrastructure  facilities  are 
extremely limited; (b) an opportunity exists for supporting value addition, including facilitating contract 
farming  arrangements;  and  (c)  FOs’  involvement  in  collective  marketing  is  an  efficient  and  effective 
way  to  strengthen  them.  Financial  support  for  FOs  and  rural  enterprises’  value  addition  activities  is 
crucial  for  the  sustainability  of  public  investment  in  SSI  development  as  well  as  for  investments  in 
agricultural production. There is a need to approach support to market linkages and commercialization 
with  great  caution  due  to  lack  of  knowledge  and  operational  experience  in  the  provision  of  such 
support.  Therefore  the  project  will  test  pilot  models  for  commercialization  during  the  first  two  years 
with a view of learning  lessons. Subsequently  adjustment will be made  to  the provision of matching 
grants for this type of subprojects.  
62.  Eligible  investments  will  be  at  both  household  and  community  level  and  may  include 
processing,  cleaning,  grading,  weighing,  packaging  and  cooling  equipment,  storage  facilities, 
transport  equipment,  packaging  materials,  and  associated  services  (capacity  building,  subproject 
monitoring and implementation support, and environmental and social impact assessments). Options 
for  household  level  post-harvest  reduction  and  storage  will  also  be  promoted  and  smallholders may 
select  from  these  options.  Market  infrastructure  such  as  rural  markets  and  spot  improvements  of 
feeder roads (including small bridges and culverts) will also be eligible (see the menu of investment 
options  in  Appendix  4)  provided  they  are  of  small  scale  nature  and  don’t  have  any  adverse 
environmental impact. Eligible beneficiaries will include FOs which have proven capacities for market-
oriented  production,  processing  and  marketing.  Proposals  and  business  plans  will  go  through  a 
thorough preparation and appraisal process to determine their technical, financial and organisational 
feasibility,  and  sustainability  and  environmental  and  social  impacts.  A  key  feature  will  be  more 
complex  sub-projects  that  may  require  multiple  stages  of  support  or  greater  focus  on  business 
development  services.  Special  attention  will  be  given  to  promote  youth  groups  or  groups  with  a 
relevant  number  of  young  members.  Those  meeting  the  eligibility  criteria  will  be  supported 
accordingly.  Other  projects  have  shown  that  young  people  are  more  attracted  to  work  in  agriculture 
towards the 'upper' part of the value chain. Therefore these specific investments are expected to be 
more attractive for youth groups. Indicatively the project would support about 30 sub-projects mainly 
dealing with post-harvest activities and value addition. 
63.  Mobilisation of Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs). The project will explore new avenues to 
encourage financial institutions to co-finance sub-projects. PFIs can benefit by expanding their client 
base and enhancing their rural business. This approach acknowledges that  matching grants are not 
suitable  for  business  financing  and  market  development  and  should  be  considered  as  a  catalyst  for 
smallholder  famers  to  progressively  access  formal  financial  services  and  part  of  the  phasing-out 
strategy  of  the  project.  In  addition  to  raising  the  capacity  and  creditworthiness  of  smallholders/FOs 
through assistance in elaborating bankable  sub-projects/BPs and mitigating  PFIs’ credit risk through 
the matching grants, the project will support the following activities to mobilise PFIs:  
  Preparatory  activities14:  (i)  In-depth  review  of  financial  services  and  products  offered  and 
analysis  of 
for  partnership;  (ii)  Negotiating  multiyear  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  (MoUs)  with  PFIs  determining  commitments  of  each  party  and  support  to  be 
provided;  and  (iii)  Preparation  of  guidelines  for  credit  disbursement  by  PFIs,  along  with  the 
matching grant - to be included in the PIM; 
the  potential 
  Support implementation of MoUs will include inter alia: (i) Capacity building of PFIs’ staff in 
agricultural  credit  appraisal, 
risk  analysis,  credit  monitoring  and  evaluation,  etc.; 
(ii) Development  of  financial  services  and  products  adapted  to  the  needs  of  the  target  group, 
including introduction of best practices and alternative delivery channels; (iii) Sensitization and 
training  of  smallholder  farmers  in  the  knowledge  and  use  of  financial  services  and  products; 
(iv) Develop  and/or  customise  financial  literacy  curriculum;  (v)  Facilitating  PFIs’  access  to 
technical  support/refinancing  from  IFAD  strategic  partner  investment  banks;  (vi) Provision  of 
14 To be conducted at the onset of implementation (or possibly between project approval and disbursement  
effectiveness), 
13 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
medium to long-term line of credit to PFIs if deemed necessary; and (vii) Strengthening of PFIs’ 
environmental, social and climate risk management systems.  
64.  This  support  is  in  line  with  the  BNA’s  policy  direction  and  efforts  for  financial  inclusion  and 
education,  which  the  project  would  assist  through  media  campaigns  and  the  establishment  of  an 
enabling policy environment. Mobilisation of PFIs to co-finance sub-projects would likely expand after 
the  first  two  years  allowing  for  progressive  graduation  of  targeted  farmers/FOs  to  access  financial 
services. 
65.  At mid-term review, or even before, the mobilization of PFIs and rural finance activities will be 
carefully reviewed and a decision will be made whether or not continue these activities depending on 
the targeted beneficiary FOs’ ease of access to PFIs financing. 
Component 3 – Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation - US$8 million (US$7.6 million 
from IFAD and US$0.4 million equivalent from GOA) 
66.  The  objective  of  this  component  is  to  ensure  timely  and  efficient  project  coordination, 
management, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and knowledge management. It consists of two 
subcomponents: (i) project management; and (ii) project monitoring and evaluation.   
Subcomponent  3.1.  Project  Management  –  US$7.1  million  (US$6.7  from  IFAD  and  US$0.4  from 
GOA) 
67.  This component will  include the national Project Implementation Unit (PIU)  and two Provincial 
Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIUs).  The  PIU  and  PPIUs  will  have  the  responsibility  for  project 
management,  including  planning  and  budgeting  and  fiduciary  matters  (financial  and  procurement 
management),  coordination,  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E),  learning  and  knowledge  sharing, 
environmental  and  social  safeguards  compliance,  audits,  and  reporting.  This  subcomponent  will 
ensure  that  the  project  is  implemented  correctly,  on  time,  and  in  accordance  with  the  project 
document,  the  PIM  and  the  Financing  Agreements.  This  will  be  the  responsibility  of  a  project 
coordinator  (PC)  and  a  team  of  experts  located  at  the  national  and  provincial  levels.  SADCP  will 
finance the procurement of office equipment, office consumables, vehicles, project staff salaries, short 
term technical assistance, training of PIU/PPIUs staff, and the PIU/PPIUs operational costs.  
Subcomponent 3.2. Monitoring and Evaluation - US$0.9 million (US$0.9 from IFAD) 
68.  This  subcomponent  aims  at  establishing  an  M&E  system  to  monitor  project  performance  and 
measure  the  output,  effects,  and  eventually  the  impacts  of  project  activities.  This  will  include  the 
establishment of a Management Information System (MIS) within the PIU/PPIU. M&E and knowledge 
management  functions  will  be  undertaken  by  specialised  staff  at  both  the  PIU  and  PPIUs  level. 
Baseline  data  will  be  collected  at  the  beginning  of  project  implementation.  Short  term  specialised 
consultants  will  support  the  establishment  and  implementation  of  the  M&E  and  knowledge 
management systems and functions. The project will also support a mid-term review, thematic impact 
evaluations, learning and knowledge management, and communication activities.  
D.  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
69. 
IFAD involvement in Angola. IFAD has been working in Angola since 1991, beginning with the 
Fund’s  first  project,  Malanje  Smallholder  Sector  Rehabilitation  Project.  Starting  in  2007,  the  Market 
Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSAP) was formulated by the World Bank for an amount 
of US$ 49.5 million to be co-financed by IFAD with a loan of US$ 8.5 million and became effective in 
2009.  MOSAP  implementation  fell  behind  schedule  early  on,  with  field  activities  having  started  only 
around  mid-2012,  some  2.5  years  after  effectiveness.  This  delay  was  attributed  to  the  difficulties  in 
recruiting and retaining project staff, as well as extremely limited capacity in the Ministry of Agriculture. 
But after a project restructuring and after the recruitment of FAO to run FFS, project implementation 
accelerated  and  by  the  closing  date  in  March  2016,  91%  of  IFAD  funds  had  been  disbursed  and 
results in terms of adoption of improved technologies were highly encouraging. The Angola Fisheries 
and Aquaculture Project (AFAP) recently became effective, more than a year after IFAD approval. 
70.  Lessons  learnt.  The  lessons  derived  from  previous  projects  and  incorporated  into  SADCP 
project design are summarised as follows: 
14 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
(i) 
The  FFS  approach  was  very  effective  in  enhancing  smallholder  farmers’  capacity  to  generate 
and use new knowledge and adopt improved agricultural practices and technology. FFS training 
was  effective  in  equipping  about  22,000  subsistence  farmers  with  the  skills  and  experience 
needed  to  engage  in  commercial  agriculture,  as  witnessed  by  the  high  success  rate  of  the 
investment  sub-projects  under  MOSAP.  SADCP  will  train  a  much  larger  number  of  farmers 
(210,000)  and  expand  existing  FFS  themes  such  as  climate  change  adaptation,  nutrition, 
horticulture, gender, business skills and financial literacy. To ensure the success of this scaled 
up  and  thematically  enhanced  FFS  training,  it  will  be  essential  to  improve  the  quality  and 
supervision  of  government  technicians  and  to  emphasise  training  of  and  reliance  on  farmer 
facilitators. 
(ii)  While  MOSAP  was  successful  in  reaching  women,  more  needs  to  be  done  to  ensure  that 
women play an equal role in FOs and influence investment decisions. Women had only limited 
influence  on  the  choice  of  sub-projects,  an  issue  that  will  receive  extra  attention  under  the 
proposed  project.  Women’s  participation  in  FOs  was  lower  than  that  of  men  with  only  a  few 
occupying  leadership  positions.  More  women  will  be  encouraged  to  get  training  as  FFS 
facilitators and become community leaders. The inclusion of literacy and numeracy skills in the 
FFS  curriculum  will  also  help  women  farmers  to  play  a  more  important  role  in  FOs’  decision 
making.  
(iii) 
Importance  of  linking  smallholder  farmers  with  markets  and  implementing  sub-projects.  The 
MOSAP  project  completion  report  (PCR)  envisaged  that  future  operations  in  Angola  should 
support  market  linkages  and  a  value  chain  approach.  It  recognised  that  MOSAP  provided 
limited  support  for  marketing,  mostly  in  connection  with  Component  2. Analysis  of  market 
opportunities  should  be  carried  out  before  investing  in  production  systems,  and  training  on 
business  and  marketing  aspects  should  complement  production-oriented  training.  Long-term 
success  requires  not  only  improved  on-farm  productivity  but  also  opportunities  for  farmers  to 
have  access  to,  and  compete  in,  output  markets.  This  led  to  the  PCR  recommendation  that 
SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  needs  to  provide  support  for  marketing  activities  at  several  levels, 
including assistance to FOs and entrepreneurs in bulking of agricultural produce or purchase of 
inputs, and in small and medium scale processing. Such interventions can stimulate investment 
diversification and the strengthening of rural enterprises.  
(iv)  The use of service providers contributes to greater efficiency in the implementation of activities 
as  well  as  greater  effectiveness  in  the  achievement  of  project  results.  Components  1.1  and  2 
will be implemented through contracted service providers who will support farmer groups to be 
more aware about risks, help build technical, commercial, financial and organisational skills and 
be  able  to  identify  priorities.  These  service  providers  will  regularly  support  individual  farmer 
groups  until  the  investment  sub-projects  are  up  and  running  satisfactorily,  normally  over  a 
period of up to two years, and be available for occasional assistance thereafter.   
(v) 
A  capable  and  internationally  experienced  service  provider  will  be  required  to  help  farmer 
organisations  develop  and  implement  investment  proposals.  The  use  of  small,  local  service 
providers  to  assist  FOs  in  the  preparation  and  implementation  their  sub-projects  was 
problematic  under  MOSAP  because  of  their  limited  technical  and  organisational  capacity. 
Improving  the  quality  of  technical  and  business  assistance  and  making  it  available  to  a  much 
larger  number  of  beneficiaries  will  require  recruitment  of  a  highly  capable  and  internationally 
experienced  service  provider  who  will  also  train  the  local  NGOs  and  private  sector 
subcontractors and supervise their work.  
(vi)  Financing demand-driven investment sub-projects promotes their sustainability. The modalities 
for  preparing  and  implementing  sub-projects  under  MOSAP  were  generally  successful,  with 
over 70 % of sub-projects judged sustainable by the independent evaluation. The key elements 
of  success  were:  (a)  creation  of  ownership  through  community  participation  in  sub-project 
preparation  and  implementation,  as  well  as  direct  community  contributions  (cash  or  in  kind); 
(b) FOs’  commitment  to  engage  in  O&M  before  disbursement  of  the  project  contribution; 
(c) training  of  FOs  and  assistance  with  establishment  of  user  rules  and  cost-sharing 
agreements; and (d) awareness raising and encouragement for farmer organisations to identify 
and contract technical assistance.  
15 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
(vii)  Building  government  capacity  accelerates  project  implementation  and  increases  country 
ownership  of  results.  MOSAP  implementation  was  slow,  especially  at  the  beginning  of  the 
project. To accelerate  SADCP implementation  and ensure sustainability, targeted government 
capacity building  will  be  essential,  in  the following areas: (a) improving the competence,  work 
conditions  and  motivation  of  government  staff  involved  in  extension  and  advisory  services  to 
FOs;  (b) improving  the  accuracy  and  timeliness  of  agricultural  statistics  to  allow  for  more 
informed decision making; and (c) informing and promoting agriculture sector policy dialogue. 
(viii)  The  creation  of  a  dedicated  project  management  unit  is  an  effective  instrument  for  decision-
making, coordination and guidance of project implementation. Thus, a PIU will be set up within 
IDA in Luanda, jointly with the World Bank, to enhance coordination and policy dialogue within 
IDA  and  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  also  to  draw  lessons  from  other  programmes.  This 
Luanda-based  unit  will  be  lean  in  structure  and  staffed  with  key  personnel  for  dealing  with 
project management, M&E and fiduciary issues. The rest of the team will be based in the PPIUs 
as well as in contracted service providers.  
(ix) 
(x) 
Involvement  of  local  authorities  at  the  provincial,  municipal  and  communal  levels  in  the 
monitoring of project activities facilitates local coordination and contributes to successful project 
implementation.  Over  time,  it  will  also  help  to  convince  local  authorities  to  provide  budgetary 
resources  for  smallholder  farmer  support  and  development.  In  addition,  Provincial  IDA 
Directorates and EDAs will fulfil a role of local coordination and guidance. 
An incentive system covering key staff involved in implementation has proved to be effective in 
promoting  project  performance.  Government  staff  will  be  provided  with  a  satisfactory  work 
environment (training, equipment, and living conditions) that will serve their future professional 
advancement. 
(xi)  Reaching project effectiveness is a lengthy process involving many steps in Angola, therefore it 
is proposed to extend the project duration to seven years.   
(xii)  Projects should have a clear and comprehensive exit strategy. To that aim the SADCP puts the 
emphasis on building capacity at different levels, but in particular through FFS, promoting FOs 
and  enhancing  their  technical,  managerial  and  business  skills,  linking  farmers  and  their 
organisations  to  value  chains  actors  such  as  buyer/traders,  input  suppliers  and  financial 
institutions and granting them vital productive assets.  
(xiii)  M&E  systems,  including  baseline  surveys,  are  important  management  tools  for  project 
adaptation  to  changing  contexts.  Therefore,  the  Project  will  establish  a  strong  M&E  staff 
structure, both at national and provincial levels. It will also involve contracted service providers 
in delivering timely and relevant monitoring data on the results of sub-projects allowing Project 
Management to have continuous flow of information on key activities. 
71.  Social,  environmental  and  climate  change  issues  and  procedures.  The  potential  social, 
environmental and climate change impacts of the project are predominantly positive:  
(i) 
Adoption of improved farming practices, storage and processing technologies promoted by FFS 
will help conserve soil and water and enhance climate resilience and promote conservation and 
processing  methods  for  enhanced  consumption  of  vegetables,  fruits  and  legumes  by 
households; 
(ii) 
Improved farming and marketing of food crops will increase smallholder revenues and enhance 
food security. 
(iii)  Diversification  of  crops  for  more  healthy  and  diverse  diets  of  households  in  combination  with 
increased  food  safety  (better  storage,  hygiene,  and  processing  facilities)  and  raised  nutrition 
awareness will contribute to improved nutrition15.  
72.  There  are  also  potential  negative  impacts  that  could  materialise.  For  component  1,  these 
include  the  potential  impact  of  extending  cultivation  and  increasing  use  of  agro-chemicals,  while  for 
component 2, site-specific negative impacts of investment sub-projects that could result from the poor 
siting  or  construction  of  irrigation  schemes  and  crop  storage  and  processing  facilities. The  potential 
15 Nutrition does not only have a social but also economic impact on livelihoods and households. 
16 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
negative  impacts  of  component  1  will  be  mitigated  by  including  suitable  environmental  and  waste 
management  practices,  proper  use  and  safe  handling  of  agro-chemicals  and  natural  resource  use 
standards in the FFS curriculum. For component 2, since the nature and location of the  sub-projects 
will  not  be  known  in  advance,  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plans  (ESMP)  will  be 
developed at each site to mitigate impacts. Also, selection and design criteria for SSI will be included 
in the PIM. 
73.  The environmental and social  category for the  SADCP is B, as most of the potential  negative 
impacts are site-specific and mostly reversible or mitigation measures can be articulated as part of a 
simple ESMP. The infrastructure development such as rehabilitation of feeder roads and SSI schemes 
(averaging  about  25  ha)  will  be  small-scale  and  located  in  non-sensitive  areas.  The  IFAD-funded 
SADCP  will  benefit  from  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework  (ESMF)  that  was 
developed for the SADCP-WB and publicly disclosed in December 2015, as well as the subsequent 
Resettlement Action Framework. The IFAD SADCP budget will include funds to extend the ESMF to 
the  project  area.  This  will  be  facilitated  by  the  fact  that  activities  of  the  two  projects  are  the  same, 
though the potential for expansion of the cultivated areas into fallow areas is more explicit under the 
SADCP-WB.  
74.  The  ESMF  of  the  SADCP-WB  establishes  the  procedures  for  the  environmental  and  social 
assessment,  review,  approval  and  implementation  of  investments.  It  specifies  roles,  responsibilities 
and  reporting  procedures  for  managing  and  monitoring  environmental  and  social  concerns.  It 
identifies the training, capacity building and technical assistance needed to ensure the implementation 
the  provisions.  About  US$250,000  will  be  set  aside  for  ESMF  elaboration  and  implementation, 
particularly  for  infrastructure  such  as  gravity  fed  irrigation  scheme  rehabilitation  is  lower  than  that 
included  in  the  World  Bank  financing.  Approximately  half  is  for  undertaking  Environmental  Impact 
Assessments  (EIAs)  and  developing,  implementing  and  monitoring  ESMPs.  Given  the  fact  that  the 
IFAD  investments  will  involve  less  infrastructure  development,  the  costs  of  ESMF  implementation  in 
the SADCP area are estimated to be lower. The framework also includes a grievance mechanism and 
provisions for chance finds that will be applicable in the IFAD target areas. 
75.  The  climate  risk  classification  for  SADCP  is  moderate.  The  main  climate  related  risk  for  the 
target beneficiaries is rainfall variability. The central highlands receive sufficient annual rainfall but dry 
spells sometimes occur. The improved farming techniques promoted by the FFS will not just increase 
smallholder production but it will also enhance their resilience to climate variability and change. FFS 
capacity building will be targeted at both the farmers and field-level technicians, thus further promoting 
climate change adaptation as trained technicians move to other duty stations.  
76.  The  adaptation  options  proposed  for  the  main  crops  in  the  highlands  include  promotion  of 
pathogen-resistant  and  water-tolerant  cassava  cultivars  and  promotion  of  improved  post-harvest 
storage  and  processing.  The  latter  is  also  recommended  for  sweet-potato  while  the  former  also 
applies  to  bananas.  The  promotion  of  multiple  varieties  of  robusta  and  arabica  coffee  in  the  same 
production areas, shade trees and other forms of intercropping and agro-forestry in new plantations. 
Promotion  of  improved  drought-tolerant  maize  varieties,  increased  access  to  weather  forecasts  and 
early warnings and promotion of sorghum, millet as climate-resilient alternatives to maize. 
77.  More  detail  on  minimising  the  potential  negative  environmental  and  social  impacts  as  well  as 
climate  risk  is  included  in  the  Social  Environmental  and  Climate Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP) 
Review note, which is attached as appendix 12. 
III. Project implementation 
A.  Approach 
78.  The approach to project implementation recognises that: (i) the project implementation capacity 
of IDA is limited; (ii) many farmer organisations have limited technical, organisational and commercial 
capacity; (iii) hitherto, government approaches to smallholder agriculture development have relied on 
unsustainable mechanisms like providing farmers with free seed and fertiliser; and (iv) pro-community 
socio-economic policies, such as local empowerment, targeting and promoting gender equity are, at 
best, incipient in Angola’s rural development sector.  
17 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
79.  Therefore the project  will adopt a  phased approach, focused  initially  on farmer education and 
subsequently on investment support based on learning by doing, and relying on service providers for 
the implementation of activities outside the core competencies of IDA. The phasing of implementation 
in IFAD-supported provinces would be as follows:  
Table 1: Phasing of implementation (in Huila and Cuanza Sul provinces covered by IFAD) 
Number of hectares 
Rain-fed with FFS 
Rain-fed with investment 
support and FFS 
Horticulture with investment 
support and FFS 
Horticulture with FFS 
Irrigation schemes  
Total hectares 
Number of beneficiaries 
Rain-fed with FFS 
Rain-fed with investment 
support and FFS 
Horticulture with investment 
support and FFS 
Horticulture with FFS 
Irrigation schemes  
Total beneficiaries 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Project Year 
3 
2 
Total 
12,330  12,330  12,330  12,330  12,330  61,650 
6 
4 
5 
- 
685 
3,425 
4,110 
4,110  12,330 
- 
100 
100 
100 
500 
500 
12,530  13,225  15,985  16,670  16,670  75,080 
10 
100 
100 
30 
100 
100 
30 
100 
100 
30 
100 
100 
9,000 
9,000 
9,000 
9,000 
9,000  45,000 
- 
500 
2,500 
3,000 
3,000  9,000 
- 
1,000 
200 
300  1,000 
1,000  5,000 
1,000 
200 
10,200  10,800  13,000  13,500  13,500  60,000 
100 
1,000 
200 
300 
1,000 
200 
300 
1,000 
200 
B.  Organisational and Implementation Framework 
Project oversight and coordination 
80.  The SADCP-C&H-SAMAP will use the same governance and oversight bodies as the SADCP-
WB16.  This  will  strengthen  the  complementarities  and  synergies  between  the  two  parallel-funded 
projects, ensure coherence, economies of scale and sustainable results and impacts. At the national 
level,  there  will  be  two  oversight  committees:  the  Project  Coordination  Committee  and  the  Project 
Implementation Sub-Committee. 
81.  The Project Coordination Committee  (PCC)  will  be chaired by the Minister of Agriculture  or 
his  delegate. The  PCC  will:  (i)  provide  strategic  guidance;  (ii)  promote  inter-ministerial  coordination; 
(iii) review  and  approve  the  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB);  (iv)  review  and  approve  the 
annual reports of the project and decide on corrective measures to solve implementation issues; (v) 
review decisions made by Provincial Governance Committee (PGC); and (vi) issue directives to guide 
project  interventions,  methods  and  criteria. The  Director  General  of  IDA  will  be  the  Secretary  of  the 
PCC. The PCC will be composed of the National Directors and the Director General of MINAGRI, and 
representatives  of  the  following  Ministries:  Planning,  Finance,  Commerce  and  Trade,  Urban  Affairs 
and  Environment,  Family  and  Women,  Health  and  Education.  The  PCC  will  meet  twice  a  year, 
additionally when necessary. 
82.  The Project Implementation Sub-Committee (PISC) of the PCC is a small sub-committee of 
the PCC that will consist of the IDA Director General, the Project Coordinator and the Project Finance  
Manager. Its task will be to: (i) speed up PCC’s decisions and implementation procedures; (ii) approve 
sub-projects under Component 2 that require central level decision making; (iii) propose the agenda 
for the PCC meetings and prepare the support documents; (iv)  submit the AWPB to PCC for review 
and  approval;  and  (v)  submit  the  Annual  Progress  Report.    At  the  provincial  level,  there  will  be  a 
16 The World Bank funding was approved by its Board of Directors on July 5th, 2016. 
18 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Provincial  Project  Coordination  Committee(PPCC)  in  each  participating  province.  The  composition 
and  tasks  of  PPCC  will  reflect  the  composition  and  tasks  of  the  PCC,  at  the  provincial  level  with 
representatives of MINAGRI and the other Ministries represented in the PCC. The PPCC will include 
the Provincial Director of Agriculture, the Provincial Director of IDA and the Area Project Coordinator, a 
representative  of  civil  society  or  NGO,  a  representative  of  the  private  sector  and  two  (minimum) 
representatives  of  beneficiaries/producers’  organisations.  The  PPCC  will  also  meet  twice  a  year, 
additionally  when  necessary.  This  sub-committee  tasks  will  be:  (i)  speed  up  decisions  and 
procedures;  (ii)  oversee  the  sub-projects  (under  Component  2)  elaboration,  review  and  approval 
processes  (that  would  be  to  a  great  extent  subcontracted  to  area  service  providers);  (iii)  review  the 
provincial level AWPB prepared by the PPIU and the main area service providers; and (iv) review the 
provincial level Annual Report prepared by the PPIU for submission to the PIU.  
Provincial Governance Committee (PGC) 
83.  To ensure good governance and accountability during project implementation, there is need to 
establish a Provincial Governance Committee (PGC) in each province. The PGCs will be comprised 
of  local  authorities  and  traditional  leaders  who  will  be  supported  (as  need  arises)  by  the  oversight 
agent. The role and functions of the PGCs will be to oversee implementation from a good governance 
and accountability point of view. The PGCs will establish a grievance mechanism as articulated in the 
ESM.  They  will  aim  at  receiving  any  grievance  (inclusive  of  sub-project  allocations).  The  PGC  will 
keep  records  of  evidences  and  complaints  with  minutes  of  the  discussions,  recommendations  and 
decisions  achieved.  The  PGCs  will  establish  detailed  mechanisms  for  the  grievance  and  complaint 
process,  describing  format,  language,  time  for  reply  and  alternative  resources  including  access  to 
Courts  of  Law  as  a  last  resort  after  exhausting  all  the  viable  peaceful  local  alternatives/options. 
Permanent  and  open  dialogue  will  also  be  promoted  as  this  is  the  most  suitable  way  of  peacefully 
addressing  any  grievance  expressed.  The  oversight  agent  will  be  entitled  to  spot-check  the  sub-
projects approval process at PGC level to ensure fairness and transparency and will report to PCC. 
19 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
ORGANISATIONAL AND IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK 
Project Coordination Committee (PCC)  Chaired by 
Minister MINAGRI 
Project Implementation Sub-
Committee (PISC)  
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) 
1) Provincial Governance 
Committee (PGC)  & Oversight 
Agent Cuanza Sul   
1) Provincial   Governance 
Committee (PGC) & Oversight Agent  
Huila 
Provincial Project Coordination 
Committee (PPCC) Cuanza Sul  
Provincial Project Coordination 
Committee (PPCC)  Huila 
Provincial Project 
Implementation Unit (PPIU) 
Provincial Project 
Implementation Unit (PPIU) 
                    Direct Coordination/Reporting    
                    Functions Governance/Oversight Functions 
1)  The oversight Agent will work with both Provincial Governance 
Committees 
20 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Project management structures 
84.  MINAGRI  will  establish  a  Project  Implementation  Unit  (PIU)  at  the  national  level,  located  in 
the IDA facilities in Luanda, overseeing the implementing of the SADCP-C&H-SAMAP, which will work 
very closely with the PIU looking after the SADCP-WB. It will be responsible for: (i) day-to-day project 
coordination  and  management  including  technical  supervision  and  coordination,  project  planning, 
quality oversight, communication, reporting, procurement, financial management, monitoring of project 
activities  and  of  its  progress  on  a  regular  basis,  and  impact  evaluation;  and  (ii) managing  fiduciary 
issues  in  conformity  with  the  IFAD  Financing Agreement  and  other  project  documents  such  as  the 
Project  Design  Report,  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  and  the  Safeguards  Frameworks 
and Manuals.  
85.  The PIU will include: a Project Coordinator, a Financial Management Specialist, a Procurement 
Specialist,  an Accountant,  a  M&E  and  Knowledge  Sharing  Specialist,  and  support  staff.  Short  term 
consultants  will  be  hired  to  support  project  implementation  (notably  for  rural  finance,  gender,  and 
nutrition issues). The PIU will also benefit from support of the technical specialists of the WB-funded 
PIU, notably in the domains of communication, environment and social safeguards, and irrigation. 
86.  Two  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIUs)  will  be  established  for  the  Huila  and 
Cuanza Sul provinces. They will be located in one of the targeted municipalities, at the existing EDA 
Office,  considering  the  long  distance  between  the  targeted  municipalities  and  the  provincial  capital. 
Choice  of  the  location  will  be  made  considering  criteria  such  as:  easy  access  to  other  target 
municipalities,  presence  of  IDA/EDA  staff  and  current  office  conditions.  The  PPIUs  will  be  lightly 
staffed,  as  most  of  the  investment  and  technical  support  duties  will  be  implemented  by  service 
providers and fiduciary management will mostly be done centrally. Therefore, each PPIU may include: 
an Area Coordinator, an Accountant, a Procurement  Assistant, an Administrative Assistant/Secretary 
and  a  Driver.  The Area  Coordinators  will  work  in  close  collaboration  with  the  Provincial  Directors  of 
IDA and the Heads of EDA Offices of targeted municipalities and will support the development of their 
capacities.  
Implementation arrangements for the components 
87.  Since institutional capacity in Angola is quite limited, project implementation will rely to a large 
extent  on  the  recruitment  of  competent  service  providers.  Government  ownership  and  institutional 
sustainability  will  be  guaranteed  by  the  inclusion  of  national  and  provincial-level  staff  in  capacity 
building activities and in key project oversight and coordination roles.  
88.  As  the  SADCP-WB  and  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  have  the  same  development  objectives  and 
indicators, components and subcomponents, target groups, implementation strategies and modalities, 
financial  management  and  procurement  procedures  etc.,  a  common  PIM  will  be  used17. The  design 
variations  introduced  in  the  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP,  namely  the  rural  finance  activities  under 
component 2, will be duly reflected in the PIM.  
89.  To  ensure  complementarity  and  synergy  between  SADCP-WB  and  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP,  a 
MoU will be signed between the two projects, no later than three months after effectiveness. The MoU 
will specify the procedures for parallel planning, monitoring, communication, learning and knowledge 
sharing, share of expertise/staff, joint procurement of service providers, etc.  
90.  Component  1:  Capacity  Building  and  Institutional  Development.  For  smallholder  farmer 
capacity  strengthening  activities  (sub-component  1.1),  the  Government  would  like  to  continue  its 
partnership with FAO for the FFS training program, following the successes achieved under MOSAP. 
For  effective  implementation  of  the  FFS  approach,  the  government  will  ensure  that  each  commune 
participating in the project has at least three agricultural extension specialists at each EDA.  FAO will 
provide  training,  coaching  and  supervision  to  IDA/EDA  staff  and  FFS  facilitators  who  will  implement 
FFS field activities. This will ensure that institutional capacity of IDA and EDA staff is enhanced and 
their  ability  to  address  developmental  issues-such  as  rural  poverty,  gender,  nutrition-sensitive  and 
climate-resilient agriculture and youth issues will be further raised. Thus, FAO’s role will be critical in 
assisting  IDA  to  implement  the  FFS  sub-component  as  IDA/EDAs  are  expected  to  take  greater 
responsibility in running the FFS as from year 4 onwards. The SADCP-C&H-SAMAP expects to cover 
17 A draft PIM has been submitted by the government to the WB and received No Objection. 
21 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
the ten targeted municipalities in Huila and Cuanza Sul provinces by the end of the third year, with at 
least three municipalities covered in the first year and six in the second year. This will ensure that all 
farmers in the target group benefit from at least one full FFS cycle during the project.  
91. 
Institutional strengthening  activities  (sub-component  1.2)  will  be implemented  at  national  level 
with IDA, GEPE and other MINAGRI structures  and with the MINAGRI and IDA Offices at  provincial 
and  municipal  level. A  multiyear  planning  exercise  will  be  undertaken  based  on  needs  assessment 
and  involving  all  stakeholders  (notably  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  and  value  chain  actors,  and  the 
Ministry in charge of environment), to determine which activities will be respectively funded under the 
WB and IFAD loans. Such plan  will be reviewed every  year against progress and duly reflected into 
the  AWPBs.  Activities  to  be  implemented  at  provincial/municipal  level  will  be  planned  taking  into 
account  the  specific  needs  of  each  project  intervention  area.  These  activities  will  be  undertaken  in 
coordination  with  partners  who  have  similar  objectives  of  strengthening  the  policy  framework  for 
smallholder agriculture, and build on existing national and provincial level policy processes.  
92.  Support to agricultural research (sub-component 1.3) will be done by the Institute of Agricultural 
Research (Instituto de Investigação Agronómica, IIA) and the partner(s) selected for the specific R&D 
activity. These activities must be well planned and justified (to address issues pertinent to smallholder 
farmers), including sharing of funding between the WB and IFAD loans. Consequently IDA and IIA will 
prepare at project start a detailed multiyear work plan and budget for these activities. Implementation 
of such work plan will be progressive and adapt to emerging issues and farmers needs as expressed 
during implementation. IDA and IIA will also prepare a MOU defining the responsibility of each party in 
the work plan, including the supervision mechanisms. The MOU should also be prepared as soon as 
the project starts, no later than six months after effectiveness. 
for 
Increased  Production  and  Commercialization.  The 
93.  Component  2:  Support 
implementation  modalities  for  technical  support  to  farmer  organisations  under  sub-component  2.1 
include contracting a main service provider (one team in each province) to: (a) identify market actors 
and opportunities, map and assess the capacity of FOs and support them to prepare subproject (SP) 
proposals/business plans (BPs); (b) provide technical assistance to IDA and beneficiaries of irrigation 
schemes  to  establish  or  strengthen  existing  WUAs;  (c)  provide  implementation  support  to 
beneficiaries  of  sub-projects;  and  (d)  strengthen  the  capacity  of  local  NGOs  and  agricultural  input 
providers  to  respond  to  the  smallholder  demands.  This  service  provider  is  expected  to  sub-contract 
local NGOs and consultants for specific activities, for example organisational audit of FOs proposing 
sub-projects,  specific  capacity  building  activities,  accompanying  subproject  implementation,  etc. 
Overseeing  the  preparation,  approval  and  implementation  of  the  sub-projects/BPs  will  be  the 
responsibility of the main service provider mentioned above. 
94.  The  main  service  provider  should  have  international  expertise  and  demonstrated  capacity  to 
manage  a  large  contract,  and  be  associated  with  competent  national  service  providers  if  available. 
Procuring such service provider will be done jointly with the SADCP-WB, which would make the scope 
of the work larger and more attractive to international service providers. 
95. 
In  helping  smallholders/FOs  prepare  and  implement  their  investment  proposals/BPs,  the 
service  providers  will  apply  the  eligibility  criteria  for  subproject  and  matching  grant  mobilisation  as 
detailed 
in  Appendix  4.  Eligibility  criteria  and  subproject  preparation,  appraisal,  approval, 
implementation and ex-post evaluation procedures will be further defined in the PIM. While the menu 
of  investment  options  will  be  flexible,  the  eligibility  criteria  will  be  strictly  followed.  Recipients  of 
matching grants will be required to contribute at least 10% of the subproject’s cost in kind and/or cash. 
96.  Under sub-component 2.2, the project will provide funding to FOs through matching grants and 
facilitated access to credit extended through PFIs. These will finance items such as: agricultural inputs 
(improved seeds, approved chemicals, fertilisers); small agricultural tools and machinery; warehouses 
and  storage  equipment;  weighing,  grading,  processing  and  packaging  equipment  and  materials; 
transport  equipment;  biological  and/or  physical  soil  erosion  control  methods;  reforestation;  among 
others.  Investments  will  be  both  at  individual  level  of  the  beneficiary  group/FO  as  well  at  collective 
level. Although  the  disbursement  mechanisms  may  vary  taking  into  consideration  the  type  of  grant, 
the eligible expenditures are for goods, works, and services. 
97.  During the first two years the FFS will not yet have matured to a level where the members can 
take on full-scale commercial production. Therefore, the Project will initially seek to obtain subproject 
22 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
proposals from more advanced FOs. This will allow the Project to test the procedures and institutional 
arrangements for supporting the development, evaluation, approval and implementation of investment 
proposals early on, so that they can be fine-tuned at the time of the Mid-Term Review. 
98.  Each  sub-project  proposal/BP  will  go  through  a  thorough  preparation,  appraisal  and  approval 
process to determine its feasibility and sustainability as well as its environmental and social impacts. 
The  business  plan  will  define:  the  technology  to  be  used  and  associated  capacity  building  activities 
and implementation support needed; the investments costs and their proposed funding (through own 
resources,  grant  and  credit);  the  operational  costs/incomes  and  forecasted  cash  flows  (before  and 
after financing); the market demand and risks; the organisational and implementation arrangements; 
the expected benefits (comparing the with and without project situation); the environmental and social 
impacts and proposed mitigation measures; the overall subproject risks; etc.  
99.  For investments in small-scale irrigation, no infrastructure investments will be made before the 
local  authorities  confirm  the  beneficiaries’  land  and  water  user  rights.  The  site  or  scheme-specific 
environment  and  social  assessment  (ESMP)  will  consider  the  ability  of  downstream  users  to  use 
water,  as  well  as,  any  environmental  flows  required  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  the  freshwater 
ecosystem.  
100.  For  other  investment  projects  with  more  localised  impacts,  standard  procedures  contained  in 
the ESMF will be followed. 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
Planning 
101.  Preparation of the AWPB will be organised so that a consolidated draft endorsed by the PCC is 
submitted to IFAD for review and No Objection latest by 31st October every year or 60 days before the 
start  of  the  next  Project  Year.  This  process  is critical  to  ensure  the  timely  submission  of  the  draft  to 
each level of approval. The AWPB final draft will be distributed to all SADCP implementing agencies 
by  31st  December  of  every  year  to  ensure  a  smooth  transition  of  implementation  from  year  to  year. 
The timeframe and process of AWPB preparation, review and approval will follow the same as that of 
the SADCP-WB in order to ensure harmonisation of national-level activities under components 1 and 
2. Considering the well elaborated capacity needs, efforts will be made to link the project to the IFAD 
funded Centres for Learning on Evaluation and Results (CLEAR) Initiative. The CLEAR initiative aims 
to  customise  an  M&E  and  impact  assessment  curriculum  and  develop  a  corresponding  certification 
framework to train and certify project staff in all  IFAD-supported projects to improve in-country M&E 
capacities. 
Monitoring and evaluation 
102.  The components of the M&E system will be: (i) baseline and end of project surveys; (ii) regular 
data collection on project activities, outputs, outcomes and impact; and (iii) special studies. A project 
database  will  be  created  for  storing  the  baseline  and  end  line  survey  data,  as  well  as  all  data 
associated with the implementation of project activities directly linked to outputs.  
103.  All activity-related data will be collected by Project stakeholders working at the community level, 
including IDA technicians and FFS facilitators, service providers and contractors. These data  will be 
entered  in  activity  monitoring  sheets  and  reported  monthly  or  more  frequently  if  needed.  Reporting 
forms  will  accompany  reports  to  be  sent  to  the  PIU.  Primary  data  will  initially  be  collected  and 
maintained by socio-economic group, age and gender subsequent to which they will be aggregated by 
community, commune, municipality and for the project globally as a basis for monitoring, analysis and 
decision making at the different levels. The PIU will submit six monthly narrative and financial reports 
to the IFAD Country Programme Manager (CPM). These reports will contain data on pre-defined basic 
indicators. 
104.  Adequate  M&E  systems  being  put  in  place  for  the  service  providers  engaged  in  FFS  and  the 
development and  implementation of sub-projects. One of the key lessons of  MOSAP  was  that  M&E 
data  was  not  systematically  used  as  a  project  management  tool,  and  that  this  handicapped  the 
learning of lessons from experience gained. Provision will be made to have an M&E system to report:  
23 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
process;  lesson  learnt;  changes  and  impact.  These  areas  will  be  clearly  identified,  the  procedures 
spelled out and the means to verify them established. 
105.  The  M&E  system  will  devote  significant  attention  to  assessing  the  poverty  impact.  Rigorous 
impact assessment will be conducted  on the basis the baseline survey. As little analysis is available 
on  FOs  and  grassroots  institutions,  the  baseline  survey  will  include  coverage  of  the  institutional 
landscape  of  grassroots  organisations.  Impact  surveys  will  be  implemented  at  mid-term  and 
completion. These surveys will monitor logical framework indicators,  and RIMS indicators as well as 
specific  reduction  impact.  They  will  be  undertaken  by  a  specialised  service  provider  contracted 
through a competitive process.  
106.  A full-time M&E Officer under the supervision of the project coordinator will be responsible for 
the  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  project.  The  PPIU  staff,  the  main  service  providers,  the 
implementation partners and the beneficiaries will play an important role in M&E functions.  
107.  Mid-term review and achievement report. A joint  Mid-Term Review  will be organised by the 
Ministry of Agriculture and IFAD during the third or fourth year to: (i) assess achievements and interim 
impact,  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  SADCP  management;  (ii)  identify  key  lessons  learnt  and 
good  practices;  and  (iii)  provide  recommendations  to  reorient  project  implementation  as  needed.  In 
the  last  year  of  implementation,  funding  will  be  provided  to  assist  the  government  in  preparing  a 
project completion report (PCR) focussing on results, impacts, lessons learnt and sustainability. The 
team  and  stakeholders  of  the  SADCP-WB  will  participate  in  these  exercises  to  cross-fertilise 
experience between the two projects and maximise knowledge sharing.  
Learning and knowledge management 
108.  The M&E system will generate quality data that will enable IDA and the Ministry of Agriculture to 
carefully monitor the Project and provide reliable information on smallholder agricultural development 
in  the  project  area  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  thus  building  a  case  for  additional  government 
investment in the sub-sector. Based on IFAD´s experience with smallholder agricultural investment in 
the  region,  knowledge  gained  in  other  countries  of  the  region  will  be  made  available  to  SADCP.  In 
turn,  the  SADCP  experience  will  inform  regional  learning  on  smallholder  agricultural  development 
farmer capacity building and investment support mechanisms.  In terms of learning, results from FFS 
implementation  will  allow  to  draw  lessons  on  best  ways  to  equip  smallholders  with  knowledge  and 
practical tools to apply good agricultural practices, adapt to climate change, improve their marketing, 
resilience,  literacy  and  business  skills,  raise  their  nutrition  awareness  and  status,  and  progressively 
move 
to  adaptive  agriculture  research,  seed 
multiplication,  soil  diagnostic  services,  characterisation  of  production  systems  and  development  of 
adapted  technology  packages  under  sub-component  1.3  will  also  produce  useful  material  for 
knowledge management. 
into  commercial  agriculture. Activities  related 
D.  Financial management, procurement and governance 
109.  Financial Management (FM). In the absence  of any  recent  Public  Expenditure  and Financial 
Accountability  (PEFA)  assessments  for  Angola,  reference  has  been  made  to  project-specific 
assessments  by  the  World  Bank  and  the  Transparency  International  Corruption  Perceptions  Index. 
Public FM and procurement systems remain relatively weak and the inherent risk is classed as “high”. 
Safeguard  measures  will  therefore  be  put  in  place  to  reduce  this  to  “medium”  once  implemented. 
SADCP-C&H-SAMAP will employ similar financial management systems to those used under MOSAP 
and  SADCP-WB,  including  use  of  the  PRIMAVERA  accounting  software.  Both  the  PIU  and  the  two 
provincial PIUs will include accounting staff. Given the parallel financing, IFAD financial management 
procedures will be followed as articulated in the project implementation manual.  
110.  Angola  is  on  ordinary  lending  terms  and  the  loan  will  be  denominated  in  US$.  Funds  will  be 
administered  through  a  designated  account  that  will  be  opened  solely  to  receive  Project  funds  from 
IFAD.  Project accounts (PAs) will be maintained in both US$ and AOA. The US$ project account  is 
intended to  be used for paying suppliers for contracts denominated in US$ and any cost incurred in 
foreign currency.  
111.  An advance of US$0.3 million will be made upon entry into force of the financing agreement for 
start-up activities. Details on the Financial Management arrangements are presented in Appendix 7. 
24 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
112.  Procurement.  All  procurement  will  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  IFAD  Procurement 
Guidelines  and  IFAD  “Policy  on  preventing  fraud  and  corruption  in  activities  and  operations”. 
Procurement  responsibility  will  rest  with  the  MINAGRI/IDA.  All  procurement  will  be  executed  only 
against  approved Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  which  align  with  the  Procurement  Plans, 
specifying items to be procured, responsibility for the  procurement and the appropriate procurement 
methods.  All  procurement  financed  by  IFAD  will  be  exempt  from  duties  and  taxes.  Details  on  the 
procurement arrangements are presented in Appendix 8.   
Governance 
113.  The governance bodies at national and provincial levels (PCC, PISC, PPCC, PGC, see chapter 
III.B)  will  integrate  stakeholders  from  all  concerned  ministries  as  well  as  representatives  of 
beneficiaries,  the  private  sector  and  civil  society.  They  will  fulfil  an  important  role  in  ensuring  good 
governance,  transparency,  compliance  with  the  financing  agreement  with  IFAD,  learning  and 
knowledge  sharing,  ensuring  synergies  between  donors  and  contribution  to  higher  level  policy  and 
strategic goals.   
E.  Supervision 
114.  Supervision  of  the  SADCP-C&H  will  be  carried  out  by  IFAD,  in  close  collaboration  with  the 
World Bank and with IDA and other implementation partners. Supervision and implementation support 
missions  by  the  World  Bank  and  IFAD  will  by  synchronised.  This  will  reduce  the  burden  of  large 
numbers  of  missions  and  will 
the  respective  project  provinces. 
Implementation support  will focus on technical  issues,  planning, gender and targeting,  procurement, 
financial management, M&E, partnerships, the integration of activities within the evolving governance 
framework; and monitoring of outputs and  outcomes. IFAD  and the World Bank  will  coordinate their 
missions  to  ensure  effective  use  of  human  resources.  At  least  one  supervision  mission  and  one 
follow-up mission will be conducted every year. 
learning  across 
facilitate 
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
115.  The overall risk of SADCP is assessed as substantial due to weak capacity for implementation 
and fiduciary matters. The main risks18 and the proposed mitigation measures are as follows:  
Main risks 
Weak institutional capacity 
including procurement and 
governance. 
Slow start-up of activities. 
Table 2: Mains risks and mitigation measures 
Implementation arrangements chosen to mitigate risk 
SADCP-C&H-SAMAP will be implemented mainly by service providers with proven 
experience in the areas for which they will be recruited, e.g. farmer field schools will be 
sub-contracted to FAO as envisaged under the SADCP-WB. Capacity building will be 
provided to IDA staff at provincial and municipality level in project design, coordination, 
monitoring and overseeing. Notwithstanding the relatively high recurrent costs, 
professional staff turnover is a risk in a very competitive job market with high demand 
and low supply. 
Hiring a Project Expeditor for a six-month period to support IDA in: (i) setting up the PIU 
and PPIUs; (ii) preparing TORs and advertisements for the recruitment of PIU and PPIUs 
staff; (iii) preparing tender documents, launching tenders and preparing guidelines for the 
selection of service providers; (iv) preparing contracts with Project staff and service 
providers; (v) setting up provincial offices; and availability of start-up financing under the 
loan. 
There are a few service 
providers with the required 
knowledge and experience in 
the project area. 
Procure experienced service providers in other provinces, in the region and 
internationally to be Lead Service Providers and encourage partnerships with local ones 
as well as training. Recruiting joint service providers with World Bank is likely to attract 
the interest of competent consultants in contract tenders. 
Weak institutional and 
fiduciary management 
capacities. 
A qualified Finance Manager supported by Accountants will be appointed to the 
PIU/PPIUs for financial management (FM) including the development of a financial 
management and information system according to IFAD rules and regulations, 
elaboration of project financial management procedures to be included in the PIM, 
training provincial FM staff, and reporting 
18 Environmental, social and climate change risks, which are rated moderate, are addressed under section II. D.  
25 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
IV. Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.  Project costs 
116.  Total  Project  costs  of  SADCP  in  Huila  and  Cuanza  Sul  provinces,  over  the  seven-year 
implementation period, including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$38.2 million. 
Component  1  (US$15.5 million)  accounts  for  40%  of  total  costs.  Component  2  (US$14.7  million) 
represents  about  39%  of  total  costs.  Component  3  (US$8.0  million)  represents  21%  of  total  costs.  
The summary of Project costs by component is shown below. Expenditure Categories 
Table 3: Project Cost Summary by Component (including contingencies, 000 US$) 
A.  Capacity Building and institutional Development  
1.  Strengthening  Capacity of Smallholders Farmers Organizations 
through FFSs 
2. 
Institutional Strengthening of Local, Provincial and National Units 
of MINAGRI 
Local 
Foreign 
Total 
1.8 
4.6 
4.6 
2.6 
6.4 
7.3 
3.  Strengthening  Capacity and Global Knowledge to address 
0.7 
0.2 
0.9 
Emerging Research issues 
Sub-total: 
B.  Support for Increased Production and Commercialization 
1.  Provision of Technical Support 
2.  Provision of Investment Support 
Sub-total: 
C. Project Management 
Project Management 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Sub-total: 
TOTAL BASELINE COSTS 
Physical Contingencies 
Price Contingencies 
Total Project Cost 
7.2 
7.4 
14.6 
5.8 
7.2 
13.1 
5.9 
0.1 
6.0 
26.3 
0.0 
1.3 
27.5 
0.3 
0.9 
1.2 
0.8 
0.7 
1.5 
10.1 
0.0 
0.5 
6.1 
8.2 
14.2 
6.7 
0.8 
7.5 
36.4 
0.0 
1.8 
10.6 
38.2 
% Foreign 
Exchange 
% Total 
Base Costs 
72 
36 
19 
91 
5 
11 
8 
11 
87 
20 
28 
64 
27 
28 
18 
20 
3 
40 
17 
22 
39 
18 
2 
21 
100 
- 
5 
105 
B.  Project financing 
117.  The SADCP-C&H-SAMAP19 will be funded by: (i) an IFAD loan of US$28.8 million (75 percent 
of total project costs); (ii) a Government contribution equivalent to US$8.2 million (22 percent of total 
costs),  to  cover  duties  and  taxes  as  well  as  some  operational  costs  of  the  public  extension  and 
agricultural  research  services;  and  (iii)  a  beneficiaries’  contribution  equivalent  to  US$1.1 million  (3 
percent  of  total  costs)  to  co-finance  sub-projects  under  subcomponent  2.2.  Details  are  presented  in 
the tables below.  
118.  Expenditure  Categories.  The  expenditure  categories  are  based  on  the  standardisation  that 
IFAD is adopting after phasing its loan and grant system. The project cost by expenditure categories 
are shown in the table below:  
19 The World Bank credit (US$70 million) to support the SADCP in Bie, Huambo and Malanje was approved on 
5 July 2016. 
26 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Table 4: Project costs by category of Expenditure (US$ ‘000)                  
Local 
Foreign 
Total 
% Foreign 
Exchange 
% Total 
Base Costs 
I. Investment Cost 
A. Civil Works 
B. Goods & Equipment 
Vehicles 
Equipment 
Subtotal 
C. Consultancies /a 
Individual Consultancy - Local 
Individual Consultancy - foreign 
Firm - NGO consultancy - Local 
Firm - NGO consultancy - Foreign 
Subtotal 
D. Training & Workshops 
Local training & workshops 
International training 
Subtotal 
E. Operating costs 
F. Matching Grants 
G. Credit 
Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
A. Travel allowances 
B. Incremental Salaries 
C. Operation & Maintenance (O&M) 
Vehicle O&M 
Office equipment O&M 
Building O&M 
Subtotal 
Total Recurrent Costs 
Total BASLINE COSTS 
Physical Contingencies 
Price Contingencies 
Total PROJECT COSTS 
0.7 
0.3 
0.1 
0.4 
1.2 
- 
6.2 
- 
7.4 
0.6 
- 
0.6 
2.4 
4.8 
1.2 
17.5 
0.3 
4.9 
0.4 
0.2 
3.0 
3.6 
8.8 
26.3 
0.0 
1.3 
27.6 
1.1 
0.5 
0.3 
0.7 
- 
1.0 
- 
5.0 
6.1 
0.0 
- 
0.0 
0.4 
- 
- 
8.3 
- 
- 
0.4 
0.2 
1.3 
1.8 
1.8 
10.1 
0.0 
0.5 
10.6 
1.8 
0.8 
0.4 
1.1 
1.2 
1.0 
6.2 
5.0 
13.5 
0.6 
- 
0.6 
2.8 
4.8 
1.2 
25.7 
0.3 
4.9 
0.7 
0.4 
4.3 
5.4 
10.6 
36.4 
0.0 
1.8 
38.2 
60 
60 
70 
63 
- 
100 
- 
100 
45 
5 
- 
5 
15 
- 
- 
32 
- 
- 
50 
40 
30 
33 
17 
28 
64 
27 
28 
5 
2 
1 
3 
3 
3 
17 
14 
37 
2 
- 
2 
8 
13 
3 
71 
1 
13 
2 
1 
12 
15 
29 
100 
- 
5 
105 
119.  Pre-Start Up Cost.  Pre-start up activities will be funded by an advance of about USD 0.3 million 
which  will  be  disbursed  at  the  entry  into  force  of  the  financing  agreement.  The  eligible 
expenditures  will  include  cost  related  to  the  establishment  of  the  PIU  key-staff,  preparatory 
activities for a prompt implementation start of SADCP-C&H-SAMAP. 
27 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
28 
 Republic of AngolaSmallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila provinces (SADCP-C&H)Components by Financiers(USD Million)LocalIFADBeneficiariesThe GovernmentTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Capacity Building and Institutional Development 1. Strengthening Capacity of Smallholder Farmers and Farmers' Organizations through Farmer Field Schools 4.566.7--2.233.36.717.64.81.9-2. Institutional Strengthening of Local, Provincial and National Units of the Ministry of Agriculture 3.038.2--4.861.87.720.32.84.30.63. Strengthening Capacity and Global Knowledge to address Emerging Research Issues 0.222.8--0.877.21.02.60.20.80.0Subtotal 7.749.7--7.850.315.540.57.87.00.6B. Support for Increased Production and Commercialization 1. Provision of Technical Support 6.5100.0--0.0-6.516.90.36.2-2. Provision of Investment Support 7.186.31.113.30.00.48.321.71.07.20.2Subtotal 13.692.31.17.50.00.214.738.61.313.30.2C. Project Management Project Management 6.794.1--0.45.97.118.70.86.10.3Monitoring and Evaluation 0.9100.0----0.92.20.70.1-Subtotal 7.694.7--0.45.38.020.91.56.20.3Total PROJECT COSTS 28.875.51.12.98.221.638.2100.010.626.51.1 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
Benefits  
120.  The  Project  will  improve  the  livelihoods  and  nutrition  status  of  60,000  beneficiaries,  create 
employment  at  farm/POs  level  and  boost  the  development  of  agricultural  value  chains.  The  main 
benefits generated by the project would be as follows: (i) increased agricultural production stemming 
from:  adoption  of  improved  technologies;  enhanced  access  to  and  efficiency  of  water  use; 
(ii) increased cash income for participating smallholders; (iii) improved food security and nutrition and 
reduction  in  the  vulnerability  to  external  shocks,  notably  climate  change  and  rising  food  prices;  (iv) 
reduced transaction costs and post-harvest losses through bulking and marketing by POs and other 
value  chain  actors  and  enhanced  access  of  smallholders  to  finance;  (v) increased  value  added  by 
smallholders  and  POs;  (vi) enhanced  market/business  opportunities  and  economies  of  scale 
benefiting  actors  of  the  supply  chains  following  the  enhancement  of  market  linkages  between 
smallholders and buyers/processors; (vii) enhanced bargaining power, understanding of markets and 
management  capacity  of  smallholders  and  their  organisations;  (viii) incremental  employment 
generated 
is 
marketed/processed; (ix) foreign exchange savings through reduced importation of food; (x) improved 
natural  resources  conservation,  enhanced  bio-diversity  and  resilience  to  climate  change;  and 
(xi) improved social stability, overall wellbeing and livelihoods in targeted areas. The Project will also 
improve the institutional capacity of MINAGRI, IDA at central, provincial and municipality levels. The 
Government’s  implementation  of  smallholder  farmer  development  policies  and  strategies  will  be 
progressively developed during the life of the Project. 
increased  share  of  production 
increased  production  and 
through 
that 
the 
Financial analysis 
121.  The financial analysis was based on five farm models, derived from seven crop models, namely 
maize,  beans,  vegetables  (onion,  tomato  and  cabbage),  Irish  potato  and  cassava.  The  financial 
models  assess  whether  the  improved  technology  packages  are  commercially  viable  and  enable  the 
beneficiaries to generate sufficient additional income, to increase their food security and resilience to 
shocks and to raise their asset base and creditworthiness. These models take into consideration the 
yield  and  input  use  evolution  in  the  “without  project”  and  “with  project”  situations.  Five  typical  farm 
models  were  elaborated  with  cropping  patterns  representing  the  situation  of  smallholders  in  the 
project  area  (average  size  of  1  ha  per  household  for  the  rain  fed  crop  model;  0.12  ha  for  the 
horticulture model and 0.5 ha for small scale irrigation schemes).  
improved 
technologies,  enhance 
122.  All  financial  models  show  substantial  increases  in  income  that  should  attract  smallholders  in 
adopting 
their 
their 
creditworthiness  vis-à-vis  buyers  and  financial  institutions  (see  appendix  10).  All  farm  models  are 
commercially  viable  with:  (i)  significantly  higher  cash  flows  in  the  with-project  situation;  (ii) 
benefit/costs  (B/C)  ratio’s  between  1.2  and  2.1;  (iii)  return  to  family  labour  between  AOA 712  and 
1,338  per  day;  and  (iv) Financial  Net  Present  Values  (FNPV)  varying  from  AOA 36,164  for  the  1 
hectare of rain-fed farm with FFS support only, to AOA 0.7 million for the 0.5 hectare irrigation model. 
into  markets  and 
integration 
raise 
Economic analysis 
123.  The  economic  and  financial  analysis  (EFA)  was  prepared  in  September  2016,  using  a  similar 
approach  to  the  one  used  for  the  EFA  of  the  SADCP-WB  (carried  out  in  June  2015),  with  due 
adaptation  to  specificities  (crops,  farm  size  and  models)  in  the  targeted  provinces,  and  IFAD 
requirements for EFAs. It was conducted over a 20-year period in constant 2016 prices, aggregating 
additional net profits derived from the various models. The assumptions are the following: (i) financial 
prices  and  costs  and  benefit  streams  were  transformed  into  economic  values  through  calculating 
economic  import/export  parity  prices  at  farm  gate,  applying  conversion  factors  for  each  category  of 
costs,  eliminating  taxes  and  transfers;  (ii)  economic  costs  were  generated  by  COSTAB;  (iii) 
incremental  costs  after  the  Project  implementation  period,  in  particular  for  maintenance  of  irrigation 
schemes and other infrastructure, as well as costs to follow up farmers were taken into account; (iii) a 
shadow  exchange rate  of AOA190/US$; (iv)  a discount rate  of five percent; (v)  an economic cost of 
labour of AOA 340 per day, compared to a financial cost of 400 AOA per day; (vi) a long-term adoption 
rate of 50%, which is realistic given the difficult conditions in rural areas. 
29 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
124.  The  Project  would  yield  an  Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return  (EIRR)  of  18%  and  a  NPV  of 
US$ 28.3 million.  The  Project  is  therefore  highly  attractive  from  an  economic  standpoint.  The 
incremental economic benefit from year 8 onwards would be valued at approximately US$ 6.7 million 
per annum20. 
D.  Sustainability 
125.  Sustainability is built-into the project through: (i) the FFSs which will give rise to large numbers 
of trained farmer facilitators who will continue to provide technical assistance to their peers long after 
the  project  has  ended;  (ii)  with  investment  support,  smallholder  farmers  and  their  organisations  will 
generate higher incomes, be better linked with traders, input suppliers, agro-processors and financial 
institutions, be more creditworthy and bankable, accumulate capital, increase their social and market 
thrust and thereby become less dependent on external support for realising their investment projects 
and  more  credible  actors  in  the  value  chains;  and  (iii)  enhanced  institutional  capacity  of  public 
services.  The  support  provided  to  the  Government  institutions  will  greatly  enhance  policy,  research, 
extension and implementation capacity and will ensure a greater project sustainability. 
126.  As  indicated  earlier  and  as  recommended  in  the  lessons  learnt  from  MOSAP,  the  project  exit 
strategy relies on: building capacity at different levels, at farmers/FOs but also at public  services and 
value  chain  actors  level,  linking  smallholders/FOs  to  value  chains  actors  (buyer/traders,  input 
suppliers)  and  raising  their  assets,  business  profile,  and  credit  worthiness,  and  supporting 
smallholders to progressively move into commercial agricultural production.  
20  The EFA carried out for the SADCP-WB resulted in an EIRR of 19 percent and a NPV of US$50 million (at a 
10 percent discount rate). 
30 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
A.  Country context 
1. 
The Republic of Angola is located in South-western Africa and bordered by the Atlantic Ocean 
to the west, Namibia to the south and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia to the north 
and east, respectively. The country covers an area of 1,247,000 km2 and is the third largest country in 
sub-Saharan Africa. The 2014 census estimated the population at 24.3 million people of whom some 
38%  are  thought  to  live  in  rural  areas21.  Angola  is  one  of  Africa’s  most  resource-rich  countries, 
representing  sub-Saharan Africa’s  second  largest  oil  producer,  after  Nigeria,  and  the  world’s  fourth 
largest  producer  (in  value)  of  diamonds.  The  country  also  possesses  a  wealth  of  other  natural 
resources, including minerals, water, agriculture, forestry and fisheries.  
2. 
In 1975, after 14 years of fighting, Angola became independent from Portugal, but immediately 
after  independence  it  became  engulfed  in  one  of Africa’s most  prolonged  civil  conflicts  between  the 
Popular  Movement  for  the  Liberation  of  Angola  (MPLA)  and  the  National  Union  for  the  Total 
Independence  of  Angola  (UNITA).  Peace  seemed  imminent  in  1992  when  national  elections  were 
held, but fighting was renewed when UNITA rejected the election results. A new peace agreement, the 
Lusaka Protocol, was signed in 1994, but war resumed in 1998. In April 2002, a cease-fire was called 
following  the  death  of  the  leader  of  UNITA,  Jonas  Savimbi,  and,  on  21  November  2002,  the 
Government  and  former  rebels  signed  a  peace  agreement  that  definitively  ended  the  conflict.  The 
political  process  appears  to  have  stabilised  since  2002  and  in  the  most  recent  legislative  election, 
President Dos Santos’ ruling party won over 72% of the vote.  
3. 
After almost four decades of war, much of the country’s economy had collapsed, infrastructure 
destroyed,  institutions  weakened  or  no  longer  functioning,  society  polarised,  an  estimated  4  million 
people  displaced,  poverty  rampant  and  the  newly  created  political  process  fragile.  Over  the  last  11 
years  since  signing  the  peace  accords,  the  Government,  together  with  its  national  and  international 
partners, have made substantial progress in re-establishing the foundation needed to address many 
of these problems. This has resulted in the development and implementation of programmes aimed at 
restoring  order  and  security,  revitalising  the  economy,  restoration  of  basic  social  services  and  the 
rehabilitation of basic infrastructure. 
B.  Agricultural sector 
4. 
Before independence, Angola had a long history of exporting agricultural commodities and was 
once  the  world’s  third  largest  exporter  of  coffee.  During  the  colonial  period,  agriculture  had  a  dual 
structure,  with  a  commercial  sector  of  about  800,000  ha  managed  by  Portuguese  settlers  using 
modern  technologies  and  a  traditional  sector  primarily  composed  of  smallholder  family  farms 
cultivating about 3.4 million ha.  
After  independence,  most  Portuguese  settlers  left  the  country  and  many  former  commercial 
5. 
farms and plantations were converted into state farms, which have since been privatised. The civil war 
resulted in a virtual collapse in commercial production as large numbers of rural inhabitants either fled 
or reverted to subsistence agricultural production. Rural infrastructure suffered because of widespread 
destruction  of  roads,  bridges,  irrigation  systems,  and  warehouses,  compounded  by  the  presence  of 
thousands of land mines in rural areas. Although the situation has improved with the rehabilitation of 
main  roads  and  bridges  and  clearance  of  mines,  the  agriculture  sector  has  not  yet  fully  recovered 
from  the  destruction  and  decapitalisation.  As  a  consequence,  agricultural  exports  are  currently 
negligible. 
6.  With  an  annual  average  share  of  5.5  percent  (2002–2013),  agriculture  is  the  third  largest 
contributor to the gross domestic product. However, public spending in the sector has not only been 
low but has declined over time. For example, the share of agriculture in the  national budget in 2013 
was 1.1 percent (US$702 million); in 2014, the share was 0.5 percent (US$597 million); and in 2015, 
21 Government of Angola (2016), “Censo 2014. Resultados definitivos do recensamento geral da populaçao e de habitaçao de 
Angola 2014”, Instituto Nacional de Estatística.  
31 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
the share was 0.41 percent (US$544 million). It is important to note that the budget allocations for the 
agriculture  sector  not  only  fall  under  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  (MINAGRI),  but  also  under  the 
Ministries  of  Commerce,  Industry,  and  Transport  (e.g.  for  PAPAGRO,  the  Food  Crops  Purchase 
Programme). Due to the decline in oil prices and oil revenues, the national budget will be constrained 
and allocations to agriculture are likely to be adversely affected. Public investment support is critical to 
capitalise  agriculture,  rebuild  agricultural 
increase 
investment  in  agricultural  research  and  development  (R&D).  In  light  of Angola’s  recent  experience, 
increased  public  and  private  investment  is  needed  in  agriculture  and  public-private  partnerships 
(PPPs) must be promoted.  
infrastructure,  strengthen 
institutions,  and 
7.  While  the  agriculture  sector  is  essential  to  promote  national  development  and  economic 
diversification,  its  potential  will  remain  untapped  if  productivity  does  not  increase  significantly. 
Agricultural  production  has  increased  gradually  since  2002  (end  of  the  war),  but  crop  yields  remain 
very low compared to other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. According to FAO, the average yield of 
beans  in Angola  is  0.34  ton  per  ha  compared  to  0.60  ton  per  ha  in  the  southern African  region;  the 
average  yield  of  groundnuts  is  0.38  ton  per  ha  compared  to  0.88  ton  per  ha  in  the  region;  and  the 
average  millet  yield  is  0.24  ton  per  ha  compared  to  the  regional  average  of  0.70  ton  per  ha. 
Substantial  scope  clearly  exists  for  increasing  crop  yields  and  crop  production  through  use  of 
improved  agricultural  technology  as  well  as  through  an  increase  in  cultivated  area.  This  will  require 
the use of animal  traction,  mechanisation, adoption of improved agronomic practices, improvements 
in  soil  fertility,  use  of  modern  agricultural  inputs,  increased  cropped  area  under  irrigation,  and 
dissemination of agricultural knowledge to farmers. In addition, there is substantial scope for a value 
chain  approach,  strengthening  market 
improving  commercialization,  and  building 
agribusiness facilities through local entrepreneurs.  
linkages, 
C.  Rural finance sector 
8. 
The financial sector overall, comprised of commercial banks, non‐banking financial institutions, 
and microfinance institutions (MFIs) such as credit cooperatives and microcredit companies, has been 
meeting  the  evolving  demands  of  the  economy  and  contributing  significantly  to  economic 
diversification of the country with a view to reducing dependency on the oil sector. Currently there are 
27 licensed banks (compared to 10 in 2005). Though competitive, the Angolan banking sector is also 
highly  concentrated,  with  5  banks  alone  having  over  75  percent  of  combined  market  share.  The 
banking sector has been expanding in terms of number of branches and ATMs throughout the country. 
Notwithstanding  the  expansion,  the  scope  of  products  and  services  offered  are  mostly  focused  on 
traditional  mass-market  banking  products.  The  banks  have  sound  and  highly  liquid  balance  sheets, 
with  a  large  proportion  of  the  assets  being  held  in  cash  (19  percent)  and  investment  securities  (24 
percent).  Loans  are  concentrated  in  a  few  sectors,  like  wholesale  and  retail  commerce,  personal 
services/consumer  finance  and  real  estate.  Geographically  too,  credit  is  highly  concentrated  in  the 
Luanda province (approximately 87 percent), and generally speaking in urban areas. The larger, older 
and urban-based firms have greater access to credit. High collateral is required for every loan. A few 
banks  have  microfinance  portfolios,  but  the  loans  to  individuals  or  groups  thereunder  are  mostly 
extended under government-sponsored or donor-supported programmes. The share of agriculture in 
the loan portfolio of the banking sector is minimal, much less than the share of agriculture in the GDP. 
Short-term finance  is preferred over  long-term finance for agriculture  investment. This deters capital 
formation  in  agriculture.  The  development  of  new  products  and  services  for  low-income  people  has 
been few and the risk perception of bankers for agriculture has been very high. The insurance market 
is weak and formal credit/deposit insurance is not in vogue. The banks have a high loan-deposit ratio 
(59 percent). The fact that funding is based on domestic deposits rather than capital means that the 
banking  sector  has  adequate  financial  resources  to  support  and  fuel  economic  diversification, 
employment generation and sustainable poverty reduction in Angola. 
9. 
The  central  bank,  Banco  Nacional  de Angola  (BNA),  has  commenced  reforming  the  banking 
sector. The new legal framework for financial institutions has been put in place in December 2015, but 
the  regulations  for  the  segment  of  MFIs  are  being  awaited.  Out  of  25  MFIs,  only  5  are  operating. 
However,  only  one  MFI  (KixiCrédito)  is  delivering  various  microcredit  products  supervised  by  BNA. 
The sector is expected to transform and graduate to the next level, i.e., the formation of Microfinance 
banks  that  provide  wide  ranging  financial  services  within  a  conducive  regulatory  framework.  The 
32 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Cooperative  sector,  notwithstanding  their  potential  for  decentralised  lending  in  rural  areas,  is  very 
weak  and  the  regulatory  framework  is  fragile.  Credit  cooperatives  need  a  major  overhaul  through 
appropriate developmental and regulatory interventions. Some of the international (e.g., World Vision, 
Care,  Development  Workshop)  and  domestic  NGOs  (e.g.,  ADRA,  ADESPOVE)  are  associated  in 
various  financial  sector-related  programmes,  particularly  in  agricultural  value  chain  and  livelihood 
finance. Potentially, they could intensify mobilisation of farmers associations, farmers groups and self-
help  groups,  with  thrust  on  savings  and  bring  about  linkages  with  banks,  service  providers  and  the 
market. Mobile and agent banking are in their infancy, lacking far behind the dynamic development in 
a  number  of  countries  in  East  and  Southern  Africa.  BNA  has  already  drafted  regulations  for  new 
financial products and services such as leasing and factoring; banking security and fraud prevention; 
agent  and  mobile  banking.  The  BNA  confirmed  its  interest  to  collaborating  with  the  SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP  to  improve  access  to  rural  finances  services  and  financial  inclusion.  The  private  sector, 
mobile  network  operators  and  NGOs  could  play  a  significant  role  in  the  financial  inclusion  space. 
Nearly 47 percent of the people are financially included in the country22 BNA has become a committed 
driver of the national financial inclusion agenda for the last few years, but the policy is not yet in place 
and developmental interventions are yet to gather required momentum. 
10.  The  Government  of  Angola  and  BNA  have  given  focus  in  recent  years  to  economic 
diversification,  deepening  of  financial  inclusion,  developing  rural  financial  system,  microfinance  and 
financing agriculture and agri-business with focus on family farming. The country’s financial sector is 
yet to give due attention to these emerging areas, but there is still a long way to go in order to achieve 
a  truly  diversified  economy  and  a  more  inclusive,  sustainable  and  robust  growth.  The  current 
economic  environment  has  provided  a  unique  opportunity  to  refocus  policies,  re-engineer  systems 
and  processes  foster  structural  transformation,  bring  about  institutional  development  and  upscale 
innovations  in  financial  sector  for  agriculture  and  rural  development.  Both  public  and  private 
institutions, including the banking sector, have to work closely to increase production and productivity 
of smallholder farmers by facilitating access to finance, technology and market 
D.  Policy framework 
11.  A  key  policy  set  out  in  Angola’s  National  Development  Plan  (NDP),  2013-2017,  is  the 
promotion of economic growth and increased employment. To implement this policy, public investment 
will continue to be a major driver. If successful, government estimates that as a percentage of GDP, 
the petroleum sector will decline from 45% to 27% by 2017. More specifically, government envisions 
the  intensification  of  economic  diversification  supported  through  investment  in  rehabilitation  and 
development  of  new  infrastructure.  In  addition,  the  Government  targets  the  development  of 
macroeconomic policies to stimulate private sector investment and the creation of a more efficient and 
flexible  public  institutional  structure.  The  latter  would  include  restructuring  of  the  central  and  local 
administrative bodies for purposes of rationalisation of resources and increased efficiency.  
12.  The  Government  is  fighting  poverty  on  various  fronts  including:  (i)  the  2005  Anti-poverty 
Strategy  (ECP);  (ii)  the  2009  National  Strategy  for  Food  and  Nutrition  Security  (ENSAN); 
(iii) inclusion of poverty alleviation activities in the national annual plan and budget, covering various 
social  and  economic  sectors;  (iv)  the  nationwide  Integrated  Municipal  Program  for  Rural 
Development and the Fight Against Poverty (PMIDRCP), which resulted from the 2010 merger of 
the ECP and ENSAN; and (v) the above-mentioned National Development Plan (NDP) 2013-2017, 
which  lays  down  the  broad  guidelines  for  the  development  of  Angola,  and  which  includes  the  key 
elements  from  the  ECP  and  the  ENSAN.  Government  continues  to  allocate  more  than  30%  of  its 
budget to improving social conditions; a figure that is projected to increase over the next five years.  
13.  The  main  goal  set  out  in  the  ECP  is  to  cut  the  country’s  poverty  level  in  half  by  2015  and  to 
consolidate  peace  and  national  unity  through  sustained  improvement  in  living  standards  of  all 
Angolans.  The  main  priorities  identified  in  the  ECP  are:  (i)  the  reconstruction  of  infrastructure;  (ii) 
increased  access  to  education,  health,  and  other  basic  services;  and  (iii)  decentralisation  of 
governance  structures.  The  ECP  highlights  rural  development,  with  a  focus  on  the  improvement  of 
food security and the revitalisation of the rural economy. Key proposed actions are: (i) strengthening 
of  the  production  capacity  of  the  traditional  sector,  particularly  food  crops  and  fisheries;  (ii)  re-
22 BNA Stability Report 2014. 
33 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
launching  of  rural  commerce;  (iii) sustainable  development  of  natural  resources;  and  (iv) re-
organisation  of  the  legal  framework  and  public  institutions.  Priority  actions  are  to  be  guided  by  the 
following basic principles: (i) a focus on smallholders; (ii) the importance of community  participation; 
(iii)  the  concentration  of  planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  at  the  municipal  level;  (iv) 
complementary activities  with  donors, the private sector and NGOs; (v) specific targeting of  women, 
including access to land; and (vi) HIV/AIDS should be treated as a cross-cutting concern.  
14.  The  goal  set  out  by  ENSAN  is  to  ensure  that,  at  all  times,  all  Angolans  have  physical  and 
economic  access  to  adequate  quantities  of  food  of  good  quality  and  variety  to  permit  them  to 
contribute to the human, economic and social development of the country. The main policy priorities 
are to: (i) increase and diversify agriculture and sustainable fish production to improve the well-being 
of the population; (ii) improve the conditions of access to food; (iii) diminish the levels of malnutrition 
of the population; and (iv)  guarantee and secure  the  sanitary conditions and the quality  of food and 
potable water.  
15.  The Integrated Municipal Program for Rural Development and the Fight Against Poverty 
(PMIDRCP)  resulted  from  the  2010  merger  of  the  ECP  and  ENSAN.    Its  general  objective  is:  “To 
reduce levels of extreme poverty in Angola and in particular in rural areas, promoting access to basic 
public  services  and  turn  Angola  into  a  prosperous  country  with  social  justice.”  This  program  is 
implemented  in  the  whole  country  and  led  by  the  Secretariat  of  Social  Issues  of  the  Presidency. 
PMIDRCP  includes  several  social  programmes,  such  as  Pro-ajuda  (“help  for  work”  aiming  at  the 
social  inclusion  of  the  more  vulnerable  households), Agua  para  todos  (Water  for  all),  Cartão  Kikuia 
(provision  of  10  thousand  kwanzas  to  cover  basic  living  expenses)  and  Programa  de Aquisição  de 
Produtos Agrícola (PAPAGRO) aiming at purchasing agricultural products from smallholder farmers.  
16.  Both the ECP and the ENSAN are reflected in the NDP 2013-2017, which lays down the broad 
guidelines for the development of Angola, such as: guaranteeing the fundamental rights and freedoms 
and the development of civil society; ensuring the improvement of quality of life, fighting hunger and 
extreme poverty; promote sustainable, competitive and equitable development ensuring the future to 
generations  to  come;  promote  the  development  of  science,  and  technology;  developing  the 
entrepreneurship  and  private  sector.  In  relation  to  the  agricultural  sector,  the  Plan  aims  to  promote 
integrated  and  sustainable  development  of  the  sector  by  the  exploitation  of  the  potentiality  of 
productive  natural  resources  and  the  competitiveness  of  the  sector  in  order  to  ensure  food  security 
and domestic supplies of regional and international markets in light of a gender sensitive approach. 
17.  Other  key  subsidiary  programmes  and  policies  focused  on  agriculture  and  rural  development 
include:  (i)  the  Rural  and  Agricultural  Development  Program,  (ii)  the  Small  Industry  Enterprises 
Development Program, (iii) the National Strategy for  Rural Trade and Entrepreneurship, and (iv) the 
National Program for Rural Women Development. 
18. 
In  parallel  to  these  efforts,  Government  is  also  making  considerable  headway  towards 
promoting  administrative  decentralisation  and  decentralisation  of  decision  making  powers  from  the 
central level to municipalities through several complementary programmes and plans. These include: 
(i)  Integrated  Municipal  Programme  for  Rural  Development  and  Poverty Alleviation  (PMIDRCP);  (ii) 
the Municipalisation of Health Services; and (iii) Consultation and Social Dialogue Councils (CACSs). 
In addition, the NDP includes measures that reinforce the integrated vision of development, especially 
the Requalification of Rural Villages (Programa de Requalificação de Aldeias Rurais) expected to be 
implemented during the course of 2014.  
19.  With  regards  to  trade  policy  measures  that  affect  agriculture,  the  Government  imposed 
regulatory measures  in 2015  on  the import market with the objective to  protect  domestic production 
and restrict monopolistic practice, particularly  through import quotas (see Joint Executive Decree no. 
34/15 of 23 January 2015). This mainly affects the trade of horticulture, chicken cuts, palm oil, sugar, 
wheat  flour,  rice,  bovine  meat,  soybean  oil  and  corn  flour  e.g.  commodities  that  are  not  currently 
produced  by  the  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  target  groups.  In  any  case,  such  trade  regulations  could 
provide  market  opportunities  for  smallholder  producers  while  having  potential  adverse  impact  on 
consumers.  Considering  the  potential  impacts  of  such  policy  measures  on  smallholder  farmers  and 
consumers, they will be closely looked at through the agricultural policy analysis activities supported 
by the project (under subcomponent 1.2), in close coordination with those funded under the SADCP-
34 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
WB and other ongoing initiatives tackling agricultural and trade policies supported by the World Bank, 
FAO, UNDP and other donors.  
20.  Concerning  land  issues,  the  current  land  tenure  arrangements  in  Angola  are  based  on  the 
principles  of  the  customary  land  ownership  system.  In  the  project  intervention  area,  arable  land  is 
available and is generally not a major issue. There is an ongoing process to revise the Land Law; any 
improvement of land use rights validation processes would assist smallholder farmers to better access 
to services offered by formal financial institutions. However, land  issues are not the main bottleneck 
that currently restrict smallholders’ access to rural financial services (see section on rural finance). 
E.  Climate change  
21.  Climate models predict Angola will experience higher temperatures (1.2 to 3.2°C by the 2060s), 
more extreme weather events, an expansion of arid and semi-arid regions, seasonal shifts in rainfall, 
localised  floods,  increased  wildfires,  sea  level  rise,  increased  rainfall  in  the  northern  parts  of  the 
country,  changes  in  river  flows  and  changes  in  sea  and  lake  temperatures  (NAPA,  2011).  The 
temperature increases and shifts in rainfall patterns are expected to  adversely affect the agricultural 
productivity in the targeted regions of the SADCP as most of the agricultural production is rain fed. 
22.  Angola’s  policy  on  climate  change  was  set  out  in  the  country’s  National  Adaptation 
Programme  of  Action  (NAPA)  in  2011.  The  NAPA  identifies  agriculture  and  fisheries  as  the  most 
vulnerable national sectors and prolonged drought, flooding and water induced soil erosion as major 
threats.  The  NAPA  process  identified  30  adaptation  actions  and  options  to  respond  to  identified 
threats, which were then ranked based on potential benefits and costs.  
23.  The top climate change adaptation priorities identified by NAPA for agriculture and food security 
include: (i) promoting sustainable land and water management for increased agricultural yields; (ii) soil 
erosion control through organic methods; (iii) diversifying crops to less climate sensitive cultures; and 
(iv) implementing water-harvesting system in drought-prone areas. These are often referred to as “no-
regrets”  options  as  they  tend  to  increase  smallholder  farmer  incomes  as  well  as  assist  in  climate 
change adaptation. SADCP will promote sustainable land management practices through the Farmer 
Field Schools (FFS). The FFS curriculum used under MOSAP already included farming techniques to 
assist climate change adaptation, e.g. conservation agriculture and composting.  Capacity building on 
climate  risk  analysis  through  the  Farmer  Business  Schools. These  capacity  building  efforts  will  also 
benefit IDA’s field technicians, who will be trained as FFS Master Trainers. 
24.  A climate vulnerability analysis on crops targeted in the SADCP project area covered by IFAD 
funding was undertaken during design by the Africa Climate and Development Initiative (ACDI) based 
at  the  University  of  Cape  Town.  The  analysis  illustrates  that  cassava  production  is  particularly  well 
suited to the extended rainfall and high temperatures of the midlands of Cuanza Sul. Cuanza Sul and 
Huila both include some areas of moderate suitability for C. robusta. With the exception of the semi-
arid  zones  in  Huila  province  and  the  coastal  plains  of  Cuanza  Sul,  sweet  potato  can  be  grown 
throughout the planalto. Apart from the arid extents of southern Huila and western Cuanza Sul, large 
extents of land  are ‘moderately’ suitable for Cavendish table banana production. The majority  of the 
planalto is ‘highly suitable’ or ‘excellent’ for maize production. Millet and sorghum are the only cereal 
crops which are appropriate for cultivation across the entire planalto, including southern Huila and the 
western coastal lowlands of Cuanza Sul.  
25.  The  spatial  range  of  suitability  for  a  number  of  climate-sensitive  crops  such  as  coffee,  maize 
and plantain bananas is likely to be reduced in low-lying and coastal parts of Cuanza Sul as well as 
the southerly parts of Huila. An additional effect of climate change on some crops will be to reduce the 
potential  range  of  growing  seasons,  particularly  in  the  case  of  maize.  Another  impact  of  climate 
change  that  is  likely  to  reduce  the  productivity  of  certain  crops  analysed  is  increased  incidence  of 
pests  and  disease.  In  the  case  of  cassava,  sweet  potato  and  banana,  there  are  multiple  soil-borne 
pathogens  that  may  become  more  frequent  or  severe  as  a  result  of  climate  change.  For  example, 
crops  are  likely  to  be  more  vulnerable  to  Fusarium  or  Phyophthora  as  a  result  of  increased 
temperature and humidity, or as a result of waterlogging during periods of prolonged rainfall. 
35 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
A.  Population and national poverty context 
1. 
Angola is a  natural resource-rich country that experienced a rapid economic growth since  the 
end of the civil war in 2002. Between 2002 and 2014 the growth of real gross national income (GNI) 
per capita increased from US$2,900 to US$6,800, largely led by oil production. In 2014, the oil sector 
represented 45% of national GDP and accounted for 95% of the country’s total exports. However, the 
country  is  currently  experiencing  a  major  financial  crisis,  mainly  due  to  declining  world  market  oil 
prices, which fell by two-thirds in 2015. 
2. 
Since  the  end  of  the  civil  war,  social  indicators  have  generally  improved,  though  at  a  pace 
slower  than  that  of  the  economy  at  large. There  is  still  a  large  gap  between  income  per  capita  and 
other  welfare  indicators  such  as  poverty  rates,  life  expectancy,  educational  attainment  or  access  to 
water and basic sanitation. 
3. 
Angola’s  HDI  (Human  Development  Index)  increased  by  36.3%  between  2000  and  2014, 
although  the  country  continues  in  the  low  human  development  category  as  it  ranks  149  out  of  188 
countries and territories (HDR, 2015). Table 1 reviews Angola’s progress in each of the HDI indicators. 
Table 1. Angola’s progress in relation to HDI indicators 
Year 
2000 
2005 
2010 
2014 
Source: UNDP, HDR 2015 
Life expectancy 
45.2 
48.6 
50.7 
52.3 
Expected years of schooling 
5.5 
7.9 
10.2 
11.4 
GNI per capita 
2,912 
4,148 
6,520 
6,822 
HDI value 
0.390 
0.449 
0.509 
0.532 
Poverty  remains  high  and  its  reduction  has  been  slow.  The  latest  data  available  (IBEP 
4. 
2008/2009)  estimate  that  37%  of  the  population  had  monthly  consumption  below  the  poverty  line, 
which  was set at  4,793 kwanzas (US$ 49 as  per  2009 exchange rate).  Poverty  is more  severe  and 
widespread  in  rural  (58%)  than  urban  (19%)  areas,  and  also  varies  across  the  country,  surpassing 
50% in the east and centre regions (including Cuanza Sul). The poverty rate increases with the head 
of household’s age and decreases with his/her level of education. Poverty is greater in female-headed 
households, particularly in rural areas. Many women are de facto heads of households because they 
are  members  of  polygamous  households,  or  because  of  male  labour  migration.  The  latest  census 
(2014)  estimates  that  38%  households  are  headed  by  women,  and  they  form  the  majority  of  the 
households living in poverty.  
5. 
Inequality in Angola is high with a Gini index of 0.55. The richest 20% of the population receive 
59%  of  all  incomes,  whilst  the  poorest  20%  receive  only  3%.  A  high  level  of  inequality,  between 
households and between regions, presents serious challenges for poverty reduction. The HDI results 
in  a  loss  of  37%  (from  0.532  to  0.335)  due  to  inequality.  Income  distribution  has  not  significantly 
improved  in  recent  years,  and  most  analysts  agree  that  the  gap  between  the  rich  and  the  poor  has 
been growing. 
Child malnutrition. According to the World Health Organisation (WHO) classification system, 
6. 
stunting,  wasting,  and  underweight  are  all  considered  to  be  of  “medium”  public  health  significance. 
Child stunting is a serious public health concern in Angola. Beyond two years of age, deficits in linear 
growth  are  largely  irreversible,  and  can  have  detrimental  consequences  in  later  life.  Furthermore, 
adolescent girls or women who were stunted during childhood are more likely to have an obstructed 
labour  or  experience  other  complications  during  delivery,  subsequently  heightening  the  risk  of 
maternal mortality. Table 2 summarises the most recent evidence in the country. 
37 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Table 2: Child malnutrition <5 in Angola 
Classification 
Indicator 
Medium 
Chronic Malnutrition (stunting, or height-for-age) 
Medium 
Acute Malnutrition (wasting, or weight-for-height) 
Underweight (weight-for-age) 
Medium 
Source: World Bank, Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper Angola Nutrition Gap Analysis. Human 
Development Network 2011 
Prevalence 
29.2 
8.2 
15.6 
7. 
Although  the  national  average  rate  of  stunting  shows  “medium  level  of  public  health 
significance” according to WHO’s cut-off point, disparities by region, sex, and area of residence exist. 
In the West, South, and Central-South regions, stunting rates were higher than the national average 
at  34.3%,  33.7%,  and  31.3%,  respectively.    Although  the  prevalence  of  stunting  was  similar  in  rural 
areas (33.0%) and major cities outside of Luanda (30.1%), rates were considerably lower in Luanda 
(19.6%). 
8.  Women and youth. While efforts have been made to reach gender parity in net enrolment for 
primary  schooling,  girls  continue  to  have  less  access  to  secondary  education.  Illiteracy  rates  are 
substantially  higher  in  women  (47%)  than  among  men  (20%).  The  increase  in  primary  school 
coverage  and  efforts  to  reach  gender  parity  in  school  enrolment  since  the  end  of  the  war  have 
contributed to reduce this rate to 30% among young women (15-24 years old). Despite these efforts, 
two  million  children  are  still  outside  the  school  system  and  girls  continue  to  have  less  access  to 
secondary education, vocational training and higher education. 
9. 
The  combination  of  limited  access  to  formal  vocational  training  and  higher  education 
opportunities strongly condition women´s reduced income levels as such circumstances relegate them 
to sectors such as subsistence agriculture and informal trade. Women and men participate in unequal 
terms  in  the  management  and  control  over  assets  and  in  decision-making,  both  at  household  and 
community level. Over 23% of households are women headed households. Angola is signatory to all 
major international and regional conventions and protocols relevant for the advancement of women´s 
rights and elimination of all types of violence against women. The Ministry of Family Affairs and for the 
Promotion  of  Women  (MINFAMU)  developed  the  National  Gender  Policy  and  Implementation 
Strategy.  Despite  the  approval  of  the  Family  Law  and  the  Law  Criminalising  Domestic  Violence,  the 
use of customary law, strongly favouring men, is still widespread. 
10.  The Angolan Government defines youth as people aged 15 to 35. The youth represent about a 
third of all citizens in the country (32.4%). Migration levels among youth peaks at 24.5% for the age 
group between 25 and 35 years. The youth in rural areas are faced with the challenge of wanting to 
explore alternative livelihood opportunities to subsistence farming while having little formal training to 
equip them to face the labour  market. School completion rates decrease  after the primary  level  and 
progressively drop along the education pathway. Poverty is lower among the 15  – 35 year old range 
group than any other age group.  Most households are youth headed, growing in size progressively 
with age. It is more frequent for the youth aged 20 – 24 years to have more than one sexual partner, 
placing this particular group, their partners and their unborn children at greater risk of HIV. This same 
group reported to have the highest level of knowledge on HIV/AIDS. 
11.  Urbanisation and rural-urban migration. Angola records high urbanisation levels with 62% of 
the  population  living  in  urban  areas  compared  to  15%  in  1970.  Since  Independence,  Angola 
experienced rapid urbanisation, which was further exacerbated by the long armed conflict. A massive 
migration of rural people in search for a more  secure environment offering better income-generating 
opportunities  took  place  during  the  war  years. The  population  of  Luanda  grew  from  less  than  half  a 
million in 1970 to over 3 million by 2000. After the civil war, the low agricultural productivity, the limited 
availability of social services and infrastructures and the scarcity of job opportunities prevented rural 
people from returning to their areas of origin. These are still the main drivers of the current migration 
that affect mainly young people.  
12. 
In fact, there is  a  large division  between the rural and urban areas. Economic activity  – other 
than  oil  and  diamonds  –  is  highly  concentrated  in  Luanda  and  the  coastal  areas:  77%  of  formal 
employment  was  concentrated  in  Luanda  in  2007,  and  there  are  other  significant  regional 
asymmetries  in  the  country  as  well.  Luanda  concentrates  75%  of  manufacturing,  65%  of  commerce 
and 90% of banking and financial activities. 
38 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
13.  Since Independence, Angola experienced rapid urbanisation, with 62% of the population living 
in urban areas compared to 15% in 1970. This was further exacerbated by the long armed conflict. A 
massive  migration  of  rural  people  in  search  for  a  more  secure  environment  offering  better  income-
generating  opportunities  took  place  during  the  war  years. The  population  of  Luanda  grew  from  less 
than  half  a  million  in  1970  to  over  3  million  by  2000  (and  was  estimated  at  over  6  million  in  2014). 
After  the  civil  war,  the  low  agricultural  productivity,  the  limited  availability  of  social  services  and 
infrastructures  and  the  scarcity  of  job  opportunities  prevented  rural  people  from  returning  to  their 
areas  of  origin.  These  same  factors  continue  to  be  the  main  drivers  of  the  current  rural–migration, 
which affects mainly young people.  
14.  Other  indicators  reflecting  current  human  development  conditions  include:  (i)  56%  of  the 
population (78%  in rural areas) do not have access to safe water sources;  (ii) only  24%  of the rural 
population (63% in urban areas) have access to government health facilities within a 2 km radius; (iii) 
life  expectancy  at  birth  is  estimated  at  52.3  years  (HDR  2015),  among  the  lowest  in  the  world;  (iv) 
despite  major  efforts  at  educational  reform,  adult  illiteracy  is  still  widespread  in  rural  areas  (59%) 
though lower in urban areas (20%); (v) youth unemployment is pronounced at 46%, against a general 
unemployment  rate  of  24%;  (vi)  Angola  ranks  121  (out  of  142  countries)  in  the  Gender  Gap  Index 
2014. 
15.  Education.  Despite  adult  literacy  rate  has  increased  in  recent  years  reaching  66%  in  2014, 
illiteracy  is still  widespread in rural  areas (59%) in comparison to urban  areas (20%). Illiteracy rates 
are  substantially  higher  in  women  (47%)  than  among  men  (20%).  The  increase  in  primary  school 
coverage  and  efforts  to  reach  gender  parity  in  school  enrolment  since  the  end  of  the  war  have 
contributed to reduce this rate to 30% among young women (15-24 years old). Despite these efforts, 
two  million  children  are  still  outside  the  school  system  and  girls  continue  to  have  less  access  to 
secondary education, vocational training and higher education.  
16.  Health. The latest data available (IBEP 2008/09) estimate that only 24% of the population have 
access to a health post within a radius of 2km in rural areas, in comparison to 63% in urban areas. In 
addition, 22% of the rural population have no access to any health service at all. In recent years, child 
and  maternal  mortality  have  gone  down,  along  with  deaths  due  to  malaria,  and  women’s  access  to 
and  uptake  of  prenatal  care  has  gone  up,  but  with  significant  differences  between  urban  and  rural 
areas.  However, Angola  has  one  of  the  highest  rate  of  diarrheal  disease  in  the  world  and  also  high 
rates  of  nutritional  problems  (stunting  and  micronutrients  deficiencies).  HIV  prevalence  in  2015  was 
only 2.2%. 
17.  Water  and  sanitation.  Angola  has  abundant  water  resources,  but  existing  infrastructure  is 
largely  inadequate  to  serve  its  population. As  a  result,  less  than  half  of  the  population  (44%)  have 
access to drinkable water. Rural areas (22%) remain far behind urban areas (57%) in terms of access 
to water services, and still large numbers of rural people rely on a seasonal supply of surface water. 
Access to sanitation is slightly higher (60%) but the gap between rural (26%) and urban areas (86%) 
is enormous. The situation varies across the country with the lower rates in the east and south.   
18.  Employment. The economically active population accounts for 7.2 million people of which 24% 
are unemployed. Unemployment is higher in urban areas (19%) than in rural areas (6%), and affects 
in a similar way to men and women. However, it is particularly high among youth (47% in young men 
and 45% in young women). The main economic activities are agriculture, livestock and fisheries (44 
%).  In  2014,  46%  of  households  were  engaged  in  agriculture  (cereals  74%,  horticulture  23%,  fruit 
farming 13% and forestry 16%) and 5.7% in fisheries.  
B. 
Institutional context 
19.  The  Estrategia  de  Combate  da  Pobreza  (ECP  –  the  Strategy  for  Poverty  Reduction)  2003-
2005,  subsequently  was  renamed  as  Global  Strategy  for  Poverty  Reduction  (EGRP)  for  the  2006-
2010  period.  Its  global  objective  consisted  on  consolidating  peace  and  national  unity  through 
sustainable  improvement  of  the  living  conditions  for  the  most  vulnerable  people,  and  creating  the 
conditions for their active participation in the economic and social development of the country. Food 
security  and  rural  development  are  identified  as  priority  areas  to  minimise  the  risk  of  hunger,  meet 
internal food needs and revitalise the rural economy. To achieve this goal, the government strategy is 
to  develop  the  smallholder  sector  through  community  participation  and  local-level  planning  and 
39 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
implementation.  The  objectives  of  the  agricultural  sector,  as  stated  in  ECP,  are  to:  (a)  increase 
production  and  productivity,  particularly  of  food  crops;  (b)  promote  agro-industry;  (c)  promote 
sustainable  development  of  natural  resources;  and  (d)  create  employment  and  income  for  rural 
communities. 
20.  National Food Security and Nutrition Strategy (ENSAN) approved in 2009 aiming at helping 
ensure that all Angolans enjoy availability of food of adequate quality and variety at all times, as well 
as physical  and economic access to  this food, so that they may  contribute to the human, economic 
and social development of Angola”. It has a multi-sectorial and multidisciplinary approach. 
21. 
Integrated  Municipal  Program  for  Rural  Development  and  the  Fight  Against  Poverty 
(PMIDRCP). In 2010, the Government merged the ECP and ENSAN resulting into PMIDRCP whose 
general  objective  is:  To  reduce  levels  of  extreme  poverty  in Angola  and  in  particular  in  rural  areas, 
promoting  access  to  basic  public  services  and  turn  Angola  into  a  prosperous  country  with  social 
justice. This program is implemented in the whole country and led by the Secretariat of Social Issues 
of the Presidency. PMIDRCP includes several social programmes, such as Pro-ajuda (“help for work” 
aiming  at  the  social  inclusion  of  the  more  vulnerable  households), Agua  para  todos  (Water  for  all), 
Cartão  Kikuia  (provision  of  10  thousand  kwanzas  to  cover  basic  living  expenses)  and  Programa  de 
Aquisição  de  Produtos  Agrícola  (PAPAGRO  aiming  at  purchasing  agricultural  products  from 
smallholder farmers).  
22.  The  National  Development  Plan  2013-2017  lays  down  the  broad  guidelines  for  the 
development  of  Angola,  such  as:  guaranteeing  the  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms  and  the 
development of civil society; ensuring the improvement of quality of life, fighting hunger and extreme 
poverty;  promote  sustainable,  competitive  and  equitable  development  ensuring  the  future  to 
generations  to  come;  promote  the  development  of  science,  and  technology;  developing  the 
entrepreneurship  and  private  sector.  In  relation  to  the  agricultural  sector,  the  Plan  aims  to  promote 
integrated  and  sustainable  development  of  the  sector  by  the  exploitation  of  the  potentiality  of 
productive  natural  resources  and  the  competitiveness  of  the  sector  in  order  to  ensure  food  security 
and domestic supplies of regional and international markets in light of a gender sensitive approach.  
C.  Description of beneficiaries 
Socio-economic characterisation of target group 
23.  The  SADCP  will  cover  36  municipalities  in  five  provinces,  of  which  26  municipalities  in  the 
provinces of Bie, Huambo and Malanje covered by the WB funding, and 10 municipalities in Cuanza 
Sul and Huila provinces covered  under IFAD funding. Most of this area is located on the North- and 
Southwestern  periphery  of  the  central  highlands  of  Angola,  which  is  well-endowed  with  natural 
resources, including water and fertile soils though some areas have acidic soils.   
24.  The  highlands  have  a  bi-modal  rainy  season  with  an  October  onset  and  peaks  in  December, 
before  a  second  ‘late’  rain  at  the  end  of  the  season  in  March-April.  The  winter  months  of  May  to 
August/September are dry and characterised by a mean temperature of ~17⁰C, ~4-5⁰C lower than the 
mean temperatures in the hot season. 
25.  The  following  ten  municipalities  have  been  identified  by  IDA  to  make  up  the  SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP  (IFAD-funded)  intervention  area:  (i)  in  Cuanza  Sul  province:  Conda,  Amboim  (Gabela), 
Cassongue, Wacu Congo (Cela) and Kibala; (ii) in Huíla province: Caconda, Caluquembe, Chicomba, 
Chipindo and Cacula.  
26.  According to a recent FAO assessment of farming systems, four types of farmers can be found 
in  the  central  highlands  of  Angola,  as  presented  in  the  table  below.  The  project  beneficiaries  will 
belong to these first two categories, namely (a) the small subsistence family farms; and (b) the small 
&  stable  family  farms.  These  targeted  smallholder  farmers  cultivate  an  average  1.37  ha.  Farm  size 
varies  between  0.5–2  ha. Although  most  smallholders  produce  at  the  subsistence  level  with  a  high 
incidence of poverty and food insecurity, the potential for increased production is large, with regard to 
both  expansion  of  cultivated  area  per  farmer  and  increased  productivity  per  unit  of  land.  With  the 
proper enabling environment, an adequate supply of agricultural inputs (including seeds and fertiliser), 
diffusion of labor-saving technology, and better access to markets, smallholders’ agricultural incomes 
could rise significantly over a relatively short period. A small minority of smallholders cultivate 2–5 ha 
40 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
and are considered to be potential change agents. The most vulnerable farmers are those who farm 
less  than  1  ha,  often  female-headed  households,  which  make  up  a  large  share  of  the  overall 
population in some villages.  
Table 3. Types of producers in Angola’ central highlands 
Agrarian systems 
Small Subsistence Family 
Farms 
Small & Stable Family Farms 
Medium Family Farms with 
Employees 
Commercial Family Farms  
Description 
Total area: 0 - 2 ha 
Labour: 5 family member labourers 
Total area: 2 -5 ha 
Labour: 3-5 family member labourers 
Diverse irrigated crops: <0.5 ha 
Total area: 5 - 15 ha 
Labour: 3-5 family member labourers, 5 permanent employees 
Diverse irrigated crops: < 1 ha 
Animal traction: < 5 heads 
Total area: >100 ha 
Labour: 3-5 family member labourers, 10 permanent employees 
Diverse irrigated crops: < 3 ha 
Associations with livestock 
Source: Carranza & Treakle, 2014 
Small subsistence households 
27.  The first and most basic production system is the most representative of the agriculture of the 
highlands  (and  probably  most  of  the  country),  reaching  roughly  90%  of  the  households.  Average 
household land holdings of this group are relatively small, partly due to the high population density23 
(among  the  highest  in  the  country),  the  loss  of  productive  assets  during  the  civil  war  that  have  not 
been replaced, and frequent climatic hazards (floods due to excessive rainfall in September/October 
and drought). 
28.  The main farming system is rain-fed agriculture, with some small-scale irrigation systems. Poor 
smallholder  farmers  have  plots  of  up  to  2  hectares  while  only  half  of  this  area  is  generally  put  to 
agriculture use as they rarely have access to animal traction. Major food crops grown include cereals 
(maize,  millet  and  sorghum),  beans  potatoes,  vegetables  and  some  fruits  (pineapple,  bananas)  in 
some areas of Cuanza Sul. They hardly use any manure or fertilisers, and only the crop residues from 
maize  and  beans  that  remain  in  the  soil  actually  degrade  and  contribute  to  fertility  restitution.  In 
general, poor farmers own few productive assets such as hand tools, poultry, few goats and pigs and 
in some cases a bicycle. In Huila province, they also own some cattle. 
29.  Their  main  sources  of  income  are  the  sale  of  poultry,  goats  and  pigs,  charcoal  and  forest 
products  and  agriculture  labour. Agricultural  surplus  is  sold  or  traded  for  basic  consumption  goods, 
while some communities also grow vegetables and fruit crops in small-scale to be sold in nearby road 
or formal markets. Cattle are a symbol of wealth and power, therefore, are only sold for special events 
(weddings, funerals) or in time of crisis. Other sources of monetary income include labour migration to 
the major Angolan cities and informal labour in the nearby towns. However, such alternative income-
generating activities are often erratic or are seasonal in the sense that people choose to migrate in the 
“quiet” season from May to August. 
30.  Being a subsistence agricultural system, there is hardly any profit to the farmers, since it mainly 
feeds the household. Poor farmers subsist on their own crops (maize, beans, potato, cassava...) and 
some  fish  and  wild  foods  (berries,  mushrooms…).  However,  due  to  unforeseen  or  unfavourable 
weather  conditions  (sporadic  droughts  or  flooding),  frequently  farmers  obtain  yields  that  are 
insufficient even for their own food security and therefore they depend on market purchase of cereals 
during the lean period (November - February). 
31. 
Labour in the family farming sector is mostly family labour, with a calendar of activities that lasts 
6-8 months, which ultimately benefits farmers with some free time, allowing for other non-agricultural 
activities that contribute to the general household income. For some farmers this allows for additional 
23 32.2 inhabitants/km2 in Cuanza Sul and 29.9 inhabitants/km2 in Huila (Angola’s population density is 19 inhabitants/km2)  
41 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
side-work  on  other  plots  in  exchange  for  money  or  commodities  (corn  flour,  rice,  salt,  oil,  soap).  In 
fact, the farmers of this production system usually do provide external services to other properties to 
increase earnings, which are typically 500 Kwanza/day (less than USD 3 a day). This however ends 
up  creating  a  vicious  circle  of  poverty:  selling  their  labour  when  it  is  most  needed  for  agriculture 
results in a labour short-fall on their own plots, which in-turn reduces their productivity leaving them in 
critical situations. Sometimes these farmers end up having to also perform work in exchange for basic 
food and seeds to secure future cultivation.  
32.  Women have a very important role in all economic activities while participating in more activities 
that  require  less  physical  effort;  these  activities  are  those  that  require  more  labour,  such  as  taking 
care  of  the  seed  and  the  crop  harvest.  Typically  male  associated  activities  require  more  physical 
effort,  such  as  tillage  and  the  construction  of  irrigation  canals.  Young  people  migrate  to  the  urban 
centres (Luanda mostly) in search of temporary jobs. Children on the other hand, participate in animal 
care and weed control activities. 
Small and stable households 
33.  This group is still small and differ little from the previous system. They are classified as stable 
due to their autonomy in securing seeds and labour, giving them higher productivity and better overall 
performance  securing  food  for  the  household  throughout  year.  Farmers  who  belong  in  this  type  of 
production  system  are  often  family  farmers  that  previously  belonged  to  the  subsistence  system. 
However they managed to stabilise their situation either through the diversification of their crops and 
agricultural practices, or through the multiple activities of the members of the household. 
34.  The main differences with the subsistence group are: 
i.  Animal  traction:  either  they  own  one  ox  that  serves  as  animal  traction  or  have  the  financial 
means to hire the service. 
ii.  Horticulture: they have in general a small horticulture system that makes up a large part of the 
income of these farmers. 
iii.  Sale  of  products:  they  sell  their  products  shortly  after  the  harvest  to  intermediate  buyers  who 
dictate the selling price. With this income they buy household products (soap, oil...), seeds and 
fertilisers (1 or 2 bags), even a motorcycle, a plough or an oxen for animal traction 
Description of project beneficiaries 
35.  Project beneficiaries will belong to these first two categories. The major problems faced by poor 
smallholder farmers to access the market are the following, among others: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Lack of affordable agricultural inputs including animal traction: The great majority of smallholder 
farmers use traditional methods of farming and family labour, as they have no access to animal 
traction.  Until  recent,  agricultural  inputs  (especially  fertilisers)  were  mainly  provided  free  of 
charge by the Government. With the ongoing financial crisis, the free distribution stopped and 
the price of fertilisers rose sharply in the local market (when available) preventing small farmers 
from using them. 
Lack of functioning infrastructure and production facilities. Warehouses, feeder roads, irrigation 
schemes  and  other  infrastructures  that  enable  farmers  to  better  access  the  market  are 
inadequate,  in  poor  condition  or  inexistent.  Lack  of  access  to  post-harvest,  storage  and 
processing facilities constitutes a barrier to entry into agricultural markets, since the emphasis 
of buyers is more on quality. Access to storage facilities increases farmers’ flexibility in selling 
their products, as well as their bargaining power 
Limited  knowledge  and  skills  and  poor  extension  services.  Smallholder  farmers  are  often 
illiterate, with poor technological skills. The majority are not trained with financial and marketing 
skills and are unable to meet the quality standards of the market. Lack of production knowledge 
leads to lower quality in production. Extension services have no capacity to reach all farmers as 
they are understaffed and lack the necessary resources. 
iv. 
Limited  organisation  among  smallholder  farmers.  There  are  few  operational  associations  and 
cooperatives in the project area, mainly created by NGOs and development projects. Since the 
colonial  times  when  smallholder  farmers  worked  for  cooperatives  or  sate  companies,  they 
42 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
prefer to work individually or with family members. Raising awareness on the advantages of the 
associative specially in terms of improving their bargaining power in the negotiation with traders 
is essential. 
v. 
vi. 
Limited  access  to  financial  services.  Formal  financial  institutions  are  reluctant  to  provide 
financial  services  to  smallholders  because  of  their  lack  of  collateral  (i.e.  titled  land),  unstable 
earnings,  the  risky  nature  of  farming  activities  and  difficulties  in  evaluating  smallholders’ 
capacity  to  save  and  repay  their  loans.  Some  projects  have  established  informal  savings  and 
credit schemes with promising results.  
Lack  of markets  in  rural  areas  and  lack  of  bargaining  power.  There  are  no  formal  agricultural 
markets  or  agro-processing  industries  in  the  area,  and  therefore  smallholder  farmers  are 
obliged  to  market  their  products  in  the  local  market  or  through  informal  traders  that  normally 
pay  very  low  prices.  The  bargaining  power  of  the  small  farmers  is  especially  low  since  they 
have poor access to market information. 
D. 
Target groups and targeting 
Target groups 
36.  Overall, the core target group of SADCP amounts to 235 000 smallholder households. The core 
target group  of the SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  in the Cuanza Sul and  Huila  provinces consists of 60,000 
rural  households, representing about 300,000 people, including  50,000 farmers who  benefit through 
farmers’ field schools (FFS) and 10,000 farmers who will benefit from FFS combined with investment 
support (of which 1,000 farmers who will also benefit from irrigation support).  
37.  This core target group will consist of: (i) small subsistence  farmers with access to less than 2 
hectares of land with a potential for production and productivity increases; (ii) small and stable family 
farms with some level of organisation, mainly through associations, with access to up to 2-5 hectares 
of land producing at subsistence level with the potential to graduate into a market-oriented level with 
focused direct support; and (iii) groups of women, youth who will be involved in processing, marketing 
and service provision activities. Women, in particular heads of household, widows and young women, 
will  account  for  at  least  50%  and  youth,  between  18  and  35  years  old,  for  30%  of  the  core  target 
group.  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  will  consider  extending  assistance  to  FOs  that  were  mobilised  by  former 
MOSAP  but  are  still  vulnerable  and  in  need  of  further  support.  Such  support  will  be  provided  by  the  project  if 
none will be planned under the SADCP-WB 
38.  A  secondary  target  group  includes  public  and  cooperative  sector  beneficiaries  (IDA  technical 
staff,  cooperatives  and  associations),  agro  dealers,  wholesale  traders  and  commercial  farmers,  that 
are key for the development of the value chain. Among the secondary target group such as IDA Staff, 
cooperatives and associations are regarded as direct beneficiaries and will be provided with support 
from  the  project.  Such  support  will  include  inter  alia  training,  improved  working  conditions  in  the 
participating  municipalities  and  improved  mobility.  While,  agro-dealers,  wholesalers  and  commercial 
farmers will benefit from market information systems and access to some training, and establishment 
of economic partnerships with smallholder farmers graduating from FFSs. 
Target mechanisms 
39.  The  SADCP  will  use  three  targeting  mechanisms  to  ensure  the  participation  of  poor 
households,  while  not  being  exclusive  of  other  households.  The  mechanisms  will  include:  (i) 
geographical targeting, (ii) self-targeting; and (iii) empowering measures. 
40.  Geographical targeting. The project will target poor municipalities and communes in the Huila 
and Cuanza Sul Provinces. The main selection criteria will be: (i) a high population density and total 
population  so  as  to  be  able  to  reach  the  project  targets;  (ii)  provincially-focused  municipalities  for 
poverty reduction, (iii) poverty incidence above country average, (iv) suitability for promoting market-
oriented production of crops and livestock products, (v) lack of supply lines for agricultural inputs, and 
(vi) geographical contiguity to maximise efficiency of project resources. 
41.  Self-targeting.  The  farmers’  field  school  (FFS)  approach  will  ensure  self-targeting.  After 
receiving  information  on  the  FFS  approach,  smallholder  farmers  in  the  selected  municipalities  and 
communes  can  decide  if  they  want  to  become  member  of  a  FFS.  The  project  will  support  the 
43 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
establishment  of  as  many  FFS  as  requested  by  the  farmers.  For  a  second  target  group,  namely 
organised groups of farmers, with particular attention to both women and youth groups, the project will 
undertake a participatory assessment of these groups to ensure that programme interventions will be 
demand-driven and respond effectively to needs of the farmers taking into account the  maturity level 
of the organisation.  
Targeting Tools to Ensure Inclusiveness  
42.  Empowering  measures.  Women  are  specifically  targeted  to  account  for  at  least  50%  of  the 
FFS facilitators and 50% of women beneficiaries-from which women-headed households will account 
for  30%  of  members  of  FFS;  and  one  target  group  comprises  young  women.  Women  heading 
households  and  women  in  male-headed  households  will  be  empowered  to  effectively  engage  in 
farming related activities. Their participation in FFS will be used to encourage their membership and 
leadership  in  farmers’  organisations,  apex  organisations  and  policy  engagement  activities.  Climate-
smart  investments  will  support  the  use  of  labour-saving  technologies,  such  as  rainwater  harvesting, 
conservation agriculture,  and  the use of fuel saving-stoves provide opportunities which can be  used 
for  household  energy.  GALS  will  stimulate  discussions  at  the  household  level  regarding  workloads 
which  invariably  result  in  an  improved  allocation  of  tasks  between  household  members.  Within  the 
selected municipalities and communes, the project will promote the participation of women, youth and 
poor smallholder farmers by using empowerment and capacity building measures to encourage their 
active  participation.  Empowering  measures  will  include:  (i)  information  and  mobilisation  campaigns, 
using  local information meetings and media on  project goal, approaches  and the FFS methodology; 
(iii)  agribusiness  linkages  and  input  supply  through  farmers’  organisations,  also  for  the  vulnerable 
groups;  (iv)  inclusive  FFS;  (v)  a  broad  range  of  skills  training  activities;  and  (vi)  monitoring  of 
inclusiveness. 
E.  Gender approach 
Gender equity 
43.  Angola ranks 121 (out of 142 countries) in the Gender Gap Index 2014. Concerning educational 
attainment – one of the four dimensions that makes up this index  – gender inequality is even higher, 
ranking  138  out  of  142.  There  is  still  a  significant  gender  gap  in  educational  attainment  in Angola. 
Despite significant progress in primary school enrolment (boys 84.2% and girls 82.6 in 2014), gender 
disparities  persist  in  access  to  secondary  education,  vocational  training  and  higher  education 
opportunities.  This  limited  access  to  education  together  with  the  high  women  illiteracy  rate  (47%) 
strongly condition women’s reduced income levels and strong presence in subsistence agriculture and 
informal trade.  
In Angola, rural women represent 52% of the rural population and are responsible for about 70-
44. 
80% of agricultural production, 90% of basic products, 100% of the processing of basic products, and 
90%  of  their  marketing.  Women  and  men  perform  different  tasks  in  agriculture.  Table  3  shows  the 
tasks performed by men and women in relation to the main value chains in Huíla province.  
Table 4. Tasks performed by women and men farmers in Huila province 
Men 
Value chain 
Maize, Beans and Potatoes 
Production 
 Purchase of inputs (seeds, fertilisers) 
 Land  preparation  (with  and  without 
animal traction) 
 Handling  water  pumps  (if  irrigation 
scheme) 
Conservation 
Transformation 
 Maize:  cutting  sticks  for  building  a 
“matala” for drying maize 
Marketing 
 Final price negotiation and sale (when 
commercial crop) 
44 
Women 
 Opening furrows by hoe 
 Planting seeds by hoe 
 Weeding by hoe 
 Forming  ridges  to  earthen  up  the  crop's 
roots 
 Opening  and  closing  irrigation  channels 
by hoe (if irrigation scheme) 
 Harvesting 
 “Matala” construction 
 Milling 
 Processing (i.e. sweet potato) 
 Final  price  negotiation  and  sale  (when 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Vegetables 
Production 
Conservation 
Transformation 
Marketing 
Coffee 
Production 
Conservation  
Transformation 
Marketing 
 Collecting the money 
surpluses of subsistence crop)  
 Purchase of inputs (seeds, fertilisers) 
 Land  preparation 
(using  animal 
traction) 
 Handling water pumps 
 Agro-chemicals pulverisation 
 Opening furrows by hoe 
 Planting seeds by hoe 
 Weeding by hoe 
 Opening  and  closing  irrigation  channels 
by hoe  
 Harvesting 
 Processing (few cases) 
 Final price negotiation and sale (when 
commercial crop) 
 Collecting the money 
 Transport to marketplace/sale point 
 Final  price  negotiation  and  sale  (when 
surpluses of subsistence crop) 
 Land  preparation  during  the  planting 
phase  (using  animal  traction)  in  few 
cases 
 Cultural care of the plants 
 Harvesting 
 Final price negotiation and sale 
 Collecting the money 
 Drying and hulling 
 Grinding for local market 
 Final  price  negotiation  and  sale  in  local 
market 
Livestock, Goats and Sheep 
Production 
 Supporting mating 
 Supporting delivery 
 Transhumance (if necessary) 
slaughter 
 Selecting 
(livestock 
traditional 
ceremonies) or sold (goats and sheep) 
for  descendants 
 Selecting  animals 
animals 
only 
for 
for 
Marketing 
Poultry 
Production 
(sisters’ sons) 
 Healthcare services 
 Final price negotiation and sale 
 Collecting money  
 Monitoring the work of his wife 
 Purchase of veterinary drugs 
Marketing 
 Collecting  the money  from  the  sale  of 
his animals 
 Feeding and grazing activities 
 Milking 
 Care  of  animals  not 
including 
transhumance 
services 
involved 
in 
healthcare 
 Cooking for traditional ceremonies 
 Care of her chickens  
 Care of her husband’s chickens  
 Healthcare of all chickens 
 Final price negotiation and sale 
 Collecting the money from the sale of her 
animals 
Source: FAO local technical staff consulted during the design field mission 
45. 
In  general,  men  perform  tasks  that  need  more  physical  strength  (plough  cultivation)  and 
technical skills, and also take the decision and collect and handle the household income. Women, in 
contrast, actively participate in unskilled farm work and marketing, and do not participate in decision-
making and have no control over household income.  
46. 
In the agriculture sector, it  is estimated that adult men  work 5 hours a  day on the farm, while 
women work 6 hours; men work 3 hours a day off-farm and women 2.5 hours. Besides those figures, 
household  work,  which  is  women’s  responsibility  in  rural  areas,  must  be  taken  into  account. 
MINADER/FAO24  estimates  conclude  that  farming  women  work  14  hours  a  day  on  household  and 
economic activities if they have a husband and 15 hours a day if they are single, divorced or widow. 
However, women’s work is usually underestimated, even by the own rural women. When women were 
asked about their working hours during the field mission, many stated that they do not work at all (as 
they are not paid for their work). Despite their key role in achieving household food security, they have 
24 MINADER/FAO (2004): Review of Agricultural Sector and Food Security – Strategy and Investment Priority Setting 
(TCP/AND/207) 
45 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
limited  access  and  control  over  resources  and  services  and  their  participation  in  decision-making 
processes is limited.  
Access to land 
47.  The  principles  regulating  inheritance  and  land  tenure  are  determined  by  customary  practices, 
which often vary from region to region. In general, women are not entitled to own property on equal 
terms with men. Women gain the right to land ownership only through marriage. In general, the right 
of a woman to own land and to access economic resources may depend on her reproductive capacity, 
as  well  as  on  her  marital  status.  This  implies  that,  in  some  regions,  a  woman  who  cannot  have 
children, who has divorced or who has become a widow may easily lose her right to land ownership. 
Widowed women might inherit land in trust for their sons, which are then allocated to the sons upon 
marriage. Women that are single or divorced, and widows who have lost all their sons, are forced to 
return to their families, and might be given a small area to farm. There are also some gaps in access 
to land due to complex and costly administrative procedures that penalise poor and poorly educated 
women. 
Access to rural credit 
48.  Rural women do not own physical assets (i.e. land or livestock) to secure loans, as household 
assets  are  generally  the  property  of  male  heads  of  households  (or  the  male  relatives  of  the 
deceased). Other constraints limiting  the access to formal savings and credit schemes are: the high 
illiteracy rate, the  lack of identity card, the  lack of bank offices in rural areas, high transaction costs 
(transport  cost,  paperwork,  time...)  and  cultural  norms  that  restrict  women’s  mobility  and  the 
interaction  with  male  bank  staff.  However,  women  actively  participate  in  informal  savings  and  credit 
schemes implemented by NGO that are having excellent results. 
Access to extension services  
49.  Women have  limited access to training and extension services, partially  because extension  is 
frequently  delivered  through  associations  and  cooperatives  and  they  are  not  members.  It  was 
confirmed  during  the  project  design  field  visit  that  only  single  and  divorced  women  and  widows  are 
members  of  associations  and  cooperatives.  In  a  married  couple,  only  the  man  is  member  of  the 
cooperative,  and  he  is  supposed  to  share  extension  information  with  his  wife,  which  rarely  occurs. 
Seeds  and  agricultural  inputs  are  frequently  supplied  through  associations  and  cooperatives,  so 
women do not benefit from improved inputs either.  
Women’s concerns and needs 
50. 
In  2014,  the  Ministry  of  Family  and  Women’s  Promotion  coordinated  a  National  Listening  of 
Rural Women aiming at learning rural women’s concerns and needs. Nearly 400 listening meetings - 
including commune, municipality and provincial levels - involving more than 44.000 rural women were 
organised  thought  the  country.  While  speaking  on  their  behalf  or  representing  their  community, 
women  gave  voice  to  many  concerns  that  affect  their  daily  life  as  the  lack  of  basic  resources,  the 
difficult  access  to  education  and  healthcare,  land  ownership  problems,  the  persistence  of  domestic 
violence and the need of professional training. The outcomes of the National Listening have been the 
basis for the elaboration of a National Development Programme for Rural Women, which will be soon 
approved. Table 4 show a summary of the main needs of rural women expressed in the consultations 
in the three project provinces.  
46 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Table 5. Main needs of rural women in Cuanza Sul and Hula provinces 
Cuanza Sul province 
Huíla province 
Area 
Economic 
and 
productive 
 Acquisition of land and means of production 
 Rural  credit 
equipment 
for  agricultural 
inputs  and 
 Support to fisheries 
 Food assistance 
 Employment for youth 
Social 
services 
 Scaling up school feeding programme 
 Construction  of  schools,  hospitals  and  bank 
offices 
Others 
 Salary and resources for literacy trainers 
 Increase in teachers and police officers 
 Training of traditional birth attendants 
 Assistance to orphans and very poor people 
 Improvement of communication network, 
 Improvement of electricity and water supply 
 Raising 
awareness 
violence, 
alcohol 
fatherhood and early pregnancy 
on 
abuse, 
gender-based 
responsible 
 Access to land and means of production 
 Rural credit for agriculture 
 Construction  of  mills,  silos  and  small 
transformation units in rural areas 
 Rehabilitation of feeder road 
 Job opportunities and microenterprises 
 Professional training centres 
 Construction of schools and health posts and 
bank offices 
 Literacy programmes for rural people 
 Training of traditional birth attendants 
 Assistance  to  orphans,  abandoned  children, 
elderly and very poor people 
 Improvement of communication network, 
 Improvement of electricity and water supply 
 Mobile civil registration campaign (ID) 
 Raising awareness on gender-based violence 
 Implementation of measures against inhuman 
cultural practices 
Gender strategy 
51.  Many constraints to improved livelihoods for poor rural women and women-headed household 
are  similar  to  those  of  poor  male-headed  households,  however,  women  face  additional  constraints 
that prevent their full and equal participation in agriculture and commercial activities and in decision-
making  processes  in  their  communities.  The  project  will  ensure  that  rural  women  are  given  equal 
opportunities  to  participate  in  and  benefit  from  project  activities.  To  this  end,  the  project  will  ensure 
that  (i)  women  are  target  equally  within  the  target  groups  and  (ii)  a  gender  mainstreaming  strategy 
and action plan are developed based on the real needs and constraints of rural women in the project 
area. 
52.  The  Project  will  monitor 
targeting  effectiveness  by  collecting  and  analysing  gender 
disaggregated  data  and  results  between  men  and  women  headed  households  and  incorporate 
necessary adjustments.  
53.  A  gender  study  will  be  carried  out  at  project  onset  to  identify  the  factors  that  prevent  women 
from  gaining  equal  access  to  value  chains,  as  producers  but  also  processors  and  managers,  and 
propose measures to facilitate women access and mainstreaming gender issues into project activities.  
54.  The  gender  study  will  include  a  pilot  experience  of  the  implementation  of  the  Gender Action 
Learning  System  (GALS)  with  one  FFS.  Learning  from  the  GALS  pilot  experience  will  be  used  to 
include GALS  as the main approach  to  build social inclusion  and ensuring that participation,  project 
activities and decision-making are more equally distributed across social levels and across gender.  
55.  The studies will be carried out by a team of consultants that will be led by the gender specialist 
who  will  be  recruited  for  the  PMU.  The  results  of  the  gender  study  will  be  the  basis  of  the  project 
gender  mainstreaming  strategy  and  its  action  plan.  The  gender  mainstreaming  action  plan  will  be 
developed  to  include  various  levels  (beneficiaries,  components,  implementation  staff)  to  ensure 
maximum  participation  of  women  in  project  activities  and  the  consequent  benefits.  Activities  for 
gender  mainstreaming  will  be  carried  out  in  coordination  with  the  Ministry  of  Family  and  Women’s 
Promotion.  
56.  The project gender strategy will pay special attention to mainstreaming gender in FFS and FBS. 
Despite the participation of women in FFS and FBS is usually greater than that of men, few women 
hold  decision-making  positions.  The  main  reason  for  women  not  being  involved  in  decision-making 
processes is their traditional gender role in the community, in addition to women’s high illiteracy rate 
and  lack of time. The strategy  will  include training and awareness raising  on gender issues for both 
47 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
men  and  women.  The  Project  will  revise  the  FFS  curriculum  to  contribute  to  women  empowerment 
and improved gender relations. Some modifications that need to be introduced are among others: (i) 
starting the literacy and numeracy training in the first cycle, (ii) including a module on violence against 
women  and  gender  relations.  In  planning  the  time  of  the  training,  in  particular  of  this  last  module, 
consideration will be given to the seasonal calendar, related variations of the workloads, and migration 
periods, to make sure that the time and period of the training do not represent a barrier to participation 
(it  should  be  taken  into  account  that  frequently  participation  of  men  in  the  gender  training  is  lower 
compared to that of women). 
57.  Additional  specific  training  will  be  provided  only  to  women,  to  promote  their  empowerment, 
enhance their capacity to articulate their roles and rights as well as strengthen their political voice in 
respective  households  and  communities,  and  fully  participate  in  and  benefit  from  development 
opportunities,  through  confidence,  self-esteem  and  self-respect  building.  Women’s  groups  will  be 
promoted and will receive vocational training for their engagement in income generating activities (i.e. 
processing  and  conservation  units)  and  home  gardens  aiming  at  increasing  their  income  and 
improving household food security and nutrition. Savings and credit schemes will be promoted within 
these  women’s  groups  reinforcing  women’s  control  over  the  income  generated  through  these 
activities.  
58.  The Project will also provide training on gender issues and gender mainstreaming in agriculture 
to  MINAGRI  staff  and  others  relevant  implementing  partners  and  government  officials  from  the  two 
provinces, possibly by the same team of consultants who carried out the initial gender study or other 
service providers 
48 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Attachment 1 – Main documents consulted 
Acidri J. et al (2013), “Angola – Livelihoods Zones and Descriptions”, FEWSNET 
African Development Bank (2008), “Angola. Country Gender Profile”. Agricultural & Agro-industry 
Department. North - East & South Regions (OSAN) 
Ammassari S. (2005), “Migration and Development. New strategic outlooks and practical ways 
forward. The cases of Angola and Zâmbia”. IOM 
Asanzi C. Et al (2006) “Food production in the planoalto of Southern Angola”, Soil Science: October 
2006 - Volume 171 - Issue 10 - pp 810-820 
Carranza F. & Treakle J. (2014), “Land, Territorial Development and Family Farming in Angola.  A 
holistic approach to community-based natural resource governance: The cases of Bie, Huambo, and 
Huila Provinces”. FAO, Land and Water Division Working Paper 9. 
Domingues do Nacimento Alexandre A. (2014), “Angola Country Report for the 2014 Ministerial 
Conference on Youth Employment”, Abidjan 21-23 July 2014 
FAO (2012), Angola Country Programming Framework 
Government of Angola (2011), “Inquérito integrado sobre o bem-estar da população – IBEP”. 
Relatório Analítico – Vol. I e II, Instituto Nacional de Estatística. 
Government of Angola (2012),”Plano Nacional de Desenvolvimento 2013-2017 
Government of Angola (2015), “Relatório sobre os Objectivos de Desenvolvimento do Milénio 2015”. 
Ministério do Planeamento e do Desenvolvimento Territorial 
Government of Angola (2016), “Censo 2014. Resultados definitivos do recensamento geral da 
populaçao e de habitaçao de Angola 2014”, Instituto Nacional de Estatística 
Government  of  Angola.  Ministry  of  Family  and  Women’s  Promotion  (2016),  “Programa  Nacional  de 
Auscultação à Mulher Rural: o contributo da Mulher rural no processo de Desenvolvimento. Relatório 
Final” 
PAANE II – Programa de Apoio aos Actores Não Estatais (2014) “Diagnóstico de Género de Angola”, 
European Union.  
Plataforma de Mulheres em Acçao (2012), “Poverty and Gender in Angola”. 
UNDP (2015), “Angola. Briefing note for countries on the 2015 Human Development report” 
UNDP (2015), “Non-oil sectors value-chain analysis in Angola”, RFP/UNDP/AGO/SPE 
UNICEF (2013), “UNICEF Annual report 2013 – Angola”. 
USAID (2010) “Angola. Water and Sanitation Profile” 
UNCTAD (2013), “Who is benefitting from trade liberalization in Angola? A Gender Perspective”. 
UNCTAD 
49 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
A.  Country performance 
1.
IFAD has been working in Angola since 1991, beginning with the Fund’s first project, Malanje 
Smallholder Sector Rehabilitation Project. After the signing of the Lusaka Peace Accord in November 
1994,  IFAD  began  formulating  new  projects. At  the  time  of  the  preparation  of  the  country  strategic 
opportunities  paper  (COSOP)  in  1994,  there  were  two  active  loan-funded  projects,  the  Northern 
Region  Food  Crops  Development  Project  (PRODECA)  and  the  Northern  Fishing  Communities 
Development  Programme  (PESNORTE).  PESNORTE  became  effective  in  1999.  However,  with  the 
new outbreak of war in late 1998, it was impossible to work in the field and operations all but ceased. 
When the war ended in early 2002 and the security situation improved and the project area became 
accessible again, project objectives were re-evaluated and judged to still be valid. The implementation 
period  was subsequently  extended to the  end of 2007, providing valuable  operational  lessons to be 
applied  in  future  lending  programmes.  Following  the  preparation  of  the  COSOP,  a  new  project,  the 
Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSAP), was formulated by the World Bank for an 
amount  of  USD  49.5  million  to  be  co-financed  by  IFAD  with  a  loan  of  USD  8.5  million  and  became 
effective  in  2009.  MOSAP  implementation  fell  behind  schedule  early  on,  with  field  activities  having 
started  only  around  mid-2012,  some  2.5  years  after  effectiveness.  This  delay  was  attributed  to  the 
difficulties in recruiting and retaining project staff, as well as extremely limited capacity in the Ministry 
of Agriculture to guide, manage and monitor the project. But after a project restructuring and after the 
recruitment  of  FAO  to  run  a  smallholder  farmer  education  program  (“Farmer  Field  Schools”,  FFS), 
project implementation accelerated and by the project closing date in March 2016, 91% of IFAD funds 
had  been  disbursed  and  results  in  terms  of  smallholder  farmer  adoption  of  improved  technologies 
were  highly  encouraging.    The  Angola  Fisheries  and  Aquaculture  Project  (AFAP)  recently  became 
effective, more than a year after IFAD approval. 
B. 
Lessons learned 
The  lessons  derived  from  previous  projects  and  incorporated  into  project  design  are 
2.
summarised as follows: 
(i)
The  FFS  approach  to  agricultural  extension  was  very  effective  in  enhancing  smallholder 
farmers’  capacity  to  generate  and  use  new  knowledge  and  adopt  improved  agricultural 
practices  and  technology.  FFS  training  was  effective  in  equipping  about  22,000  subsistence 
farmers  with  the  skills  and  experience  needed  to  engage  in  commercial  agriculture,  as 
witnessed by the high success rate of the investment  sub-projects that a subset of the trained 
farmers were engaged in under MOSAP. The proposed World Bank and IFAD follow-up projects 
(SADCP-WB and SADCP-C&H-SAMAP)  will train a  much larger number of farmers (210,000) 
and take on new themes such as nutrition, horticulture, marketing and business skills, financial 
literacy and strengthen the curriculum in fields such as climate-smart agriculture. To ensure the 
success of this scaled up, thematically enhanced FFS training, it will be essential to improve the 
quality  and  frequency  of  supervision  of  government  technicians  and  to  emphasise  training  of 
and reliance on farmer facilitators. 
(ii)
  While  MOSAP  was  successful  in  reaching  women,  more  needs  to  be  done  to  ensure  that 
women play an equal role in farmers’ organisations and influence project investment decisions. 
Women had only limited influence on  the choice  of  sub-projects, an  issue that  will need  extra 
attention under the proposed project. Women’s participation in farmers’ organisations was lower 
than  that  of  men  and  women  usually  had  a  secondary  role,  with  only  a  few  occupying 
leadership positions. More women could be encouraged to get training as FFS facilitators and 
become  community  leaders,  for  example  by  arranging  training  sessions  to  favor  women’s 
participation.  The  inclusion  of  literacy  and  numeracy  skills  in  the  FFS  curriculum  under  the 
SADCP  will  also  help  women  farmers  benefit  from  the  training  provided,  to  play  a  more 
important  role  in  farmers’  organisations’  decision  making,  and  to  develop  marketable 
production. 
(iii)
Importance of linking smallholder farmers with markets and implementing subprojects. MOSAP 
was  implemented  in  a  post-conflict  situation  in  which  most  smallholder  agricultural  production 
51 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
reverted to subsistence.  This situation still prevails for the target households in the three  new 
provinces,  where  most  subsistence  farmers  remain  net  food  buyers.  MOSAP  provided  fairly 
limited support in marketing and value chain development During the course of implementation 
three PDO indicators were dropped including two that related to market access, viz: 
  percentage  of  participating  smallholder  farmers  with  secured  market  access  through 
contractual arrangements with agribusinesses or traders; and 
  percentage  of  participating  smallholder  vulnerable  groups  with  secured  access  to  market 
through contractual arrangements with agribusinesses or traders. 
3.
These changes  were made to sharpen MOSAP’s focus on production  and productivity  on  the 
basis  that  other  projects  supporting  smallholder  agriculture  were  better  placed  to  support  the 
development of market linkages.  However, training on marketing and commercialization formed part 
of the FFS curriculum and was the main focus of the training in the third year cycle. It was expected 
that  as  farmer  organisations  become  more  mature,  they  would  serve  as  a  tool  for  increased  group 
marketing. Some associations explored higher level organisational development and were registered 
as cooperatives in order to put in place more coordinated output marketing and access to credit.  
4.
The Project Completion Report (PCR) found that stakeholders had positive perceptions about 
better  market  knowledge  about  input  supplies  and  downstream  marketing  channels.  However,  the 
PCR considered that the project could have developed an additional focus on input market access to 
complement  sub-project  investments  and  training.  The  PCR  also  found  that  the  smallholder  sector 
has  the  potential  to  reach  much  higher  levels  of  production  provided  farmers  have  the  right 
commercial incentives.  It noted that farmers were sceptical about increasing production of local cash 
crops unless there are provisions for a secure market outlet. Consequently, a strategy to encourage 
the  production  of  crops  should  go  beyond  the  provision  of  inputs;  and  support  farmers  to  develop 
storage, processing, and marketing strategies. 
5.
The  PCR  considered  that  future  operations  in Angola  should  support  market  linkages  and  a 
value  chain  approach.  It  recognised  that  MOSAP  provided  limited  support  to  marketing,  mostly  in 
connection with Component 2. Analysis of market opportunities should be carried out before investing 
in  production  systems,  and  training  on  business  and  marketing  aspects  should  complement 
production-oriented  training.  Long-term  success  requires  not  only  improved  on-farm  productivity  but 
also opportunities for farmers to have access to, and compete in, output markets. This led to the PCR 
recommendation  that  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  needs  to  provide  support  for  marketing  activities  at 
several  levels,  including  assistance  to  farmer  groups,  members  of  groups  or  entrepreneurs  for 
establishment  and  initial  operation  via  credit  of  marketing  associations  of  agricultural  produce  or 
purchase of inputs, private small and medium scale processing plants, equipped with storage facilities 
and  quality  testing.  Such  interventions  can  stimulate  diversification  and  investments  and  the 
strengthening of rural enterprises.  
As  demonstrated  by  MOSAP  implementation  experience,  the  use  of  service  providers  for 
6.
activities that are outside the core competences of the government contributes to greater efficiency in 
the implementation of activities as well as greater effectiveness in the achievement of project results. 
Outputs 4.1 and 4.2 will be implemented through contracted service providers to support smallholder 
farmer groups and increase their awareness of risks, help build technical, commercial, financial and 
organisational  skills  and  identify  priorities.  These  service  providers  will  regularly  support  individual 
farmer  groups  until  the  investment  sub-projects  are  up  and  running  satisfactorily,  normally  over  a 
period of up to two years, and be available for occasional assistance thereafter.   
A  capable  and  internationally  experienced  service  provider  will  be  required  to  help  farmers’ 
7.
organisations  develop  and  implement  investment  proposals,  especially  for  value  chain  investments. 
The  use  of  small,  local  service  providers  to  assist  farmers’  associations  in  the  preparation  and 
implementation  of  MOSAP  sub-projects  was  problematic  because  of  their  limited  technical  and 
organisational  capacity.  Improving  the  quality  of  technical  and  commercial  assistance  and  making  it 
available  to  a  much  larger  number  of  beneficiaries  will  require  recruitment  of  a  highly  capable  and 
internationally  experienced  service  provider  who  will  also  train  the  local  NGOs  and  private  sector 
subcontractors with whom they will work.  
52 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Financing  demand-driven  subproject  investment  proposals  promotes  their  sustainability.  The 
8.
modalities for preparing and implementing demand-driven sub-projects under MOSAP were generally 
successful,  with  over  70  percent  of  sub-projects  judged  sustainable  by  the  above-mentioned 
independent  evaluation.  The  key  elements  of  success  were  (a)  creation  of  ownership  through 
community participation in all stages of subproject preparation and implementation, as well as direct 
community contributions (cash or in kind); (b) farmers’ organisations’ commitment to engage in O&M 
before disbursement of project contribution; (c) training of farmers’ organisations and assistance with 
establishment  of  user  rules  and  cost-sharing  agreements;  and  (d)  awareness  raising  and 
encouragement for farmers’ organisations to identify and contract the technical assistance they need.  
Building  government  capacity  accelerates  project  implementation  and  increases  country 
9.
ownership of results. MOSAP implementation was slow, especially at the beginning of the project. To 
accelerate  SADCP  implementation  and  ensure  sustainability  of  project  results,  targeted  government 
capacity building will be essential, especially in the following areas: (a) improving the competence and 
motivation of government staff involved in supervision of extension agents; (b) improving the accuracy 
and  timeliness of government  agricultural statistics to allow for more informed decision making; and 
(c) enabling senior government staff to address structural constraints through informing and promoting 
agriculture sector policy dialogue. 
  The  creation  of  a  dedicated  project  management  unit,  separate  from  the  implementing 
10.
institution, is an effective implementation  instrument for decision-making, coordination and  guidance 
of project activity implementation. Thus, a Project Management Unit (PMU) will be set up within IDA in 
Luanda, aligned with the SADCP-WB, to enhance coordination and policy dialogue within IDA and the 
Ministry of Agriculture and also to draw lessons from other sector programmes. However this Luanda-
based  coordination  unit  will  be  lean  in  structure  and  only  with  key  personnel  for  dealing  with 
programme management, M and E and financial management. The rest of the team will be based in 
Provincial Project Implementation Units in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces.  
Involvement  of  local  authorities  at  the  provincial  and  municipal  (“comuna”)  levels  in  the 
11.
monitoring  of  project  activities  facilitates  local  coordination  and  contributes  to  a  successful  project 
implementation. Over time, it will also help to convince local authorities to make available budgetary 
resources  for  smallholder  farmer  support  and  development.  In  addition,  Provincial  IDA  Directorates 
and EDAs (in the municipalities) will fulfil a role of local coordination and guidance;  
  An  incentive system covering key staff  involved in the implementation  of project  activities has 
12.
proved  to  be  an  effective  element  in  promoting  project  performance  and  helping  to  achieve  project 
targets.  Government  staff  working  under  the  project  will  be  provided  with  a  satisfactory  work 
environment  (training,  equipment,  living  conditions)  that  will  serve  their  future  professional 
advancement; 
  Reaching project effectiveness is a lengthy process involving many steps in Angola, therefore it 
13.
is proposed to extend the project duration to seven years.  
  Projects should have a clear and comprehensive exit strategy to enhance sustainability beyond 
14.
project  end.  SADCP  puts  the  emphasis  on  building  capacity  at  different  levels,  but  in  particular 
regarding  its  main  beneficiary,  by  providing  comprehensive  training  through  Farmer  Field  Schools, 
promoting  its  organisation 
farmers  and  their 
organisations  to  agriculture  value  chains  in  long  term  commercial  relations  and  granting  them  vital 
productive assets thus empowering smallholders to improve their livelihoods in a sustainable manner. 
levels  of  association, 
through  various 
linking 
  Monitoring  and  evaluation  systems,  including  baseline  surveys,  are  important  management 
15.
tools  that  support  and  give  guidance  for  project  adaptation  to  changing  contexts. Therefore  SADCP 
will set a strong monitoring & evaluation staff structure, both at national and provincial level. It will also 
specifically  involve  contracted  service  providers  in  delivering  timely  and  relevant  monitoring  data  on 
the results of investment sub-projects supported by the project allowing Project Management to have 
continuous flow of information on key activities and related achievements. 
53 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
1.
The  Project  is  structured  around  three  components:  (i)  Component  1:  Capacity  building  and 
institutional development; (ii) Component 2: Support for increased production and commercialization; 
and (iii) Component 3: Project Coordination and Management. The sub-components and activities for 
components 1 and 2 are described in detail below. 
Component 1 – Capacity Building and Institutional Development 
2.
The  objective  of  this  component  is  to  improve  the  technical,  institutional,  managerial,  and 
marketing  skills  of  farmer  beneficiaries  and  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  government  agricultural 
extension  specialists,  agricultural  research  institutions,  private  agricultural  service  providers,  and 
NGOs related to different aspects of agriculture, including value chains.   
3.
Under  this  set  of  interventions,  SADCP  will  further  support  pluralistic  extension  services 
delivery  to  promote  the  adoption  of  good  agricultural  practices  for  sustainable  intensification 
innovations  in  both  irrigated  farms  and  rainfed  agriculture.  This  will  include  (a)  support  to  applied 
research on selected areas of both irrigated ad rainfed  agriculture; (b) establish and facilitate Farmer 
Field  and  Business  Schools  (FFS)  providing  applied  training  to  farmers  on  the  adoption  of  good 
agricultural  practices  (GAP),  including  use  of  quality  seed/planting  materials  of  improved  varieties, 
timely  planting  and  weeding,  integrated  soil  fertility  management,  integrated  pest  management  and 
water-nutrient  use  efficiency,  and  conservation  agriculture;  (c)  establish  community  seed  systems; 
and (d)  promote Climate Smart Agriculture  (CSA)  in rainfed areas. This activity  will  be implemented 
under  the  overall  responsibility  of  IDA  with  backstopping  and  technical  support  on  applied  research 
from the IIA and international research centers. 
Sub-component  1.1:  Strengthening  Capacity  of  Smallholder  Farmers  and  Farmers’ 
Organisations through Farmers Field Schools 
4.
The  objective  of  this  subcomponent  is  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  smallholder  farmers  and 
farmers’  organisations  through  FFSs,  including:  (a)  supporting  the  establishment  of  smallholder 
farmers’  organisations;  (b)  strengthening  the  knowledge  of  farmers  on  agricultural  practices, 
technology, inputs, and marketing; (c) strengthening the functional literacy and numeracy of farmers; 
(d)  improving  dietary  diversity  awareness  among  households  as  well  as  knowledge  about  infant 
feeding and infant caring practices; (e) improving soil fertility and integrated nutrient management; (f) 
promoting conservation agriculture and sustainable land and water use; and (g) building the capacity 
of relevant government staff at the municipal level to implement an FFS program through training-of-
trainers  courses  and  on-the-job  training.  The  expected  outcome  is  “smallholder  farmers’  technical, 
organisational and managerial competence improved”. 
5.
The FFS training is expected to benefit 60,000 smallholder farmers in the Huila and Cuanza Sul 
provinces  covered  by  the  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  (and  total  of  210,000  farmers  in  the  five  provinces 
also  considering  the    SADCP-WB),  a  significant  increase  as  compared  to  what  achieved  under 
MOSAP.  The  FFS  methodology  empowers  smallholder  farmers  to  set  their  own  agenda  and  take 
steps to improve their agricultural knowledge, incomes and livelihood. It will include training of master 
trainers (mainly EDAs’ agricultural extension staff), who will in turn train other government extension 
staff  and  farmer  facilitators  by  using  the  enhanced  and  improved  FFS  curriculum.  For  effective 
implementation of the FFS approach, the government will ensure that each municipality participating 
in  the  project  has  at  least  three  agricultural  extension  specialists  at  each  EDA.  Scaling  up  the  FFS 
initiative involves:  
(a) 
(b) 
Increasing  training  capacity  at  the  commune  (comuna)  and  municipality  (municipio)  levels 
(three  agricultural  extension  specialists  in  each  EDA)  and  farmer  facilitators  at  the 
community  (aldeia)  level  (farmers  selected  by  farmers)  who  will  become  paid  FFS 
facilitators, backstopped by the EDA agricultural extension specialists. 
A complete FFS training cycle is approximately 30 months (12 months in cycle 1, 6 months 
in  cycle  2,  and  12  months  in  cycle  3).  One  agricultural  extension  specialist  is  expected  to 
cover 14 FFS at any one time. The curriculum of each FFS cycle is summarised below.  
55 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
(c) 
An  FFS  group  will  consist,  on  average,  of  30  smallholder  farmers  (both  men  and  women) 
from the same village or surrounding villages, and the training will be conducted within the 
village itself. Women farmers are expected to comprise at least 50 percent of all trainees.  
6.
The project expects to cover all targeted communes and municipalities by the end of the third 
year, with at least 30% of total target covered in the first year and  60% in the second year. This will 
ensure that all farmers in the target group benefit from at least one full FFS training cycle during the 
project.  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1st cycle – Basic crops 
Participatory diagnostics 
Organisation of the FFS 
program 
Production techniques for the 
main crops of the area 
(cassava, beans, maize, 
potato, beans, vegetables, 
coffee)  
Social themes on gender, 
basic sanitation, HIV/AIDS, 
planning, etc.  
Summary of Farmers Field and Business Schools Cycles 
2nd cycle - Diversification 
Reinforcement of the themes of the 1st  
cycle 
Diversification of crops: (beans, 
vegetables, potatoes etc.) 
Climate-smart agriculture: soil 
management, irrigation, soil improving 
plants, agro-forestry, crop rotation, 
composting, etc.  
Rational use of chemical fertilisers 
Social 
nutrition 
diversification) 
themes  as  per  1st  cycle  plus 
crop 
accompany 
(to 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
3rd cycle - Consolidation 
Sustainable management of soils  
 
  Reinforcement of the structure 
and management of farmer 
organisations  
Integration of agriculture-
livestock, forestry 
  Commercialization, processing 
and access to credit and financial 
services  
Social themes: literacy and 
numeracy 
7.
The  above  FFS  curriculum  will  be  further  improved  under  the  SADCP-WB  and  SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP,  reinforcing  its  content  on  issues  such  as  gender  (in  particular  gender-based  violence  and 
more  equal  gender  relations),  nutrition  (including  dietary  diversity  through  kitchen  gardens  and 
conservation and processing of nutrient-dense products) and hygiene. Other aspects of the curriculum 
to  be  enhanced  are  natural  resources  and  waste  management,  climate  resilient  and  conservation 
agriculture, and business skills including financial literacy and knowledge and use of financial services 
and  products.  The  curriculum  will  incorporate  the  recommendations  for  climate  change  adaptation 
resulting from the climate risk analysis that was undertaken as part of the design. In order to improve 
the effectiveness and implementation of the FFS approach an in-depth evaluation of the performance 
of FFS established under  MOSAP will be carried out at the onset  of implementation, possibly jointly 
with the World Bank. This evaluation will be undertaken by the an independent entity. 
8.
As  part  of  the  FFS  training,  the  project  will  make  a  concerted  effort  to  promote  the  active 
participation  of  women  and  other  vulnerable  groups  in  agricultural  production  and  value  chain 
activities. Specifically, the project will support their acquisition of basic skills to (a) increase their ability 
to actively participate in smallholder farmer group formation and leadership; (b) increase their chances 
of benefitting from investment sub-projects under Component 2 25; and (c) more effectively operate in 
an increasingly commercial environment.  
9.
The  issue  of  malnutrition  will  be  addressed  in  FFS  training  as  it  is  critical  to  reduce  the 
prevalence  of  diseases,  facilitate  normal  growth  of  children26,  and  improve  human  productivity.  The 
project  will  encourage  the  production  and  consumption  of  fresh  vegetables  and  promote  balanced 
nutrition to address the problems of malnutrition for adults as well as children in the project area. The 
ongoing  extension  activities  under  FFS  already  include  a  nutrition  module  that  raises  awareness 
about  malnutrition's  causes  and  measures  for  reducing  it,  such  as  growing  more  nutritious  crops, 
preparing  more  diverse  meals,  and  using  improved  methods  to  preserve  seasonal  crops  rich  in 
vitamins and minerals for use throughout the year. Specific focus will be placed on training girls and 
25 For example, the grinding mills funded under MOSAP reduced the time and energy spent by women on food preparation and 
freed their time for other activities, with a significant positive impact on household revenue and quality of life. 
26 The 1,000 days between pregnancy and a child's second birthday are the most crucial time to optimize a child's cognitive, 
immune system and physical development. Poor nutrition during pregnancy (diet, wellbeing, and health) can have harmful long-
term effects for the child in leading to stunting and consequentially also predisposing the child to metabolic diseases later in life. 
Furthermore, exclusive breastfeeding during the first 6 months of a child’s life and complementary feeding from 6 to 18-24 
months of age is essential to optimize health and development. Each of these represents an important pillar for improving 
nutrition rates in Angola. 
56 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
women, because they are responsible for preparing daily meals for the family, and on increasing the 
awareness  of  both  male  and  female  household  heads  of  the  importance  of  allocating  adequate 
resources  for  improving  nutrition27.  Nutrition  issues  will  also  be  addressed  as  part  of  the  project's 
awareness and communication efforts, notably  a Behavior Change Communication (BCC) campaign 
for nutrition. Such campaign will allow: (i) identifying effective behavior change strategies through in-
depth  social  diagnostic;  and  (ii) developing  materials  such  as  ‘’community  memory  for  nutrition’’ 
through  pictures,  audio  messages,  or  videos,  which  allow  access  to  a  wider  audience,  particularly 
among illiterate population groups. 
10.
In  order  to  adequately  target  rural  youth  and  especially  with  most  vulnerable  youth  (orphans, 
heads of households, HIV-positive  youth, etc.), the project will also support Junior Farmer Field and 
Life Schools (JFFLS),  an  effective approach  that has been  already piloted  in other African  countries 
by FAO (e.g.  Kenya). This approach is similar to the  standard FFS but  also  includes basic life skills 
and  targets  vulnerable  young  people,  especially  those  who  are  under  18  and  at  risk  of migration  or 
being involved in hazardous labour to survive.  
11.
  The available limited transport facilities constrain  EDA agricultural extension specialists’ ability 
to travel to villages and interact with smallholders. To address this problem, the project will provide all 
government  extension  staff  involved  in  FFS  with  motorcycles  to  enable  them  to  effectively  reach 
smallholder beneficiaries (see subcomponent 1.2).  
12.
  The key selection criteria for determining smallholder farmers’ eligibility as beneficiaries  of the 
FFS  training  program  are:  (a)  farming  as  the  main  economic  activity;  (b)  willingness  to  work  in  a 
group/organisation; (c) awareness and willingness to resolve their agricultural problems; (d) preferred 
location with easy access to the FFS site; (e) average farm size not greater than 5 ha; (f) gender, such 
that at least 50 percent of FFS participants are women; (g) potential for knowledge transfer to other 
villages  in  the  same  area;  and  (h)  existence  of  farmer  leaders  and  champions  for  modernising 
agriculture. 
Sub-component 1.2: Institutional Strengthening of Local, Provincial and National Units of the 
Ministry of Agriculture 
  The  second  subcomponent  aims  at:  (a)  strengthening  the  institutional  capacity  of  local, 
13.
provincial,  and  national  units  of  MINAGRI  in  the  areas  of  irrigation,  extension,  market  information, 
statistics, and policy analysis to improve provision of services to smallholder farmers at the farm-level 
investments; and (b) rehabilitating and constructing agricultural extension facilities at the local level of 
MINAGRI,  including  offices  and  residential  complexes  for  agricultural  extension  staff.  The  expected 
outcome is a “more conducive policy and enabling environment for smallholder agriculture”.   
1.2.1. Institutional Capacity Strengthening  
  The objective of this group of activities is to strengthen MINAGRI’s institutional capacity at the 
14.
national  and  decentralised  levels  to  provide  appropriate  data,  statistics,  and  market  information  as 
well as the complementary services needed for SADCP farm-level  investments. This subcomponent 
represents a  new  area  of investment and builds on  lessons learned under  MOSAP and the need  to 
strengthen  technical  services  to  increase  the  impact  of  community-level  investments.  In  parallel  to 
working  with  smallholder  farmer’s  organised  in  FFS,  FAO  will  provide  training,  coaching  and 
supervision to IDA and EDA staff in the targeted intervention areas. This  will ensure that institutional 
capacity of IDA and EDA staff is enhanced and their ability to address developmental issues-such as 
rural poverty, gender and youth issues will be further raised.The PIU will coordinate implementation of 
these activities in collaboration with the MINAGRI’s Department of Planning and Studies (Gabinete de 
Estudos,  Planificação  e  Economia,  GEPE)  and  IDA.  Financing  will  be  provided  to  strengthen:  (a) 
agricultural statistics; (b) market information systems; (c) agricultural policy analysis; and (d) irrigation-
related services.  
27 Nutrition is contingent on people’s practices and preferences. Dietary, care and health habits are partly driven by knowledge 
but also by preferences rooted in cultural norms and values as well as broader food, social and health systems, making certain 
goods or services more or less accessible and acceptable.  Beyond imparting messages however, it is important to understand 
the drivers of habits in order to understand and improve people’s attitudes towards healthy eating or child care practices, skills 
in selection of healthier and local foods, adoption of healthy and safe food practices, and application of skills to prepare 
culturally acceptable balanced meals, exclusively breastfeed, and prepare complementary foods.   
57 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
  Agricultural Statistics. Project support under this activity will expand the regular collection and 
15.
dissemination  of  data  on  crop  forecasts,  crop  production,  agricultural  input  and  output  prices,  and 
other  agricultural  and  economic  variables,  with  a  focus  on  SADCP  project  areas.  GEPE  will  be 
responsible for its implementation. At present, GEPE undertakes regular post-harvest surveys on crop 
production but has not been able to expand the frequency or scope of these surveys to allow for crop 
forecasts  or  collection  of  detailed  price  data,  according  to  standard  practice  in  many  Sub-Saharan 
African countries. Recent efforts to strengthen agricultural statistics have been made with the support 
of FAO and other partners at the national level, and as part of the larger ‘Global Initiative to Improve 
Agricultural and Rural Statistics’, to which the World Bank is a partner. In line with these efforts, a full 
agricultural  census  is  planned  for  2016.  A  strategic  plan  for  the  Division  of  Statistics  is  also  under 
development and is expected to provide a roadmap for a comprehensive approach to data collection, 
processing,  dissemination,  and  analysis  for  the  agriculture  sector  and  capacity  strengthening  within 
MINAGRI.  
  The SADCP-WB and gap-funding from SADCP-C&H-SAMAP will provide targeted financing in 
16.
three  areas:  (a)  expansion  of  data  collection  for  crop  forecasts  and  post-harvest  surveys;  (b) 
preparation  of  regular  agricultural  statistics  and  reports  at  national,  municipal,  and  commune  levels; 
and (c) support to the  national agricultural census. To expand  data collection for crop forecasts and 
post-harvest surveys, project funding will be used to undertake training of enumerators and MINAGRI 
technical staff in target provinces as well as to provide operational support to provincial directorates to 
undertake data collection. This work is expected to support MINAGRI’s effort to expand survey data 
collection nationwide. Lessons learned from this initiative will be instrumental in the expansion of this 
program  to  additional  provinces  under  government  funding  outside  the  project.  The  project  will  also 
provide funding for technical assistance and capacity building at the national and provincial levels to 
improve the quality of regular reports and statistics. The project will finance technical assistance and 
training for the agricultural census’s design and implementation. Some support will also be provided to 
include a module within the census to capture data on SADCP overall beneficiaries. 
  Market Information Systems This activity  will also be implemented by  GEPE in coordination 
17.
with  the  National  Directorate  of  Rural Trading  at  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  (Trade). The  project  will 
support  these  two  institutions  to  increase  the  availability  of  market  information  (prices  and  market 
situation)  on  a  regular  basis  at  least  for  the  crops  targeted  in  the  project  area.  This  will  allow  more 
informed  production  and  marketing  decisions.  Farmers  currently  have  relatively  limited  access  to 
retail, wholesale, and producer prices within major marketing centers. In addition to crops, the market 
information system will deal with the prices of critical agricultural inputs. Project financing is designed 
to support establishment of a market information system for key agricultural commodities and inputs 
and  dissemination  of  this  information  for  the  benefit  of  farmers.  Support  is  likely  to  include 
development of action plans at the provincial level and technical assistance to design possible options 
for the market information system. This could include linkages to farmers’ or traders’ groups such as 
UNACA (Confederação das Associações de Camponeses e Cooperativas Agropecuárias de Angola) -
the  National  Federation  of  Farmers’  Association  and  Cooperatives-  and  linkages  to  Ministry  of 
Commerce  initiatives  (notably  the  Program  for  Acquisition  of  Agriculture  Products  (Programa  de 
Adquisição de Produtos Agropecuários), PAPAGRO).  
  Agricultural Policy Analysis. The project will provide funding to support studies and training in 
18.
agricultural  policy  analysis,  carry  out  annual  sector  review  processes  and  establish  or  strengthen 
platforms for discussing relevant policy issues that will arise from implementation. These activities will 
be led by GEPE (MINAGRI’s Department of Planning and Studies). This is expected to include policy 
dialogue related to major issues such as fertiliser and seed policy, agricultural finance, market access 
and rural infrastructure, food security  and human nutrition, as well as their social and environmental 
implications  including  the  impact  of  climate  change  on  agriculture  and  resilience,.  These  policy 
discussions  should  utilise  existing  policy  mechanisms  at  the  national  and  provincial  level.  The  main 
purpose of this activity is to strengthen MINAGRI’s capacity to analyze agricultural policy constraints 
and identify appropriate policy solutions to address them; activities will be undertaken in coordination 
with  the  World  Bank  and  other  partners,  who  have  expertise  in  the  area  of  policy.  The  project  will 
support  the  country  to  comply  with  its  commitments  under  the  CAADP  to  institute  two  reviews 
annually  of  the  agriculture  sector,  which  were  agreed  in  June  2014  as  part  of  the  African  Union 
Summit in Malabo and contained in the Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth.  
58 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
19.
Irrigation-related Services. The project will strengthen the capacity of MINAGRI/ADI staff who 
deal with provision of SSI-related services, particularly at  provincial and municipal  levels where staff 
have limited capacity to provide technical backstopping to communities undertaking rehabilitation and 
construction of SSI systems. The service provider (to be hired under Component 2) will also include 
targeted  technical  training  on  gravity-fed  irrigation  systems  and  support  to  WUAs  at  both  provincial 
and municipal levels. This will enable more effective technical backstopping for irrigation activities in 
Component 2. Training will primarily target the provinces with the highest potential for gravity-fed SSI 
systems. In addition, the project will also support an inventory/reconnaissance study of potential SSI 
schemes  to  be  rehabilitated  in  the  targeted  provinces,  particularly  for  Huila  and  Cuanza  Sul  which 
were not covered by the study undertaken during design and funded by MOSAP.  
20.
  Environmental  education.  The  Ministry  of  Environment  has  the  mandate  for  ensuring 
environmental  protection  and  climate  change  adaptation.  As  part  of  the  strategy  to  mainstream 
environmental and climate risk management and demonstrate activities in specific sectors, ecological 
centers have been constructed in Namibe, Cabinda,  Cuando Cubango and Huambo Provinces. The 
center  in  Huambo,  one  of  the  five  provinces  covered  under  the  SADCP-WB  and  SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP,  can  be  used  by  the  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  as  a  training  base  for  the  smallholders  and 
technicians  in  environmental  management  and  climate  change  adaptation  options  as  well  as 
renewable energy technologies for post-harvest facilities where feasible. The project will thus provide 
support  to  equip  the  Huambo  ecological  education  centre  as  well  as  mobilisation  of  expertise  for 
demonstrations and training.  
  Under  the  above  activities,  IFAD-financing  would  mainly  focus  on  the  provision  of  adequate 
21.
support for activities to be implemented in the Huila and Cuanza Sul provinces and complement WB-
funding for other activities implemented at national/MINAGRI headquarter level. 
1.2.2. Provision of Extension Infrastructure and Facilities 
  Most of Angola’s agricultural infrastructure in rural areas was destroyed during the civil war and 
22.
agricultural  production  suffered  a  great  deal.  In  this  context,  critical  agricultural  extension  facilities 
need to be rehabilitated and/or built at the local level. This will require construction and rehabilitation 
of office and residential complexes for agricultural extension staff in selected communes.  In addition, 
the  extension  officers  will  need  motorbikes  and  office  equipment.  The  government  will  identify  the 
priority houses and offices to be rehabilitated or built in the targeted communes and municipalities as 
well the equipment needed. An estimated 40 new houses and 10 new offices would be required in the 
80 beneficiary communes in the three provinces covered under the WB funding; the needs for the two 
provinces covered under IFAD funding will be provided by IDA before project start. This activity will be 
implemented  by  the  Project  Implementation  Unit  (PIU)/Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units 
(PPIUs),  in  collaboration  with  IDA/EDAs.  The  government  will  allocate  specific  resources  for 
operations and maintenance (O&M) of buildings, transport means and office equipment as part of its 
contribution.  
23.
  Under  that  activity  funding  would  focus  on  the  provision  of  adequate  extension  facilities  and 
equipment  for  the  Huila  and  Cuanza  Sul  provinces  (indicatively,  provision  was  made  for  procuring 
about 10 vehicles, 40 motorbikes, 10 office equipment sets, civil works, studies and work supervision 
under the IFAD loan). 
Sub-component  1.3:  Strengthening  Capacity  and  Global  Knowledge  to  address  Emerging 
Research Issues 
  This  subcomponent  aims  to  strengthen  the  institutional  capacity  of  Angola’s  national-  and 
24.
provincial-level  agricultural  research  system  to  enhance  access  to  modern  agricultural  innovations 
and technologies that increase agriculture productivity and production. The objective is to strengthen 
the research systems to address emerging issues in the productivity, production, and value chains of 
priority food and horticultural crops (vegetable, coffee). This will include scaling  up the availability  of 
improved technologies for farmers, thereby filling technical knowledge gaps around cropping systems 
within the project areas and introducing new knowledge and technologies that may be available within 
the region or globally, where appropriate. The expected outcome is “government capacity to support 
59 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
climate  resilient  smallholder  production  and  commercialization  enhanced”.  Project  financing  will  be 
provided  to  develop  and  support  proposals  for  addressing  specific  R&D  initiatives  linked  to  project 
objectives and building on relevant global or regional sources of knowledge and technology. 
  The  main  activities  to  be  financed  under  this  sub-component  include:  (a)  improving  soil 
25.
diagnostic  services;  (b)  supporting  the  multiplication  of  seeds  and  planting  material;  (c)  building  the 
technical capacity of the national research and extension system; (d) developing technology packages 
for  selected  crops;  and  (e)  scaling  up  the  testing  and  demonstration  of  improved  technologies.  The 
expected outcome is: “capacity of research systems to support smallholder agricultural production and 
commercialization  enhanced”.  In  particular,  financing  under  the  SADCP  will  be  provided  for  the 
following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Multiplication  of  seeds  and  planting  material.  Scaling  up  breeder  or  foundation  seed 
production  within  the  IIA,  developing  partnerships  with  seed  producers  to  increase 
production of certified or quality-declared seed, and scaling up production and dissemination 
of virus-free cassava cuttings. 
Development  of  recommended  technology  packages  for  project  crops  (cartas 
tecnológicas por culturas). Packaging and recommendations for priority crops for use by 
farmers, delivered by extension system/technical service providers. 
soil  diagnostic 
Improvement  of 
fertiliser 
recommendations). Provision of equipment, training, and operational costs within Cuanza 
Sul  and  Huila 
fertiliser 
recommendations.  
facilities  and  development  of 
improve  soil 
services 
analysis 
testing 
(soil 
and 
to 
(iv)  Training  of  national  research  and  extension  system  on  specific  technical  topics  by 
international experts. Support to partnerships to bring in outside knowledge for the benefit 
of  the  national  research  and  extension  system  from  partners  such  as  the  Brazilian 
Agricultural  Research  Corporation  (Empresa  Brasileira  de  Pesquisa  Agropecuária, 
EMBRAPA),  Consultative  Group  for  International Agricultural  Research  (CGIAR)  institutes, 
or within the Southern African Development Community region.  
(v) 
Scaling up the testing/demonstration of new technologies based on CGIAR research 
system or others. Support for R&D activities within the IIA to test new technologies brought 
in from the CGIAR system, EMBRAPA, or countries  within the region and targeting priority 
crops.  
Implementation of these activities will be done by the Institute of Agricultural Research (Instituto 
26.
de Investigação Agronómica, IIA) and the partner(s) selected for the specific R&D activity. IDA and IIA 
will prepare a detailed work plan for the R&D activities to be financed, with the time frame and budget. 
The PIU will retain the fiduciary responsibility. 
27.
IDA and the IIA will prepare a detailed work plan for the R&D activities to be financed, with the 
time  frame  and  budget.  They  will  also  prepare  a  memorandum  of  understanding  (MOU)  setting  the 
responsibility  of  each  party  in  the  implementation  of  the  work  plan,  including  the  supervision 
mechanisms  during  implementation.  The  MOU  should  be  prepared  no  later  than  six  months  after 
effectiveness. 
28.
  Similarly to subcomponent 1.2, IFAD-financing would mainly focus on the provision of adequate 
support for activities to be implemented in the Huila and Cuanza Sul provinces and complement WB-
funding for other activities implemented at national level. 
Component 2 – Support for Increased Production and Commercialization 
through:  (i) supporting,  on  a  demand  basis, 
  The  objective  of  this  component  is  to  strengthen  smallholders’  capital,  market  linkages  and 
29.
incomes 
farmers’  groups  and 
organisations (FOs) to improve agricultural productivity, production, market access and value addition 
(for  an  estimated  10,000  beneficiaries)  through  a  combination  of  own  resources  of  promoters,  a 
matching  grant  and  short  and  medium  term  credit  extended  by  Partner  Financial  Institutions  (PFIs); 
(ii) sustainably  linking  smallholders  and  their  FOs  to  buyers,  input  suppliers  and  partner  financial 
institutions.  The  beneficiaries  will  be  selected  from  those  trained  through  FFS  (under  MOSAP,  the 
investments  of 
60 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
SADCP-C&H-SAMAP,  or  any  other  training  program)  and/or  be  member  of  existing  FOs  that 
demonstrate  to  have  the  capacity  to  manage  and  implement  such  investments.  The  expected 
outcome is “investments in agricultural production and post-harvest management increased”. 
  Different  type  of  investments  will  be  supported  including:  (a)  rehabilitation  of  SSI  schemes; 
30.
(b) agricultural  production  and  productivity  improvements;  and  (c) post-harvest  and  value  addition 
investments  including  storage,  processing  and  marketing  facilities.  To  access  financing  support, 
eligible beneficiaries/FOs will submit subproject proposals/business plans. 
  Subcomponent  2.1  will  support  all  necessary  capacity  building  and  technical  assistance 
31.
activities for enabling eligible sub-projects promoters to emerge and good subproject proposals to be 
prepared,  appraised  and  agreed  for  funding  by  all  three  parties  involved  (promoters,  SADCP  and 
PFIs) ensuring an informed decision about their feasibility from technical, economic, financial, social, 
and  environmental  perspectives;  while  Subcomponent  2.2  comprises  the  financial  support  to 
approved sub-projects/BPs implementation itself.  
Sub-component 2.1: Provision of Technical Support 
  This  subcomponent  aims  to  provide  technical  support  in  the  following  fields:  (a)  sensitizing, 
32.
informing,  identifying  and  selecting  eligible  beneficiary  FOs;  (b)  mapping  and  characterising  value 
chain actors and opportunities to facilitate the  identification  of eligible FOs and  of sound sub-project 
(SP) proposal; (c) facilitating economic partnerships between beneficiary FOs and other value chain 
actors  and  link  FOs  with  PFIs  and  facilitate  access  to  their  services,  particularly  investment  and 
working  capital  credit,  thanks  to  the  mobilisation  of  PFIs  activities  (see  subcomponent  2.2); 
(d) assisting  eligible  FOs  to  prepare  their  SP  proposals/business  plans  (BPs),  including  providing 
specialised  technical  assistance  to  IDA  and  beneficiaries  to  develop  Small  Scale  Irrigation  (SSI) 
schemes and establish Water User Associations (WUAs) or strengthen existing WUAs; (e) support the 
ex-ante  appraisal,  independent  review  and  approval  process  of  SPs/BPs  through  support  to 
appropriate  decision  bodies  and  due  diligence  mechanisms;  (f)  provide  implementation  support  to 
beneficiaries of SPs to ensure that the objectives of each SP funded under the project are achieved; 
(g)  ensure  the  ex-post  evaluation  of  impacts  and  implementation  performance  of  funded  SPs; 
(h) oversee  the  provision  of  adequate  capacity  building  activities  to  SP  promoters  to  ensure  the 
success  and  expected  impact  of  each  funded  SP/BP;  (i)  strengthen  the  capacity  of  IDA,  local 
NGOs/consultants and agricultural input providers participating in  SPs’ implementation to respond to 
the smallholder demands.  
  The implementation modalities for providing the above technical support include contracting an 
33.
experienced  and  competent  main  service  provider,  as  recommended  from  lessons  learnt  from 
MOSAP  (see  Appendix  3).  Such  service  provider  will  be  at  the  forefront  of  all  above-mentioned 
activities  and  act  as  a  coordinator  of  the  component  2  implementation,  working  in  very  close 
collaboration  with  the  provincial  and  municipal  IDA  offices.  This  is  also  to  ensure  a  competitive  and 
transparent process and avoid elite capture in matching grant allocation. 
  The  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  will  fund  the  following  main  group  of  activities:  (a)  provision  of 
34.
overall  technical  and  implementation  support  by  a  qualified  service  provider;  (b)  information  and 
sensitisation; (c) assessment of actors, supply and demand in the target value chains and facilitating 
market  linkages;  (d)  support  for  sub-projects/business  plans  preparation,  appraisal,  implementation 
and monitoring and evaluation – including irrigation sub-projects.  
35.
  Main service provider. The SADCP-C&H-SAMAP will hire a main service under a multi-year 
results-based contract. This  provider  will establish teams located in  the two targeted provinces (one 
team in each province) comprised of different fields of expertise: team/area managers;  agribusiness, 
value  chain  and  marketing;  small  scale  irrigation;  farmers'  and  rural  organisations  and  capacity 
building; agronomist/livestock specialist; communication, M&E and knowledge sharing; nutrition; field 
technicians;  and  support  functions  (administration,  finance,  and  accounting).  These  experts  will  be 
provided  with  adequate  transport  means,  office  equipment  and  operational  budget  to  perform 
efficiently their duties, in close collaboration with MINAGRI/IDA provincial and municipal staff and with 
FAO that will oversee the implementation of FFS. Provision for backstopping, short term specialised 
technical assistance on key  topics pertinent to the SADCP, mid-term review  and evaluation  will also 
embedded into the main service provider contract. 
61 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
  The  main  service  provider  should  have  international  expertise  and  demonstrated  capacity  to 
36.
manage  large  contracts.  It  should  be  associated  with  competent  national  service  providers,  if 
available.  Procuring  such  service  provider  will  done,  to  the  extent  possible,  jointly  with  the  SADCP-
WB  making  the  scope  of  the  work  larger  and  more  attractive  to  international  service  providers. 
Applicants will be provided with professional assistance to prepare business plans. 
37.
Information  and  sensitisation.  Information  and  sensitisation  activities  will  be  carried  out  by 
IDA  and  the  main  service  provider  to  inform  potential  beneficiaries  on  the  project  and  conditions  to 
participate and benefit from it, focusing on component 2 objectives and implementation mechanisms. 
This would include: (i) preparation, editing and printing of messages by consultants; (ii) organisation of 
sensitisation  workshops  at  provincial  and  municipal  level  targeting  actors  of  the  value  chains  (FOs, 
input  suppliers,  traders/buyers,  transporters,  processors  and  agro-industries,  etc.)  and  local  NGOs; 
(iii) targeted radio and television communication; etc.  
  Assessment  of  actors,  supply  and  demand  in  targeted  value  chains,  facilitation  of 
38.
market  linkages  and  beneficiaries  selection. This would  include:  (i)  assessments  of  existing  FOs 
and  other  value  chains  actors  in  the  ten  targeted  municipalities;  (ii)  various  market  studies  and 
technical studies; (iii) organisational audits/screening of FOs proposing sub-project ideas for selecting 
FOs complying with eligibility criteria, before embarking on a full scale business plan preparation; (iv) 
establishment of economic partnerships with large buyers/input suppliers that could become major of 
supply/output for FOs benefiting from investment support; (v) organisation of partnerships meetings, 
dialogue platforms and study tours.  
  The proposed value chains and actors assessment will be undertaken jointly with SADCP-WB 
39.
and  work  on  the  IFAD  target  area  will  be  earmarked  to  start  at  the  onset  of  implementation.  Such 
studies will map existing actors, identify market opportunities and help define support for production, 
storage and marketing that should be prioritised at private (FOs) level as well as public market access 
investments at the different levels. The studies will also assess whether commercial farms and large 
agribusinesses  (mainly  in  Luanda)  might  consider  smart  subsidies  in  the  form  of  cost-sharing  and 
contracting farming arrangements. The potential of such arrangements with Nestlé for coffee (cropped 
in three out the ten targeted municipalities) will notably be investigated.  
  Both  the  information/sensitization  activities  and  assessment  of  actors,  supply  and  demand  in 
40.
targeted  value  chains  and  municipalities  will  facilitate  the  identification  and  selection  of  potential 
beneficiary  FOs  that  would  be  likely  to  comply  with  the  FO  eligibility  criteria  (see  below)  and  would 
propose sound sub-projects proposals; avoiding a mass communication campaign/calls for proposals 
that might generate non eligible or a too numerous demand which the project would have difficulty to 
answer to. Rather the communication and calls for proposals will be made at local level (in targeted 
municipalities and communes) through targeted meetings and local media.  
  Beneficiaries Selection Criteria. The proposed selection criteria for determining the eligibility 
41.
of FOs as beneficiaries of investment support under Component 2 are the following:  
(a) 
all members of the organisation have already completed training in FFS curriculum;  
(b)  most  of  the  organisation  members  have  a  commercial  orientation  and  produce  for  the 
market;  
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
the  organisation follows good governance practices and has dynamic leaders  who respect 
the organisation’s rules;  
the  organisation  has  not  benefitted  from  SADCP  investment  support  or  has  already 
completed a first investment sub-project with satisfactory performance;  
the  organisation  is  willing  and  able  to  provide  financial  contribution  for  implementing  its 
envisaged sub-project; and 
(f) 
the results of the organisational audits of the organisation is positive.  
  Support 
to  sub-projects/business  plan  preparation,  appraisal, 
42.
implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation. Under this group of activities, the project will fund the following activities: 
(i) organise a training of trainers on the participatory preparation and analysis of business plans using 
the  Rural  Invest  methodology  and  software  developed  by  FAO;  (ii)  train  selected  MINAGRI/IDA/ICA 
62 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
staff  participating  in  SP/BP  preparation,  appraisal  and  implementation  support  in  various  fields,  as 
needed  (such  as  environment  &  climate  change  adaptation,  gender  approach,  nutrition-sensitive 
agriculture,  etc.);   (iii)  assist  FOs  in  the  participatory  and  iterative  preparation  of  their  subproject 
proposal and business plan that could meet the eligibility criteria for investment support (see below). 
This  will  done  by  the  main  service  prodder  staff  and  by  selected  local  consultants  trained  in  the 
Rural Invest  methodology;  (iv)  assist  the  discussion  of  prepared  SPs/BPs  with  PFIs  and  pre-
negotiating credit commitments through business meetings; (v) assist the appraisal and environmental 
screening (when necessary) of prepared SPs/BPs by technical experts, before they are presented to 
the  grant  approval  committees  (PISC  and  PGCs);  (vi)  support  to  the  grant  approval  committees 
sessions (particularly for the representatives of beneficiaries, the civil society and the private sector in 
these committees); (vii) Under the leadership of the PDGs, the Oversight Agent mandate is as follows: 
"  independent  review  of  the  beneficiary  selection,  SP/BP  preparation  and  appraisal  process,  grant 
approval processes etc by an Oversight Agent to ensure that all procedures, criteria were applied in a 
fair  and  transparent  manner  in  order  to  ensure  transparency  and  avoid  elite  capture;  (viii)  making 
public the grants approved by the PGCs/PISC through posting on boards at municipal/provincial level, 
communication  on  local  radios  and  publication  on  local  newspapers  and  web  sites  of  MINAGRI/IDA 
and of the PISC/PGCs; (ix)  support the  implementation of approved  SPs/BPs both the main service 
provider  field  staff,  participating  IDA/ICA  staff  and  local  consultants  as  envisaged  in  the  approved 
SP/BP;  (x)  ex-post  evaluation  of  funded  SPs/BPs  after  two  years  of  implementation  by  the  service 
provider staff and local consultants if necessary to generate lessons, and inform adequately the M&E 
system  of 
implement  a 
methodology/software 
funded  SPs/BPs  and  generating 
references. 
technical-financial  monitoring  of 
the  project;  (xi)  specialized 
technical  assistance 
to  set  up  and 
for 
43.
It is extremely important that the component supports SPs/BPs that are viable, sustainable, and 
likely  to  make  a  major  contribution  to  increased  productivity,  production,  and  marketing,  including 
value  addition.  The  service  providers  may  receive  training  for  some  topics  particularly  on  the 
participatory  preparation  and  analysis  of  BPs,  establishment  of  technical  and  financial  reference  to 
prepare/analyse  such  BPs,  etc.  They  may  in  turn  provide  coaching  to  local  NGOs  and  consultants 
they would possibly subcontract  - with PIU agreement- to carry some of the tasks mentioned above 
such  as  assisting  BP  preparation  and  analysis,  organisational  audit  of  subproject  promoters, 
environment and social screening, etc.  
  Technical support for the rehabilitation and  development  of small-scale irrigation schemes will 
44.
be  the  overall  responsibility  of  the  main  service  provider  which  will  hire  the  needed  technical  and 
social expertise to perform this task, in close cooperation with the IDA and MINAGRI technicians.   
Sub-component 2.2: Provision of Investment Support  
  This sub-component will provide financing to eligible beneficiaries (through matching grants and 
45.
facilitated  access  to  credit)  for  carrying  out  the  approved  sub-projects/business  plans  and  crowd-in 
PFIs  for  loans  partially  financing  the  investment.  As  indicated  above,  investment  support  will  be 
provided for those competitively selected  sub-projects that deal  with the  development of small scale 
irrigation, agricultural production and productivity improvements, and post-harvest activities and value 
addition,  individually  or  in  a  fully  justified  package  of  investments.  An  Oversight Agent  (specialised 
firm)  will  be  recruited  to  work  closely  with  the  Provincial  Governance  Committee  (PGC)  in  each 
participating province, conduct due diligence on the process before any submitted subproject approval 
is finalised. This agent will review how selection criteria were applied at all stages of SP proponents 
identification,  selection,  BP  preparation  and  review,  in  order  to  ensure  transparency  and  avoid  elite 
capture.  The  agent  will  also  support  the  PGCs  to  address  complaints/grievances  and  feedback 
received from any FO, SP proponent or third party and report accordingly to the Project Coordination 
Committee  (PCC)  and  IFAD  for  decision  making.  A  full  set  of  criteria,  procedures,  and  eligible 
expenditures  will  be  defined  in  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM).  While  the  menu  of 
investment  options  will  be  flexible,  the  eligibility  criteria  and  the  subject  preparation  and  appraisal 
procedure  will be strictly followed. Although the disbursement mechanisms and advances may vary, 
taking into consideration the type of  sub-project, the  eligible  expenditures are for goods,  works, and 
services. 
63 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
  Detailed  eligibility  criteria,  and  eligible  expenditures  in  each  category  will  be  included  in  the 
46.
Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM).  While  the  menu  of  investment  options  will  be  flexible,  the 
eligibility criteria will be strictly followed. Beneficiaries of matching grants will be required to contribute 
at  least  10  percent  of  the  subproject’s  cost  (in  kind  and/or  cash)  in  the  case  of  FOs/individuals;  the 
contribution  may  vary  between 10-30%, depending of the type  of investment.  This  will stimulate the 
beneficiaries’ ownership of the subproject and ensure their commitment for implementation as well as 
sustainability.  The  maximum  matching  grant  contributed  by  the  project  is  set  at  US$100,000.  Sub-
projects  that  will  require  project  contribution  above  US$100,000  may  be  considered  on  exceptional 
basis and will require prior IFAD clearance.  
  Type  of  investment  supported.  FOs  and  even  some  critical  enterprises  may  be  eligible  for 
47.
five different investment support options:  
 
 
 
 
 
Investment  support  for  irrigation  only  (for  those  eligible  FOs  that  get  FFS  training  during  the 
latter phase of the Project); 
Investment support for production only (for those eligible  FOs that get FFS training during the 
latter phase of the Project) 
Investment  support  for  post-harvest  activities,  value  addition  and  marketing  only  (for  those 
eligible FOs and enterprises trained in FFS in the latter phase of the Project)  
Investment  support  for  production  and  value  addition  (for  eligible  FOs  and  enterprises  that 
received FFS training but no investment support under MOSAP, in rainfed areas)  
Investment support for irrigation, production and value addition (for eligible FOs and enterprises 
developing irrigation schemes under the Project) 
  Funding for any follow-up phase of the investment proposal for any of the above categories will 
48.
be subject to satisfactory completion of the previous phase of the investment proposal. Verification will 
be  the  responsibility  of  the  PPIUs  and  the  PIU.  IFAD  and  the World  Bank  will  randomly  select  sub-
projects for evaluation to verify satisfactory performance during implementation support missions.  
  The  sub-projects  cycle.  As  indicated  above  the  beneficiary  identification/selection  and  the 
49.
sub-projects cycle encompass a number of steps  involving  different types  of actors, as summarized 
below. 
  Sensitization  and  information  campaign  in  targeted  municipalities  (including  meetings  for 
targeted audiences and use of local media of which local radios) 
  Assessments  of  value  chains  and  mapping  local  and  value  chains  actors  for  facilitating  the 
identification of suitable FOs and the likeliness to support FOs and SPs/BPs that would comply 
with eligibility criteria, including targeted local calls for proposals 
  Reception and analysis of SP ideas and request for support from FOs (to be screened by the 
main service provider) 
  Organisation  audit  of  FOs  that  proposed  eligible  SP  ideas  (by  the  service  provider  staff  and 
local consultants overseen by the main service provider) 
  Review of the organisational audit and selection/rejection of the FO (by the service provider in 
close consultation with IDA/EDAs and the PPIUs) 
  Assistance  to  the  preparation  of  the  SP/BP  for  eligible/selected  FOs  (by  the  service  provider 
and trained local consultants as necessary) through a participatory and iterative process 
  Assistance  to  the  discussion  of  the  prepared  SP/BP  with  PFIs  for  securing  the  credit  funding 
part of the BP 
  Appraisal (ex-ante evaluation) of the SP/BP by independent technicians providing their advice 
to the grant approval committee (PGC and PISC), particularly for complex projects 
  Analysis of the proposed SP/BP by the grant approval committee (PISC or PGC) and approval 
64 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
(in principal) or rejection of the proposed matching grant (MG) 
 
Independent  review  of  the  FO  selection  process,  SP/BP  preparation  and  appraisal  process, 
compliance  with  procedures  and  criteria  as  set  out  in  the  PIM  by  the  oversight  Agent  (by 
batches of SPs/BPs) 
  Publication of authorized matching grants on web sites, boards, radio, etc. 
  Support  to  approved  SP/BP  implementation  that  went  through  the  oversight/due  diligence 
process; disbursement of the MG by tranches and adequate and timely reporting to PPIUs/PIU 
by the main service provider 
  Ex-post evaluation of funded SPs/BPs and drawing lessons for improving implementation and 
informing the M&E system 
  Generation of technical and financial references from the execution of SPs/BPs for learning and 
M&E purposes 
50.
  The Oversight Agent would report directly to the PGCs and to the PCC: "In line with the IFAD 
anti-fraud and anti-corruption policy a feedback mechanism will be established under which any sub-
project  proponent  or  SP  beneficiary  or  third  party  might  report  on  perceived  irregularities  and  non-
compliance  with 
the  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  procedures,  eligibility  criteria,  procurement  and 
disbursement activities under component 2. Feedback/complaints  will be addressed diligently by the 
Oversight  Agent  that  will  report  adequately  to  the  project  steering  committee  (PCC)  and  propose 
adequate  corrective  measures.  Details  of  such  feedback/grievance  mechanism  will  be  further 
developed in the PIM. 
51.
  The authorized ceilings of the grant approval committees will be as follows: 
(a) 
(b) 
PGCs  at  provincial  level  will  approve  sub-projects  up  to  US$50,000,  with  the  first  two 
proposals in each category to be cleared by IFAD; and 
PISC,  at  the  national  level,  will  approve  sub-projects  above  US$50,000  and  up  to 
US$100,000, with prior review and clearance by IFAD.  
52.
In case obtaining a working capital and/or investment loan from a PFI PGC forms an integral of 
the financing plan of the SP/BP, the first tranche disbursement of the matching grant will be subject to 
the approval of the envisaged loan by the identified PFI. 
  The PISC and PGC will include representatives of beneficiaries (through FOs and community-
53.
based organisations), of the civil society (NGOs) and of the private sector to ensure full transparency 
in  the  selection  process  of  SP/BP  proposals  eligible  for  investment  support  (see  Appendix  5)  to 
ensure transparency and avoid elite capture.  
  Sub-projects evaluation criteria. Sub-project proposals will be evaluated against the following 
54.
evaluation criteria for matching grants:  
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
The financial viability of proposed sub-project activities in the “with project situation”, based 
on  a  cash  flow  analysis  after  financing,  taking  into  consideration  the  received  financing 
(promoters’  own  resources,  matching  grant  and  credit)  as  well  the  repayment  of  proposed 
working capital and investment loans;   
The  economic  viability  of  proposed  subproject  activities,  comparing  the  “with  project”  and 
“without project situations;   
The  extent  to  which  these  activities  add  value  and  are  consistent  with  the  Project  
objectives,  such  as  to  promote  production  and  productivity,  improve  market  access,  add 
value and raise income of participating farmers; 
The  expected  positive  impact  on  market  demand  for  smallholder  produce  and  adequate 
assessment of market demand, prices and marketing risks; 
The  extent  to  which  the  proposal  adopts  good  agricultural  practices  and/or  addresses 
climate  change  adaptation  recommendations  and/or  introduces  agricultural  innovations  in 
Angola’s context;  
65 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
(j) 
The  extent  to  which  the  proposal  has  minimum  adverse  environmental  and  social  impacts 
and the soundness of proposed mitigation measures;  
Possible  replicability  and  scalability  by  other  farmers  and  FOs  in  the  Project  area  and 
beyond; 
Likelihood  of  sustainability, 
including  soundness  of  proposed  organisational  and 
implementation  arrangements  during  the  investment  and  operation  phases,  and  sharing  of 
expecting benefits between sub-project promoters;  
Reasonable duration to get results (less than two years);  
Implementable with a clearly defined timeline for work and implementation responsibilities.  
  The full set of criteria and procedures will be further defined in the PIM. Farmers’ organisation 
55.
with  poor  performance  under  MOSAP  will  not  be  eligible  for  any  new  investment  support  under  the 
project,  but  every  effort  will  be  made  to  reach  a  diverse  and  large  number  of  qualified  farmers’ 
organisations. In other words, selection of farmers’ organisations for investment support will focus on 
both equity and efficiency criteria.  
  Type  of  investments  excluded  from  financing.  Not  all  sub-projects  will  be  eligible  for  funding 
56.
under  component  2.  The  preliminary  negative  list  of  sub-projects  is  summarised  below  and  will  be 
included in the PIM: 
(a) 
Sub-projects with negative impact on the environment or health: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Sub-projects with any activity in protected areas 
Earth dams greater than 8 m 
(iii)  Sub-projects requiring the use of banned agrochemicals 
(iv)  Sub-projects that will damage cultural property 
(v) 
Sub-projects involving logging in protected areas/natural forests 
(vi)  Sub-projects using waters from international rivers 
(b) 
Sub-projects for private or non-agricultural use: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Private residential houses 
Schools, libraries, and related facilities 
(iii)  Health centers/clinics 
(c) 
Sub-projects in which beneficiaries are members or staff of the following entities: 
(i) 
MOSAP and/or SADCP-C&H-SAMAP implementation committees 
(ii)  MOSAP and/or SADCP PIU or PPIUs 
(iii) 
Local governments (village, communes, municipalities) 
Investments in Irrigation Systems and Support Infrastructure 
  Development  of  Small-scale  Irrigation  (SSI)  will  contribute  to  the  sustainable  increase  of  the 
57.
productivity,  production  and  incomes  of  smallholder  farmers.  It  will  mainly  focus  on  rehabilitation  of 
existing schemes and be at modest scale, covering about 500 ha in the SADCP-C&H-SAMAP area.28. 
At  the  onset  of  implementation  a  survey  will  be  conducted  to  map  potential  existing  schemes  that 
would  fit  the  eligibility  criteria  in  the  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  project  area  and  assess  whether  this 
28 A study in the three provinces covered by MOSAP showed that significant areas that were formerly used for small-scale 
gravity-fed irrigation schemes could be rehabilitated at modest cost. The detailed study funded by MOSAP identified 15,000 ha 
of inactive small-scale irrigation schemes, of which 5,500 ha could be rehabilitated at a cost lower than US$1,500 per hectare. 
The average size of these schemes was 32 ha. The MINAGRI Irrigation Division confirmed that similar type of rehabilitation of 
SSIs would be possible in Cuanza Sul and Huila provinces.  
66 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
minimum  500  ha  target  could  be  exceeded. At  mid-term  review  the  implementation  performance  of 
SSI rehabilitation will be fully assessed and decision to scale up this investment activity will be taken 
accordingly. 
  Development  of  SSI  schemes  will  be  made  through  an  integrated  participatory  planning  and 
58.
development process, including the establishment of Water User Associations (WUAs) to ensure the 
investment’s sustainability and to avoid possible future conflicts. The project will finance the costs of 
the schemes’ rehabilitation/construction as  well as the studies and  work supervision costs. Irrigation 
infrastructure development  will  be based on clearly  articulated investment proposals. Different steps 
will  be  followed  including  prefeasibility  studies,  feasibility  studies,  detailed  design,  and  environment 
assessment (ESMP) to quantify the negative and positive impacts due to construction and operation 
and  provide  recommendation  to  sustain  ecological  flow  to  other  users.  Studies’  findings  and 
recommendations will be thoroughly discussed with stakeholders and project support will be subject to 
commitment from beneficiaries in scheme development and O&M. 
59.
  No infrastructure investments will be made before the local authorities confirm the beneficiaries’ 
land user rights and water rights. Regarding land and water user rights, the site- or scheme-specific 
ESMP  (to  be  prepared  after  the  site/design  details  are  known)  should  consider  the  ability  of 
downstream users to use water, as well as, any environmental/ecology flow required to maintain the 
integrity of the ecosystem, as an important element.  
60.
Irrigation  development  will  be  restricted  to  schemes  that  are  clearly  feasible  from  a  technical 
point  of  view;  are  economically  and  financially  viable;  and  have  firm  commitment  from  potential 
beneficiaries  to  scheme  development  and  to  O&M.  Criteria  for  selecting  irrigation  schemes  will 
include:  (i) technical  considerations  (with  emphasis  on  water  availability)  and  cost  of  rehabilitation; 
(ii) economic  viability  of  investment/rehabilitation;  (iii) upfront  financial  contributions  and  commitment 
of  beneficiaries; 
(clear 
complementarity and no overlap). The proposed detailed eligibility criteria are presented in the table 
below: 
(iv) market  potential  and  private  sector 
(v)  synergies 
investment; 
Requirements 
Pre-
requirements 
  Financial, economic, environmental, and social feasibility of the proposed investment  
  Availability  of  water  of  acceptable  quantity  and  quality  and  of  irrigable  land  (soils, 
topography) 
Eligibility Criteria 
  Beneficiary commitment to contribute to the O&M costs of the investment  
  Proven  opportunities  to  link  irrigation  scheme  with  profitable  cropping  pattern  and 
identified market outlets 
Core 
requirements 
  Land surveyed and registered, allowing processing for secured access to land through, for 
example,  Direito  de  Uso  e  Aproveitamento  da  Terra,  titulo  provisório,  or  certidão  de 
garantia de posse da terra issued by the municipality or local authorities. 
  High number of potential direct beneficiaries (in particular women) and low average cost 
per beneficiary 
  Good physical access to irrigation perimeter 
  Willingness to make in-kind contribution of labor and materials 
  Women smallholder farmers among beneficiaries 
  High  degree  of  organisation  and  social  capital  among  producers,  and  clear  potential  to 
evolve into a formal WUA 
  Reasonably low average cost per hectare (including investment and O&M costs) 
  Assurance to receive water rights from responsible local authorities  
  Rehabilitation of existing irrigation infrastructure will have preference over construction of 
new irrigation schemes 
Additional 
requirements 
  The 
technical  studies  and  reports 
61.
include: 
(i) Prefeasibility  studies’  technical  reports;  (ii)  Feasibility  studies’  reports;  (iii)  Detailed  design  report 
(including  construction  drawings  and  schedule  as  well  as  tender  documents);  and  (iv)  Preliminary 
operation  and  maintenance  (O&M)  manual.  Those  schemes  fulfilling  the  prefeasibility  level 
requirements will pass to feasibility and detailed design levels for a more detailed studies, analyses, 
target  schemes  will 
to  be  delivered 
for 
67 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
and  designs  using  best  practices.  Studies’  findings  and  recommendations  are  to  be  thoroughly 
discussed with stakeholders, and presented with relevant supporting technical annexes 
  The feasibility studies will be conducted in collaboration with irrigators/WUA, and in consultation 
62.
with the resident IDA extension agent. These should  at a minimum include: (i) hydrologic and  water 
resources availability study to acceptable level of reliability taking current and foreseeable rainfall and 
catchment  characteristics  as  well  as  climate  change  projections  into  consideration;  (ii) bathymetric 
surveys  (reservoir  dams  sedimentation);  (iii)  for  dams  over  20  years  old,  dam  safety  and 
instrumentation  to  ensure  reasonable  operation  of  the  scheme  for  anticipated  service  years; 
(iv) diagnostic  meteorological  and  hydrometric  network  survey  and  water  resources  monitoring; 
(v) land  suitability,  engineering  and  soils  surveys  and  investigations  to  include  but  not  limited  to 
topographical,  salinity,  fertility,  geotechnical,  groundwater  table  and  water  quality;  (vi)  surface  and 
sub-surface  hydraulics  with  focus  on  prevailing  and/or  proposed  irrigation  structures  and  systems; 
(vii) agronomic in the light of land suitability, market, climatic condition. It will also determine scheme-
specific  crop  and  field  irrigation  water  requirements  and  water  sources  withdrawals  with  due 
consideration to other uses and users; (viii) detailed inventory of irrigation and drainage infrastructures 
and assets including last-mile access roads; (ix) diagnostic assessment of the irrigation O&M system, 
to include technical, institutional and related challenges and opportunities for improvement in view of 
subsequent  assessment  of  training  and  capacity  building  related  needs;  (x)  Socio-economic  studies 
and an analysis of input and output markets; and (xi) ESMPs.  
63.
In  general,  the  rehabilitation  and  construction  works  will  consist  of  (a)  upgrading  of  the  area 
around  the  intake  and  the  main  canal;  (b)  construction  of  water  collecting  structures  and/or 
rehabilitation  of  damaged  embankments;  (c)  installation  of  control  structures  like  water  gates;  (d) 
upgrading of the main canals and, where necessary, lining critical stretches of the distribution system; 
and  (e)  use  of  local  plants/grass  to  control  canal  erosion.  In  places  where  the  installation  of  buried 
pipes is feasible, hand-dug earthen canals may be substituted by pipes, if water losses warrant this. 
Considering the higher unit cost of installing gravity-buried pipe systems, the costs and benefits of this 
option will be evaluated and discussed with the community before installation of any such system. 
  The project will endorse a mix of construction methods, including  both plant-based and  labor-
64.
intensive construction methods that are designed to: (a) build local capacity in irrigation construction 
and maintenance; (b) create local entrepreneurship for sustainable delivery of irrigation services; and 
(c)  deliver  planned  irrigation  construction  investments  on  time,  of  high  quality,  and  at  potentially 
significantly  lower  cost  than  contractor  and  equipment-based  constructions  experienced  in  past 
irrigation projects in Angola. The choice of construction method will be made on a case-by-case basis 
at the feasibility stage, as this will determine subsequent stages of design/supervision and tendering. 
After field  visits to some of the  irrigated areas, the cost for small-scale gravity-fed irrigation scheme 
rehabilitation or development was estimated to be between US$1,000–US$2,000 per ha.  
  Specific procurement methods for the construction of SSI schemes are detailed in Appendix 8. 
65.
The procurement methods will be also detailed in the PIM to indicate ceilings for investment costs per 
hectare for the applicable irrigation technologies; these ceilings will need to be regularly reviewed and 
updated; the bidding documents will be critically reviewed and, when applicable, provisions granted in 
the  World  Bank’s  and  IFDA’s  Procurement  Guidelines  will  be  used  to  reject  all  bids.  Procurement 
guidelines will ensure that the contract management/supervision is diligently carried out by the service 
providers and the PIU/PPIUs. 
Investments in Agricultural Production  
  This  includes  financial  support  to  FOs-promoted  sub-projects  aiming  mainly  at  a  sustainable 
66.
increase  of  smallholder  climate  resilient  agricultural  productivity  and  production  for  key  priority  food 
and  horticultural  crops  in  the  project  area.  The  main  economic  rationale  for  agricultural  production 
investment  support  is  that:  (a)  the  agriculture  sector  was  decapitalised  during  the  civil  war  and 
productivity remains low; (b) adoption and use of improved agricultural practices and technology are 
limited; (c) access to capital and financial services are very limited for smallholder. The main focus will 
68 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
be on crops identified as a priority for the project area (that is, maize, beans, cassava, potatoes, and 
soybean and horticultural crops such as onions, carrots, tomatoes, cabbage and coffee).  
  Eligible  investment  items  financed  under  such  sub-projects  are  demand-based  agricultural 
67.
technology  packages  including  improved  seeds  and  planting  material,  fertilisers  and  approved 
pesticides,  draft  animals  and  animal  traction  equipment,  mechanisation  tools  and  equipment, 
biological and/or physical soil and water conservation methods, storage equipment and facilities, etc. 
as well as associated capacity building of FOs and implementation support to ensure the sub-projects 
success,  and  environmental  and  social  impact  assessments  where  required.  The  preliminary  list  of 
eligible expenditures for investment sub-projects for agricultural production includes the following:  
(a) 
Seed multiplication 
(b)  Multiplication  of  vegetative  planting  material  (cassava,  sweet  potatoes,  fruits  trees,  and 
nurseries) 
(c) 
Seeds of improved crop varieties 
(d)  Chemical fertilisers 
(e) 
Approved pesticides (insecticides, fungicides, and weedicides, and so on)  
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
(j) 
(k) 
(l) 
Draft animals and animal traction equipment (ploughs, disc  harrows, rippers, seeders, and 
cultivators) 
Tillers and related equipment 
Small tractors and related traction equipment 
Plant protection equipment (sprayers and so on) 
Small farm tools for tillage, planting, weeding, and harvesting 
Biological and/or physical soil erosion control methods 
Cultivation of nitrogen fixing plants 
(m)  Reforestation 
(n) 
Storage equipment and facilities for agricultural inputs 
Indicatively the SADCP-C&H-SAMAP would support about 120 sub-projects mainly dealing with 
68.
investments in farm production assets in the IFAD-targeted provinces.  
Investment in post-harvest and value addition  
  The  main  objective  is  to  promote  investments  aimed  at  increasing  value  addition,  reducing 
69.
post-harvest losses, and strengthening market linkages for key priority food and  horticultural crops in 
the  project  area.  The  main  economic  rationale  for  supporting  sub-projects  aiming  at  achieving  this 
objective  is  that:  (a)  crop  losses  are  high  and  appropriate  packaging,  storage,  and  small-scale 
processing  and  market  infrastructure  facilities  are  extremely  limited  in  the  project  area;  (b)  an 
opportunity  exists  for  supporting  value  addition  activities,  including  facilitating  the  development  or 
expansion of contract farming arrangements; and (c)  FOs’ involvement in collective marketing efforts 
is  not  only  economically  desirable  and  efficient  but  is  also  a  very  effective  way  to  strengthen  them. 
The ultimate goal is to improve the performance and efficiency of the targeted value chains. Financial 
support for  FOs and rural  enterprises’  value addition  activities  is  also crucial for the sustainability  of 
other investments in SSI development and in agricultural production and productivity enhancement. 
  Eligible  investments  under  such  sub-projects  will  include  processing,  cleaning,  grading, 
70.
weighing,  packaging  and  cooling  equipment,  storage  facilities,  transport  equipment  (for  bulking 
production  and  marketing  it  after  storage  or  processing),  packaging  materials,  and  associated 
services (capacity building, subproject monitoring and implementation support, and environmental and 
social  impact  assessments  where  required)  and  working  capital  requirements.  Market  access 
69 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
infrastructures such as rural markets and spot improvements of feeder roads (including small bridges 
and culverts) will also be eligible.  
  The preliminary  list of eligible expenditures for sub-project in post-harvest activities and  value 
71.
addition covers the following: 
(a)  Cassava processing mills 
(b)  Maize processing mills, hullers, and huskers 
(c) 
Bean-shelling equipment 
(d)  Milk chillers 
(e) 
Fruit and vegetable dryers and processing equipment (including for coffee) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
(j) 
Rural market/farmers’ market facilities 
Small-scale storage equipment and facilities for commodities 
Transport equipment (ox cart, trailers, and motor trailers) 
Spot improvement of feeder roads 
River crossing points with small bridges 
(k)  Manual/mechanical weighing and quality equipment (for example, scales, moisture meters) 
(l) 
Packaging equipment and facilities for storage and marketing  
(m)  Bags, boxes, and other containers and packaging material 
(n) 
Fumigation material and equipment for storage 
  Horticulture and high value crops are subject to seasonality and the risk of oversupply and post-
72.
harvest losses are high. The support to bulking, storage and low-cost processing technology (such as 
cooling29)  would  greatly  improve  the  capacity  of  farmers  to  play  the  market  and  not  be  subject  to 
market flooding and opportunistic traders that are well aware of product perishability. The project will 
pilot and  promote different low cost technologies for storage  and processing of perishable  products. 
Examples  include  passive/active  cold  storage,  processing,  cleaning,  grading,  weighing,  and 
packaging facilities and equipment. The project will provide farmers and local traders with training in 
post-harvest value addition activities such as product handling, storage, and transport. To ensure the 
sustainable adoption of such technologies, the project will also support local suppliers of spare parts 
and other material. This will create demand for goods and services in the rural areas and thus provide 
opportunities for non-farm job creation. The programme will give particular attention to young people 
engaging in these activities.  
  As above, sub-project proposals and business plans will go through a thorough preparation and 
73.
appraisal  process  to  determine  their  technical,  financial,  organisational  and  economic  feasibility, 
sustainability  and environmental and social impacts. The business plan  will define a clear marketing 
strategy;  any  storage,  handling  and  processing  investments  needed,  costs  and  expected  benefits, 
risks, responsibilities to be shared among the farmers’ organisation members, partnership with other 
actors (large farms, informal and formal traders), and investments needs, among others. 
74.
  Proposals will be identified, appraised, and approved based on a full set of eligibility and design 
criteria and evaluation procedures that will be defined in detail in the PIM. Proposals will be evaluated 
by the PGC and PISC with support from independent technical expert wherever necessary. Although 
the disbursement mechanisms and advances may vary, taking into consideration the type of grant, the 
eligible expenditures are for goods, works, and services. 
  Eligible  beneficiaries  will  notably  include  smallholder  FOs  that  have  proven  capacities  for 
75.
market-oriented production and/or bulking and marketing and/or processing activities. During the first 
29 For example, a storage temperature of below 12 degrees is sufficient to triple the shelf life and decrease rapid deterioration of 
most of horticulture products. Investments in the cold chain tend to be highly capital demanding, but ongoing research and 
availability of low cost post-harvest technologies brings opportunities for farmer groups and other chain actors to invest in these 
technologies. 
70 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
two  years of  project implementation, notably in Huila and Cuanza Sul provinces which didn’t benefit 
from MOSAP, the FFS supported by project in the project area will not yet have “graduated” to a level 
where  the  smallholder  groups  concerned  can  easily  take  on  full-scale  commercial  production. 
Therefore,  the  project  will  initially  seek  to  support  investment  proposals  from  more  advanced  FOs 
present in the SADCP project area. This will allow the project to test the procedures and institutional 
arrangements put in  place  for supporting the development, evaluation, approval and implementation 
of investment proposals early on, so that they can be fine-tuned at the time of the Mid-Term Review. 
  A key distinguishing feature will be more complex sub-projects that may require multiple stages 
76.
of support or greater focus on business development services. Indicatively the project would support 
about  30  sub-projects  mainly  dealing  with  post-harvest  activities  and  value  addition  in  the  IFAD-
targeted provinces. 
  There  is  a  need  to  approach  support  to  market  linkages  and  commercialization  with  great 
77.
caution  due  to  lack  of  knowledge  and  operational  experience  in  the  provision  of  such  support. 
Therefore the project will first test pilot models for commercialization during the first two years with a 
view of learning  lessons.  Subsequently  adjustment  will be made to the provision of matching grants 
for this type of subprojects. 
Mobilisation of Partner Financial Institutions 
78.
  The  Project  will  explore  new  avenues  to  encourage  national  Partner  Financial  Institutions 
(PFIs), notably commercial banks and microfinance institutions, to co-finance eligible production and 
value addition sub-projects with short and medium term credit. This approach takes cognisance of the 
fact that one-off matching grants may not optimise  business sustainability and market development, 
but  should  be  considered  as  a  catalyst    and/or  a  strong  instrument  to  help  smallholder  farmers 
develop  and  subsequently    “graduate”  from  dependency  on  financial  hand-outs  to  semi-formal  and 
formal  financial  markets.  In  addition  to  raising  the  capacity  and  credit  worthiness  of  smallholder 
producers/FOs, structuring their demand through assistance in elaborating bankable sub-projects/BPs 
and  encouraging  the  participation  of  private  sector  financing    through  the  mobilisation  of  matching 
grants, the Project will support the following activities to mobilise PFIs: 
  Preparatory  activities,  to  be  conducted  at  the  onset  of  implementation  (or  possibly  between 
79.
project approval and loan effectiveness), will include:  
  an in-depth review of financial services and products offered and analysis of the potential for 
partnership;  
  negotiating multiyear Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) with PFIs determining 
commitments of each party and support to be provided; and 
  preparation of guidelines for credit disbursement by PFIs, along with the matching grant - to be 
included in the PIM.  
  Based  on 
80.
implementation of signed MoUs which may include:  
the  outcomes  of 
the  preparatory  activities, 
the  Project  will  support 
the 
train and orient the PFIs on the subproject procedures and  expected outcomes; 
 
  capacity  building  of  PFIs’  staff  in  agricultural  credit  appraisal,  risk  analysis,  credit  monitoring 
and evaluation, etc.;  
  development of financial services and products adapted to needs of the target group;  
 
training and sensitization of smallholder farmers in the knowledge and use of financial services 
and products; 
introducing best practices and alternative delivery channels;  
facilitating PFIs’ access to technical support/refinancing from IFAD strategic partner investment 
banks;  
incentive  mechanisms  such  as  a  medium-to-long  term  line  of  credit  as  a  means  to  support 
financial outreach and deepening; and  
 
  strengthening of PFIs’ environmental, social and climate risk management systems.  
  The envisaged support is in line with the Banco Nacional de Angola (BNA, central bank) policy 
81.
direction  and  efforts  for  financial  inclusion  which  encourage  financial  institutions  to  support  more 
71 
 
  market assessments;  
 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
productive  sectors  and  rural  areas,  and  its  thrust  programmes  like  financial  education.  The  project 
would  assist  the  expansion  of  the  later,  including  media  campaigns,  and  the  establishment  of  an 
enabling policy environment. Mobilisation of PFIs to co-finance sub-projects would likely expand after 
the  first  two  years  of  implementation  allowing  for  progressive  graduation  of  targeted  farmers/FOs  to 
access developed financial services.  
  At  mid-term  review,  or  even  before  if  necessary,  the  mobilization  of  PFIs  and  rural  finance 
82.
activities will be carefully reviewed and decision will be made whether or not continue these activities 
depending on the targeted beneficiary FOs’ ease of access to PFIs financing 
Component 3 – Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
83.
  This is a cross-cutting component servicing the two technical components. The objective will be 
to strengthen overall coordination, monitoring and  evaluation through the  establishment and support 
to  a  Project  Implementation  Unit  (PIU)  at  national  level,  and  five  Provincial  Project  implementation 
Units  (PPIUs).  The  project  will  finance  the  PIU/PPIUs  operational  costs,  procurement  of  office 
equipment, office consumables and vehicles, and the associate equipment and vehicle operation and 
maintenance costs. It  will  provide project staff salaries, and technical  assistance to address specific 
needs. Support will also be provided to PIU/PPIU staff to receive training as and when needed. The 
PIU will be tasked with overall responsibility of coordinating and monitoring implementation of project 
activities,  including  (a)  financial  management  and  reporting,  (b)  procurement,  (c)  preparing  and 
coordinating the implementation of  annual work plans and budgets including procurement plans, and 
(d) monitoring and evaluation of project activities, learning and knowledge sharing.  
72 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional and implementation arrangements 
I. 
1. 
KEY IMPLEMENTING INSTITUTIONS 
Public institution  
1.1  Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI) 
Institute for Agrarian Development (Instituto de Desenvolvimento Agrário - IDA). IDA has 
1.
the  overall  responsibility  for  supporting  smallholder  agriculture  in  Angola,  promoting  production 
increases and the improvement of livelihoods of rural households and thus of actively contributing for 
achieving the projects objectives. IDA will be the main implementing partner. It will play a key role in 
both  the  overall  project  management  and  the  coordination  of  government  and  non-government 
agencies participating in the Project.  
EDAs  (Estacões  de  Desenvolvimento  Agrário)  are  the  field  offices  of  IDA  at  municipal  level 
2.
where extension staff is located. The agricultural activities and marketing take place on the farms and 
in the villages at the Commune and Municipal level. Given the nature of the project, implementation at 
the  field  level  is  the  most  important.  EDAs  are  responsible  for  extension,  capacity  building  of 
farmers/FOs,  statistics  and  collecting  data  for  the  Ministry  of  agriculture,  implementation  of  various 
government-sponsored  programmes.  However,  their  staffing  is  very  limited  and  their  administrative 
and  technical  capacities  are  generally  weak.  Therefore  the  project  will  provide  both  institutional 
capacity building to EDAs (including office and housing facilities and equipment where necessary) and 
targeted technical assistance through service providers working closely with EDA (and ICA) staff.  
3.
Provincial Directorates of Agriculture. The MINAGRI Provincial directorates are responsible 
for  the  agriculture  sector  support  and  policy  issues  relating  to  their  respective  province,  as  well  the 
overall  coordination  of  the  actions  carried  out  by  agriculture  institutions  present  in  the  province. 
Project  activities  will  be  implemented  at  local  level,  in  municipios,  comunas  and  aldeias.  The 
involvement of the provincial directorates of agriculture in the project is important for overall oversight 
of  project  implementation  at  field  level  by  IDA/contracted  service  providers,  implementation  of 
activities  at  provincial  level  related  to  agricultural  statistics,  policy  analysis,  agricultural  research, 
implementation of best agricultural practices, etc.  
1.2 
 Specialised agricultural institutions 
4.
The Angola’s Coffee Institute (ICA): It will play an advisory role for the implementation of the 
Project in relation to the coffee value chain in areas suitable for the cultivation of this cash crop. It will 
provide  advice  to  IDA  and  EDAs  on  all  aspects  of  the  coffee  value  chain.  It  may  be  called  on  to 
participate in the Project Coordination Committee and in the policy dialogue. 
5.
The Veterinary  Service Institute (ISV): It  will play an advisory role for the  implementation  of 
the  Project  in  relation  to  different  livestock  value  chains  in  areas  suitable  for  livestock  raising.  It  will 
provide  advice  to  IDA  and  EDAs  on  all  aspects  of  livestock  value  chains.  It  may  be  called  on  to 
participate in the Project Coordination Committee and in the policy dialogue. 
1.3  Other ministries: 
  Ministry of Commerce (marketing) 
  Ministry of Industry (processing) 
  Ministry of Family and Women’s Promotion (gender) 
  Ministry of Health (nutrition) 
  Ministry of Education (literacy and numeracy training) 
  Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF):  The  MoF  is  responsible  for  the  financial  supervision  of  all 
government  programs.  It  will  supervise  the  budget  process  and  the  allocation  of  project 
financing from external sources. 
  Ministry of Environment 
73 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
2. 
Service Providers 
Service providers are expected to play a key role in the implementation of project activities. The 
6.
project will request the services of the following entities:  
7.
FAO:  Following  the  successful  experience  of  the  MOSAP  project  co-funded  by  IFAD/World 
Bank, the Project will require the services of FAO for the implementation of the Farmer Field School 
methodology in Cuanza Sul and Huila provinces. The project will also capitalise on FAO experience in 
understanding the Angolan agriculture context and its close link to MINAGRI. 
8.
NGOs:  there  are  well-established  national  and  international  NGOs  with  long  experience  in 
working  with  local  communities  and  also  in  establishing  and  reinforcing  farmers’  groups  and 
developing  their  capacities.  Their  major  weakness  is  the  lack  of  experience  in  supporting  market 
linkages  and partnerships  between smallholder farmers and the private sector, although there  are a 
few NGOs already working in similar initiatives. 
9.
Consultancy  firms  and  individual  consultants:  There  is  a  wide  range  of  competent 
consultancy  firms  and  independent  consultants  with  working  experience  in  the  implementation  of 
agricultural  and related  value chain projects  in Angola that can  provide the services required by the 
Project. They may lack experience in working with rural communities and informal traders.   
10.
In  addition  to  the  entities  mentioned  above,  banks,  agriculture  traders  and  processors, 
commercial  farm  operations,  agro-dealers  and  other  partners  may  also  be  involved  in  the 
implementation of project activities. 
II.      PROJECT OVERSIGHT 
At the national level, there will be the following oversight committees: 
Project Coordination Committee 
  The  project  will  establish  a  Project  Coordination  Committee  (PCC),  chaired  by  the  Minister  of 
11.
Agriculture  (or  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  whom  he  delegates  this  task). The  PCC  will:  (i)  provide 
strategic  guidance;  (ii)  promote  inter-ministerial  coordination.;  (iii)  review  and  approve  the  Annual 
Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) prepared by the PIU; (iv) review and approve the annual reports of the 
project  and  decide  on  corrective  measures  to  solve  project  related  implementation  problems  and 
issues;  (v)  review  decisions  made  by  Provincial  Governance  Committee  (PGC);  and  (vi)  issue 
directives to guide future project interventions, methods and criteria. The Director General of IDA will 
be the  Secretary of the PCC. The PCC  will be composed of the  National  Directors and the Director 
Generals of MINAGRI, and representatives of the following Ministries: Planning, Finance, Commerce 
and  Trade,  Urban  Affairs  and  Environment,  Family  and  Women,  Health  and  Education. 
Representation  of  financial  and  technical  partners  including  civil  society  and  of  provincial 
representatives  is  still  to  be  discussed  with  the  government.  The  PCC  will  meet  twice  a  year,  and 
additionally whenever necessary. 
Project Implementation Sub-Committee  
12.
  Project Implementation Sub-Committee (PISC) of the PCC. The PISC is a small executive and 
technical  project  implementation  sub-committee  of  the  PCC  that  will  consist  of  (at  least)  the  IDA 
Director General, the Project Coordinator and the Financial Management Specialist. Its task will be to: 
(i)  speed-up  decisions  and  procedures;  (ii)  approve  sub-projects  under  Component  2  (agricultural 
investment  support)  that  require  central  level  decision  making  (based  on  the  feasibility  studies 
prepared  by  the  PIU);  (iii)  propose  the  agenda  for  the  PCC  meetings  and  prepare  the  support 
documents; (iv) propose the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) to PCC for analysis and decision; 
and (v) submit the Annual Report of the project. The PISC will, in addition, include a representative of 
NGO or civil society and a representative of the private sector, when deciding on the approval of sub-
projects  
74 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
At the provincial level, there will be two committees:  
Provincial Project Coordination Committee 
  The  composition  and  tasks  of  Provincial  Project  Coordination  Committees  (PPCC)  will  reflect 
13.
the composition and tasks of the PCC, including the provincial level representatives of MINAGRI and 
the other Ministries represented in the PCC. The PPCC will also meet twice a year, and additionally 
whenever necessary. 
Provincial Governance Committee  
14.
  The  Provincial    Governance  Committees  (PGCs)  will  include  the  Provincial  Director  of 
Agriculture,  the  Provincial  Director  of  IDA,  the  Area  Project  Coordinator,  a  representative  of  civil 
society  or  NGO,  a  representative  of  the  private  sector  and  (minimum)  two  representatives  of 
beneficiaries/producers’ organisations. The PGC  tasks will be as follows: (i) speed up decisions and 
procedures;  (ii)  oversee  the  sub-projects  (under  Component  2)  elaboration,  review  and  approval 
processes  (that  would  be  to  a  great  extent  subcontracted  to  two  area  service  providers),  (iii) review 
the  provincial  level Annual Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  prepared  by  the AIU  and  the  main  area 
service  providers  for  submission  to  the  PIU;  and  (iv)  review  the  provincial  level  Annual  Report 
prepared by the PPIU (or AIU) for submission to the PIU.  
III. PROJECT MANAGEMENT  
Project Implementation Unit 
  MINAGRI will establish a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at the national level, located in the 
15.
IDA  facilities  in  Luanda,  overseeing  the  implementing  of  the  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP.  It  will  be 
responsible:  (i)  for  day-to-day  project  coordination  and  management  including  technical  supervision 
and coordination,  overall  project planning, quality  oversight, communication,  reporting, procurement, 
financial  management,  monitoring  of  project  activities  and  of  its  progress  on  a  regular  basis,  and 
impact evaluation; and (ii) manage fiduciary issues in conformity with the standards and requirements 
agreed  upon  with  IFAD,  in  accordance  with  the  Financing Agreement  and  other  project  documents 
such as the Project Design/Appraisal Documents, the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) and the 
Environment and Social Management Framework.  
16.
  The PIU will be accountable to the Director General of IDA.  
  The PIU will include: a Project Coordinator, a Financial Management Specialist, a Procurement 
17.
Specialist,  an Accountant,  a  M&E  and  Knowledge  Sharing  Specialist,  and  support  staff.  Short  term 
consultants  will  be  hired  to  support  project  implementation  (notably  for  rural  finance,  gender,  and 
nutrition issues). The PIU will also benefit from support of the technical specialists of the WB-funded 
PIU,  notably 
the  domains  of  communication,  environment  and  social  safeguards,  and 
agribusiness/value chain development. 
in 
Provincial (or Area) Project Implementation Units 
  Two  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIUs)  will  be  established  for  the  Huila  and 
18.
Cuanza Sul provinces. They will be located in one of the targeted municipalities, at the existing EDA 
Office,  considering  the  long  distance  between  the  targeted  municipalities  and  the  provincial  capital. 
Choice  of  the  location  will  be  made  considering  criteria  such  as:  easy  access  to  other  target 
municipalities, presence of IDA/EDA staff and current office conditions.  
19.
  The PPIUs will be lightly staffed, as most of the investment and technical support duties will be 
implemented by service providers and fiduciary management will mostly be done centrally. Therefore, 
each  PPIU  may  include:  an  Area  Coordinator,  an  Accountant,  a  Procurement  Assistant,  an 
Administrative Assistant/Secretary and a Driver. The Area Coordinators will work in close collaboration 
with the Provincial Directors of IDA and  the Heads of EDA Offices of targeted municipalities and  will 
support the development of their capacities. 
75 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
IV. 
PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MECHANISMS 
implemented  at 
  The  project  will  be 
20.
levels:  National,  Provincial,  Municipal,  and 
four 
Commune/local.  The  project  will  be  implemented  by  the Agricultural  Development  Institute  (IDA)  of 
MINAGRI,  from  the  National  to  the  Municipal  level,  and  there  will  be  strong  coordination  and 
consultation mechanisms with the relevant government stakeholders and authorities at these different 
levels: 
  At  the  National  Level:  MINAGRI  will  be  responsible  for  the  overall  implementation  of  the 
21.
project, in full consultation with the other relevant Ministries at the  national level  that are involved in 
the project, in order to ensure that the project activities are consistent with national policies: 
  A  Project  Coordination  Committee  (PCC),  chaired  by  the  Minister  of  Agriculture  (or  by 
delegation  by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  Agriculture)  will  have  the  overall  decision  making 
responsibility  regarding  the  management  of  the  project,  including  approval  of  work  plans  and 
budgets; 
  The Director General of IDA (within MINAGRI) will be the executive level head responsible for 
strategic direction of the project; 
  A Project Implementation Unit (PIU), headed by a Project Coordinator, will be established within 
IDA (within MINAGRI) and will be responsible for day-to-day management of the project; and 
  A  small  executive  Project  Implementation  Sub-Committee  (PISC),  under  the  PCC,  will  be 
established to speed-up decisions and procedures. 
  At  the  Provincial  Level:  At  the  Provincial  level,  the  Provincial  delegation  of  IDA  will  be 
22.
responsible  for  project  implementation,  in  coordination  with  the  provincial  Directorate  of Agriculture 
and  consultation  with  other  provincial  government  and  provincial  level  representatives  of  the  other 
Ministries that are involved. 
  A  Provincial  Project  Coordination  Committee  (PPCC),  chaired  by  the  Vice-Governor  of 
economic  development  will  oversee  project  implementation,  including  monitoring  local  project 
progress  and  making  decisions  in  line  with  the  objectives  and  institutional  arrangements  that 
are consistent with the project document and legal agreements. The Provincial Director of IDA 
(within the provincial government) will be responsible for strategic direction of the project at the 
Provincial level; 
lightly  staffed  Provincial  (or  Area)  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  will  be  established  in 
each of the project area and will be responsible for day-to-day coordination of the project and 
liaison with the IDA provincial Office; 
 
  A  small  executive  Provincial    Governance  Committee  (PGC),  under  the  PPCC,  will  be 
established to speed-up decisions and procedures.  
  At the Municipal Level: At the Municipal level, the local Agricultural Development Office of IDA 
23.
(EDA)  will  be  responsible  for  project  implementation,  in  coordination  and  consultation  with  the 
Municipio  administration.  The  EDA  will  obtain  the  consent  of  the  Municipio  administration  before 
forwarding sub-project proposals to the Provincial level. 
  At the Commune/local Level: The main level for the implementation of sub-projects is at the 
24.
level of rural communities/villages (aldeias) and smallholder farmer organisations.  
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROJECT COMPONENTS 
  As noted above, government institutional capacity in Angola is quite limited. Therefore, project 
25.
implementation  will  rely  to  a  large  extent  on  the  recruitment  of  competent  and  experienced  service 
providers. Government ownership and institutional sustainability will be guaranteed by the inclusion of 
national  and  provincial-level  staff  in  capacity  building  activities  and  in  key  project  oversight  and 
coordination roles, as detailed under Project Structures above.  
Component 1: Capacity Building and Institutional Development 
76 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
  For  smallholder  farmer  capacity  strengthening  activities  included  in  Component  1,  the 
26.
Government has indicated it would like to continue its partnership with FAO for the implementation of 
a  Farmer  Field  School  (FFS)  training  programme,  following  the  successes  achieved  under  MOSAP 
with  this  partnership.  To  ensure  that  IDA  has  sufficient  capacity  to  take  over  and  replicate  the  FFS 
sub-component,  FAO  will  provide  on  the  job-training,  coaching  and  supervision  to  participating 
IDA/EDA  (and  ICA)  staff  and  FFS  facilitators.  In  fact  field  activities  to  directly  support  FFS 
implementation will be done by Master trainers mainly issued from IDA/ICA staff; while FFS facilitators 
will  be  chosen  from  farmers  within  the  targeted  communes.  For  an  effective  implementation  of  the 
FFS approach, the government will ensure that each commune participating in the project has at least 
three agricultural extension specialists at each EDA. During the Mid Term Review, IDA’s capacity will 
be  reviewed  with  a  view  of  FFS  training  programme  to  be  handed  over  to  the  IDA  and  EDA  staff. 
Financial resources have been set aside to ensure such seamless hand over. 
  As  was  done  under  MOSAP,  FAO  will  sub-contract  local  NGOs  for  topics  where  specialised 
27.
inputs  are  required,  for  example  capacity  building  of  smallholder  FOs  and  functional  literacy  and 
numeracy.  
  The Project expects to cover all 10 municipalities by the end of the third year, with at least 30 
28.
percent  of total  covered in  the first  year  and 60 percent in the second  year. This  will  ensure that all 
farmers in the target group benefit from at least one full FFS training cycle during the project.  
29.
  For  the  institutional  strengthening  activities  under  sub-component  1.2,  which  are  to  be 
implemented  at  central  level  with  IDA  and  GEPE,  and  other  MINAGRI  structures  –  including  data 
gathering  and  statistics,  market  information  systems  for  smallholders,  among  others  –service 
providers will be hired to ensure coherence among the different capacity strengthening efforts. 
30.
  For the research sub-component (1.3), IDA and the IIA will prepare a detailed work plan for the 
R&D activities to be financed, with the time frame and budget. They will also prepare a memorandum 
of understanding (MOU) setting the responsibility of each party in the implementation of the work plan, 
including  the  supervision  mechanisms  during  implementation.  The  MOU  should  be  prepared  during 
the first year of the project. 
Component 2: Support for Increased Production and Commercialization  
Sub-component 2.1: Provision of Technical Support 
31.
  The  implementation  modalities  for  providing  technical  support  to  IDA  and  smallholders  under 
sub-component 2.1 include contracting an experienced and competent service provider (one team in 
each  province)  -  possibly  associated  with  competent  national  service  providers  to:  (a)  support 
Farmers’  Organisations  (FOs)  to  prepare  subproject  (SPs)/business  plans  (BPs)  proposals  for 
competitive funding under Subcomponent 2.2; (b) provide specialised technical assistance to IDA and 
smallholder beneficiaries of small scale irrigation (SSI) schemes to establish and/or strengthen Water 
User Associations (WUAs) and elaborate then implement successfully their SSI scheme sub-project; 
(c)  provide  implementation  support  to  smallholder  beneficiaries  of  sub-projects  to  ensure  that  the 
objectives of  each SP/BP funded under the project are achieved; and (d) strengthen the capacity  of 
local NGOs and consultants and agricultural input providers to respond to the smallholder demands. 
Service providers are expected to sub-contract local NGOs and consultants for specialised inputs, for 
example  organisational  audit  of  smallholder  farmer  organisations  proposing  projects,  drafting  of 
business  plans.  Service  providers  may  need  to  provide  some  prior  training  for  some  of  these 
activities. 
  The  main  service  provider  is  expected  to  sub-contract  local  NGOs  and  consultants  for  some 
32.
activities, for example for: organisational audit of smallholder FOs proposing SP ideas, assisting the 
elaboration  of  business  plans,  specific  training  and  capacity  building  activities,  accompanying 
approved  SPs/BPs  implementation,  etc.  However,  overseeing  the  preparation,  approval  and 
implementation  of  the  SPs/BPs  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the  main  service  provider  mentioned 
above. 
33.
  The main service provider may provide some prior training then coaching to these local actors 
to perform requested tasks at the expected quality level from them. This will increase the local level 
capacity and sustainability of the project interventions over time. It will also strengthen the capacity of 
local  NGOs/consultants  and  agricultural  input  providers  to  be  able  to  respond  promptly  to  the 
77 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
smallholder needs. Selected NGOs’ capacity will be strengthened to help disseminate knowledge and 
identify  appropriate  FOs  to  prepare  subproject  proposals;  private  agricultural  input  suppliers  will  be 
strengthened  in  developing  systems  to  supply  critical  agricultural  inputs  and  services  to  smallholder 
farmers; and private enterprises’ capacity will be strengthened in agricultural marketing, post-harvest 
management,  specific  value  chains,  and  processing  as  well  as  in  strengthening  market  linkages  so 
that  
34.
  The  main  service  provider  will  have  international  expertise  and  demonstrated  capacity  to 
manage  a  large  contract,  and  be  possibly  associated  with  competent  national  service  providers  if 
available.  Procuring  such  service  provider  would,  to  the  extent  possible,  be  done  jointly  with  the 
SADCP-WB,  which  would  make  the  scope  of  the  work  larger  and  more  attractive  to  competent 
international service providers. 
35.
In  helping  smallholders/FOs  prepare  and  implement  their  investment  proposals/BPs,  the 
service provider will apply the eligibility criteria for sub-project, matching grant mobilisation and eligible 
expenditures  in  each  category,  as  detailed  in  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM).  While  the 
menu of investment options will be flexible, the eligibility criteria will be strictly followed. Recipients of 
matching  grants  will  be  required  to  contribute  at  least  10  percent  of  the  subproject’s  cost  in  kind 
and/or cash. 
Sub-component 2.2: Provision of Investment Support 
  Under sub-component 2.2, the project will provide matching grants to smallholder FOs for their 
36.
investment sub-projects in production and value chain assets. The Project will finance items such as 
agricultural  inputs,  storage,  packaging  and  processing  facilities  and  materials,  collection  centers, 
transport equipment, among others. Eligible investments will be both at individual (FO member) and 
collective (FO) level. The task of accompanying the implementation of the funded SPs/BPs will be the 
responsibility  of  the  main  service  provider  and  locally  mentioned  under  sub-component  2.1  above, 
and the approval of grants will be done by the project implementation sub-committee 
  During the first two years of operations, the FFS supported by SADCP-C&H-SAMAP will not yet 
37.
have  “graduated”  to  a  level  where  the  smallholder  groups  concerned  can  easily  take  on  full-scale 
commercial production. Therefore, the project will initially seek to obtain investment support proposals 
from more advanced FOs present in the SADCP-C&H-SAMAP Project area. This will allow the project 
to  test  the  procedures  and  institutional  arrangements  put  in  place  for  supporting  the  development, 
evaluation, approval and  implementation of investment proposals early on, so that they can  be fine-
tuned at the time of the Mid Term Review. 
  Any sub-project requesting financing  under this subcomponent will prepare a project proposal 
38.
and  a  business  plan  that  will  go  through  a  complete  appraisal  process  to  determine  its  economic 
feasibility  and  sustainability  as  well  as  its  environmental  and  social  impacts.  The  business  plan  will 
define  a  clear  marketing  strategy;  any  storage,  handling  and  processing  investments  needed,  costs 
and expected benefits, risks, responsibilities to be shared among the farmers’ organisation members, 
partnership  with  other  actors  (large  farms,  informal  and  formal  traders),  and  investments  needs, 
among others. 
  Proposals will be identified, appraised, and approved based on a full set of eligibility and design 
39.
criteria and evaluation procedures that will be defined in detail in the PIM. Proposals will be evaluated 
and  selected  by  an  independent  technical  committee  (see  project  management  structures  above) 
based on the defined criteria. Although the disbursement mechanisms and advances may vary, taking 
into consideration the type of grant, the eligible expenditures are for goods, works, and services. 
  For  the  specific  case  of  investments  in  small-scale  irrigation  schemes,  no  infrastructure 
40.
investments  will  be  made  before  the  local  authorities  confirm  the  beneficiaries’  land  user  rights  and 
water  rights.  Regarding  land  and  water  user  rights,  the  site-  or  scheme-specific  environment  and 
social  assessment  supported  by  an  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan  (ESMP)  (to  be 
prepared after the site/design details are known) should consider the ability  of downstream users to 
use  water,  as  well  as,  any  environmental/ecology  flow  required  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  the 
freshwater ecosystem concerned, as an important element.  
  For  other  investment  projects  with  more  localised  impacts,  standard  procedures  contained  in 
41.
the Environmental and Social Management Framework will be followed. 
78 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
79 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge 
management 
Planning 
The process of preparing the AWPB will be organised in such manner that a consolidated draft 
1. 
that  has  been  vetted  by  the  Project´s  Steering  Committee  is  submitted  to  IFAD  for  review  and 
provision of a ‘No Objection’ latest by 31st October of every Project Year or 60 days before the start of 
the proceeding Project Year. Proper planning and coordination of this process is critical to ensure the 
timely  submission  of  the  draft  to  each  level  of  approval.  The AWPB  final  draft  would  need  to  have 
been distributed to all AFAP implementing agencies by 31st December of every Project Year to ensure 
a prompt start of activity implementation for the upcoming Project Year. 
Monitoring and evaluation 
The  Project´s  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  (M&E)  system  will  constitute  the  main  project 
2. 
management  tool  for  tracking  project  implementation  progress  and  results.  The  components  of  the 
M&E system will be: (i) baseline and end of project surveys, (ii) regular M&E data collection on project 
activities, outputs and impacts; and (iii) special studies. A project database will be created for storing 
the  baseline  and  end  of  project  survey  data,  as  well  as  all  monitoring  data  associated  with  the 
implementation of project activities directly linked to outputs.  
3. 
All activity-related data will be collected by project stakeholders working at the community level 
(IDA technicians and FFS facilitators, service providers and contractors). These data will be entered in 
activity  monitoring  sheets  and  reported  monthly  (or  more  frequently,  if  deemed  needed).  Data 
reporting forms will accompany reports to be sent to the PMU. Primary data will initially be collected 
and  maintained  by  socio-economic  group,  age  and  gender  subsequent  to  which  they  will  be 
aggregated  by  community,  commune,  municipality  and  for  the  project  globally  as  a  basis  for 
monitoring,  analysis  and  decision  making  at  the  different  levels.  The  PMU  will  submit  six  monthly 
narrative  and  financial  reports  to  the  IFAD  Country  Programme  Manager  (CPM).  These  reports  will 
contain data on pre-defined basic indicators. 
4. 
There will be a particular emphasis on adequate M&E systems being put in place also for the 
service  providers  engaged  in  Farmer  Field  Schools  and  the  development  and  implementation  of 
smallholder  agriculture  investment  sub-projects.  One  of  the  key  lessons  of  MOSAP  was  that  M&E 
data  was  not  systematically  used  as  a  project  management  tool,  and  that  this  handicapped  the 
learning  of  lessons  from  experience  gained  under  the  project.  Provisions  will  be  made  to  have  an 
M&E  system  to  report:    process;  lesson  learnt;  changes  and  impact.  These  areas  will  be  clearly 
identified, the procedures spelled out and the means to verify them established. 
5. 
In line with IFAD’s corporate priorities, the project’s M&E system will devote significant attention 
to assessing the poverty impact. Under SADCP, rigorous impact assessment will be conducted using 
appropriate  methodologies  that  ensure  that  the  target  group  is  compared  with  a  control  group  not 
benefiting  from  programme  support.  Impact  surveys  will  be  implemented  at  baseline,  midterm  and 
completion.  These  surveys  will  monitor  logical  framework  indicators,  IFAD  corporate  Results  and 
Impact Management System (RIMS) indicators as well as specific poverty reduction impact. They will 
be undertaken by a specialised service provider contracted through a competitive process.  
6. 
A full-time M&E Officer under the supervision of the project coordinator will be responsible for 
the monitoring and evaluation of the Project. This person will be hired by the SADCP-WB and shared 
with SADCP-C&H-SAMAP just as the gender expert that will be hired under SADCP-C&H-SAMAP will 
be shared with the World Bank-funded project. 
Learning and knowledge management 
7. 
The project will attempt to implement new mechanisms for supporting smallholder farmers so it 
is  important  that  the  PIU  adopt  a  learning-by-doing  stance,  and  shares  lessons  learned  from 
experience with relevant stakeholders. The Project´s M&E system will generate quality data that will 
enable  IDA  and  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  to  carefully  monitor  the  Project  and  provide  reliable 
information  on  smallholder  agricultural  development  in  the  project  area  to  senior  officials  in  the 
81 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Ministry  of  Finance,  thus  building  a  case  for  additional  government  investment  in  the  sub-sector. 
Based  on  IFAD´s  broad  and  multifaceted  experience  with  different  mechanisms  for  supporting 
smallholder agricultural investment in the region, knowledge and experience gained in other countries 
of the region will be made available for SADCP. In turn, the SADCP experience will feed into the wider 
regional learning on smallholder agricultural  development and, in particular, farmer capacity  building 
and investment support mechanisms. In terms of learning, results from FFS implementation will allow 
to draw lessons on best ways to equip smallholders with knowledge and practical tools to apply good 
agricultural  practices,  adapt  to  climate  change,  improve  their  marketing,  resilience,  literacy  and 
business  skills,  raise  their  nutrition  awareness  and  status,  and  progressively  move  into  commercial 
agriculture. Activities  related  to  adaptive  agriculture  research,  seed  multiplication,  soil  diagnostic 
services,  characterisation  of  production  systems  and  development  of  adapted  technology  packages 
under sub-component 1.3 will also produce useful material for knowledge management. 
82 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement 
arrangements 
Summary of Financial Management arrangements 
Financial Management Assessment (FMA) has been undertaken as part of the project design in 
1. 
accordance  with  IFAD  requirements  and  Financial  Management  Division  (FMD)  guidelines  on 
financial management assessment at design. The assessment is based on review of operation of the 
recently completed MOSAP and the ongoing AFAP. A decision has been made by IFAD management 
that the new project will be a parallel financing with the SADCP-WB. Each of the two PIUs, SADCP- 
C&H-SAMAP and the World Bank Financed SADCP will follow procedures of the respective funding 
institution with each institution separately supervising its own financing. IFAD will supervise SADCP-
C&H-SAMAP and implementation will follow IFAD procedures.  
Summary of strengths and weaknesses of the proposed FM arrangements 
Summarised  below  are  the  key  strengths  and  weaknesses  on  the  basis  of  which  financial 
2. 
management arrangements have been designed. 
Strengths: 
i.  A stand-alone PIU overseen by IDA will be put in place to implement SADCP-C&H-SAMAP; 
ii.  Project specific staffs will be recruited, thus they will not be affected by mandatory transfers; 
iii.  The  proposed  USD  single  currency  loan  both  by  IFAD  will  ease  accounting  for  the  two 
financiers; 
iv.  MOSAP  statutory  audit  was  conducted  by  private  auditors  whose  performance  was  rated 
satisfactory.  AFAP  will  be  audited  by  a  private  audit  firm  and  this  arrangement  will  be 
adopted  under SADCP-C&H-SAMAP; and 
v.  Project  funds  will  flow  directly  from  the  designated  account  to  the  operating  accounts 
managed by PIU which will facilitate timely implementation of activities. 
Weaknesses: 
i.  There is limited financial management staff capacity at all levels to handle  accounting and 
reporting requirements of the project; 
ii.  Proposed counterpart and private sector financing may not be realised as planned owing to 
the current economic conditions in the Country; 
iii.  The  coding  and  configuration  of  the  accounting  software  may  not  adequately  address  the 
accounting needs of the project; 
iv.  Whereas there exist internal audit arrangements under the National Inspectorate of Finance, 
internal audits are not regularly carried out. Audits are done when there are special requests 
or when there are allegations of financial mismanagement;  and 
v.  The experience of the IFAD funded AFAP shows  that there is  a  very big effectiveness lag 
usually  associated  with  delays  in  satisfying  disbursement  conditions  including  staff 
recruitment. 
3. 
The capacity constraints to be addressed and operating changes to be made are as follows: 
i.  The  major  capacity  gaps  to  address  will  be  capacity  of  the  finance  staff.  Qualified  and 
experienced finance staff with technical capacity to manage projects cannot be easily found. 
The  experience  with  AFAP  shows  that  there  are  significant  delays  in  constituting  PIUs 
mainly  due  to  lack  of  staff  with  requisite  qualifications  and  experience.  This  will  require 
special  attention  including  early  recruitment  and  training  to  support  on  time  start-up  of  the 
project, taking an option of start-up costs; and 
ii.  There  will  be  need  to  internal  audit  arrangements  as  the  project  resources  may  not  be 
adequate  to  develop  the  capacity  National  Inspectorate  of  Finance  to  handle  the  internal 
audit needs of the SADCP-C&H-SAMAP in addition to the current tasks. 
4. 
Angola’s  inherent  risk  is  high  as  measured  by  Transparency  International’s  Corruption 
Perceptions Index (CPI). The country’s annual CPI in 2015 score of 15  (scale 0- high risk and 100 -
83 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
low risk), 19 in 2014 and 23 in 2013. The 2015 ranking  put the Country at 163rd position out of 168 
countries  which  falls  in  the  high-risk  category.There  is  no  public  information  available  on  PEFA 
Assessments.  
5. 
At project level, the residual risk taking into account mitigation measures based on MOSAP and 
AFAP  has  been  assessed  by  the  IFAD  as  substantial;  IFAD  overall  rating  at  design  is  high.  Project 
design has taken into consideration this risk profile and included mitigating measures at project level. 
The main considerations made include the following. 
a) 
IDA  in  consultation  with  IFAD  will  carry  out  a  recruitment  of finance  staff. The  staff  will  be 
engaged on performance based contracts. Performance indicators developed by IDA will be 
cleared by IFAD; 
b)  GOA  will  make  a  decision  to  take  up  a  start-up  advance  to  meet  start-up  costs  including 
c) 
staff recruitment; 
In the Project area, Accountants will be recruited at provincial level to follow up justifications 
and  to  ensure  reports  and  expenditure  support  documents  from  the  provinces  are  collated 
and submitted to PIU on a timely basis; 
d)  Consideration will be made to outsource financial management services to an qualified and 
experienced individual or a firm; 
e)  Existing accounting software will be upgraded taking into consideration modules necessary 
to  facilitate  budget  control  and  production  of  financial  reports  by  component,  expenditure 
category and financier. 
The  following  Financial  Management  conditions  or  covenants  for  Board  presentation  and 
6. 
conditions for withdrawal.  
i.  The  designated  account  (DA)  and  two  project  accounts  (OAs)  will  have  been  duly  opened 
and specimen of signatures of the authorised persons to manage the DA shall be submitted 
to IFAD; 
ii.  The  PIU,  headed  by  the  Project  Coordinator  shall  have  been  fully  constituted  and 
adequately  staffed  with  in  addition  to  the  Project  Coordinator,  Financial  Management 
Specialist,  M&E  Officer,  Procurement  Officer  and  staff  responsible  for  operations  at  the 
provinces will have been recruited; 
iii.  A  draft 
financial  manual  will  have  been  developed  and  submitted 
to 
IFAD 
for 
comments/approval; 
iv.  Primavera  accounting  software  will  have  been  procured  and  coded  with  the  SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP chart of accounts to facilitate generation of reports as required by the IFAD. 
v.  There are no proposed exceptions to the general conditions. 
I. 
Project Financial Profile 
7. 
Nature of project eligible expenditures – SADCP-C&H-SAMAP expenditure categories have 
been assigned in accordance with the standard expenditure categories. Eligible expenditures include 
the following expenditure categories: (i) vehicles, (ii) equipment and materials, (iii) consultancies, (iv) 
training,  (v)  workshops,  (vi)  grants  and  subsidies,  (vii)  salaries  and  allowances  (viii)  credit,  and  (ix) 
operating costs. The summary costs and financing plan are shown  in the table  below. Detailed cost 
tables are presented in appendix 9. 
8. 
Financing  Plan  –  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  will  be  a  parallel  financing  with  the  SADCP-WB 
project.  Total  project  costs  of  SADCP  in  Huila  and  Cuanza  Sul  provinces,  over  the  seven-year 
implementation period, including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$ 38.2 million. 
The project will be funded by: (i) an IFAD loan of US$28.8 million (75 percent of total project costs); 
(ii) a Government contribution equivalent to US$8.2 million (22 percent of total costs), to cover duties 
and  taxes  as  well  as  some  operational  costs  of  the  public  extension  and  agricultural  research 
services; and (iii) a beneficiaries' contribution equivalent to US$ 1.1 million (3 percent of total costs) to 
co-finance  sub-projects  under  component  2.  The  detailed  cost  tables  show  the  exact  activity  level 
attribution to the various financiers which reflect eligibility of expenditure by expenditure category. 
The World Bank and IFAD financing will be parallel with varying activity level contributions. Any 
9. 
synergies  during  implementation  will  be  tapped  for  the  benefit  of  both  projects.  A  memorandum  of 
84 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Understanding (MOU) will be entered into between the two projects to define management of shared 
resources. 
II. 
A. 
Implementation arrangements 
Implementing and participating organisations with fiduciary responsibilities 
10.  MINAGRI will be the lead project agency implementing the project on behalf of the Ministry of 
Finance, the borrower. MINAGRI will be responsible for overall project implementation in consultation 
with  other  relevant  national  agencies  and  ministries  to  ensure  consistency  with  national  policies. 
Implementation  will  be  through  a  Project  Implementation  Unit  (PIU)  established  by  MINAGRI  at 
National level composed of project specific recruited staff headed by a Project Coordinator. The PIU 
will  be  accountable  to  the  Director  General  of  Angolan  Institute  for  Agricultural  Development  (IDA) 
who will be the executive level head responsible for the strategic direction of the project.  
11.  The  PIU  will  be  responsible  for  project  coordination  and  management  of  fiduciary  issues  in 
conformity  with  the  standards  and  requirements  agreed  upon  with  the  IFAD;  and  (b)  manage  the 
project in accordance with the financing Agreement and other project documents such as the Project 
Design  Report    and  the  PIM.    The  PIU  will  be  responsible  for  the  day-to-day  management  of  the 
project. 
12.  There shall be a standalone PIU at national level with Provincial Project Implementation Units 
(PPIUs)  for  the  two  provinces.  The  key  staff  in  the  provinces  will  include  Provincial  Project 
Coordinator, Accountant, an M&E officer and other subject matter specialists.  
13.  There shall be established a Project Coordination Committee (PCC), chaired by the Minister of 
Agriculture (MINAGRI), or his/her nominee/Delegate. The Director General, IDA will be the Secretary 
to the Committee which will be composed of national directors and director generals of MINAGRI, and 
representatives  from  ministries  and  institutions  with  direct  relevancy  to  the  achievement  of  SADCP- 
C&H-SAMAP’s  goal  and  development  objective  including  the  ministries  of  Planning,  Finance, 
Commerce.  The  PCC  will  provide  strategic  guidance  towards  the  achievement  of  Project  objectives 
and  contribute  to  the  higher  level  sector  policy  and  strategic  goals.  This  will  also  be  responsible  for 
review  and  approval  of  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets,  annual  reports  and  decisions  of  the 
Provincial Project Coordination Committee (PPCC).  
14.  The following will be the roles and responsibilities of the other implementing organisations. 
a)  The  Project  delivery  systems  will  be 
the  decentralised  government 
organisational and operational structures that cascade from the national level to commune and 
municipal  levels.  Given  low  technical  capacity  at  lower  levels,  there  will  be  technical 
backstopping from the PIU and engagement of technical service providers to support activities 
at  the  lower  levels.  At  provincial  level,  the  provincial  delegation  of  IDA  will  be  responsible  for 
project  implementation,  in  coordination  and  consultation  with  other  provincial  government  and 
province-level representatives of other ministries involved. 
integrated 
into 
b)  At  the  municipal  level,  Agricultural  Development  Office  of  IDA  at  the  Municipality  level  will  be 
responsible 
the  municipal 
administration.  At  the  commune  level,  rural  communities/villages  (aldeias)  and  smallholder 
farmers’ groups and organisations will be the main implementers of the sub-projects. 
in  coordination  and  consultation  with 
implementation, 
for 
c)  The proposed MOU between two  projects  will provide for the knowledge sharing and transfer 
from  the  World  Bank  financed  SADCP  to  help  set  up  financial  management  systems  at 
SADCP-C&H-SAMAP. This can be used in combination with services of technical assistance in 
the first two years of implementation or as shall be deemed appropriate during implementation.  
d)  PIU will be the central financial management hub of the project responsible for data processing 
and  reporting.  Payments  to  service  providers  and  contractors  will  be  centralised  except  for 
PPIU  operational  costs  and  provincial  level  activity  payments  that  will  be  transferred  to  the 
PPIU accounts. 
e)  Involvement  of  other  public/  private  institutions  in  the  delivery  of  Project  activities  other  than 
those  directly  implementing  the  project  will  be  treated  as  service  provision,  and  will  be 
85 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
translated  into  output-based  contracts  and  MOUs.  Any  advance  payment  will  be  in  line  with 
public procurement provisions and stipulated in the contracts for service provision.  
III.  Financial Management Risk Assessment 
A. 
Inherent risks, Country issues, Entity risks and Project design 
15.  Major Country accountability issues affecting fiduciary environment. 
a)  There  is  no  public  information  in  respect  of  Angola’s  recent  PEFA  assessments.  At  World 
Bank’s appraisal of SADCP, the Bank indicated that the Government is undertaking a number 
of  public  financial  management  reform  initiatives  including  the  roll  out  of  the  state  financial 
management  system  (SIGFE).  In  its  assessment,  it  indicated  that  the  public  financial 
management systems remain weak with the overall risk rating being HIGH.   
b)  Government accountability, transparency and corruption factors. 
(i)  Transparency  International's  Global  Corruption  Perception  Index  scores  put Angola  in  the 
high risk category. The country’s annual CPI in 2015 score of 15 (scale 0- high risk and 100 
-low risk), 19 in 2014 and 23 in 2013. The 2015 ranking put the Country at 163rd position out 
of 168 countries which falls in the high-risk category; and 
(ii) According to the World Bank, GOA is undertaking a number of public financial management 
reform initiatives, including the roll out of the state financial management system to improve 
public financial management.  
16.  The implementation arrangements pose a risk of low disbursements arising from delays in start-
up  and delays  in submission  of withdrawal  applications;  weak financial management capacity,  weak 
procurement  capacity,  delays  in  financial  reporting,  delays  in  submission  of  and  poor  quality  audit 
reports, among others. 
17.  Overall assessment indicates that Angola is a high risk country, characterised by weak financial 
management systems. SADCP-C&H-SAMAP design arrangements have taken into account this high 
inherent risk, and proposed appropriate financial management safeguard measures to be put in place 
at project level. The SADCP-C&H-SAMAP PIU will have project specific recruited staff that will source 
qualified  and  experienced  staff,  operate  separate  bank  accounts  and  run  a  dedicated  off  the  shelf 
accounting software.  
B.  Project Control Risks 
Table 2. Summary of FM Risks and mitigating actions: 
Initial 
Assessment 
Risk 
Proposed 
mitigation 
Final 
Risk 
Assessment 
Inherent Risk 
1.  TI Index 
Control Risks 
Internal Controls 
1.  Organisation and Staffing 
2.  Budgeting 
3.  Funds Flow and Disbursement arrangements 
4. 
5.  Accounting systems, Policies and Procedures 
6.  Reporting and Monitoring 
7. 
Internal Audit 
8.  External Audit 
Fiduciary Risk @ Design 
H 
H 
M 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
M 
H 
- 
Par 18 
Par 19 - 20 
Par 21 - 22 
Par 23 
Par 24 - 25 
Par 26 - 28 
Par 29 
Par 30 - 31 
H 
H 
M 
H 
M 
M 
M 
H 
M 
H 
86 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
IV.  Financial Management and Disbursement arrangements 
18.  Organisation and staffing. 
a)  The  Ministry  of  Finance,  as  the  representative  of  the  borrower,  will  take  overall  fiduciary 
responsibility  of  on  all  matters  pertaining  to  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP.  IDA  as  the  lead  executing 
agency will ensure the overall oversight for the implementation of Project at National, Provincial 
and Commune and Municipal level through its structures. This includes the provision of general 
policy directions for the implementation, coordinating, implementing and ensuring coordination 
with  other  relevant  agencies  and  supervision  of  the  PIU  (headed  by  the  Project  Coordinator) 
and the respective PPIUs. 
b)  The  Financial  Management  Specialist  (FM  Specialist)  of  the  project  will  report  to  the  project 
coordinator  and  will  be  responsible  for  managing  the  project  finance  staff  and  all  accounting 
functions of the project including funds flow, preparation of annual financial statements, periodic 
financial  reporting  and  overseeing  the  arrangements  for  audits,  in  accordance  with  GOA 
procedures and IFAD’s audit requirements for the entire project. The FM specialist will assign a 
staff within the team to ensure  that SADCP-C&H-SAMAP financial management requirements 
have been adequately attended.  
c)  The  Provincial  level,  accountants  (responsible  to  the  provincial  PC)  to  manage  financial 
management requirements of SADCP-C&H-SAMAP will be recruited on competitive basis and 
will be engaged on performance based contracts. As the financial management focal points at 
their  respective  provinces  they  will  be  responsible  for  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  financial 
management  requirements 
justifying  expenditure  and 
including  processing  payments, 
generating  financial  reports.  As  part  of  start  up,  they  will  receive  training  on  the  Project 
accounting  requirements  including  IFAD  procedures  and  guidelines.  They  will  also  receive 
regular technical backstopping including on job training from PIU. 
d)  The experience with AFAP has shown that delays in constituting of PIU delayed start up losing 
one  year  of  project  implementation.  Coupled  with  scarcity  of  experienced  project  accountants 
and  high staff turnover,  there is a risk that project start-up  will  be delayed. It is  proposed that 
outsourcing 
to  a  qualified  and 
experienced  individual(s)  or  a  firm  be  considered  as  an  option  to  a  full  time  Financial 
Management Specialist whenever there are difficulties in finding the required staff. 
financial  management  services/Technical  Assistance 
19.  Budgeting-The project will be implemented on the basis of approved Annual Work Plans and 
Budgets (AWPBs). The budgeting process will be done jointly between PIU, PPIUs and implementing 
agencies using a bottom – up approach. The PIU will consolidate the AWPB, present it for approval 
by the PCC in accordance with the PIM/Financial Manual. To facilitate proper budget monitoring and 
control, PIU will provide budget templates to provinces, and other implementing agencies that mirror 
its  code/chart  of  accounts  reflecting  components,  categories  and  activities  together  with  funding 
sources as part of preparation for implementation readiness. The approved budget will also be posted 
into  the  primavera  accounting  software  to  facilitate  real  time  reporting  of  budget  against  actual 
expenditure  and  budget  monitoring  and  control.  Detailed  budget  schedules  will  be  included  in  the 
financial manual.  
20.  Disbursement  arrangements  and  Flow  of  Funds  –  Project  design  has  put  into 
consideration  financial  management  requirements  that  will  ensure  that  the  loan  proceeds  and 
other financing sources will be used for their intended purposes. The following summarises the funds 
flow arrangements: 
a)  Bank  Accounts  –  The  designated  account  denominated  in  USD  specifically  for  receiving 
IFAD loan proceeds and operated by the borrower will be opened in the a commercial bank 
in Angola acceptable to IFAD; 
b)  Two  project  operation  accounts  one  denominated  in Angolan  Kwanza  (AOA)  and  another  in 
USD opened in a commercial Bank acceptable to IFAD will be operated by the lead project 
agency in accordance with GOA procedures;  
c)  A project counterpart account denominated in AOA will be opened by the lead project agency to 
receive  counterpart  funds  from  the  borrower.  Counterpart  financing  provided  by  the  borrower 
87 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
shall cover the payment of duties and taxes and any other project costs to be financed by the 
borrower. 
d)  Authorised allocation estimated at USD 2.0 million has been proposed for the first two years of 
project implementation. During implementation, if this is deemed insufficient, it will be increased 
to handle the high operations in the subsequent  years. The threshold of  direct payments from 
IFAD will be limited only to large payments over the equivalent of USD 100,000. 
e)  The funds flow chart attached depicts the use of the standard disbursement methods including 
(a)  Direct  payment  method  for  bigger  payments  over  USD  100,000;  (b)  use  of  designated 
account;  and  (c)  reimbursement  if  the  GOA  has  pre-financed  any  transactions.  Detailed 
instructions for disbursements will be included in the LTB issued for SADCP-C&H-SAMAP and 
the PIM/Financial Manual. 
21.  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP Funds flow Chart - The Project will have external and domestic funding 
sources:  External  funding  sources  are  IFAD  loan  while  domestic  funding  sources  will  include  GOA 
and  Beneficiaries.  IFAD  loan  disbursements  will  be  through  one  designated  bank  account  in  USD 
opened in a commercial bank acceptable to IFAD. Two project operations accounts one denominated 
AOA  and  another  in  USD  managed  by  the  lead  project  agency.  The  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP 
Coordinator  and  the  General  Director  of  IDA  will  be  principal  signatories  to  the  account.  Domestic 
funding  from  the  beneficiaries  will  be  earmarked  for  specific  activities  as  a  contribution  that  will  not 
flow  through  the  above  system.  GOA  will  fund  taxes,  duties  and  other  costs  earmarked  for  GOA 
financing. A project counterpart account will be opened. Beneficiary financing will not require opening 
of a bank account as their contribution will not flow to the project. The funds flow chart is attached at 
annex 1. 
a)  The financial management risks under the area of  funds flow and disbursement include the 
following: 
i.  Delays  in  submission  of  withdrawal  applications  arising  out  of  delays  in  posting  data, 
difficulties in collating expenditure justification documents to support the SOEs and low 
staff capacity; 
ii.  Unsystematic capture and reporting of counterpart and beneficiary contribution; 
iii.  Delays in release of counterpart contribution funds; and 
iv.  Pre-financing taxes with IFAD loan resources. 
v.  Exchange rate volatility 
b)  The proposed mitigations for the financial management risks under the area are:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
The  finance  team  at  PIU  and  PPIUs  will  be  facilitated  to  enable  them  carry  out  field 
visits  to  follow  up  justifications  to  facilitate  generation  of  SOEs  and  quick  turn  over  of 
withdrawal applications; 
Include  in  PIM  clear  approach  and  forms  for  capture  of  beneficiary  and  coun terpart 
contributions; 
 The  use  of  designated  account  reconciliation  as  part  monthly  management  accounts. 
This  will  reflect  amounts  withdrawn  and  not  yet  claimed  clearly  identifying  advances 
which should guide the FM Specialist in prioritisation of follow  up actions; 
iv.  Opening  of  a  two  Operating  accounts,  one  in  USD  and  another  in  AOA.  The  USD 
operations  account  will  be  used  for  payments  of  transactions  in  respect  of  procurements 
done in USD and foreign travel/foreign training related costs that require financing in USD. 
Train  staff 
financial  management  procedures, 
requirements; 
including  disbursement 
IFAD 
v. 
in 
vi.  Submit withdrawal application whenever expenditure is 30% of the authorised allocation 
or three months since the last submission. 
22. 
Internal Controls: At project level, internal controls will be set to ensure that project resources 
are  properly  utilised  for  purposes  they  are  meant  and  funds  reach  intended  beneficiaries.  IFAD 
financial management procedures will be applied in the implementation of SADCP-C&H-SAMAP. The 
key controls should include evidence of funds reaching intended beneficiaries and the use of financial 
management  procedural  manuals,  adequate  segregation  of  duties  with  the  following  functional 
88 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
responsibilities  performed  by  different  units  or  persons,  budget  control,  proper  use  of  accounting 
software, data backup, and storage of accounting records, among others.  
(a) 
The FM risks under the area of internal controls include the following: 
i.  Selection  and  managing  of  sub  projects  to  ensure  the  right  beneficiaries  are  selected 
and funds have been used as proposed; 
Lack of segregation of duties, given the high staff turnover;  
Inadequate  scope  or  absence  of  internal  audit  which  may  not  help  enforce  the 
prescribed  internal  control  environment  given  the  capacity  of  the  National  Inspectorate 
of Finance; and 
Improper handling and storage of accounting records. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
(b) 
The following measures will be put in place to strengthen internal controls: 
i.  Adherence  to  the  internal  control  framework  will  be  verified  during  the  internal  and  external 
audit  exercises  and  reported  to  the  IFAD  in  the  form  of  an  internal  audit  report  and 
Management letter, in line with IFAD’s audit guidelines. Compliance to the internal controls will 
also be part of the fiduciary checks performed during supervision missions and external Audit. 
ii.  As  part  of  the  controls,  budget  monitoring  and  control  will  be  supported  through  the  Project 
accounting  software  and  reflected  in  the  financial  reporting  templates  at  provincial  levels  and 
details on internal controls shall be provided in the PIM; 
iii.  Consideration to outsource internal audit services; and 
iv.  Regular supervision and implementation support missions, for the first years of implementation 
at least thrice in the year.  
23.  Accounting  Systems,  policies  and  procedures  -  The  accounting  systems,  policies,  and 
procedures to be used by the PIU in accounting and managing the project funds will be documented 
in the Financial Manual. The manual will describe the accounting system, internal control procedures, 
basis  of  accounting,  standards  to  be  followed,  authorisation  procedures,  financial  reporting  process, 
budgeting  procedures,  financial  forecasting  procedures,  and  contract  management.  In  addition,  the 
manual  should  document  procedures  to  be  undertaken  for  the  replenishment  of  the  designated 
accounts and auditing arrangements. 
24.  Primavera accounting software that has been used under MOSAP and is being used by AFAP 
will be procured and implemented by SADCP-C&H-SAMAP. The coding of the chart of accounts will 
reflect  funding  sources,  components  and  categories  to  provide  for  accounting  and  reporting 
requirements of SADCP-C&H-SAMAP. The financial management risks under this area is poor coding 
of  chart  of  accounts  and  failure  to  report  using  International  Public  Sector  Reporting  Standards 
(IPSAS).  
25.  Financial  reporting  -The  objective  of  monitoring  and  reporting  is  to  ensure  that  complete, 
accurate and timely reports are produced in accordance  with International  Public Sector  Accounting 
Standards  (IPSAS).  The  PIU  will  be  the  financial  management  and  reporting  hub,  responsible  for 
posting,  reconciling  and  reporting  on  project  finances.  In  line  with  the  IFAD  requirements,  PIU  will 
prepare and present Interim unaudited financial reports on a semi-annual basis. The contents of the 
reports will consist of at least the following: a statement of source and uses of funds, a statement of 
uses  of  funds  by  project  component  and  expenditure  category,  and  a  summary  variance  report 
explaining financial performance for the period. 
a) 
The PIU will also produce annual project financial statements, will comprise the following: 
i.  A statement of sources and uses of funds/cash receipts and payments that recognises all cash 
receipts,  cash  payments,  and  cash  balances  controlled  by  the  project  for  this  project  and 
separately identifies payments by third parties on behalf of the entity; 
ii.  The  accounting  policies  adopted  and  explanatory  notes.  The  explanatory  notes  should  be 
presented in a systematic manner with items on the statement of cash receipts and payments 
cross-referenced to any related information in the notes. Examples of this information include a 
summary of fixed assets by category of assets; 
iii.  A  management  assertion  that  project  funds  have  been  expended  in  accordance  with  the 
intended purposes, as specified in the relevant IFAD financing agreement. 
89 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
b) 
Each PPIU will produce, on a monthly basis, financial reports required to manage and monitor 
implementation  of  project  activities  at  the  provincial  level.  PPIUs  will  produce  and  submit  monthly 
financial  reports  to  the  PIU.  The  financial  reports  produced  by  the  PPIUs  will  be  used  to  produce 
consolidated reports to be used for generation of withdrawal applications and to meet other reporting 
requirements. The formats and contents of quarterly financial reports produced by the PPIUs will be 
documented in the Financial Manual. 
Internal  Audit -Internal audits will be conducted to provide assurance that there exists strong 
26. 
internal  controls,  the  project  is  being  implemented  in  accordance  with  the  PIM/Financial  Manual, 
complies  with GOA regulations and is complying  with the IFAD financing covenants. The key risk is 
weak capacity of the National Inspectorate of Finance (INF) to cover the internal audit requirements of 
the  project.  The  risk  that  internal  audit  may  not  provide  the  required  service  has  been  assessed  as 
high.  
27.  External  Audit  - The project’s financial statements will be audited by  independent auditors in 
accordance  with  International  Standards  on  Auditing  and  the  audit  report  will  be  submitted  to  IFAD 
within  six  months  after  the  financial  year-end.  The  costs  incurred  for  the  audit  will  be  borne  by  the 
project.  The  arrangements  for  the  appointment  of  the  external  auditors  of  the  project  financial 
statements shall be in accordance with the IFAD audit guidelines. The Audit Terms of Reference and 
appointment  of  auditors  are  subject  to  IFAD  No  Objection.  Audit  TORs  are  included  in  the  Project 
Financial Manual. 
28. 
 The  auditors  will  be  required  to  express  a  three  audit  opinions  on  the  project  financial 
statements,  operation  of  the  designated  account  and  on  the  certified  Statements  of  Expenditure 
(SOEs). In addition, a detailed management letter containing the auditor’s assessment of the internal 
controls,  accounting  system  and  compliance  with  financing  covenants  in  the  IFAD  Financing 
Agreement and suggestions for improvement will be prepared and submitted together with the audit 
report. 
V. 
Implementation Readiness 
Table 3: FM Actions Summary: The actions needed to mitigate financial management risks are 
summarised below: 
Action 
Responsible 
Party / Person 
Target Date / Covenants 
1  Constituting  PIU  headed  by  a  Project 
IDA/MINAGRI 
Coordinator and PPIUs 
Within  first  six  months  or 
as  shall  be  agreed  during 
negotiations 
2  Compile the first AWPB and its related 
PIU/IDA 
Withdrawal condition 
Procurement plan 
3  Open the required bank accounts 
IDA/MINAGRI 
Withdrawal condition 
4  Draft  PIM 
include  a 
that  should 
comprehensive financial manual with a 
comprehensive 
of 
accounts 
project 
chart 
PIU/IDA 
Within  first  six  months  of 
entry into force 
5  Establish  a  PCC  headed  by 
Secretary of State/MINAGRI 
the 
MINAGRI 
Within  six  months  of  entry 
into force 
and 
install 
6  Procure 
Primavera 
accounting software and configure it to 
meet  the  accounting  and  reporting 
requirements of project. 
7  Hire an external auditor 
PIU/IDA 
Part of start-up activities 
IDA/MIAGRI 
No  later  than  nine  months 
of implementation 
29.  FM Supervision plan:  The Project  will be supervised by the IFAD. The risk profile described 
above  requires  IFAD  implementation  support  especially  in  the  first  years  of  implementation.  IFAD 
missions  should  include  sufficient  provision  for  facilitating  the  PIU  to  put  in  place  the  systems  and 
controls  to  manage  fiduciary  aspects  of  the  project.  In  the  first  two  years,  it  is  proposed  that  there 
90 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
should  be  at  least  two  IFAD  missions  supplemented  by  a  fiduciary  follow-up  mission  to  ensure 
financial management systems and tools are in place and implemented.  
91 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Annex 1. Funds flow chart 
Line 1: Authorised allocation into the DA and subsequent replenishments in USD; 
Line 2: Transfers into the two OAs in one in USD for procurements done and contracts entered  into in 
USD and foreign travel/foreign trainings and another in AOA for all local currency transactions; 
Line 3: Transfer of funds from the OA into Sub Accounts managed by PPIUs for covering eligible local 
costs; 
Line 4: Payments for goods supplied, works executed, services rendered, salaries and other expenses 
for  Project  implementation  and  management  from  the  OA  (in  AOA)  and  from  USD  account  for  USD 
payments; 
Line 5: Payments of contractual services and service providers, both locally and nationally executed by 
the PPIUs; 
Line 6: Direct payments to the suppliers of goods and service providers from IFAD for payments equal 
to or above USD 100,000;  
Line  7:  Payments  from  the  designated  account  to  service  providers  and  contractors  with  contracts 
denominated in USD and foreign travel costs; 
Line 8: Funds from GOA into the project counterpart account; and 
Line 9: Payment for taxes, duties and other payments allocated to be financed by GOA. 
92 
SOURCES16Designated Account8Commercial  Bank 274395PIU operations accountTwo IFAD Loan Operations Accounts (USD and AOA)PPIU  sub- operations accounts (one for each Province)PPIUs sub-accountsService providers, suppliers, consultants, imprests, project implementers, etcCounterpart Funds Account (AOA)IFADGoAIFAD Loan/ grant  Designated Account      (USD) 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
1. 
Procurement of Goods, Works and Services financed by the IFAD loan  will  be undertaken by 
the  PIU  both  at  Headquarters  and  province  level  in  accordance  with  the  IFAD’s  Procurement 
guidelines and procedures. These will be described in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) with 
additional  requirements  of  IFAD’s  Prior-Review  procedures  specified  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower 
(LTB). It has been has decided that the Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization 
Project  (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP)  will  be  parallel  financing  with  the  World  Bank,  and  IFAD’s 
Procurement Procedures and Guidelines shall be applicable.   
2. 
Project specific principles governing  project procurement will be the following: 
a.  Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the Financing Agreement,  the Letter to the 
Borrower  and  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  and  any  subsequent  changes  reflected  in 
IFAD‘s mission reports (e.g. supervision reports, mid-term reviews, etc.); All procurement shall 
be carried out in accordance with the IFAD’s procurement guidelines. The overall procurement 
responsibility will rest with the MINAGRI/IDA.  
b.  Procurement  shall  be  conducted  within  the  project  implementation  period  (from  the  date  of 
effectiveness to the date of completion). Procurement cannot be undertaken between the date 
of completion and the closing date; 
c.  Procurement must not exceed the availability of funds duly allocated by the financial agreement; 
d.  Procurement  Plans  must  be  consistent  with  the  approved  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget 
(AWBP); and 
e.  The  principle  of  value  for  money  must  be  sought:  Best  value  does  not  necessarily  mean  the 
lowest  initial  price  option,  but  rather  represents  the  best  return  on  investments,  taking  into 
consideration the unique and specific circumstances of each procurement activity; the balance 
of time, cost and quality required; and the successful overall outcome of the contract in meeting 
its original objectives. 
3. 
Further,  ICB  procurement  will  be  done  in  accordance  with  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and 
Handbook, using the World Bank’s Standard Bidding Documents (SBD). All ICBs will be subject to the 
IFAD’s prior review and the SBD will be agreed between IFAD and the PCU/IDA. 
4. 
The following project activities are subject to IFAD’s procurement procedures: 
a.  Goods.  This  activity  will  include  procurement  of  vehicles  and  motorcycles,  agricultural 
implements, IT equipment, and furniture. Goods will  also include any  activities included in the 
selected subproject proposals. 
b.  Works.  This  activity  will  include  rehabilitation  of  irrigation  systems,  rehabilitation  of  roads, 
construction  of  bridges/drifts,  construction  of  technical  staff  housing  and  office  complexes, 
construction of warehouses and market infrastructure, and rehabilitation and/or construction of 
critical  agricultural  extension  facilities  at  local  level.  Specific  activities  for  irrigation  are  (i) 
upgrading  of  the  area  around  the  intake  and  the  main  canal;  (ii)  construction  of  collecting 
structures  for  the  accumulation  of  water  to  be  distributed  and/or  rehabilitation  of  damaged 
embankments; (iii) installation of control structures like water gates; (iv) upgrading (digging) of 
the  main  canals  and,  where  necessary,  lining  critical  stretches  of  the  distribution  system;  and 
(v)  use  of  local  plants/grass  to  control  canal  erosion.  Works  will  also  include  any  activities 
included in the selected subproject proposals. 
c.  Consultancies. This activity will include (i) recruitment of service providers for capacity building 
of  community  associations,  agricultural  statistics,  market  information  systems,  agricultural 
policy analysis, irrigation-related services, and agricultural research that  will include improving 
soil diagnostics services; multiplication of seeds and planting materials; strengthening national 
research  and  extension  systems;  and  scaling  up  testing  and  demonstration  of  improved 
technologies at the international and regional levels; and (ii) recruitment of project staff.  
93 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Particular Methods of Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services 
a.  International  competitive  bidding  (ICB).  Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  the  paragraph 
below, Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services shall be procured under contracts awarded 
on the basis of ICB. 
b.  Other  methods  of  procurement  of  goods,  works,  and  non-consulting  services.  The 
following  methods,  other  than  ICB,  may  be  used  for  procurement  of  goods,  works,  and  non-
consulting services for those contracts specified in the Procurement Plan. 
Other Procurement Methods  
Procurement Method 
(a) National Competitive Bidding (NCB), subject to the provisions of the paragraph below on NCB 
(b) National Shopping 
(c) Direct contracting 
(d) Community participation procedures acceptable to the Bank/Fund   
5. 
For NCB, Angolan regulations will apply. All bid documents will need to be satisfactory to IFAD 
and subject to the additional procedures and modifications stipulated below and to be reflected in the 
Financing Agreement. 
General.  The  procedures  followed  for  NCB  shall  be  those  set  forth  in  ‘Lei  No.  20/10  da 
6. 
Contratação  Pública’  of  the  Republic  of  Angola  of  September  7,  2010,  (‘the  Law’),  with  the 
modifications described in the following paragraphs. 
Eligibility.  The  eligibility  of  bidders  shall  be  as  defined  in  the  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines; 
7. 
therefore, no bidder or potential bidder shall be declared ineligible for contracts financed by the fund 
for  reasons  other  than  those  provided  in  guidelines.  Bidding  shall  not  be  restricted  to  domestic 
bidders. No restriction based on nationality of bidders and/or origin of the goods shall apply other than 
those  imposed  by  primary  boycotts  as  contemplated  in  the  guidelines.  Foreign  bidders  shall  be 
allowed to participate in NCB without restriction and shall not be subject to any unjustified requirement 
that  will  affect  their  ability  to  participate  in  the  bidding  process  such  as,  but  not  limited  to,  the 
submission of evidence of good standing  with regard  to taxes paid to the Angolan Government and 
with regard to social security contributions made in Angola. 
Prior  registration  or  obtaining  a  license  or  authorisation  shall  not  be  a  requirement  for  any 
8. 
bidder to participate in the bidding process.  
9. 
Government-owned  enterprises  or  institutions  of  Angola  shall  be  eligible  to  participate  in  the 
bidding  process  only  if  they  can  establish  that  they  are  legally  and  financially  autonomous,  operate 
under commercial law, and are not dependent agencies of the borrower or sub-borrower. 
10.  Bidding documents. Standard bidding documents acceptable to the Fund shall be used. 
11.  Participation by joint ventures. Participation shall be allowed from joint ventures on condition 
that  such  joint  venture  partners  will  be  jointly  and  severally  liable  for  their  obligations  under  the 
contract. 
12.  Preferences. No domestic/regional preference or any other kind of preferential treatment shall 
be  given  for  domestic/regional  bidders,  for  domestically/regionally  manufactured  goods,  and/or  for 
domestically/regionally originated related services. 
13.  Applicable  procurement  method.  Subject  to  these  provisions,  procurement  shall  be  carried 
out  in  accordance  with  the  ‘Public  Competitive  Bidding’  method  (Concurso  Público)  set  forth  in  the 
Law. 
14.  Qualification. Qualification criteria shall entirely concern the bidder’s capability and resources 
to  perform  the  contract  considering  objective  and  measurable  factors.  The  qualification  criteria  shall 
be  clearly  specified  in  the  bidding  documents,  and  all  criteria  so  specified  and  only  such  criteria  so 
specified  shall  be  used  to  determine  whether  a  bidder  is  qualified.  Qualification  criteria  shall  be 
assessed on a ‘pass or fail’ basis, and merit points shall not be used. Bidders’ qualifications shall be 
94 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
assessed  by  post-qualification  and  such  an  assessment  shall  be  conducted  separately  from  the 
technical and commercial evaluation of the bids. 
15.  Advertisement.  A  shorter  version  of  the  advertisement  text,  including  the  minimum  relevant 
information, may be published in a national newspaper of wide circulation provided that the full text is 
simultaneously published in the official gazette (Diário da República) or on a widely used website or 
electronic portal with free national and international access. 
16.  Bid preparation time. Bidders shall be given at least 28 days from the date of the invitation to 
bid or the date of availability of bidding documents, whichever is later, to prepare and submit bids. 
17.  Bids submission and bid opening. Bids may be submitted by electronic means only provided 
that  the  Fund  is  satisfied  with  the  adequacy  of  the  system,  including,  among  other  things,  that  the 
system  is  secure,  maintains  the  integrity,  confidentiality,  and  authenticity  of  the  bids  submitted,  and 
uses an electronic signature system or equivalent to keep bidders bound to their bids. 
18.  Bids  shall  be  opened  in  public,  immediately  after  the  deadline  for  their  submission  in 
accordance  with  the  procedures  stated  in  the  bidding  documents. The  public  bid  opening  shall  take 
place in only one session. At the public bid opening, the names of the bidders and the total amount of 
each bid and of any alternative bids if they have been requested or permitted, shall be read aloud and 
recorded  when  opened.  Bids  shall  not  be  evaluated  as  part  of  the  bid  opening  process,  and  no  bid 
shall  be  rejected  during  the  public  bid  opening  session,  except  for  late  bids.  Bidders  shall  not  be 
allowed to complete their bids after the deadline for submission of bids has expired. 
19.  Bid  validity.  No  automatic  extension  of  the  bid  validity  shall  apply.  If  justified  by  exceptional 
circumstances, an extension of the bid validity may be requested in writing from all bidders before the 
original bid validity expiration date and it shall cover only the minimum period required to complete the 
evaluation  and  award  of  the  contract.  The  extension  of  the  bid  validity  requires  the  IFAD’s  No 
Objection for those contracts subject to prior review. 
20.  Bid evaluation: Evaluation of bids shall be made in strict adherence to the evaluation criteria 
declared in the bidding documents. Evaluation criteria other than price shall be quantified in monetary 
terms  and  the  manner  in  which  they  will  be  applied  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  lowest 
evaluated bid shall be established in the bidding documents. A weighting/scoring system shall not be 
used. 
a.  A  contract  shall  be  awarded  to  the  qualified  bidder  offering  the  lowest-evaluated  and 
substantially responsive bid. No negotiations shall be permitted. 
b.  Bidders shall not be eliminated on the basis of minor, non-substantial deviations.  
c.  Requests for clarification and the bidder’s responses shall be made in writing and they shall not 
be notified to other bidders.  
d.  After  the  public  opening  of  bids,  information  relating  to  the  examination,  clarification,  and 
evaluation  of  bids  and  recommendations  concerning  the  awards  shall  not  be  disclosed  to 
bidders or other persons not officially concerned with this process until publication of the award 
of the contract. 
21.  Rejection of all bids and re-bidding. All bids shall not be rejected, the procurement process 
shall not be cancelled, and new bids shall not be solicited without the IFAD’s prior concurrence. 
22.  Securities. Bid securities shall not exceed 3 percent of the estimated cost of the contract; and 
performance securities shall not exceed 10 percent of the contract price. The successful bidder shall 
be given at least 15 days from the receipt of notification of contract award to submit a performance 
security. No advance payment shall be made without a suitable advance payment security. 
23.  Publication of contract award. Information on contract award shall be published at least in a 
national newspaper of wide circulation within two weeks of receiving the IFAD’s No Objection to the 
award  recommendation  for  contracts  subject  to  prior  review  and  within  two  weeks  from  the  award 
decision  for  contracts  subject  to  post  review.  The  publication  shall  include  the  following  information: 
(a)  the  name  of  each  bidder  who  submitted  a  bid;  (b)  bid  prices  as  read  out  at  bid  opening;  (c) 
evaluated prices of each bid that was evaluated; (d) the names of bidders whose bids were rejected 
and  the  reasons  for  their  rejection;  and  (e)  the  name  of  the  winning  bidder,  the  final  total  contract 
price, and the duration and summary scope of the contract. 
95 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
24.  Complaints  by  bidders  and  handling  of  complaints.  The  borrower  shall  establish  an 
effective  and  independent  protest  mechanism  allowing  bidders  to  protest  and  to  have  their  protest 
handled in a timely manner. 
25.  Contract  and  contract  modifications.  Contracts  shall  be  in  writing  and  the  bid  of  the 
successful bidder shall become part of the contract documents without any modification introduced by 
the  contracting  authority.  In  the  case  of  contracts  subject  to  prior  review,  the  IFAD’s  No  Objection 
shall be obtained before agreeing to (a) a material extension of the stipulated time for performance of 
a contract; (b) any substantial modification of the scope of services or other significant changes to the 
terms  and  conditions  of  the  contract;  (c)  any  variation  order  or  amendment  (except  in  cases  of 
extreme  urgency)  which,  singly  or  combined  with  all  variation  orders  or  amendments  previously 
issued,  increases  the  original  contract  amount  by  more  than  15  percent;  or  (d)  the  proposed 
termination of the contract. A copy  of all contract amendments shall be furnished to the IFAD for its 
record. 
26.  Right  to  inspect/audit.  In  accordance  with  the  Procurement  Guidelines,  each  bidding 
document  and  contract  financed  from  the  proceeds  of  the  financing  shall  provide  that  bidders, 
suppliers, and contractors, and their subcontractors, agents, personnel, consultants, service providers 
or  suppliers,  shall  permit  the  IFAD,  at  its  request,  to  inspect  their  accounts,  records,  and  other 
documents relating to the submission of bids and contract performance and to have them audited by 
auditors  appointed  by  the  IFAD.  Acts  intended  to  materially  impede  the  exercise  of  the  IFAD’s 
inspection  and  audit  rights  constitute  an  obstructive  practice  as  defined  in  the  Procurement 
Guidelines. 
27.  Fraud  and  corruption.  In  accordance  with  the  Procurement  Guidelines,  each  bidding 
document  and  contract  financed  from  the  proceeds  of  the  financing  shall  include  provisions  on 
matters pertaining to fraud and corruption. The IFAD will sanction a firm or individual, at any time, in 
accordance  with  prevailing  IFAD  sanctions  procedures,  including  by  publicly  declaring  such  firm  or 
individual ineligible, either indefinitely or for a stated period of time: (a) to be awarded a IFAD-financed 
contract;  and  (b)  to  be  a  nominated  subcontractor,  consultant,  supplier,  or  service  provider  of  an 
otherwise eligible firm being awarded a IFAD-financed contract. 
28.  Debarment  under  the  national  system.  The  IFAD  may  recognise,  if  requested  by  the 
borrower,  exclusion  from  participation  as  a  result  of  debarment  under  the  national  system,  provided 
that  the  debarment  is  for  offenses  involving  fraud,  corruption,  or  similar  misconduct,  and  further 
provided that the IFAD confirms that the particular debarment process afforded due process and the 
debarment decision is final. 
29.  Particular methods of procurement of consultants’ services 
(a)  Quality-  and  Cost-Based  Selection  (QCBS).  Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  the  next 
paragraph, consultants’ services shall be procured under contracts awarded on the basis of 
QCBS. 
(b)  Other  methods  of  procurement  of  consultants’  services.  The  following  methods,  other 
than  Quality-  and  Cost-Based  Selection,  may  be  used  for  procurement  of  consultants’ 
services for those contracts specified in the Procurement Plan: 
Other Procurement Methods for Consulting Services 
Procurement Method 
(a) Quality-Based Selection (QBS) 
(b) Selection under a Fixed Budget (FBS) 
(c) Least-Cost Selection (LCS) 
(d) Selection Based on the Consultants’ Qualifications (CQS) 
(e) Single Source Selection (SSS) 
(f) Selection of Individual Consultants (IC) 
(g) Single source procedures for the selection of Individual Consultants 
(h) Selection of UN agencies 
(i) Procurement involving local communities will be conducted according to procedures to 
be detailed in the PIM and acceptable to IFAD. 
96 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
30. 
IFAD  Review  of  Procurement  Decisions:  The  review  thresholds  are  shown  in  below  Table. 
The Procurement Plan shall set forth those contracts that shall be subject to prior review by the IFAD. 
All other contracts shall be subject to post review by the IFAD. The IFAD may, at its own discretion, 
require that a sample of contracts below the threshold be subject to prior review, at any time or when 
the Procurement Plan is updated. 
Thresholds for Procurement and Review Methods 
Expenditure 
Category 
Contract Value Threshold 
(US$) 
≥ 10,000,000 
Procurement/Selection 
Method 
ICB 
Contracts Subject to Prior 
Review 
All 
Works 
Goods 
Consulting 
Services – 
Firms 
Consulting 
Services - 
Individuals (IC) 
≥ 3,000,000 < 10,000,000 
< 3,000,000 
< 100,000 
All values 
≥ 1,000,000 
NCB 
NCB 
Shopping 
Direct Contracting 
ICB 
All 
None (Post Review) 
None (Post review) 
All 
All 
≥ 250,000 < 1,000,000 
NCB 
All 
< 250,000 
< 75,000 
All values 
≥ 200,000 
< 200,000 
All values 
NCB 
Shopping 
Direct Contracting 
QCBS/Other (QBS/FBS/ 
LCS) 
CQS/Other (QCBS/QBS/ 
FBS/LCS) 
SSS 
UN Agencies 
≥ 100,000 
IC – Qualification 
None (Post Review) 
None (Post review) 
All 
All 
None (Post Review) 
All 
All 
< 100,000 
IC – Qualification 
None (Post review) 
All Values 
IC – SSS 
All 
The Procurement Unit  
31.  SADCP procurement activities shall be coordinated by a Procurement Specialist (PS) who  will 
be  responsible  for  undertaking  procurement  activities  within  the  defined  thresholds  and  prepare 
procurement documents for processes. The PS will help in running the unit’s responsibilities. The PS 
should have the relevant experience and  sound knowledge and understanding of IFAD procurement 
procedures  applying  to  internationally  financed  projects.  The  PS  will  facilitate  procurement  for  the 
SADCP  with  following  guidelines  to  be  specified  in  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM), 
including  procurement  procedures  for  Goods,  Works  and  Services;  community  based  procurement 
procedures, 
internal  control,  reconciliation  and  dispute  resolution,  risk  management;  post 
procurement, audit and monitoring, etc. 
Procurement Plan 
32.  The implementing agency has to prepare its procurement plan for the activities to be carried out 
during the first 18 months of project implementation. The Procurement Plan shall be submitted to the 
Project  Steering  Committee  for  approval  prior  to  submission  to  IFAD  for  review  and  No  Objection. 
This procurement plan shall be agreed between the borrower and the IFAD during negotiations. The 
procurement  plan  will  be  made  available  at  the  project’s  database  and  on  the  IFAD’s  website  after 
loan  approval.  The  Procurement  Plan  shall  be  prepared  annually  and  submitted  to  IFAD  for  review 
and expression of No Objection 60 days before the beginning of each subsequent project year. When 
preparing the Procurement Plan, an accurate  and realistic planning and prioritisation  of needs is  an 
essential prerequisite to effective procurement and a key tool for monitoring project implementation.  
97 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
33.  The  frequency  of  procurement  supervision  missions  will  be  once  every  six  months.  Special 
procurement  supervision  for  post-procurement  reviews  will  be  carried  out  at  least  once  every  12 
months. 
34.  Procurement Plan shall include the following: 
a)  A  brief  description  of  each  procurement  activity  to  be  undertaken  during  that  project 
implementation period;  
b)  The estimated value of each activity in US$ equivalent to Angolan Kwanza (AOA);  
c)  The method of procurement to be adopted for each activity;  
d)  Works Procurement Packages with Methods and Time Schedule 
e)  Goods Procurement Packages with Methods and Time Schedule  
f)  Consultancy Assignments with Selection Methods and Time Schedule 
g)  The method of review IFAD will undertake for each activity (Post or Prior Review); and 
h)  Timelines showing milestones when the key stages of the procurement cycle will be achieved. 
I. 
General 
a)  Project:  The  project  aim  is  to  increase  smallholder  agriculture  productivity,  production,  and 
marketing for selected crops in the project areas. 
b)  Country: Angola  
c)  Borrower: Republic of Angola 
d)  Project  Name:  Smallholder  Agriculture  Development  and  Commercialization  Project 
(SADCP)  
e)  Loan No.  
f)  Project Implementing Agency (PIU): MINAGRI/IDA.  
g) 
Implementing Partners/Donor: IFAD 
II. 
Goods and Works and Non-consulting Services  
Prior Review Threshold: Procurement decisions subject to prior review as follows. 
Expenditure 
Category 
Contract Value Threshold 
(US$) 
Procurement/Selection Method 
Contracts Subject to 
Prior Review 
≥ 10,000,000 
≥ 3,000,000 < 10,000,000  
Works 
< 3,000,000 
< 100,000 
All values 
≥ 1,000,000 
≥ 250,000 < 1,000,000  
< 250,000 
< 75,000 
All values 
Goods 
ICB 
NCB 
NCB 
Shopping 
Direct Contracting 
ICB 
NCB 
NCB 
Shopping 
Direct Contracting 
All 
All  
None (Post Review) 
None (Post review) 
All 
All 
All  
None (Post Review) 
None (Post review) 
All 
  Reference  to  (if  any)  Project  Operational/Procurement  Manual:  Procurement  related  to 
goods,  works  and  services,  consultants’  services  will  be  carried  out,  by  PIU/PPIU  of  SADCP, 
following procedures as laid down in the Operational Manual to be approved by the IFAD. 
  Any  Other  Special  Procurement  Arrangements:  PIU  and  PPIU  shall  comply  strictly  with 
procurement provisions as indicated in the manual for sub-projects. 
98 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
III. 
Selection of Consultants 
(i)  Prior Review Threshold: Selection decisions subject to prior  review by the IFAD. In addition, 
all  TOR’s  for  consultant’s  services,  irrespective  of  value  of  the  contract,  shall  be  reviewed  by 
the IFAD. 
Expenditure 
Category 
Contract Value Threshold 
(US$) 
Procurement/Selection Method 
Contracts Subject to 
Prior Review 
≥ 200,000 
QCBS/Other (QBS/FBS/ LCS) 
All 
Consulting 
Services –Firms 
Consulting 
Services - 
Individuals (IC) 
< 200,000 
All values 
≥ 100,000 
< 100,000 
All Values 
CQS/Other (QCBS/QBS/ 
FBS/LCS) 
None (Post Review) 
SSS 
UN Agencies 
IC – Qualification 
IC – Qualification 
IC – SSS 
All 
All 
None (Post review) 
All 
Risk Identification and Mitigation 
35. 
The risk mitigation measures for the project include enhancement of the SADCP’s procurement 
capacity by: (a) hiring experienced Procurement Specialist at the PIU, whose main duty will be to hire 
a service  provider and  provide support to the team; (b) training  of procurement personnel at federal 
and provincial levels and (c) preparation of the procurement implementation manual. Considering the 
above  mitigating  measures,  the  residual  procurement  risk  for  the  project  is  considered  Moderate. 
Further the potential risks to project success and mitigation measures are summarised below:  
Issues 
Inadequate  and 
specifications and Bill of Quantities (BOQ) 
Inadequate contract administration 
incomplete  TORs, 
Inadequate  procurement  planning  and  monitoring 
and follow-up of procurement activities 
Non-compliance with procurement regulations 
Inefficiencies in procurement processes 
Inadequate capacity in procurement 
Inadequate record keeping 
Improper Receipt of bids and opening 
Bid 
improvements 
examination 
evaluation 
requiring 
and 
technical 
Mitigation Measures 
Capacity building and Technical assistance 
Continuous capacity building and strict follow-up and 
supervision 
Make  Procurement  Planning  a  requirement  as  part 
of the Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Technical assistance and/or capacity building 
Strict follow-up and supervision 
Technical assistance and/or capacity building 
Capacity building 
Capacity building and/or technical assistance 
Capacity building and/or technical assistance 
99 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
This Appendix presents the main assumptions underlying the derivation of project costs and the 
1. 
financing plan, and the results of the project costs estimates using the Costab software. 
Main assumptions for project costing 
2. 
Project  duration  and  start.  The  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  duration  would  be  seven  years.  It  will 
be presented to the IFAD Executive Board in April 2017. It is estimated that the IFAD loan would be 
declared effective in July 2017. The World Bank-funded SADCP (SADCP-WB) was approved in July 
2016 and the IBRD loan is expected to come into effectiveness in December 2016.  
3. 
National  and  international  inflation  and  exchange  rate.  National  inflation  inputted  in  the 
Costab  is  based  on  forecasts  provided  by  the  Economist  Intelligence  Unit  (EIU).  Inflation  in  Angola 
has  peaked  since  2015  following  the  successive  reductions  in  fuel  subsidies  and  the  Kwanza's 
continued  weakness  against  the  US$,  which  continues  to  push  up  the  cost  of  imported  goods. 
Inflation will establish at 26% in 2016, but would lower to 14% in 2017 and progressively reach 7% as 
from  2020.  During  the  project  implementation  period  (July  2017-July  2024),  an  average  yearly 
international  inflation  of  1.6%  has  been  considered.  The  initial  exchange  rate  for  the  analysis  has 
been set at Kwanza (AOA) 165 to US$ 1, the official rate prevailing in November 2016. In the absence 
of  AOA/US$  exchange  rate  forecasts  provided  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Angola  (BNA)  a  constant 
purchasing  power  exchange  rate,  as  calculated  by  Costab,  has  been  used.  Considering  the  high 
national  inflation  rate  and  the  difficulties  in  forecasting  the  AOA/US$  exchange  rate,  the  costs  have 
been inputted in US$ in the Costab.  
Summary of project costs and financing 
4. 
Total  project  costs  of  SADCP  in  Huila  and  Cuanza  Sul  provinces,  over  the  seven-year 
implementation period, including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$ 38.2 million. 
Component  1  (US$ 15.5 million)  accounts  for  40  percent  of  total  costs.  Component  2  (US$ 14.7 
million)  represents  about  39  percent  of  total  costs.  Component  3  (US$  8.0  million)  represents  21 
percent of total costs.   
5. 
The project will be funded  by: (i) an IFAD loan of US$ 28.8 million (75 percent  of total project 
costs); (ii) a Government contribution equivalent to US$ 8.2 million (22 percent of total costs), to cover 
duties and taxes as well as some operational costs of the public extension and agricultural research 
services; and (iii) a beneficiaries’ contribution equivalent to US$ 1.1 million (3 percent of total costs) to 
co-finance sub-projects under subcomponent 2.2.  
6. 
and additional summary cost tables are available in the Project Life File.  
Summary of project costs and financing are presented in the tables below. Detailed cost tables 
101 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
102 
 Republic of AngolaSmallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila provinces (SADCP-C&H)Components Project Cost Summary(AOA Million)(USD Million)%% Total%% TotalForeignBaseForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Capacity Building and Institutional Development 1. Strengthening Capacity of Smallholder Farmers and Farmers' Organizations through Farmer Field Schools 294.5764.11 058.672181.84.66.472182. Institutional Strengthening of Local, Provincial and National Units of the Ministry of Agriculture 766.5433.21 199.736204.62.67.336203. Strengthening Capacity and Global Knowledge to address Emerging Research Issues 123.628.2151.81930.70.20.9193Subtotal 1 184.61 225.52 410.251407.27.414.65140B. Support for Increased Production and Commercialization 1. Provision of Technical Support 957.846.71 004.55175.80.36.15172. Provision of Investment Support 1 195.6149.51 345.111227.20.98.21122Subtotal 2 153.4196.22 349.683913.11.214.2839C. Project Management Project Management 979.2126.01 105.211185.90.86.71118Monitoring and Evaluation 17.3116.3133.78720.10.70.8872Subtotal 996.6242.31 238.920216.01.57.52021Total BASELINE COSTS 4 334.61 664.05 998.62810026.310.136.428100Physical Contingencies 2.64.67.264-0.00.00.064-Price Contingencies 2 637.41 068.73 706.129621.30.51.8275Total PROJECT COSTS 6 974.62 737.49 711.92816227.610.638.228105 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
103 
 Republic of AngolaSmallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila provinces (SADCP-C&H)Components by Financiers(USD Million)LocalIFADBeneficiariesThe GovernmentTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Capacity Building and Institutional Development 1. Strengthening Capacity of Smallholder Farmers and Farmers' Organizations through Farmer Field Schools 4.566.7--2.233.36.717.64.81.9-2. Institutional Strengthening of Local, Provincial and National Units of the Ministry of Agriculture 3.038.2--4.861.87.720.32.84.30.63. Strengthening Capacity and Global Knowledge to address Emerging Research Issues 0.222.8--0.877.21.02.60.20.80.0Subtotal 7.749.7--7.850.315.540.57.87.00.6B. Support for Increased Production and Commercialization 1. Provision of Technical Support 6.5100.0--0.0-6.516.90.36.2-2. Provision of Investment Support 7.186.31.113.30.00.48.321.71.07.20.2Subtotal 13.692.31.17.50.00.214.738.61.313.30.2C. Project Management Project Management 6.794.1--0.45.97.118.70.86.10.3Monitoring and Evaluation 0.9100.0----0.92.20.70.1-Subtotal 7.694.7--0.45.38.020.91.56.20.3Total PROJECT COSTS 28.875.51.12.98.221.638.2100.010.626.51.1 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
104 
 Republic of AngolaSmallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila provinces (SADCP-C&H)Disbursement Accounts by Financiers(USD Million)LocalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Works 1.686.40.210.70.12.91.94.91.10.60.2B. Goods & Equipment 1. Vehicles 0.683.0--0.117.00.82.00.50.20.12. Equipment 0.383.0--0.117.00.41.10.30.10.1Subtotal 1.083.0--0.217.01.23.10.70.20.2C. Consulting Services 1. Individual consultancy 2.399.5--0.00.52.36.11.11.20.02. Firm - NGO consultancy 11.999.8--0.00.211.931.15.36.60.0Subtotal 14.299.8--0.00.214.237.26.37.80.0D. Training & Workshops 1. Local training & workshops 0.6100.0--0.0-0.61.60.00.6-2. International Training -----------Subtotal 0.6100.0--0.0-0.61.60.00.6-E. Operating Costs 1.112.5--8.087.59.123.82.46.10.7F. Salaries & allowances 5.2100.0----5.213.7-5.2-G. Grants & Subsidies 3.981.30.918.8--4.812.6-4.8-H. Credit 1.2100.0----1.23.1-1.2-Total PROJECT COSTS 28.875.51.12.98.221.638.2100.010.626.51.1The GovernmentTotalBeneficiariesIFAD 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
105 
 Republic of AngolaSmallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila provinces (SADCP-C&H)Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies(USD Million)Capacity Building and InstitutionalDevelopmentStrengtheningCapacity ofInstitutionalStrengtheningSmallholderStrengtheningCapacity andFarmers andof Local,GlobalFarmers'ProvincialKnowledge toOrganizationsand NationaladdressProvisionthroughUnits of theEmergingofProvision ofMonitoringFarmer FieldMinistry ofResearchTechnicalInvestmentProjectandSchoolsAgricultureIssuesSupportSupportManagementEvaluationTotal I. Investment Costs A. Civil Works -0.5--1.3--1.9B. Goods & Equipment Vehicles -0.5---0.3-0.8Equipment -0.20.1--0.1-0.4Subtotal -0.70.1--0.4-1.2C. Consultancies /a Individual Consultancy - Local -0.2-0.60.4--1.2Individual Consultancy - foreign -0.60.0---0.51.1Firm - NGO consultancy - Local -0.80.15.30.2-0.16.6Firm - NGO consultancy - Foreign 4.50.1-0.30.2-0.35.3Subtotal 4.51.70.26.20.8-0.914.2D. Training & Workshops Local training & workshops -0.20.00.30.1--0.6International training --------Subtotal -0.20.00.30.1--0.6E. Operating costs 2.2-0.7----3.0F. Matching Grants ----4.8--4.8G. Credit ----1.2--1.2Total Investment Costs 6.73.11.06.58.30.40.926.9II. Recurrent Costs A. Travel allowances -----0.3-0.3B. Incremental Salaries -----5.2-5.2C. Operation & Maintenance (O&M) Vehicle O&M -----0.7-0.7Office equipment O&M -----0.4-0.4Building O&M -4.6-----4.6Subtotal -4.6---1.2-5.8Total Recurrent Costs -4.6---6.7-11.3Total PROJECT COSTS 6.77.71.06.58.37.10.938.2  Taxes -0.60.0-0.20.3-1.1Foreign Exchange 4.82.80.20.31.00.80.710.6 _________________________________\a including studies and technical assistance.Project ManagementSupport for IncreasedProduction andCommercialization 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
`  
106 
 Republic of AngolaSmallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila provinces (SADCP-C&H)Disbursements by Semesters and Government Cash Flow(USD Million)Costs tobeFinancing AvailableFinancedThe GovernmentIFADBeneficiariesProjectCashCumulativeAmountAmountTotalCostsFlowCash Flow1 2.3-2.33.0-0.6-0.62 2.3-2.33.0-0.6-1.33 2.40.12.53.1-0.6-1.94 2.40.12.53.1-0.6-2.45 2.80.13.03.5-0.6-3.06 2.80.13.03.5-0.6-3.67 2.30.12.43.0-0.6-4.18 2.30.12.43.0-0.6-4.79 2.20.12.32.9-0.6-5.310 2.20.12.32.9-0.6-5.911 1.40.11.52.1-0.6-6.512 1.40.11.52.1-0.6-7.013 0.9-0.91.5-0.6-7.614 0.9-0.91.5-0.6-8.2  Total28.81.129.938.2-8.2-8.2 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
This Appendix presents the economic and financial analyses of the Smallholder Agriculture 
1. 
Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) that will be proposed to IFAD funding. 
A.   Project beneficiaries and benefits 
2. 
The project beneficiaries are smallholder farmers cultivating 0.5 to 2 hectares and living in 
areas with high potential for agricultural growth, in terms of agro-ecological and climatic conditions 
and market access. The total number of direct project beneficiaries is estimated at 60,000 (300,000 
household members), of which 50,000 would benefit from FFS support and 10,000 from investment 
support combined with FFS, including 1,000 from small scale irrigation. The targeted households 
account for 21% of all households in the project area.   
In addition, the project will also improve availability of public and private agricultural services. 
3. 
As such, traders, agro-industries, wholesalers, input suppliers, financial institutions (commercial 
banks, microfinance institutions) as well as public and private technical and business service 
providers will benefit. Traders and agri-businesses might benefit from an increased and stable supply 
of raw material, an organised marketing by producers’ organisations and therefore reduced bulking 
costs and an improved traceability of supply.  
Project benefits. The Project will improve the livelihoods of the direct beneficiaries. The main 
4. 
economic benefits generated by the project would be as follows:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
increased agricultural production from higher yields due to the adoption of improved 
technologies crops, enhanced access to and efficiency of water use through irrigation 
development;  
increased sales and cash income for participating smallholders; 
improved food security and nutrition status at household level and reduction in vulnerability 
to external shocks, notably climate change;  
reduced  transaction  costs  (bulking,  transport,  marketing  and  financial  costs)  and  post-
harvest  losses  thanks  to  the  higher  surpluses,  bulking  and  marketing  by  producers’ 
organisations  (POs)  and  other  value  chain  actors;  enhanced  access  of  POs’  members  to 
financial  services  -  including  matching  grants  and  enhanced  creditworthiness  and  linkages 
with financial institutions;  
increased value added by smallholders and POs within targeted value chains;  
enhanced  market/business  opportunities  and  economies  of  scale  benefiting  actors  of  the 
supply  chains  (smallholders  and  their  POs,  transporters,  traders,  agro-industries)  following 
the enhancement of market linkages between smallholders and buyers/processors; 
(vii)  enhanced  bargaining  power,  understanding  of  markets  and  management  capacity  of 
smallholders and their POs;  
(ix) 
(x) 
(viii)  enhanced  technical  and  managerial  capacities  of  POs  and  value  chains  actors  combined 
with  matching  grants  and  market  linkage  activities  will  increase  their  creditworthiness  and 
likeliness to receive adequate finance from buyers/financial institutions and in the long run to 
secure bulking of production from smallholders and sales to agribusinesses; 
incremental on and off-farm employment;  
foreign  exchange  savings  through  reduced  importation  of  food  and  possibly  enhanced 
exportation of coffee;  
improved natural resources conservation and resilience to climate change; and 
improved social stability, overall wellbeing and livelihoods in targeted areas. 
(xi) 
(xii) 
(xiii)  The project will also improve the institutional capacity of MINAGRI, IDA at central, provincial 
farmer 
and  municipality 
development  policies  and  strategies  will  be  progressively  developed  during  the  life  of  the 
project. 
implementation  of  smallholder 
levels.  The  Government’s 
107 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
B. Economic justification of the project 
Rationale for public sector financing 
5. 
In  Angola,  most  of  the  critical  public  investments  and  institutions  were  destroyed  or  de-
capitalised during the civil war. The project will support the rebuilding, rehabilitation and development 
of public goods, including agricultural value chain infrastructure, institutions and production capacity. 
The benefits generated by this support will be reinvested in part in the creation of new infrastructure 
and  production  capacity,  thus  serving  as  a  catalyst  for  the  development  of  additional  private  assets 
even after the project will have ended. 
6. 
The rationale for public sector financing in the proposed project lies in the following: (i) most of 
the rural population in Angola relies on agriculture as the main source of livelihood (food, income and 
employment);  (ii)  the  Poverty  Reduction  Strategy  (ECP)  clearly  highlights  agriculture  and  rural 
development  as  a  priority  to  fight  poverty  and  sustain  economic  growth;  (iii)  public  sector  support  is 
needed  to  improve  the  technical  and  managerial  capacity  of  smallholders  and  their  producer 
organisations  (POs),  better  integrate  them  into  markets  and  correct market  failures;  (iv)  the  SADCP 
will build on the work initiated and results achieved under the IFAD and World Bank-funded MOSAP. 
7. 
The  SADCP  will  address  a  number  of  market  failures:  (a) the  difficulties  of  smallholders  and 
their  organisations  to  access  improved  agricultural  inputs,  technologies  and  best  practices,  and  to 
investment  and  value  chain  financing;  (b) deficient  or  insufficient  links  between  smallholders  and 
formal agribusinesses/wholesalers in the targeted value chains;  (c) the deficiencies in the crop seed 
market, etc.  
8. 
Therefore,  public  intervention  is  fully  justified  to:  (i)  strengthen  direct  partnerships  between 
smallholders/POs, traders  and  agro-industries to overcome market barriers; (ii)  promote value chain 
development;  (iii)  support  the  modernisation  of  cropping  patterns  and  input  supply  lines,  including 
facilitated  access  to  improved  technologies  (technical  knowledge,  seeds,  mechanisation  services, 
organised  bulking  and  marketing,  product  quality  enhancement,  etc.);  (iv)  kick  start  and  co-finance 
youth/women groups and POs’ sub-projects through matching grants combined with capacity building 
of  these  groups/POs,  facilitation  of  smallholders’ access to short and medium term credit  and value 
chain finance products; and (v) support reforms and modernisation of the seed sector as well as key 
investment and adaptive research in the targeted value chains. 
Value added of IFAD's support  
9. 
The  Project  is  well  aligned  with  the  priority  themes  of  the  Angolan  2013-2017  National 
Development  Plan  (PND)  and  the  overall  IFAD  goals  and  regional  strategies.  This  notably  covers: 
enhance  access  to  markets  for  smallholders  linking  them  to  large  food  buyers/processors  and  to 
their 
financial 
organisations;  access  to  improved  technologies  and  technology  transfer;  promotion  of  climate-smart 
agriculture; and due consideration of gender, nutrition-sensitive agriculture and resilience issues.   
technical  and  managerial  capacity  building  of  smallholders  and 
institutions; 
10.  The  Project  has  significant  added  value  from  the  Government  and  development  community 
stand  point.  Beyond  financing,  the  added  value  arises  mainly  from  the  World  Bank’s,  IFAD’s  and 
FAO’s  technical  input  based  on  international  experience  for  similar  smallholder  and  value  chain 
development  projects,  introduction  of  innovative  financing  mechanisms  for  smallholders,  capacity 
development of POs and other value chain actors through participatory extensions (FFS) and training-
of-trainers  methodologies  (notably  for  the  ex-ante  preparation  and  financial  analysis  of  POs’  sub-
projects/ business plans), knowledge sharing and communication. By providing this support, IFAD will 
complement  -and  aim  at  correcting  deficiencies  of-  national  sources  of  expertise  and  business 
advisory support services to farmers/POs, resulting in enhancing the project’s development impact in 
ways  that  go  beyond  what  could  be  realised  by  exclusive  reliance  on  the  Government’s  own 
institutions or existing national consulting firms. 
11. 
In  addition,  as  an  important  development  partner  promoting  economic  and  agricultural 
development in Angola, IFAD’s involvement in supporting the SADCP-C&H-SAMAP, through parallel 
financing,  together  with  the  World  Bank,  will  help  implement  a  harmonised  framework  and  policy 
dialogue  for  supporting  smallholder  agriculture  in  Angola.  This  is  likely  to  have  a  broader  long  term 
impact than a stand-alone IFAD-funded operation.  
108 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
C. Financial analysis 
12.  The financial analysis of SADCP is based on 5 farm models, derived from 7 crop models.  The 
purpose of these financial models is to assess whether the proposed improved technology packages 
are commercially viable and enable the targeted smallholders to generate sufficient additional income, 
to  increase  their  food  security  and  resilience  to  shocks  and  to  raise  their  asset  base  and 
creditworthiness.  
Crop models 
13.  Seven  (7)  crop  models  have  been  developed  for  the  main  crops  cultivated  by  the  targeted 
smallholders.  These  crops  are  maize,  beans,  vegetables  (onion,  tomato  and  cabbage),  Irish  potato 
and  cassava.  These  crop  models  enable  us  to  compare  the  “without  project”  and  the  “with  project” 
with respect to (i) yields, input requirements, unit costs and prices; (ii) labour requirements, which can 
be a bottleneck in some operations/farming systems; (iii) sales, production costs, gross margins, cash 
flows, self-consumption, potential savings. These crop models have been developed on the basis of 
discussions with smallholders during the design of SADCP-C&H-SAMAP in the provinces of Cuanza 
Sul  and  Huila,  with  technicians  of  the  provincial  offices  of  the  Institute  of  Agricultural  Development 
(IDA), with FAO staff in charge of FFS and on the basis of secondary data.  
14.  The  “without  project”  situation  represents  the  current  situation  of  smallholders.  Typically, 
smallholders follow a traditional cropping pattern and practices that are characterised by the following: 
(i) the use of locally or own produced seeds, seedlings and planting material; (ii) no or limited use of 
fertiliser and pesticide, (iii) some use of manure, however at inappropriate rates to maintain soil fertility 
as  these  smallholders  generally  have  insufficient  livestock.  In  the  without  project  situation,  the  unit 
area cropped by smallholder household  ranges from 0.5 to 2.0 ha, with an average of 1.37  ha. The 
yield information was derived from the MOSAP baseline study (December 2012), IDA statistics for the 
2014/2015 crop year and discussions with technicians. 
15. 
“With  project”  situation:  The  smallholder  will  increase  his  production  by  improving  yields, 
cultivated  area  or  both.  A  distinction  has  been  made  between  the  impact  of  FFS  support  and  the 
investment support. The FFS support  will reach all targeted smallholders (60,000) but will have less 
impact on yield as the improved cropping techniques would not often be accompanied by an optimal 
use of inputs. The expected yield increases and post-harvest losses are presented in the table below.  
16.  The  investment  support  is  expected  to  reach  fewer  smallholders  (10,000)  but  would  have  a 
more  significant  impact  on  yields,  thanks  to  rehabilitation  and  development  of  small  irrigation 
schemes, access to finance (matching grants mainly, possibly combined with loans from participating 
financial institutions) to acquire equipment and use higher doses of inputs, in addition to FFS training. 
Forecasted  yields however still remain relatively  low  compared to  potential maximum yields and but 
largely  consistent  with  assumptions  made  for  higher  and  quality  input  use  and  are  in  fact  already 
achieved by some farmers supported under MOSAP.   
17.  Higher  yields  would  lead  to  higher  surpluses.  Self-consumption  is  particularly  important  for 
SADCP beneficiaries as the project targets smallholders, who typically cultivate small areas, are often 
food-insecure.  For  a  typical  household  of  5  members  (preliminary  results  of  the  2014  population 
census), yearly consumption of maize and cassava were estimated respectively at 455 kg and 730 kg. 
For the typical household cropping, this corresponds to an estimated self-consumption of 511 kg per 
ha of cropped maize and to 5,150 kg per ha of cropped cassava. A smallholder household that does 
not  reach  such  production  levels  from  their  farm  are  net  buyers  of  food.  They  need  to  sell  their 
workforce to others, use incomes derived from livestock, coffee (particular the case of three targeted 
municipalities in Cuanza Sul) and off-farm activities to meet their household food needs. 
Progressive  yields build up, over two to three  years before reaching the target  yields, have 
18. 
been  considered  to  take  into  account  into  account  the  progressive  mastering  of  the  improved 
technology packages by adopting smallholders, the difficulty to access inputs due to the remoteness 
of  some  areas,  etc.:  (i)  FFS:  as  the  yield  increase  is  limited  and  mostly  due  to  the  application  of 
improved agricultural practices with limited input use, it was considered that 90 % of the target  yield 
would  be  achieved  in  the  year  of  adoption,  95%  in  the  second  year,  and  100%  as  from  year  3 
onwards after adoption; (ii) investment support: the yield increase would be less rapid, namely 80% of 
target  yield  in  the  year  of  adoption,  90%  in  the  second  year,  before  reaching  the  full  target  yield  as 
109 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
from  year  3  onwards;  (iii) irrigation:  with  secured  access  to  water,  it  was  assumed  that  the  yield 
increase  woul  be  faster  ,  namely  90%  of  target  yield  in  the  adoption  year  and  95%  in  year  2.  In  all 
situations the full use of input and associated costs were considered, from the first year of adoption.  
Table 1: Assumptions for crop yields (kg/ha) 
19.  Output  prices  considered  in  the  financial  analysis  take  into  account  inter-annual  and  intra-
annual variation between harvest period and the lean season. In both the “without project” and “with 
project”  situations  it  is  relevant  to  assume  that  surpluses  are  sold  at  different  times  and  prices  after 
harvest,  as  smallholders  will  receive  support  to  link  with  buyers,  enhance  their  marketing  skills  and 
also  receive  funding  to  increase  their  bulking  and  storage  capacity;  in  both  the  with  and  without 
project  situations,  a  varying  share  of  the  production  surplus  (over  self-consumption)  would  be 
marketed: a) the largest share of surplus would be sold at harvest (at the lowest price as per available 
market data); b) a lower share after short storage of 1 to 2 months (at medium price); and c) a limited 
share after 2 to 5 months storage -depending on crop type- at a peak price during the lean season.  
20.  Prices of agro-chemicals, improved seeds, animal traction services (oxen-plough), hired labour 
and  transport  costs  are  based  on  farm  gate  prices,  which  can  vary  quite  considerably  between 
Provinces and according to the remoteness of the municipality considered.  
21. 
In the “without project” and “with project” situations for rain-fed crops, it can be assumed that, in 
most  SADCP  households,  the  available  family  labour  is  enough  to  carry  out  most  of  the  farming 
operations due the limited size of land holdings.  Both family  and paid labour have been  valued at a 
price of 400 AOA per day. 
Description of farm models 
22.  On the basis of the crop models described above, five farm models have been developed.  
  The rain-fed crop models 1 and 2 assume a cropped area of 1 ha in an improved way with 
project support30;  
  The household horticulture models 3 and 4 aims at capturing the vegetable production on small 
individual plots, on lowland or close to a river, using basic technologies, such as small diversion 
canals or hand-dug wells. The area per smallholder (0.12 ha) is within the capacity of a typical 
household to manage. Although a large variety of vegetables could be cropped, the model only 
considers  the  three  main  crops  grown  in  the  area:  (i)  onions  which  are  in  high  and  growing 
demand, relatively perishable but that can be stored during a certain period; (ii) tomatoes, also 
in high demand but sensitive to pest attacks, very perishable and quite risky; and (iii) cabbage; 
and 
  The irrigation model 5 is based on 0.5 ha of irrigated area per household. A cropping intensity 
of 180 % has been considered in the “with project” situation, compared to 100% in the without 
project situation. 
23. 
Distribution  of  the  cropped  area  between  crops  is  based  on  crop  statistics  (2015  season) 
provided by IDA for the ten targeted municipalities where the project will operate. More than half of the 
total area (60%) is cropped with cereals, essentially maize, followed by pulses (23%), mainly beans; 
then roots and tubers (13%) for self-consumption and sale, including cassava, sweet potato and Irish 
30 The average area cropped by smallholder farmers was estimated at 1.37 ha in the 3 provinces covered by 
MOSAP/SADCP-WB. 
110 
Crop Without projectWith project, FFS onlyWith project, FFS and investment suportPost-harvest lossesMaize500                       1,000                       2,100                                 5%Cassava7,000                   9,000                       13,000                              10%Irish Potato9,000                   10,000                     12,000                              15%Bean300                       550                           900                                    15%Onion8,000                   10,000                     14,000                              20%Tomato12,000                 15,000                     20,000                              25%Cabbage10,000                 12,000                     17,000                              15% 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
potato (the later essentially for commercial purposes); and horticultural crops (4%), mainly vegetables. 
Coffee  is  cropped  in  three  municipalities,  not  by  all  smallholders  and  cannot  be  considered  as 
representative.  
Table 2: Summary of farm models 
Farm model 
Model 1: rain-fed, FFS 
Model  2:  rain-fed,  FFS 
and investment support 
Model  3:  horticulture, 
FFS 
Model  4:  horticulture, 
investment 
FFS  and 
support 
Model 5: irrigation, FFS 
Area 
cultivated 
1 ha 
1 ha 
0.12 ha 
0.12 ha 
Support 
provided  by 
the project 
FFS 
Investment 
support & FFS 
FFS 
Investment 
support & FFS 
Crops and acreage 
Maize (0.7 ha), cassava (0.10 ha), Irish potato 
(0.05 ha), beans (0.15 ha) 
Maize (0.7 ha), cassava (0.10 ha), Irish potato 
(0.05 ha), beans (0.15 ha) 
Onion (0.05 ha), tomato (0.06 ha), cabbage (0.01 
ha) 
Onion (0.05 ha), tomato (0.06 ha), cabbage (0.01 
ha) 
0.9 ha (2 
seasons) 
Investment 
support & FFS 
Maize (0.17 ha), cassava (0.02 ha), Irish potato 
(0.11 ha), beans (0.05 ha), onion (0.21 ha), tomato 
(0.29 ha), cabbage (0.06 ha) 
24.  The total area cropped by the household as well as the distribution between crops have been 
kept constant  in the “with  project” situation, although land  doesn’t  appear to be a constraint in most 
targeted areas; however labour availability seem to be a major one, notably for some critical cropping 
operations; the main impact of the project being the  yield  increase. This assumption seems realistic 
as most of the project beneficiaries would benefit from FFS training, with improved cropping practices, 
weed control, and a minimal use of inputs; while improved technologies considered in the “investment 
support” mainly consider use of improved seeds, higher dose of fertilisers, some use of pesticides and 
improved  bulking/marketing  without  investment  in  mechanisation  and  animal  traction.  Since  some 
cropped area increase may well occur, this assumption likely underestimates the impact of the project 
on overall production, making the results of the financial and economic analysis even more robust.  
Financial analysis of the farm models 
25.  The tables below summarise financial performance of the five farm models. All farm models are 
financially viable with: (i) significantly higher cash flows in the “with project” situation, (ii) benefit/costs 
(B/C) ratio’s between 1.2 and 2.1, (iii) return to family labour between 712 AOA and 1,338 AOA per 
day; and (iv) Financial  Net  Present  Values (FNPV)  at  20 percent discount rate (the average  lending 
rate)  varying  from  AOA  36,164  for  1  ha  of  rain-fed  crops  with  FFS  support  (model  1)  to  AOA  0.7 
million for 0.5 ha of irrigated crops (model 5). 
26.  Both rain-fed models 1 and 2 shows substantial increases in  net income (at full production as 
from  year  3  after  adoption  of  the  technology  package)  with  project  support:  the  net  income  before 
financing  would  be  doubled,  from  AOA 33,560  per  year  in  the  “without  project”  situation  to 
AOA 55,835 per year in the “with project” situation, in the case of FFS support only (model 1); and it 
would be almost threefold combining FFS and investment support under model 2 (from AOA 33,560 
to AOA 90,010 per year). 
27.  The  horticulture  (HH)  models  3  and  4  also  shows  significant  increment  in  net  cash  flow  from 
about AOA 42,265 per year in the “without project” situation to AOA 57,046 and AOA 68,868 per year 
“with  project”  for  respectively  model  3  (FFS  support  only)  and  model  4  (combining  FFS  and 
investment  support).  These  financial  results  highlight  the  potential  attractiveness  and  profitability  of 
horticulture  compared  to  rain-fed  farming,  provided  that  markets  are  secured,  and  confirm  the 
soundness  of  supporting  household  horticulture  in  addition  to  food  crops  under  the  SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP. 
28.  The  small-scale  irrigation  (SSI)  model  displays  a  significant  increment  in  net  income  (before 
investment)  from  about  AOA 81,515  per  year  in  the  “without  project”  situation  to  AOA 356,745  per 
year in the “with project” situation.  
111 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 3: Cash flow and operating costs in with and without project situation (in AOA) 
Model 1: rain-fed, FFS 
Model 2: rain-fed, FFS and 
investment support 
Model 3: horticulture, FFS 
Model 4: horticulture, FFS and 
investment support 
Model 5: irrigation, FFS 
Revenue 
WoP 
WP 
Production costs 
WOP 
WP 
Net income a/ 
WoP 
WP 
80,582 
122,919 
47,022 
67,084 
33,560 
55,835 
80,582 
211,225 
47,022 
121,215 
33,560 
54,550 
78,582 
11,285 
12,005 
42,265 
90,010 
57,046 
54,550 
98,188 
11,285 
28,320 
42,265 
68,868 
126,154 
600,894 
44,639 
244,148 
81,515 
356,745 
a/ before family labour costs and before financing. NB: WoP: current “without project” situation; WP: “with project” situation. 
Table 4: Financial performance of the farm models  
D. Project costs and indicators of the logical framework 
29.  The table below summarises the project costs and indicators of the logical framework that were 
derived  from  the  logical  framework.  The  average  cost  per  beneficiary  of  SADCP,  just  taking  into 
account the IFAD contribution (US$28.8 million) is approximately US$ 481 per household.   
Table 5: Project costs and number of benefitting households 
Component 
Cost IFAD  
(US$ million) 
Number of 
households 
Cost 
(US$/household) 
building 
and 
institutional 
increased  production  and 
A.  Capacity 
development  
B.  Support 
commercialization  
C. Project management 
Total  
for 
   7.7 
  13.6 
  7.6 
28.8 
60,000 
10,000 
60,000 
60,000 
153 
1,361 
126 
481 
E. Economic analysis 
30.  The  economic  cost-benefit  analysis  aims  to  assess  the  economic  viability  of  the  proposed 
project from the overall national economic standpoint.  
Methodology and assumptions 
31.  The  analysis  was  conducted  over  a  20-year  period  in  constant  2016  prices,  aggregating 
additional  net  profits  derived  from  the  various  models  developed  in  the  financial  analysis.  The 
assumptions are the following: (i) financial prices and costs and benefit streams were transformed into 
112 
 Model 1: rain-fed, FFS  Model 2: rain-fed, FFS and investment support  Model 3: horticulture, FFS  Model 4: horticulture, FFS and investment support  Model 5: irrigation, FFS PY1698585(381)4,86125,353PY27,84422,7077,62415,580180,147PY310,85442,83013,62924,299209,192PY411,85443,83014,62925,299209,683PY510,85442,83013,62924,299209,192PY611,85437,57114,62925,299210,192PY710,85439,70013,62925,299209,192PY811,85443,83014,62925,299210,192PY910,85442,83013,62924,299209,192PY1011,85443,83014,62925,299210,1921.221.282.051.881.5436,164128,62742,50780,831704,628NANANANANA7129781,1771,3381,301 IRR  B/C  NPV (AOA)  Return to family labour Farm models' net incremental benefits -NIB(in AOA)FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
economic  values  through  calculating  economic  import/export  parity  prices  at  farm  gate,  applying 
conversion  factors  for  each  category  of  costs,  eliminating  taxes  and  transfers;  (ii)  economic  costs 
were  generated  by  COSTAB;  (iii)  incremental  costs  after  the  Project  implementation  period,  in 
particular for maintenance of irrigation schemes and other infrastructure, as well as costs to follow up 
farmers  were  taken  into  account;  (iii)  an  economic  exchange  rate  is  AOA 190/US$;  (iv)  a  social 
discount  rate  of  five  percent;  (v)  an  economic  cost  of  labour  of  340  AOA  per  day,  compared  to  a 
financial cost of 400 AOA per day; (vi) an adoption rate of improved technologies of 50%, given the 
difficult circumstances. 
32. 
Import  parity  prices  were  calculated  for  maize,  pulses  (soybean)  and  fertilisers  (urea)  on  the 
basis of the World Bank projections for the year 2025 – considered as the middle year for the period 
of  the  analysis  –expressed  in  2010  constant  prices  and  adjusted  to  2016  current  process  using  the 
weighted  index  for  each  category  of  commodity  index  as  published  on  the  World  Bank  web  site 
(commodity price forecasts) as of 26 July, 2016. The table below shows the conversion factor used to 
generate shadow prices.  
Table 6: Conversion factors 
Item 
Conversion factor 
Fertilisers & chemicals 
Seeds 
Maize (improved seeds) 
Bean and soybean seeds 
Packaging 
Labour 
Animal Power 
0.5 
1 
0.9 
0.8 
0.9 
0.85 
1 
33.  Economic  benefits  considered  in  the  analysis.  Quantified  economic  benefits  are  mainly 
those deriving from increased  cash flows of main rain-fed and  irrigated crops (maize, cassava, Irish 
potato,  bean,  onion,  tomato,  cabbage)  at  smallholder  level  resulting  from  increases  in  productivity 
(yield increases and increase in cropping intensity on SSI). After transforming financial crop, farm and 
irrigation  models  into  economic  values,  the  economic  benefits  of  each  model  type  have  been 
aggregated  to  calculate  the  net  incremental  economic  benefit  stream  (difference  between  the  “with 
project”  and  “without  project”  economic  benefit  streams)  derived  from  improved  technologies 
adoption.  The  phasing  of  implementation,  in  terms  of  number  of  hectares  and  beneficiaries  is 
presented in the table below. 
Aggregation and phasing of implementation 
34.  The following table presents the phasing of implementation with the number of hectares and 
number of beneficiaries to be reached per annum during the project life.  
Table 7: Phasing of implementation  
113 
PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TOTALNumber of beneficiariesRainfed FFSNumber-         9,000     9,000     9,000     9,000     9,000     45,000        Rainfed InvestmentNumber-         -         500        2,500     3,000     3,000     9,000          Horticulture investmentNumber-         -         100        300        300        300        1,000          Horticulture FFSNumber-         1,000     1,000     1,000     1,000     1,000     5,000          IrrigationNumber200        200        200        200        200        1,000          TotalNumber-         10,200    10,800    13,000    13,500    13,500    61,000        Number of hectaresRainfed FFSHa-         9,000     9,000     9,000     9,000     9,000     45,000        Rainfed InvestmentHa-         -         500        2,500     3,000     3,000     9,000          Horticulture investmentHa-         -         10          30          30          30          100             Horticulture FFSHa-         100        100        100        100        100        500             IrrigationHa-         100        100        100        100        100        500             Total Ha-         9,200     9,710     11,730    12,230    12,230    55,100         
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Remark: beneficiaries of small scale irrigation are already accounted for as beneficiaries of FFS, thus total number of beneficiaries is 60,000.  
Results of the economic analysis 
35.  The Project would yield an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 18% and an Economic 
Net Present Value (ENPV) of US$28.3 million (at 6% social discount rate)31. The Project is therefore 
highly profitable from an economic standpoint.   
36.  The  following  table  shows  the  incremental  economic  cash  flow  for  the  five  farm  models,  the 
total  economic  benefits  and  economic  costs  over  a  period  of  20  years.  From  year  8  onwards,  the 
incremental annual cash flow would be approximately US$ 6.7 million per annum. 
Table 8: Project economic cash flow, benefits and costs 
31 As recommended by the World Bank for project economic analysis. Source: Discounting Costs and Benefits in  
Economic Analysis of World Bank Projects, January 2016 - email from World bank Chief Economist, Sustainable Development 
Department (Ms. Marianne Fay), 13 January 2016. 
114 
PY1-                              -                                -                    -                      -                    -                    5,080(5,080)           PY2993                             -                                (3)                       -                      95                     542                   4,904(4,361)           PY32,367                          177                               36                      5                          3741,480                5,975(4,495)           PY43,929                          1,135                           106                    26                        684                   2,940                5,789(2,850)           PY55,537                          2,619                           182                    62                        995                   4,697                5,756(1,059)           PY67,098                          4,437                           252                    108                     1,3056,600                4,5752,025            PY77,714                          5,265                           331                    140                     1,5207,485                3,0944,392            PY87,901                          5,650                           363                    154                     1,5517,809                1,1476,662            PY97,948                          5,603                           368                    155                     1,5537,813                1,1476,666            PY107,901                          5,555                           363                    154                     1,5527,762                1,1476,614            PY117,948                          5,559                           368                    155                     1,5537,791                1,1476,644            PY127,948                          5,625                           368                    154                     1,553               7,824                1,1476,676            PY137,995                          5,676                           373                    155                     1,554               7,877                1,1476,730            PY147,995                          5,676                           373                    155                     1,554               7,877                1,1476,730            PY158,043                          5,692                           378                    157                     1,555               7,913                1,1476,765            PY168,043                          5,692                           378                    157                     1,555               7,913                1,1476,765            PY178,043                          5,692                           378                    157                     1,555               7,913                1,1476,765            PY188,043                          5,692                           378                    157                     1,555               7,913                1,1476,765            PY198,043                          5,692                           378                    157                     1,555               7,913                1,1476,765            PY208,043                          5,692                           378                    157                     1,555               7,913                1,1476,765            ENPV (US$ '000)28,335a/ with an adoption rate of:50%EIRR18.4%ECONOMIC ANALYSISIncremental Ecoonmic Costs           (US$ '000)Cash Flow (US$ '000)Total Economic NIB  a/ (US$ '000)Model 5: irrigation, FFSModel 4: horticulture, FFS and investment supportModel 3: horticulture, FFSModel 2: rain-fed, FFS and investment supportModel 1: rain-fed, FFSNet Aggregated Incremental Benefits (NIB) (US$ '000) 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
37.  The graphs below depicts and compares over time Project’s net benefits and incremental costs 
alongside Project cash flow  
Graph 1: Economic cash flow of the project 
38.  A  sensitivity  analysis  was  carried  out  to  assess  the  likely  impact  of  a  variation  of  some  key 
factors on the economic return of the project. It indicates a strong resilience to increases of costs and 
reductions of benefits. The project would still  yield an EIRR of respectively  16% and 13% if benefits 
were  reduced  by  10%  and  20%.  In  the  extreme  case  of  benefits  being  reduced  by  30%,  the  EIRR 
would establish at 11%, a value above the social discount rate. If benefits would lag by two years the 
EIRR would still establish at 12%. A summary of the sensitivity analysis is presented in Table 9 below. 
Table 9. Sensitivity analysis summary  
39.  Fiscal  Impact.  In  the  short-term,  the  impact  of  the  project  on  the  Government  budget  will  be 
neutral  or  slightly  negative,  given  that  the  Government’s  contribution  to  project  costs  essentially 
covers taxes and duties on items which wouldn’t have been purchased without the project, salaries of 
existing  staff,  and  additional  operational  costs  for  extension  services  and  agricultural  research  (IDA 
and ICA offices in targeted municipalities). In the medium to long-term, the potential fiscal impact shall 
be  positive,  mainly  due  to:  (i)  increased  output,  income  and  employment,  resulting  in  increased  tax 
revenues; and (ii) multiplier effects due to increased economic activities in targeted production areas, 
resulting  in  sustained  demand  for  goods  and  services,  which  is  expected  to  generate  additional 
income and employment effects. 
115 
 (6,000) (4,000) (2,000) - 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Graph G: Project Economic Cash FlowCash Flow (US$ '000)Incremental Ecoonmic Costs           (US$ '000)Total Economic NIB  a/ (US$ '000)IRR (%)NPV (US$ '000)18.4%               28,335 -10%15.9%               21,992 -20%13.3%               15,648 10%16.1%               24,825 20%14.2%               21,315 1 year14.8%               22,417 2 years12.2%               16,834 Link with the risk matrixBase caseCombination of risks affecting output prices, yields and adoption ratesIncrease of input prices or construction material Decrease in benefitsIncrease in project costsDelay of benefits∆%Risks affecting  adoption rates and low implementation capacity 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft Project implementation manual 
Appendix 11: Draft Project implementation manual 
1.
The Project Implementation Manual (PIM) describes the modalities and procedures to be used 
for  implementation  of  the  Smallholder  Agriculture  Development  and  Commercialization  Project 
(SADCP).  The  Manual  provides  a  checklist  of  procedures  and  tasks  to  be  executed  during  routine 
loan  administration  and  project  implementation  activities.  In  particular,  the  PIM  clarifies  procedures 
and requirements regarding, project implementation, loan administration and flow of funds, reporting, 
accounting  and  participatory  implementation  procedures.  The  PIM  aims  to  provide  the  project 
management and implementing partners with procedural guidance to implement the Project. The PIM 
is intended to be a functional document to be adapted and amended as necessary to incorporate the 
lessons learned from implementation experience. 
2.
The PIM presents a  general  description of the project planning design,  project  costs, benefits 
and  sustainability,  its  implementing  partners,  organisational  arrangement,  staffing,  and  their 
responsibilities. The PIM will cover the implementation guidelines and procedures for implementation 
of each project component and preparation of annual work plan & budget and procurement planning, 
reporting, monitoring and evaluation and supervision.  
3.
Preparation and submittal of the draft Project Implementation Manual (PIM) for IFAD review and 
“No  Objection”  is  a  key  condition  for  the  project  to  enter-into-force.  While  the  Project  Coordination 
Committee (PCC) will adopt the PIM substantially in the form approved by IFAD,  it does not replace 
the definitive Project Documents. Where there are inconsistencies with any provision of the Financing 
Agreement, the provision of the Agreement shall govern. 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS32 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
INTRODUCTION 
A.  Purpose and Contents the PIM 
B.  Overall Approach to Project Implementation 
C.  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP Summary 
D.  Country and rural development context  
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A.  Project area and Target group 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
C.  Project Outcomes and Components 
D.  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
PROJECT COSTS, FINANCING, BENEFITS AND SUSTAINABILITY 
A.  Project costs 
B.  Project financing 
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
D.  Sustainability 
IMPLEMENTATION AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS  
(PLANNING, MONITORING & EVALUATION AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT) 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
Background 
Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Annual Work Planning and Budgeting 
Knowledge Management 
Supervision 
Risk identification and mitigation 
32Draft PIM will be prepared and included as a separate document. 
117 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11: Draft [project/programme] implementation manual 
V. 
VI. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTING MODULE 
A. 
B. 
Purpose of Financial Management Manual 
Roles and responsibilities of key actors in financial management of SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP 
General Institutional Set-Up and Governing Regulations 
Types of Accounts, Special Account and Project Accounts 
IFAD Disbursement Procedures 
Check List for Withdrawal Applications 
Annual Financial Statements 
Special Account Reconciliation Statement 
Project Completion 
Financial management team responsibilities in procurement 
Treasury management 
Accounting software and chart of accounts 
Financial reporting and management accounting 
Audit arrangements (Internal and External) 
Funds flow – including management of withdrawal applications 
Other internal controls 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 
L. 
M. 
N. 
O. 
P. 
Purpose of Procurement Management Manual 
General Conditions of Procurement 
Procurement Procedures 
Procurement Committees 
Procurement Methods 
Review of Procurement Decisions 
PROCUREMENT MANAGEMENT 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G.  Guidelines for Evaluation of Bids 
Bid Evaluation Summary Checklist 
H. 
Procurement Method: Goods and Work 
I. 
Procurement Method: Services 
J. 
Procurement through community 
K. 
L. 
Review of Procurement Decisions 
M.  Grievance/complaint redressal system  
VII.  MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS… 
Introduction 
A. 
B. 
Approach 
C.  Measuring results 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 
L. 
SADCP-C&H-SAMAP Monitoring Indicators 
Learning 
Impact Measurement 
Assessing RIMS Indicators 
 SADCP-C&H-SAMAP Management Information System 
Logical Framework Planning 
Establishing Participatory MIS 
Indicative List of Baseline Data for Scheme 
SADCP-C&H-SAMAP Logical Framework 
VIII.  RESULT-ORIENTED ANNUAL WORK PLAN & BUDGET 
Introduction 
A. 
B.  Model Format for AWP&B 
C.  Pointers for Preparation of AWP&B 
D.  AWP&B 
E.  Result-oriented AWP&B 
F.  Procurement Plan 
G.  Training Schedule 
H.  Staff Deployment 
118 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
Appendix 12: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment 
Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
1.  Major landscape characteristics and Issues  
The  Smallholder  Agricultural  Development  and  Commercialization  Project 
1.
(SADCP) 
interventions  will be focused in  five provinces of Bie,  Malanje,  Huambo, Cuanza Sul and Huila. The 
IFAD financing will focus on the two provinces of Cuanza Sul and Huila. This SECAP review note will 
mainly address the interventions in these two provinces. The wider geographic region will be covered 
as a result of the synergies and opportunities from the co-financing with the World Bank. World Bank 
financing  will cover  the three provinces  of Bie,  Malanje and Huambo,  which is  where  MOSAP I that 
was also co- financed with IFAD was implemented. The main intervention areas of the SADCP will be 
in the central highlands and transition zones (most of Huambo, the south eastern part of Cuanza Sul, 
northern part of Huila, southern part of Malanje and western part of Bie). The vegetation is this region 
is mainly miombo woodlands, montane forest and grassland mosaic (Figure1).   
Figure 1. Vegetative cover of Angola      Source: WWF 
2.
Angola has rich biodiversity and ecosystems ranging from the Namibe desert in the southwest, 
the Okavango and Zambezi basins in the southeast and the tropical forest  within the Congo basin in 
northeast.  The  main  biomes  are:  Guinea-congolese  in  the  north,  Zambezi  (which  entails  more  than 
80%  of  the  country’s  territory), Afromontano  and  Karro-Namib  in  the  south.  The  dominant  soils  are 
ferralitic and psamítico. In some areas the ferralitic soils have a sandy to argilo-arenosa texture, are 
deep and well drained with low organic matter and mineral nutrients.  According to IUCN, about 75% 
of  animals  and  plants  occurring  in  Angola  are  listed  in  red  list  as  being  vulnerable,  endangered, 
critically endangered or of which there are no available data33. 
3.
Angola's  climate  is  tropical,  hot  and  humid,  with  a  longer  hot  and  wet  season  (September  to 
April) and a shorter cool and dry season (May to August). Short dry spells, usually lasting about two 
weeks,  are  common  during  the  hot  and  wet  season.  The  mean  temperature  in Angola  is  between 
25ºC and 33ºC in the rainy season and between 18ºC and 22ºC during the dry season. The project 
target  zone  is located between the higher rainfall region of the north and  the lower rainfall southern 
region. Annual rainfall in the central plateau region is around 900 mm to 1,500 mm. 
33 The list includes three species of insects, 37 bird species, 90 mammals, seven species of reptiles, 10 species of 
gastropods and 29 magnoliopsidics. The 2002 assessment appears to be the most holistic though it may now be 
outdated.  
119 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
4.
The preliminary findings of the last population census (2014), estimate a total population of 24.3 
million resident inhabitants, of which 48% are males and 52% are females. The population density is 
relatively low at around 20 inhabitants/km2. Approximately 38% of the population live in the rural areas 
where poverty levels are estimated at 58%, almost twice the level in urban areas, which is 30%. FAO 
statistics  show  that  almost  68%  of  the  economically  active  adult  population  work  in  the  agricultural 
sector.  In  the  central  highlands,  where  SADCP  will  intervene,  the  main  livelihoods  are  centred  on 
agricultural  systems  including  bananas,  pineapples,  maize,  beans,  potatoes  and  vegetables  as  the 
main crops, Figure 2. Sorghum, millet and cassava are also cultivated in neighbouring areas.  
Figure 2. Livelihood zones of Angola Source: FEWSNET 
2.  Potential project’s social, environmental and climate change impacts and risks 
5.
SADCP aims to support poor rural households that are involved in agriculture and interested in 
developing  their  production  skills  and  commercialising  part  or  all  of  their  production.  This  will  be 
achieved  through  two  main  components,  one  focusing  on  capacity  building  and  another  on 
investments in agricultural productivity and market access.  
6.
Under component 1, the capacity building activities will be through Farmer Field and Business 
Schools (FFS and FBS, Section II C of the PDR). The knowledge and skills developed by farmers will 
result  in  an  increase  in  production  due  to  the  adoption  of  good  agricultural  practices  that  will  be 
promoted  by  the  project.  The  curriculum  will  also  include  climate  change  adaptation  options  for  the 
farmers to select from based on their asset base.  Another key aspect to be included in the curriculum 
is  environmental  management  standards  to  improve  the  natural  resource  use,  waste  management, 
food safety and the hygiene of the target beneficiaries.  
7.
Under Component 2 with the investments in agricultural productivity, it is estimated that famers 
will also be able to expand the cultivated area from the average area 1.5 ha to about two to three ha. 
The  expansion  will  be  on  previously  cultivated  land  that  smallholders  already  have  access  to.  This 
expansion if not well managed may have adverse impacts such as increasing soil erosion and health 
risks. Increased use of agro-chemicals may also result in pollution. Poor handling and application of 
agrochemicals will increase health risks to those exposed to the chemicals and the consumers of the 
products.  The  use  of  agrochemicals  may  contribute  to  soil  and  water  (surface  and  groundwater) 
eutrophication  and  contamination  with  hazardous  pollutants.  The  curriculum  of  the  Farmer  Field 
Schools will include best practice on the safe use, storage and disposal of agrochemicals. 
8.
Acidic soils are a rather common localised occurrence in the central plateau region. In order to 
take corrective measures, IDA carries out soil assessments every three years. Several provinces are 
120 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
sampled annually and the dolomite lime procured for correction is also sampled before smallholders 
are advised on the quantities to apply. Capacity  building of the smallholders is an integral part of the 
assessments as in some cases they are not able to explain why their yields are decreasing when soils 
are acidic. Recent soil assessments were done in Huila and others are planned in Kwanza Sul during 
2016/2017.  Given  the  occurrence  of  the  acidic  soils,  SADCP  will  need  to  make  use  of  and  support 
these  assessments  where  feasible  and  ensure  the  corrective  measures  can  be  undertaken  by  the 
smallholders  once  the  capacity  building  is  provided. The  corrective  measures  for  acidic  soils  will  be 
included in the FFS curriculum.  
9.
The post-harvest sub-projects covering storage, processing and packaging facilities may have 
adverse  impacts  that  are  site  specific  particularly  during  construction  phases.  Damages  to  the 
vegetation cover will occur due to the installation of new structures, localised land clearing, disposing 
of excavated materials and land levelling. Losses of soil and landscape degradation are also potential 
impacts  associated  with  these  activities.  Wildlife  disturbance  and  habitat  fragmentation  may  also 
occur in some locations. Social impacts could include changes in informal access and resource use 
such as water and  land. The concentration of labour may also contribute to an increase of waste  at 
the  sites.  The  potential  risk  of  encountering  archeological  sites  including  graveyards  should  also  be 
considered. However, the details of these sub-projects and exact location of these activities will not be 
known until project implementation. Therefore, Environmental and Social Management Plans will have 
to be developed in a participatory manner at each site.  
10.
Impacts  on  informal  land  and  water  use  may  be  caused  in  the  course  of  infrastructure 
development  and  expansion  of  cultivation  areas.  The  infrastructure  development  will  include  the 
rehabilitation of rural roads and small-scale irrigation  schemes of approximately  20-35ha (potentially 
500 ha in total). The access rights will have to be ensured for different users in line with local customs 
and  culture.  Provisions  for  managing  chance  finds  have  been  articulated  in  the  ESMF.  The 
infrastructure  installation  will  result  in  some  localised  adverse  environmental  effects  such  as  land 
cover  and  water  course  disturbances.  On  the  positive  side,  the  construction  and  in-field  land 
preparation  will  create  opportunities  for  employment  at  the  local  level.  Though  HIV/AIDS  and  other 
STDs  may  increase  due  to  the  inflows  of  people  to  these  locations  in  search  of  employment 
opportunities. 
  The  anticipated  positive  impacts  of  the  SADCP  include:  improved  incomes,  food  security  and 
11.
nutrition at household level as a result of increased production and productivity; adoption of improved 
improved 
agronomic  practices  and 
environmental standards and conditions including food safety as a result of the field schools and the 
investment opportunities being provided by the project. The environmental conditions are expected to 
improve  as  a  result  of  better  land  use  and  availability  of  infrastructures.  In  addition  to  the  improved 
environmental  conditions  and  hygiene,  the  diversification  of  crops  and  diet  of  the  communities  will 
contribute to improved nutrition. 
that  will  enhance  climate  resilience  and; 
technologies 
  The impact of climate change  effects including  prolonged drought, damaging flash floods and 
12.
forest  fires,  has  been  reduced  crop  production  and  water  resources.  Economic  sectors  such  as 
agriculture,  coastal  zones,  forests,  water  resources,  ecosystems  and  biodiversity  are  extremely 
vulnerable  to  impacts  resulting  from  the  extreme  events,  which  will  pose  not  only  serious  livelihood 
and  direct  health  risks  but  can  also  affect  national  food  security  (INDC,  2015).  Mean  annual 
temperature  is  projected  to  increase  in  the  region  by  1.2  to  3.2°C  by  the  2060s.  Climate  models 
predict  Angola  will  experience  more  extreme  weather  events,  an  expansion  of  arid  and  semi-arid 
regions,  seasonal  shifts  in  rainfall,  localised  floods,  increased  wildfires,  sea  level  rise,  increased 
rainfall  in  the  northern  parts  of  the  country,  changes  in  river  flows  and  changes  in  sea  and  lake 
temperatures (NAPA, 2011). The temperature increases and shifts in rainfall patterns are expected to 
adversely  affect  the  agricultural  productivity  in  the  targeted  regions  of  the  SADCP  as  most  of  the 
agricultural production is rain fed.  
3.  Environmental and social category  
  The environmental and social  category for the  SADCP is  B as most of the  identified  potential 
13.
negative impacts, in the section above, for the sub-projects under Component 2 are site-specific and 
mostly  reversible  or  mitigation  measures  can  be  articulated  as  part  of  the  ESMPs. All  the  irrigation 
schemes to be rehabilitated are small scale. As mentioned in the introductory section, the SADCP will 
be co-financed with the World Bank. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
121 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
has  been  developed  for  the  three  provinces  to  be  covered  by  the  World  Bank  funds,  which  will  be 
extended  to  the  two  provinces  for  IFAD  financing.  Following  IFAD  review,  the  ESMF  will  be 
strengthened in areas such as biodiversity, domestic energy sources, water management, labour and 
community  health  and  safety,  as  necessary.  Based  on  the  World  Bank  policies  the  ESMF  was 
disclosed in December 2015. A Resettlement Action Framework has also been elaborated to respond 
to the acknowledged potential resettlement as a result of the irrigation scheme development. The RAF 
can also be extended to the IFAD financed regions. Most of the activities in and the two components 
identified  for  financing  by  IFAD  and  the  World  Bank  are  the  same,  though  a  key  difference  is  the 
higher  level  of  small  scale  irrigation  rehabilitation  activities  (1,000  ha)  and  additional  infrastructure 
activities such as roads rehabilitation and housing for extension officers that have been included in the 
latter.  
  The ESMF identifies and establishes the procedures and methodologies for the environmental 
14.
and  social  assessment,  review,  approval  and  implementation  of  investments  to  be  financed.  It 
specifies  roles  and  responsibilities  as  well  as  outlines  the  necessary  reporting  procedures,  for 
managing  and  monitoring  environmental  and  social  concerns  related  to  project  investments.  It 
identifies the training, capacity building and technical assistance to ensure the implementation of the 
provisions. The estimated budget for its implementation is $650,000 USD, of which approximately half 
is for undertaking Environmental Impact Assessments and developing, implementing and monitoring 
ESMPs.  The  IFAD  investments  will  involve  less  infrastructure  development  and  therefore  resources 
for  developing  and  monitoring  ESMPs  should  be  manageable  and  can  be  included  in  the  SADCP 
budget under IFAD financing. 
4.  Climate risk category  
15.
  The climate risk classification for SADCP is moderate. This classification is further explained in 
Annex  1,  which  provides  responses  to  the  guiding  questions  for  climate  risk  screening.  The  main 
climate  related  risks  for  the  target  beneficiaries  is  the  rainfall  variability.  The  central  plateau  region 
receives  sufficient  annual  rainfall  but  dry  spells  sometimes  occur.  The  northern  regions  are  also 
expected to have increased rainfall, which may result in excess water flows. However, some studies 
predict  improved  productivity  in  terms  of  crop  yields  for  cereals  as  a  result  of  the  shifts  in  rainfall 
patterns. The specific impact on crops that will be targeted under the SADCP have been investigated 
through  a  climate  vulnerability  analysis  undertaken  during  the  design  phase.  This  analysis 
recommended  appropriate  adaptation  measures  to  be  considered  during  the  implementation  of  the 
SADCP.  
  However, even in the absence of the climate risk analysis, the SADCP should be aligned to the 
16.
priorities  for  adaptation  in  the  agriculture  sector  in  a  no-regrets  approach.  The  priorities  under 
agriculture and food security as well as terrestrial ecosystems include promoting sustainable land and 
water  management  for  increased  agricultural  yields,  soil  erosion  control  through  organic  methods, 
diversifying  crops  to  less  climate  sensitive  cultures  and  implementing  water-harvesting  system  in 
drought-prone  areas  (NAPA  2011). The  SADCP  will  include  sustainable  land  management  practices 
that will be promoted through the Farmer Field Schools and capacity building on climate risk analysis 
through the Farmer Business Schools. The capacity building will be targeted at both the farmers and 
technicians at the field level particularly for climate change adaptation.  
  The  Ministry  of  Environment  has  the  mandate  for  ensuring  environmental  protection  and 
17.
climate  change  adaptation.  As  part  of  the  strategy  to  mainstream  environmental  and  climate  risk 
management and demonstrate activities in specific sectors, ecological centers have been constructed 
in Namibe, Cabinda, Cuando Cubango and Huambo Provinces. The center in Huambo can be used 
by the SADCP as a training base for the small holders and technicians in environmental management 
and  climate  change  adaptation  options  as  well  as  renewable  energy  technologies  for  post-harvest 
facilities where feasible.   
5.  Recommended features of project design and implementation 
  The  SADCP  provides  several  opportunities  for  enhancing  the  climate  resilience  of  the  target 
18.
population and incorporating environmental and social risk management. This  has been informed by 
the climate risk analysis on selected crops and implemented within the context of the ESMF already 
undertaken  for  Huambo,  Bie  and  Malanje  that  will  be  expanded  to  include  Kwanza-Sul  and  Huila 
provinces.  Successful  implementation  of  the  ESMF  will  largely  depend  on  the  involvement  and 
122 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
participation of local communities and the local institutions. Therefore as stakeholders they should be 
actively engaged in the implementation of the project and the ESMF. 
19.
In terms of specific activities, the FFS and FBS that FAO will conduct jointly with local IDA/EDA 
extension  services  will  include  environmental  management  and  climate-smart  agriculture  practices 
related to soil conservation, rational use of water, fertilisers, pesticides and improving soil fertility and 
integrated  nutrient management, nutrition and hygiene. HIV/AIDS and gender awareness will also be 
systematically  integrated  in  field  schools  as  cross-cutting  issues.  FAO  will  coordinate  the  FFS  and 
FBS and source resource persons for some of the specialised topics.  
  Training on environmental topics such as management, impact assessment and monitoring will 
20.
also be undertaken to build the capacity of agricultural officers. This is a lesson learnt from MOSAP I's 
environmental  performance,  which  showed  that  although  the  legislation  and  understanding  of  the 
importance  of  environmental  management  exists  among  technicians,  there  is  a  lack  of  cooperation 
between the agriculture and environmental departments. This sentiment was also echoed during the 
discussions  with  the  Environment  Ministry  as  part  of  the  SADCP  design  consultations.  Capacity  will 
also be built in environmental and social systems for financial intermediaries that will participate in the 
SADCP. This will enhance the investment risk screening capacity of the institutions.  
  The infrastructure installation for storage and processing facilities and rehabilitation of irrigation 
21.
schemes  implies  risks  for  landscape  conservation  and  may  induce  soil  erosion  and  habitat 
disturbance.  Measures  to  minimise  the  negative  impacts  can  include:  striping  and  storing  topsoil 
separately;  piling  up  excavated  earth  separately  from  topsoil;  backfilling  excavated  material; 
reinstating  the  work  site  by  spreading  topsoil  and  stimulating  re-vegetation  as  appropriate;  applying 
slope  stabilisation  techniques  –  terracing,  drainage,  gabions,  greening,  etc.-  as  appropriate  on  the 
steep  slopes  prone  to  erosion;  and  not  extracting  gravel  from  watercourses.  Waste  should  be 
temporarily stored in designated locations at the work sites before final disposal at appropriate sites 
agreed with local authorities. 
  Expansion of cultivated land can have two approaches; either the existing plots are expanded 
22.
or farmers acquire additional  land in another nearby  location.  Prior to the land  acquisition extension 
officers  (IDA  personnel)  conduct  an  assessment  of  the  soils  and  also  advise  farmers  on  conflict 
avoidance and resolution mechanisms when it occurs. The officers also advise farmers on soil fertility 
and suitable crops for specific areas. These systems will need to be supported through the SADCP. 
23.
  The  promotion  of  improved  post-harvest  and  value  addition  technologies  (including  storage, 
processing and packaging) is an adaptation measure under Component 2 particularly for cassava and 
sweet  potatoes.  The  promotion  of  pathogen-resistant  and  water-tolerant  cultivars  for  cassava  and 
bananas  will  also  help  smallholders  adapt  to  climate  change.  The  smallholders  engaged  in  coffee 
production  can  adapt  through  the  use  of  multiple  varieties  of  robusta  and  arabica  in  the  same 
production  areas,  shade  trees  and  other  forms  of  intercropping  and  agro-forestry  in  new  coffee 
plantations.  The  staple  maize  crop  can  have  improved  drought-tolerant  varieties  to  increase  the 
resilience of smallholders. Sorghum and millet can also be promoted as climate-resilient alternatives 
to  maize.  In  addition  the  smallholders  will  need  increased  access  to  weather  forecasts  and  early 
warnings to enhance their resilience. Annex 2 provides further details on adaptation options.   
  A grievance mechanism will also be set up under the SADCP, as articulated in the ESM, that 
24.
can  be  replicated  in  the  two  provinces  to  be  covered  by  IFAD  financing.  A  Provincial  committee 
comprising  local  authorities  and  traditional  leaders  is  envisaged  with  the  aim  of  receiving  all 
grievances.  The  committees  will  keep  records  of  grievances  and  complaints  with  minutes  of 
discussions,  recommendations  and  decisions  achieved.  The  ESMPs  will  establish  detailed 
mechanisms for the grievance and complaint process, describing format, language, time for reply and 
alternative resources including access to Courts of Law as a last resort after exhausting all the viable 
peaceful local alternatives/options. Permanent and open dialogue will also be promoted as this is the 
most suitable way of peacefully addressing any grievance expressed.  
  An Environmental and Social Safeguard Focal Point will be appointed for the SADCP provinces 
25.
to ensure compliance of the proposed project activities with relevant Angola environmental laws and 
regulations and the SECAP. Under the World Bank financing, a specialist has been proposed for each 
province. However, for the IFAD financing given the lesser volume of infrastructure development, one 
specialist  would  be  able  to  cover  the  two  provinces  with  additional  support  as  required  from  other 
123 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
team members. In addition, regional training workshops to be organised for all actors involved, such 
as  project  coordination  team  at  all  levels,  beneficiary  groups,  contractors  and  other  relevant  project 
partners in the implementation of the SECAP upon project effectiveness. 
6.  Analysis of alternatives   
  Various approaches were considered during the design of the SADCP including the provision of 
26.
inputs  by  the  project.  This  option  was  deemed  unsustainable  and  would  have  required  more 
descriptive environmental and social management plans based on the inputs to be provided. Another 
option considered was the rehabilitation of small scale irrigation schemes, which have been identified 
through a scoping study financed by the World Bank. The SADCP will rehabilitate approximately 20% 
of the identified schemes in the three provinces of Huambo, Bie and Malanje. Based on the identified 
need for small-scale irrigation to reduce the dependency on rain-fed agriculture, IFAD resources  will 
finance a study to identify  small-scale irrigation schemes  that can be rehabilitated at modest cost  in 
Huila  and  Cuanza  Sul.  The  development  of  these  schemes  can  be  taken  up  by  the  SADCP  or  by 
small holders willing to invest in the infrastructure in groups. ESMPs will have to be developed for the 
irrigation  sites  and  specifications  adhered  to  in  terms  of  scale.  This  would  ensure  only  small  scale 
schemes are rehabilitated and the B categorisation adhered to for environmental and social risks.  
7.  Institutional analysis 
27.
  The  Ministry  for  the  Environment  is  responsible  for  the  development  and  coordination  of  the 
country’s  environmental  policy  and  for  implementing  the  National  Environmental  Management 
Programme. It is also mandated to implement the Environmental Framework Law, No. 5/98 (EFL), the 
Environmental Licensing Law No. 59/07 and all related regulations. It also reviews and regulates the 
environmental impact assessments through the National Directorate for Protection and Environmental 
Impact Assessment. 
  A  functional  multi-sectoral  Commission  dealing  with  environmental  matters,  which  has 
28.
representation from over 12 different ministries and three environmental NGOs, as well as a number 
of environmental experts also exists. However, issues such as bureaucracy, lack of skills, and lack of 
continuity in some key programs pose challenges in meeting all the objectives of the Commission and 
ensuring  a  coordinated  approach  to  environmental  management  issues.  The  Ministry  is  making 
strides in capacity development for staff and would like to reach out to other line Ministries.  
29.
  As  part  of  the  institutional  strengthening,  a  5-days  training/awareness  program  will  be 
organised  under  SADCP  for  Project  Implementation  Units,  Project  Staff  and  other  relevant 
stakeholders at national and Province level. The training program aims to provide attendees with the 
basic  approach  to  implementing  the  guidelines  provided  in  the  ESMF  combined  with  the  use  of  the 
appropriate  tools,  such  as  the  screening  form,  ESMP,  EIA  and  related  relevant  subjects.  Two-day 
refresher courses should also be held as needed during the course of the programme lifecycle. The 
full SADCP team will benefit from the training during  the start-up phases  if recruitment of personnel 
can  be  synchronised.  The  training  will  be  extended  to  include  stakeholders  from  Kwanza-Sul  and 
Huila.  
  Discussions were held with the Ministry of Environment regarding the available GEF resources, 
30.
for which SADCP can be used as the baseline. The funds targeted would be from the Climate Change 
and  Land  Degradation  focal  areas.  The  commitments  under  GEF  6  are  yet  to  be  finalised  and 
implementing  agencies  have  not  been  selected.  However,  the  Ministry  indicated  some  projects  and 
programmes  will  be  continued  from  GEF  5  and  thus  available  resources  may  be  very  limited.  The 
Ministry expressed interest in operationalising the ecological centres (Cabinda, Huambo, Namibe and 
Cuando Cubango) and GEF resources could potentially contribute to this effort if made available. The 
operationalisation  of  the  ecological  centre  in  Huambo  would  be  prioritised  as  it  is  located  within  the 
SADCP  geographic  target  area.  SADCP  will  provide  support  for  equipping  the  centre  and  also 
sourcing  the  technical  expertise  through  technical  assistance  on  selected  thematic  areas  to  staff  at 
the  center.  The  equipment  will  include  locally  suitable  technologies  for  improved  environmental 
management and climate change adaptation that will be demonstrated to the farmers. The ecological 
centre will be used as a learning and training center both for technicians and the smallholders.  
124 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
8.  Monitoring and Evaluation 
  Under  the  SADCP,  quarterly  monitoring  of  the  mitigation  measures  will  be  undertaken  by  the 
31.
relevant  authorities  (environment  officers,  agriculture  extension  officers  and  water  officers)  working 
closely  with  the  Project  Coordination  team.  This  monitoring  arrangement  will  be  extended  to  all 
SADCP  areas  of  intervention.  In  addition,  as  part  of  the  Project’s  overall  monitoring  program,  the 
Environmental Authorities and PCO will provide annual reports on the performance of the investment 
sub-projects  with  regards  to  environment  and  natural  resource  management.  This  will  include  the 
monitoring of implementation of the ESMPs. 
  Under  the  SADCP  an  independently  commissioned  environmental  and  social  audit  will  be 
32.
carried out on an annual basis. The audit will ensure that any required corrective measures are taken 
and that the ESMF process and mitigation measures are being implemented effectively. 
9.  Further information required to complete screening, if any 
  Additional information will be required in the form of climate risk analysis to inform the selection 
33.
of the value chains and also recommend specific adaptation measures for the smallholders. The risk 
analyses will be done during the design phase. In addition, the ESMF developed for the World Bank 
financing  will  be  extended  to  the  IFAD  funded  geographic  target  area  during  the  initial  phases  of 
project implementation.  
10. Budgetary resources and schedule 
  The resources required for the climate risk analysis is approximately US$45,000 and a service 
34.
provider to undertake the assignment would be identified as the expertise is available either national 
or within the region. The resources for the analysis have been set aside as part of the design budget. 
The revision of the  SADCP ESMF to  include  the IFAD funded target  area  will require approximately 
US$50,000. These  resources  will  be  included  in  the  SADCP  budget  as  well  as  additional  resources 
for the implementation and monitoring of the ESMF estimated at US$200,000.  
11. Record of consultations with beneficiaries, civil society, general public etc. 
  Consultations with potential beneficiaries were held during the field visits as part of the design 
35.
mission  in  June  2016.  Smallholders  are  aware  of  climate  variability  and  often  request  support  from 
Government in terms of improved inputs such as seeds to cope with the variability. Government also 
provides tools and fertiliser subsidy and dolomite lime for soil amendments.  
  The consultations also provided scope to build on already cultivated commodities in the target 
36.
provinces  (i.e.  maize,  cassava,  beans,  potatoes,  and  vegetables),  which  will  make  use  of  local 
knowledge in rolling out the project activities. Conservation agriculture was being practiced by some 
smallholders in the drier regions in southern Huila. This can be further promoted for improved soil and 
water conservation particularly in the water stressed and drought prone regions. Crop rotation, usage 
of  organic  fertilisers  as  well  as  vegetated  contours  to  reduce  erosion  can  also  be  encouraged  as 
farmers also showed basic knowledge of these measures.     
37.
  Further  consultations  are  anticipated  as  the  design  progresses.  Stakeholder  consultation  and 
participation  is  an  iterative  process,  which  will  be  maintained  throughout  the  lifespan  of  this  project. 
The  RAF  also  entails  continued  consultation  that  will  enable  free  prior  and  informed  consent  to  be 
secured where required based on the SECAP.   
125 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Table 1: Guiding Questions for Climate Risk Screening 
Question 
Yes 
No 
Is the target group of the project dependent on climate-
sensitive natural resources (such as drought-prone crops, 
rainwater-fed agricultural plots, migratory fish stocks)? 
Has the project area been subject to extreme weather 
events in the past, such as flooding, drought, tropical 
storms, or heat waves?  
Could changes in temperature, rainfall, or extreme 
weather affect the project impact, sustainability or cost 
over its lifetime?  
Will climate variability likely affect agricultural productivity 
within the project (crops/ livestock/fisheries) or incidence 
of pests and diseases?  
Would weather-related risks or climatic extremes 
adversely impact upon key stages of identified value 
chains in the project (from production to markets)? 
Does the project have potential to integrate climate 
resilience measures without extensive additional costs 
(such as applying improved building codes; expanding 
capacity building programmes; or including climate risk 
issues in policy processes)  
Would the project benefit from a more detailed climate 
risk and vulnerability analysis to identify the most 
vulnerable rural population, improve targeting and identify 
additional complementary investment actions to manage 
climate risks? 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Additional Explanation of 'Yes' 
response 
Most of the small holders are 
dependent on rain-fed agriculture  
Climatic extremes are not expected 
to have significant impact in the 
project area though droughts have 
negatively impacted the southern 
parts of Huila province. Floods are 
also anticipated in the northern 
regions of the project provinces. 
Changes in rainfall patterns and 
potential shifts in agro-ecological 
zones may have an impact 
Crop productivity is likely to be 
affected though an increase in 
rainfall predicted 
Climatic extremes are not expected 
to have significant impact in the 
project area though production of 
some crops are expected to be 
adversely impacted particularly in 
the coastal zones and southern 
parts of Huila (e.g. outside project 
area). 
The capacity building through 
farmer business school and field 
schools can incorporate these 
measures at affordable additional 
cost 
The more in-depth climate risk 
analysis is already planned as part 
of the design as information is 
relatively scarce 
126 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
Table 2: Summary of climate risk analyses on main crops in Cuanza Sul and Huila 
Cuanza Sul 
Crop  
Cassava  
Suitability  
Extensive areas of moderate 
suitability.  
Coffee robusta and 
arabica 
Extensive areas of marginal to 
moderate suitability in the 
interior highlands.  
Climate risks  
Moderate  
Increased temperature may reduce 
productivity due to plant stress.  
Inundation after heavy rainfall, 
increase temperature, may 
increase susceptibility to soil 
pathogens.  
Increased temperature may 
increase spoilage of tubers and 
flour.  
Moderate  
Vulnerable to increased heat stress 
and drought.  
Suitable area may be reduced due 
to increased temperature at low 
altitudes.  
Opportunities  
Widespread staple crop, 
generally considered to be 
climate-resilient relative to 
other rainfed staples.  
Comparatively less 
vulnerable to unpredictable 
rainfall.  
Can be harvested at any 
time to meet short-term 
food security needs.  
Already widely grown, 
considerable potential for 
expansion.  
Adaptation options  
Promotion of pathogen-resistant and 
water-tolerant cultivars.  
Promotion of improved post-harvest 
storage and processing.  
Prioritise engagement with private 
sector to support research & 
development, strengthening of value 
chain.  
Promotion of multiple varieties of 
robusta and arabica in the same 
production areas to reduce exposure 
to unknown climate risks.  
Promotion of shade trees and other 
forms of intercropping and agro-
forestry in new coffee plantations.  
Sugar cane  
Sweet potato  
Some areas of marginal to 
moderate suitability.  
High to excellent in the interior, 
unsuitable in the arid lowlands 
and coastal region.  
Banana  
Extensive areas of marginal to 
moderate suitability for 
Cavendish table banana, 
Low  
Low to moderate  
Considered to be climate-resilient, 
however suitable range may be 
reduced by temperature increases 
and drought in the south.  
Low to moderate  
Considered to be climate-resilient, 
however suitable range may be 
127 
Prioritise engagement with private sector to support research & 
development, strengthening of value chain.  
Promote as a climate-resilient, easily grown perennial crop 
(particularly as an alternative or complement to cassava).  
Promotion of improved post-harvest storage and processing.  
Considerable area with 
suitable potential which is 
currently underexploited.  
Promotion of pathogen-resistant and 
water-tolerant cultivars.  
Promotion of irrigation for 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
marginal suitability for cooking 
plantain, marginal suitability for 
hybrid cooking plantain.  
Maize  
to 
Extensive  areas  of  high 
for  all 
suitability 
excellent 
varieties  of  maize  in  interior 
midlands 
uplands. 
and 
Unsuitable  in  the  arid  lowlands 
and  coastal  region.  Planting 
season  is  limited  to  October  – 
November.  
Millet and Sorghum  Extensive areas of good to high 
suitability  in  interior  midlands 
and 
uplands.  Marginally 
suitable  in  the  arid  lowlands 
and  coastal  region  during  the 
late  rainy  season  (December  – 
January).  
reduced by temperature increases 
and drought in low-lying areas.  
Inundation after heavy rainfall, 
increase temperature, may 
increase susceptibility to soil 
pathogens. 
Moderate to high  
Vulnerable  to  variability  in  onset 
and  duration  of  rainy  season, 
drought in low-lying areas.  
N/A  
plantation-scale producers.  
Prioritise engagement with private 
sector to support research & 
development, strengthening of value 
chain. 
improved  drought-
Promotion  of 
tolerant varieties.  
Increase  access  to  weather  forecasts 
and early warnings.  
Promotion  of  sorghum,  millet  as 
to 
climate-resilient 
maize.  
alternatives 
Low to moderate  
Considered  to  be  climate-resilient, 
however  suitable  range  may  be 
reduced  by  temperature  increases 
and drought in the south.  
Large  potential  area  of  high  suitability,  noted  as  climate-resilient 
alternative to maize.  
Huila 
Crop  
Cassava 
Coffee robusta  
Coffee arabica  
Suitability  
Mostly poor, except for some 
marginal areas in the north-
west. 
Mostly or totally unsuitable.  
Extensive areas of marginal to 
moderate suitability in the 
interior highlands.  
Climate risks  
N/A Not recommended for this 
province 
N/A Not recommended for this 
province  
Moderate to high  
Vulnerable to increased heat 
stress and drought.  
Suitable area may be reduced 
due to increased temperature, 
Opportunities  
Promotion of sweet potato as a perennial starch-rich alternative. 
Adaptation options  
Promotion of arabica coffee or other subtropical crops e.g. banana  
Already widely grown, 
considerable potential for 
expansion  
Prioritise engagement with private sector 
to support research & development, 
strengthening of value chain.  
Promotion of multiple varieties to reduce 
exposure to unknown climate risks.  
128 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
drought in southern regions.  
Promotion of shade trees and other 
forms of intercropping and agro-forestry 
in new coffee plantations.  
Sugar cane  
Sweet potato  
Banana  
Maize  
Millet and 
Sorghum 
Mostly or totally unsuitable.  
High to excellent in the 
northern and western 
uplands, unsuitable in the arid 
lowlands and south.  
Totally unsuitable for 
production of plantain 
varieties, marginal suitability 
for Cavendish table banana in 
the centre and north of 
province.  
Isolated areas of high to 
excellent suitability for all 
varieties of maize in the 
northern and western 
uplands, moderate to 
marginal  
Good to high suitability 
throughout the province. 
N/A  
Low to moderate  
Considered to be climate-
resilient, however suitable 
range may be reduced by 
temperature increases and 
drought in the south.  
Moderate  
Suitable range may be reduced 
by temperature increases and 
drought in the south.  
Inundation after heavy rainfall, 
increase temperature, may 
increase susceptibility to soil 
pathogens.  
Moderate to high  
Vulnerable to variability in 
onset and duration of rainy 
season, drought,  
Low 
Promotion of subtropical crops e.g. coffee, banana  
Promote as a climate-resilient, easily grown perennial crop (particularly as 
an alternative or complement to cassava).  
Promotion of improved post-harvest storage and processing.  
Considerable area with 
suitable potential which is 
currently underexploited.  
N/A  
Large potential area of good 
suitability, noted as a climate-
resilient alternative to maize. 
Promotion of pathogen-resistant and 
water-tolerant cultivars.  
Promotion of irrigation for plantation-
scale producers.  
Prioritise engagement with private sector 
to support research & development, 
strengthening of value chain.  
Promotion of improved drought-tolerant 
varieties.  
Increase access to weather forecasts and 
early warnings. 
Promotion of sorghum, millet as climate-
resilient alternatives to maize. 
129 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Appendix 13: Contents of the Project Life File 
1.
To be completed for final PDR 
Project Development Timeline 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aide memoire, Concept Mission (April 2016) 
Project Concept Note (April 2016) 
Aide memoire, First Design Mission (June 2016) 
Aide memoire, Second Design Mission (June 2016) 
Aide memoire, Final Design Mission (November 2016) 
SADCP Draft First Design Mission Report (July 2016) 
SADCP Second Mission Report (September 2016) 
SADCP Final Design Mission Report (1st December 2016) 
World Bank SADCP Financing Agreement 
World Bank SADCP Design Report 
Review 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of CPMT review of concept note (April 2016) 
Minutes of CPMT review of first design report (July 2016) 
Minutes of CPMT review of second design report (September 2016) 
Minutes of Pre-QE CPMT (30 November 2016) 
CPMT members (in-house) 
 
 
 
Sana F.K. Jatta, Regional Director 
Ms. Abla Benhammouche, Country Director, Angola 
Mr. Michael Hamp, Lead Technical Specialist - Inclusive Rural Financial Services, PTA (Lead 
Advisor for SADCP) 
Mr. Henrik Franklin, Lead Portfolio Advisor, ESA 
Ms. Shirley Chinien, Regional Economist (ESA) 
Mr. Custodio Mucavel Country Programme Officer, IFAD 
Mr. Stephen Twomlow, ESA Regional Climate and Environment Specialist, ECD 
Ms. Paxina Chileshe, Environmental and Climate Change Specialist, ECD 
Mr. Waseem Khan, Procurement Management Specialist, Zambia/Angola, ESA-IFAD 
Mr. Oscar Atiim Anaadumba, Consultant, Zambia/Angola, ESA-IFAD 
Ms. Clare Bishop Sambrook, Lead Technical Specialist – Gender, PTA 
Mr. Marco Camagni, Senior Technical Specialist - Rural Markets and Enterprise Dev, PTA 
Ms. Wafaa El Khoury, Lead Technical Specialist – Agronomy, PTA 
Ms. Lauren Philipps, Senior Technical Specialist – Policy, PTA 
Ms. Marian Odenigbo, Special Adviser on Nutrition, ESA 
Mr Jonathan Agwe, Senior Technical Specialist – Inclusive Rural Financial Services, PTA 
Mr Robert Delve, Senior Technical Specialist – Agronomy, PTA 
Ms. MariaElena Mangiafico, Knowledge Management and Grants Officer, PTA 
Ms. Miriam Okong’o, Portfolio Advisory Team, ESA 
Ms. Carla Dellanave, Consultant, CFS 
Mr. Simon Rietbergen, Senior Forestry Officer, FAO Investment Centre Division - Africa Service 
Ms. Hélène Ní Choncheanainn, Programme Assistant, ESA 
Mr. Enrico Bologni, Intern, CFS 
Mr. Miguel Rodrigues Nogueira, Value Chain Consultant (IFAD) 
Ms. Bernadette Mukonyora, Programme Analyst, ESA 
Mr. Joseph Nganga, Programme Officer, ESA 
Ms. Eloisa de Villalobos, Results Specialist, PMD/OPE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
131 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 14:  Mainstreaming nutrition in the SADCP-C&H 
Appendix 14: Mainstreaming nutrition in the SADCP-C&H-SAMAP 
I. Investing in nutrition-sensitive agriculture in Angola 
1. 
Any  project  promoting  food  supply,  through  small-scale  agriculture  and  value  chains, 
can  consider  one  or  some  of  food  security  pillars  and  the  nutrition  status  of  the  population. 
IFAD SADCP focuses on food crops, high value crops, as horticultures and pulses, and animal-based 
foods; each of which can contribute to the food and nutrition security of households through various 
‘impact  pathways’  either  by  increasing  purchasing  power  and  the  average  propensity  to  consume 
(APC)  for  food  items,  increasing  local  production  of  nutrient-rich  foods,  improving  conservation  of 
foods  for  household  consumption  and  ensuring  off-season  supply  towards  diverse  food  choices. 
Increases in income alone do not automatically render a better diet as diets depend on types of foods 
available in market, affordable, convenient, and desirable as well as lacks of knowledge on nutrition 
and traditional food habits based on staple security, also on who controls the income, is in charge of 
feeding  household  members,  how  food  is  prepared,  and  how  food  is  distributed  among  family 
members. A nutrition ‘lens’ has been adopted in order to maximise the positive impacts of SAMP on 
household  food  security  and  nutrition.  By  aiming  to  (i)  increase  the  availability  of  nutrient-rich  foods 
given local micronutrient deficiencies (particularly vegetables, fruits, pulses and animal-based foods), 
(ii)  complementing  this  with  nutrition  awareness  and  behavior  change  communication  in  FFS  to 
diversify dietary patterns, (iii) enhancing accessibility of food products in markets, and (iv) improving 
nutrient  content,  seasonality  and  yearlong  availability  of  selected  food  items;  for  improved  diets 
throughout  the  year  by  developing  capacities  and  providing  assets  to  smallholders  to  produce, 
markets  and  consume  more  diverse  foods,  IFAD  SADCP  aims  to  enhance  its  contribution  to  food 
security and nutrition. 
2. 
This approach is in line with and pilots Government strategies. The ‘National Strategy for 
Food Security and Nutrition of Angola’, developed  by the Government of Angola with  the support of 
FAO  in  2009,  has  been  updated  by  FAO  Angola  in  2016-2017,  and  is  aligned  with  the  Millennium 
Development Goals and Regional Initiative 1 to Eradicate Hunger in Angola by 2025. The Ministry of 
Agriculture  (MINAGRI)  made  a  request  to  FAO  to  support  the  integration  of  nutrition  in  the  Food 
Security  Cabinet  strategies,  and  has  now  the  mandate  to  develop  nutrition-sensitive  actions,  as  the 
Ministry  of  Health  is  focused  on  nutrition-specific  actions.  MINAGRI  recognises  the  importance  and 
contribution  of  nutrition  in  socio-economic  and  physical  development  of  people  in  the  country.  New 
axis  of  work  suggested  by  FAO  in  support  of  the  new  National  Strategy  include  i)  trainings  of 
agricultural  extension  workers  on  nutrition  curriculums,  ii)  elaboration  of  nutrition  strategies  and 
policies  on  bio-fortification,  nutrition  in  commercialization  and  women  breastfeeding,  iii)  Infant  and 
young  child  feeding  and  complementary  feeding,  and  iv)  trainings  of  community  health  workers  on 
infant  and  young  child  feeding.  Other  strategic  areas  include  advocacy,  integration  of  nutrition 
indicators  in  agriculture,  strengthening  of  institutional  capacities,  supervision,  and  multi-sectorial 
enhancement.  Although  objectives  are  clear,  well  formulated  and  combining  nutrition-sensitive  and 
nutrition-specific approaches, there is a need in testing and piloting various interventions for scaling-
up  best  practices  and  developing  lessons  learnt,  and  considering  prevention  of  malnutrition  through 
supply of foods. IFAD SADCP will, by piloting some of the activities mentioned in the Strategy as per 
production  diversification,  transformation  and  commercialization  of  foods,  BCC  (Behavior  Change 
Communication)  and  WASH 
learnt  and 
recommendations for further scaling-up. 
(Water,  Sanitation  and  Hygiene),  bring 
lessons 
Overview of the Nutrition situation in Angola 
Typical  diet/meals  in  country.  Malnutrition  is  not  only  a  direct  result  of  food  insecurity,  but 
3. 
also  often  find  its  roots  in  dietary  habits  and  food  choices  themselves  influenced  by  agro-ecological 
conditions, lack of transmission of food-based knowledge here engendered by the post-war context, 
illiteracy, gender issues, cultural and traditional consumption patterns, low price of imported high fats 
and sugar foods, and private sector marketing campaigns. In Angola in 2011, 9% of households were 
having only one meal a day, and in the poorest wealth quintile, only 18% of households were having 
three  meals  a  day.  It  was  also  estimated  that  in  the  poorest  quintile,  25%  of  households  consumed 
meat  at  least  once  a  week  and  31%  consumed  fish  at  least  once  a  week  (Figure  1).  The  2007 
132 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 14:  Mainstreaming nutrition in the SADCP-C&H 
National  Nutrition  Survey      also  highlighted  the  fact  that  51.8%  of  households  were  consuming  less 
than three meals on the day prior to the survey, and more than 70% in rural areas. 
Figure 1. Household food intake: Proportion of households consuming one, two or three or more 
meals per day by residence and wealth quintile, 2011 
Source: UNICEF, 2011 
Meals  are  generally  kept  simple  and  every  meal  is  typically  composed  of  funge  or  pirão, 
4. 
prepared with fubá, a maize, cassava or rice flour, which can be accompanied with a small portion of 
feijão (palm oil black beans),  lombi (a mixture of local leaves and herbs cooked in palm oil), a spicy 
condiment  and  can  also  be  eaten  with  fish  or  meat  (pig,  goat  or  chicken).  Meals  are  often 
accompanied  by  beverages  such  as  a  corn  flour  drink,  imported  soft  drinks  and  spirits  made  out  of 
maize,  cassava  skin,  corn,  palm  tree  juice,  sugarcane,  mongozo  (homemade  beer  with  palm  nuts), 
homemade  vodka  and  whisky.  Meals  do  not  vary  throughout  the  day  or  season,  but  dishes  vary 
across regions, especially between rural and urban areas. However, dietary habits in rural areas are 
more rudimentary,  and meals are  often composed, three times a day, of  funge,  rarely  accompanied 
with foods from any other food groups 
5. 
Poor dietary diversity in household. Angola is home of 30% of stunting, 15.6% underweight 
and  8%  wasting  among  children  under  5  (2007  National  Nutrition  Survey  (NNS)),  and  a  higher 
prevalence of chronic malnutrition in rural and Southern areas of Angola, also with an extremely poor 
dietary diversity  in households as shown  by 2006  alarming rates of severe anemia among pregnant 
(57.1%) and non-pregnant (52.3%) women (WHO’s Worldwide Prevalence of Anemia: 1993-2005, the 
WHO’s Global Prevalence of Vitamin A Deficiency in Populations at Risk: 1995-2005), and for 29.7% 
of  6-59  months  children.  Vitamin-C  and  Vitamin-A  deficiencies  among  others  (also  zinc  and  iodine 
deficiencies) are also critically common and prevalence of scurvy among children in Southern regions 
of Angola was surprisingly high. 
6. 
Chronic  and acute malnutrition and undernutrition: According  to the  latest estimates from 
the  2007  National  Nutrition  Survey  (NNS),  nearly  30%  of  children  under  5  are  stunted,  15.6%  are 
underweight  and  more  than  8%  are  wasted.  Micronutrient  deficiencies  are  also  high  with  30%  of 
preschool  children  and  more  than  half  of  pregnant  women  anemic,  almost  two-thirds  of  preschool-
aged  children  are  Vitamin  A  deficient,  20%  of  young  children  are  at  risk  of  developing  iodine 
deficiency  disorders,  and  almost  half  of  the  population  is  at  risk  of  inadequate  zinc  consumption. 
Additionally, infant and found child feeding practices are poor with less than one-third of infants being 
exclusively breastfed for 6 months of age. Although the prevalence of undernourishment among the 
population  has  been  decreasing  in  the  past  decade,  the  nutritional  situation  is  still  acute  as  child 
stunting  remains  high  and  more  than  50%  of  people  consume  less  than  three  meals  a  day.  When 
examining  anthropometric  indicators  disaggregated  by  region,  sex,  age  and  area  of  residence, 
disparities  become  apparent.  The  2007  NNS  also  revealed  that  stunting  rates  were  higher  among 
boys  (32.4%)  than  girls  (26.1%),  which  could  suggest  a  greater  biological  resiliency  to  chronic 
undernutrition among girls. The survey also revealed  that even among the  6  - 11 month age group, 
more than one-fifth of children were stunted (Box 1.1), which calls for the need to put the accent on 
133 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 14:  Mainstreaming nutrition in the SADCP-C&H 
infant  and  child  feeding  practices  among  women.  Also,  if  prevalence  of  stunting  was  similar  in  rural 
areas  (33.0%)  and  major  cities  outside  Luanda  (30.1%),  rates  were  considerably  lower  in  Luanda 
(19.6%), which suggests that access to diverse food products in markets and off-season supply could 
be one of the major drivers of malnutrition. In the West, South and Central South regions, stunting and 
underweight  are  also  above  the  National  average,  with  respectively  34.3%,  33.7%,  and  31.3%  of 
stunting  (Box  1.2).  This  suggests  higher  rates  of  stunting  and  underweight  in  geographical  areas  of 
IFAD SADCP. 
Box 1. Prevalence of: 
1.1 Child Stunting (HAZ<-2) by Age Group 
Region 
1.2  Child  Stunting,  Wasting  and  underweight  by 
Source: National Nutrition Survey 2007, Ministry of Health Angola 
5. 
Basic,  immediate  and  underlying  causes  of  malnutrition.  The  UNICEF  Framework, 
developed  in  1990,  is  widely  acknowledged  as  the  guiding  structure  for  understanding  the  multi 
sectoral drivers of malnutrition, determined by basic, underlying and three broad immediate causes as 
further illustrated below. 
134 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 14:  Mainstreaming nutrition in the SADCP-C&H 
6.  While the availability  of social sector  data in  Angola  continues to be limited, findings from the 
design  mission,  2015  small-scale  surveys  on  FSN  by  MINAGRI  and  reports  from  the  Ministry  of 
Health, recognised the following three immediate causes of malnutrition: 
a.  Poor dietary diversity: extremely low intake of iron-rich foods, all types of vitamins (especially 
vitamin A and vitamin C), proteins, zinc and iodine, due to food inflated prices, availability and 
consumption  of  vegetables,  fruits,  pulses  and  animal  based  foods,  and  lack  of  knowledge  in 
conservation techniques. 
b.  Diseases impacting on the nutritional status: such as diarrheal diseases, malaria, yellow fever, 
typhoid,  water-borne  diseases  and  acute  respiratory  infection  as  pneumonia;  all  generating 
inadequate  absorption  of  nutrients,  loss  of  nutrients  and  appetite,  anaemia,  and  in  certain 
cases impaired foetal development, low birth weight and growth faltering (Figure 2).  In Angola, 
diarrhoea  is  a  leading  cause  of  child  mortality,  and  can  engender  terrible  damages  for  the 
nutritional  status  and  lead  to  the  vicious  cycle  of  malnutrition.  Among  children  aged  1-
59months, 20.6% of deaths are due to pneumonia, 20.0% to diarrhoea, and 17.5% to malaria 
(Source: WHO, 2013). 
Figure 2. The Infection-Malnutrition Cycle 
                                                            Source: UNICEF 
135 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 14:  Mainstreaming nutrition in the SADCP-C&H 
c.  Inadequate  infant  feeding  and  caring  and  hygiene  practices:  in  2015,  the  coverage  of 
exclusive breastfeeding remains low as less than one third of infants are exclusively breastfed, 
and  children  under  5  are  usually  observing  same  feeding  practices  than  adults.  In  addition, 
sanitation is very poor; rural households tend to practice open defecation, as in 2015, 54% of 
inhabitants from rural areas were practicing it for 1% in urban areas (Figure 3) 
Figure 3. Estimated trends of sanitation coverage 
Source: WHO/UNICEF JMP, 2015 
7. 
In addition, there are several underlying and basic causes of malnutrition in Angola, including:  
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
Poverty: wealth inequalities shed light on the importance of poverty for reducing stunting. In 
2015, Angola was ranked as 149th country in the Human Development Index, and 42.7% of 
income  distribution  inequality  as  per  the  Gini  coefficient.  Also,  among  the  lowest  quintiles, 
people  are  46.2%  more  likely  to  have  a  lower  life  expectancy  (Source:  UNDP,  2015)  and 
43.6% of people are living below income poverty line; 
Education:  average  expected  years  of  schooling  in  the  country  is  about  11.4  years,  and 
there  is  an  existing  68.1%  rate  of  primary  school  dropout.  Expected  years  of  schooling 
among  women  is  about  8.7  years  for  14  years  among  men.  Stunting  among  children  with 
mothers  with  secondary  and  higher  education  have  seen  two  times  as  fast  as  compared 
with those with mothers who have no formal education; 
Urban / rural areas: children  living in rural areas are 1.65 times more likely  to  be stunted 
than in urban areas.  
Health systems  in Angola are  well organised in decentralised areas,  and often present  in 
rural  areas  and  aldeias.  However,  health  services  are  often  unaffordable  for  rural 
communities,  and  capacities  for  nutrition  services  and  nutrition  prevention  need  to  be 
enhanced; 
Affordability of food basket:  due to a  general inflation of prices, the  domestic food price 
level index34 of 7.2% in 2015 was in the highest category and reflected a high price of food 
relatively to the price of the generic consumption basket in the country. Also, the domestic 
food  price  level  volatility  index35  of  13.7%  was,  in  2015,  among  the  highest  in  the  world, 
reflecting instability of food prices and potentially leading to insecurity for both consumers in 
consumption of food items and smallholder farmers in accessing fair market prices; 
Food  market  environment  generating  post-harvest  losses  (PHLs)  and  waste:  since 
2010 Angola’s livestock, horticulture and cereal losses have been increasing, especially due 
to  continuous  droughts  and  general  variable  rainfall  seasons.  In  areas  with  poor  rainfall 
distribution,  harvest  losses  can  reach  between  40  and  90%  for  maize,  beans,  sweet 
potatoes and millets (Source: FAO/WFP, 2006), and from 10 to 30% on a national scale. In 
the  districts  most  affected  by  the  variable  rainfall  patterns,  an  overall  loss  of  65%  is 
expected  for  the  first  season  of  maize,  beans  and  vegetables.  In  2009,  15  percent  of 
cassava, 10 percent of the sweet potatoes and maize were lost. Post-harvest losses directly 
lead to the fears of smallholder households to lose and waste the food production kept for 
self-consumption, who will then tend to sell to intermediaries the whole production. 
34 Food purchasing power parity rate divided by the general PPP rate. FAOSTAT 2015 
35 A measure of variation of the domestic food price level index, computed as the standard deviation of the deviations 
from the trend over the previous five years. FAOSTAT 2015 
136 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 14:  Mainstreaming nutrition in the SADCP-C&H 
8. 
Immediate and underlying causes of malnutrition are compounded by market price fluctuations, 
agro-ecological  contexts,  social  taboos  and  beliefs  related  to  child  feeding  practices,  and  consumer 
knowledge, tradition, ethnic, cultural and social trends. 
Objectives and Outcomes through IFAD SADCP 
9. 
Following  a  thorough  situation  analysis,  the  project  aims  to  work  through  several  key 
impact  pathways.  Key  nutrition-related  challenges  were  highlighted  as  linked  with  the  project’s 
overall  objectives  and  components:  lack  of  i)  nutrition-related  knowledge,  ii)  dietary  diversity  at 
household level, iii) hygiene and sanitation conditions, and iv) infrastructures of ways for conservation 
of food crops for household consumption and to tackling PHLs. These issues have multiple underlying 
causes as described above. As such, in line with the project’s objective, income, production and value 
addition of food crops have been identified as the key impact pathways through which the project will 
work. In order for these pathways to positively  impact nutrition, dietary behaviors, shaped  in part by 
the ‘enabling environment’ were considered of greatest importance. Activities have been identified to 
improve the effectiveness of the project on nutrition by working through Farmer Field Schools (FFS), 
associations and cooperatives, and micro-units of processing. 
IFAD  SADCP  with  nutrition-sensitive  interventions  aims  to  generate  positive  impacts  on 
10. 
four different pathways:  
(i)  Consumption  Pathway:  Increased  safe  and  affordable  availability  of  5  food  groups  (cereals 
and  grains,  pulses,  vegetables,  fruits,  and  poultry  from  in-land  production)  and  improved 
conservation  of  foods  through  storage  and  processing  techniques  promoting  nutrient-dense 
products;  
(ii)  Income Pathway: Improved access to diversified food as a result of increased income; 
(iii)  Empowerment  Pathway:  increased  awareness  on  shared-income,  appropriate  infant  caring 
capacity and practices through women’s empowerment; 
(iv)  Healthcare  pathway:  dietary  and  nutrient  requirements  for  better  food  choices  and  diverse 
diets; and improved water, sanitation, hygiene (WASH) and health practices. 
in 
the  FFS 
(i) 
Consumption  pathway:  Ensured  by  the  increase  of  safe  and  affordable  cereals, 
horticultures, pulses and poultry at household. Behavioral change communication in the form of 
nutrition  education 
through  community-based  discussions,  which  will  be 
complemented by cooking demonstration sessions and processing techniques demonstrations 
in  trainings  for  home  gardening,  which  will  contribute  to  the  demand  and  increase  of  diverse 
food items. While most families in Angola claim to be food secure, often  ensured by both on-
farm  production  and  purchases,  they  do  not  have  regular  access  to  a  balanced  food  basket 
throughout the year, due to physical access, lack of market information and infrastructure, and 
insufficient disposable income, among other drivers. Additionally, even when such products are 
available,  they  could  be  utilised  in  a  manner  to  better  make  use  of  their  nutrient  value.  The 
project will seek to improve not only the production / availability of diverse nutrient-dense foods, 
but  also  processing,  storage  and  preservation  of  these  crops,  and  expanding  market 
opportunities for these products. ;  
(ii) 
Income  pathway:  Promotes  food  safety  and  hygienic  condition  of  crops  and  animal 
keeping,  proper  storage  of  food  crops  and  animal  feedings  to  retain  nutrition  value  to  attain 
better quality and higher market value of production by capacity building, knowledge generation 
of  small  famers  and  reduction  of  losses  and  waste.    The  proposed  Farmers’  Field  Schools 
approach will include a module on promotion of more diverse consumption habits with nutrient 
value of horticultures, pulses and animal-based foods as well as utilisation. Also, as described 
above, inequalities in  income and depth of poverty have a significant differentiating  impact on 
nutrition as the cost of a balanced food basket is most likely higher. With increased in income, 
households are more likely to afford a more balanced food basket. However, in order to install 
healthy dietary choices and values for a diverse diet, behavior change communication activities 
are imperative; 
(iii)  Women’s  empowerment  pathway:  Facilitates  women’s  participation  in  associations, 
cooperatives  or  small  business  related  to  several  value  chains,  especially  on  processing, 
137 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 14:  Mainstreaming nutrition in the SADCP-C&H 
distribution  and  utilisation  of  these  food  items  as  well  as  building  capacity  to  manage  in-land 
and home garden production and contribution to family welfare. 
(iv)  Healthcare  pathway:  Nutritional  status  is  strongly  influenced  by  the  health,  water  and 
sanitation  environment,  including  water  sources  and  toilets,  preventive  care,  and  other  basic 
necessities,  which  are  crucial  to  supporting  good  nutrition,  especially  for  women  and  young 
children.  All  rural  farm  households  must  balance  their  spending  decisions  between  farm 
production and marketing investments and the immediate purchases of food, health, and care 
necessities.  
Nutrition-sensitive activities in IFAD SADCP 
11.  Causes  of  malnutrition  in  Angola  do  not  only  phase  immediate  causes    as  mainly  poor  infant 
feeding  and  caring  practices,  and  low  dietary  diversity;  but  also  underlying  causes  of  malnutrition, 
predominantly  education  /  literacy,  poor  in-land  biodiversity,  affordability  of  food  basket  linked  to 
inflated food prices, enormous post-harvest losses (PHLs) and waste generated by lacks in structures 
of  conservation  and  processing,  inadequate  and  varied  agro-ecological  contexts,  and  consumer 
knowledge, tradition, ethnic, cultural and social trends. 
12. 
IFAD SADCP’s theory of change in regards to nutrition is anchored in the four above mentioned 
key impact pathways, aiming to address several underlying causes of malnutrition in the rural Angola 
for improved dietary diversity and food choices, and care practices of women to address  malnutrition 
in 1,000 day window of opportunity. 
I. 
Nutrition education and awareness in FFS: 
13.  Nutrition  education  and  awareness  will  be  enhanced  in  the  FFS  curriculum,  in  a  view  to  link 
food diversification in kitchen gardens to more diverse diets, also linking processing and conservation 
techniques  trainings  to  perishable  items  (mainly  vegetables,  fruits  and  animal-based  foods,  cruelly 
lacking in diets) utilisation and consumption.  
14.  A  clear  thread  has  also  been  woven  through  the  project  to  enhance  the  production  of, 
accessibility  to,  conservation  and  consumption  of  diverse  foods.  An  integrated  approach  has  been 
adopted to enhance the confluence of demand and supply from a nutrition perspective. In an effort to 
ensure  that  the  agricultural  production  and  household  income  increases,  encouraged  through  the 
project,  also  contribute  to  improved  nutrition  -  activities  will  focus  on  raising  awareness  for  dietary 
diversity and nutrition among FFS, especially through women of reproductive age and youth. The FFS 
Curriculum  for  nutrition  started  being  developed  with  MOSAP  through  external  nutrition  specialists. 
With IFAD SADCP, nutrition experts will revise the manual and work with and train FFS facilitators, to 
ensure an integrated methodology anchored in the core of the FFS curriculum. 
Improved availability, accessibility and seasonality of diverse foods for healthier 
II. 
and more diverse diets in households 
15.  This  aims  to,  through  above  mentioned  pathways,  tackle  some  of  the  basic  and  underlying 
causes  of  malnutrition,  through  (i)  higher  availability  of  diverse-foods  in  households,  (ii)  increased 
knowledge and support on preservation and processing techniques of foods for yearlong availability of 
nutrient-dense foods, and (iii) improved infant feeding and caring practices. 
Promoting and supporting diversified diets through food production in home gardens.  
16.  A well-developed home garden has the potential to supply most of the non-staple foods needed 
by a household every day of the year, especially for smallholder households producing only staples or 
animals.  Rural  households  in  the  project  area  have  limited  access  to  vegetables  and  fruits.  In  fact, 
during the design field visit a group of women in Huila province mentioned that many children in the 
community  suffered  from  scurvy  (due  to  a  critical  lack  of  Vitamin  C).  Training  rural  women  in  home 
gardening and nutrition  will improve the household food security  and  nutrition and  will also enhance 
women’s empowerment. 
138 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 14:  Mainstreaming nutrition in the SADCP-C&H 
17.  Home gardens produce a wide variety of food crops supplying households with vegetables and 
fruits,  legumes  as  well  as  poultry.  The  home  garden  is  usually  a  small  area  of  flat  land  around  the 
house, around 10% of the total area, with a majority of sloping land and wetland. It is a major supplier 
of  daily  food,  and  combined  with  consumption  of  staple  foods,  it  can  contribute  to  providing  energy 
and dietary requirements to households. It has been successfully piloted at small scale by a number 
of small-scale agricultural development projects in Angola. IFAD projects in dry areas of Brazil have 
developed  a  model  of  economic  water-saving  home  garden  with  excellent  results,  which  could  be 
replicated.  
18.  The establishment of home gardens will be promoted as follows: (1) All communities benefiting 
from Farmer Field School will be introduced to the nutrition and health benefits of home gardens and 
will  be  explained  how  to  establish  these,  as  well  as  some  basic  preservation  techniques  (including 
hygiene)  to  increase  availability  of  diverse  foods  during  the  year;  (2)  In  communities  where  FFS 
trainers  or  facilitators  notice  a  particular  interest  in  home  gardens,  they  will  further  emphasis  the 
growing  and  processing  of  home  garden  produce,  and  establish  a  home  garden  learning  plot  with 
interested  women  farmers;  (3)  inputs    (seeds,  fruit  trees  and  bio-fertilisers  as  well  as  the  necessary 
materials  and  tools)  and  technical  assistance  will  then  be  provided  to  interested  women  farmers  to 
establish  their  own  home  gardens,  (4)  In  communities  where  a  number  of  households  have 
established  home  gardens  and  where  there  is  an  interest  in  small-scale  commercial  processing  of 
home garden produce, the FFS trainers and facilitators will call in the help of a service provider to help 
the women’s groups involved develop a micro-project proposal – see output 3.2 below.   
19.  Activities  necessary  to  achieve  this  output  are  partly  included  under  output  2.2,  by  the 
implementation of Farmer Field School  training, as  well  as through a service provider,  who  will take 
care of (1) support to women’s group to implement home gardens, and (2) support for making vermi-
compost for fertilising and generating homemade products for pest-management.  
20.  Accent  will  be  put  on  food  crops  potentially  contributing  to  preventing  major  micronutrient 
deficiencies, following the thorough nutritional diagnosis: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Vitamin A rich crops: orange sweet potatoes, pumpkins, mangoes, papaya, etc. 
Vitamin C rich crops: papaya, guava, kiwis, broccolis, leafy greens, tomatoes, etc. 
Iron-rich crops: dark green leafy vegetables, lentils, beans, poultry 
Protein-rich foods: soya, poultry, eggs, etc. 
Zinc-rich foods: green leafy vegetables, poultry, pumpkin, beans, etc. 
Support to women’s groups for processing and developing nutrient-dense products 
In  rural  areas,  lack  of  electricity  and  cold  storage  oblige  households  to  sell  the  totality  of 
21. 
horticulture and  other production in market, to avoid food rotting in household.  Perishable  items are 
often  ones  sacrificed  and  gaps  in  food  preservation  lead  to  the  non-consumption  of  perishable  and 
fresh foods, resulting in critical micronutrient, including Vitamins, deficiencies. Agro-processing can be 
defined as post-harvest activities used to transform, preserve and prepare agricultural production for 
intermediary or final consumption, ensuring yearlong supply and market sale.  
22.  While the logic would tend to think that smallholder farming families should have home gardens 
independently of any commercial activity – especially for improving household nutrition and well-being 
– evidence has shown that promoting small-scale commercial processing of home garden and in-land 
produce  among  women’s  groups  tends  to  result  in  wider  adoption  of  home  gardens  and  associated 
food  processing  techniques,  as  well  as  improved  sustainability  beyond  the  end  of  the  project.  Such 
small-scale processing ventures can generate nutritional and economic value out of food items such 
as  pulses  and  perishable  items  (vegetables,  fruits,  soya,  eggs),  thus  reducing  food  waste  and 
improving food security in qualitative and quantitative terms.  
23.  Food  processing  techniques  to  be  promoted  may  include:  (i)  cooking  to  maximise  nutrient 
content  (e.g.  iron-rich  snacks  bars  or  soya  steaks),  (ii)  dehydration  (e.g.  mango,  tomato),  (iii) 
preserves  /  bottling  (e.g.  sweet  potato  and  mango  juices);  and  (iv)  pickling  (e.g.  gherkins)  and 
germination  (e.g.  pulses).  Promotion  of  food  safety  standards  and  use  of  safe water,  sanitation  and 
hygiene will be integrated in all food processing training, first initiated through the FFS trainings. 
139 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 14:  Mainstreaming nutrition in the SADCP-C&H 
24.  To  this  end,  a  competitively  recruited  service  provider  will  help  women’s  groups  identified 
through  FFS  and  under  output  3.1  to  develop  small-scale  commercial  food  processing  ventures, 
including  a  marketing  strategy  and  a  detailed  request  for  micro-project  support,  according  to  a  pre-
established format. Women’s groups that successfully implement a micro-project could subsequently 
«  graduate  »  to  apply  for  investment  support  under  outcome  4.  This  will  empower  women  to 
participate  more  actively  in  decision-making  on  agricultural  investments  –  and  in  so  doing,  remedy 
one of the shortcomings of MOSAP (see also lessons learnt section). 
25.  A service provider will implement the following activities to achieve this output: 
  Following the establishment of the first contact by the FFS trainer or facilitator, a first meeting 
will be held to explain the support the project can provide (e.g. technical, commercial, financial 
and  organisational  capacity  building;  micro-project  investment  in  seeds,  fruit  tree  seedlings, 
tools  and  machinery)  to  women’s  groups,  and  the  responsibilities  the  group  and  its  members 
would  need  to  take  on.  This  meeting  could  also  start  discussing  the  commercial  processing 
plans the women might have already and their feasibility, as well as possible alternatives; 
  A  subsequent  meeting  would  be  called  to  confirm  the  women’s  groups  interest  to  participate 
and, if confirmed, agree on next steps;  
  Practical  technical  including  WASH,  Food  Safety  as  well  as  basic  business  and  marketing 
training  would  then  be  organised  (with  active  participation  of  the  trainees,  along  the  lines  of 
output  2.4)  and  the  tasks  needed  to  complete  the  chosen  micro-project  would  be  distributed 
among the group members, with support from the service provider as needed; 
  Regular  technical  assistance  to  women’s  groups  during  implementation  of  the  micro-project, 
including help with trouble shooting when necessary. 
Communicating  for  improved  nutrition  in  the  1,000  day  window  of  opportunity  in  rural 
III. 
Angola 
26. 
1,000  day  window  of  opportunity.  The  1,000  days  between  pregnancy  and  a  child's  2nd 
birthday  are  the  most  crucial  time  to  optimise  a  child's  cognitive,  immune  system  and  physical 
development.  Poor  nutrition  during  pregnancy  (diet,  wellbeing,  and  health)  can  have  harmful  long-
term  effects  for  the  child  in  leading  to  stunting  and  consequentially  also  predisposing  the  child  to 
metabolic  diseases  later  in  life.  Furthermore,  exclusive  breastfeeding  during  the  first  6  months  of  a 
child’s life and complementary feeding from 6 to 18-24 months of age is essential to optimise health 
and development. Each of these represents an important pillar for improving nutrition rates in Angola. 
27.  Nutrition  is  contingent  on  people’s  practices  and  preferences.  Dietary,  care  and  health  habits 
are partly driven by knowledge but also by preferences rooted in cultural norms and values as well as 
broader  food,  social  and  health  systems, making  certain  goods  or  services  more  or  less  accessible 
and  acceptable.    Beyond  imparting  messages  however,  it  is  important  to  understand  the  drivers  of 
habits  in  order  to  understand  and  improve  people’s  attitudes  towards  healthy  eating  or  child  care 
practices, skills in selection of healthier and local foods, adoption of healthy and safe food practices, 
and application of skills to prepare culturally acceptable balanced meals, exclusively breastfeed, and 
prepare complementary foods.   
28. 
IFAD  SADCP’s  BCC  campaign  for  nutrition  will  add  to  the  project  by  (i)  identifying  effective 
behavior  change  strategies  through  in-depth  social  diagnostic;  and  (ii)  developing  of  trial  materials 
such as ‘’community memory for nutrition’’ through pictures, audio messages, or videos, which allow 
access to a wider audience, particularly among illiterate population groups. 
PROPOSED INDICATORS 
  Reduction in 2.5% to 5% in stunting rates among children under 5 
  Reduction of 60% in scurvy prevalence 
  Kitchen garden production from at least 3 food groups 
 
Increased  consumption  from  at  least  2  food  groups,  excluding  i)  cereals  and  ii)  starchy: 
evaluated through the Minimum Dietary Diversity Score for Women, MDD-W 
  At least one conservation technique adopted by women from FFS 
 
  Presence during nutrition trainings in FFS: target of 60% 
Improved behaviors, attitudes and practices towards food, assessed with KAP survey 
140 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
Appendix 15: Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector 
Analysis 
1. Economic outlook 
1.
Angola  has  been  one  of  the  world's  fastest-growing  economies  over  the  past  decade.  GDP 
Growth Rate in Angola averaged 9.93% from 2000 until 2015. This trend has reversed and Angola’s 
economy grew by 3.8% during 2015. Its GDP growth is likely to be subdued due to lower oil prices. 
Economic  diversification  never  has  been  as  much  at  the  top  of  the  political  agenda  in  Angola. 
Agriculture  is  forecast  to  expand  by  4.6%.  However,  rapid  agricultural  expansion  is  unlikely  given 
weak  infrastructure  and  poor  supply-chain  management.  Notwithstanding  official  efforts  to  diversify 
the  economy,  real  GDP  growth  will  continue  to  be  driven  by  trends  in  the  hydrocarbons  sector. The 
Economist  Intelligence  Unit  (EIU)  expects  growth  to  average  just  2.7%  in  2016-2020.  Significant 
private and public investments in the non-oil sector including water, energy, food production and agri-
business are underway and government-led initiatives to improve the business environment and fiscal 
effectiveness  are  expected  to  promote  diversification  and  job  creation.  The  diversification  of  the 
Angolan economy will also pose a significant challenge to the banking system, which has a key role to 
play in this process as well as the responsibility to adapt itself to meet the evolving demands of the 
economy.  Strengthening  human  development,  enhancing  production  and  productivity  and  ensuring 
equitable and inclusive growth are needed to reduce vulnerability to external shocks. The reduction of 
fuel price subsidies and currency devaluation will fuel inflationary pressures; despite the imposition of 
some price controls, inflation will increase to 25.5% in 2016, before moderating gradually to 7.3% in 
2020 (EIU). 
1.1 Agriculture - national strategies and priorities 
2.
The  Republic  of  Angola  is  the  third  largest  country  in  sub–Saharan  Africa,  with  an  area  of 
1,246,700 km.  It has about 57 million hectares of arable land, of which less than 4 million hectares 
are currently under cultivation. The agricultural sector contributes to about 12%  of GDP and 42% of 
total  employment,  with  women  estimated  to  provide  70%  of  agricultural  labour. Almost  two-thirds  of 
the  population  depends  directly  or  indirectly  on  agriculture  for  their  income,  employment  and 
livelihood.  In Angola, national and household food security continues to depend partially on imports of 
various  food  commodities.  Actually  with  the  oil  prices  going  down,  national  food  security,  thus, 
remains a major development issue. 
The  Medium  Term  Plan  for  the  Agriculture  Sector  Development  PDMPSA  (2013-2017) 
3.
proposes  a  sustainable  transformation  of  subsistence  agriculture  to  a  market-oriented  commercial 
agriculture,  to  promote  food  security  and  fostering  the  national  agro-industry,  to  combat  hunger  and 
poverty. This  embraces public sector reform and  good governance, improving  investment, operating 
and  regulatory  environment  for  the  private  sector,  and  providing  the  necessary  infrastructure  and 
support services, particularly in rural areas, for the primary sectors and tourism as well as in the urban 
centers.  It  is  also  worth  mentioning  that  about  37%  of  the  population  is  below  the  poverty  line  and 
about 85% of the poor are in the rural areas and depend on agriculture. 
4.
Relatively fertile soil, immense biodiversity, abundance of water resources in some parts of the 
country, adequate biological and natural resources and  favourable semi-tropical climate can be cited 
as  positives  of  Angolan  agriculture.  The  challenges  are  many,  which  include  natural  resources 
management,  tenure  security  and  land  rights,  drought-  related  effects  due  to  climate  change  and 
investment  in  agriculture.  MINAGRI  is  in  charge  of  formulating/implementing  agricultural  and  rural 
development  policies  and  addressing  related  issues,  particularly  for  family  farming.  The  national 
financial system has a key responsibility in addressing the related issues, primarily relating to finance 
in tune with the national priorities as outlined above.      
2. The national financial system –Legal and regulatory framework 
5.
The Banco National de Angola (National Bank of Angola - BNA), the Central Bank operates the  
monetary market, implements monetary and  foreign exchange policies,  and regulates & supervises 
financial  institutions  in  the  credit  market.  The  Comissão  de  Mercado  de  Capitais  (Capital  Market 
141 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
Commission - CMC) is responsible for the control, supervision and monitoring  of the capital market. 
The capital market was launched in December 2014. Public debt transactions were launched in 2015. 
The  Agência  Angolana  de  Regulação  e  Supervisão  de  Seguros  (Angolan  Agency  of  Insurance 
Regulation and Supervision - ARSEG) is the authority responsible for the regulation, supervision and 
monitoring of the insurance market.   
2.1 Issue of regulations 
6.
The  Government  of  Angola  has  enacted  Financial  Institutions  Law  in  2015,  which  is  very 
comprehensive  and  covers  all  sets  of  banks  and  non-banking  financial  institutions.  It  encompasses 
microfinance  institutions  (MFIs),  Credit  Cooperatives,  Financial  Leasing,  Micro  Credit  companies, 
Credit Guarantee companies, Payment service providers, etc. The Financial Institution Law provides a 
framework for Deposit Guarantee, Bank Resolution Fund and an inter-institutional National Council of 
Financial  Stability.  Angola’s  non-bank  financial  sector  is  small  but  they  are  likely  to  grow  with  the 
implementation  of  the  Financial  Institutions  Law  which  defines  a  host  of  non-bank  institutions. 
However,  to  facilitate  the  smooth  functioning  of  these  agencies,  there  is  a  need  for  separate  and 
specific  legislation/  regulations  for  each  category  of  institutions.  The  Central  bank  has  commenced 
reform of the banking sector, in tune  with the changes made in the financial systems internationally, 
particularly in the area of regulatory and prudential framework.  It has issued a series of regulations 
since  2014,  covering  a  wide  range  of  issues,  with  a  view  to  strengthening  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework.  Recent  regulations  for  banks  covered,  interalia,  prudential  standards, 
corporate governance, internal control and risk management system, prevention of money laundering, 
fight  against  terrorism,  harmonisation  of  accounting  rules  with  International Accounting  Standards  / 
International Financial Reporting Standards, external audit and customer protection. However, there is 
an emerging need to have a relook at all regulations in the light of the Financial Institutions Law with a 
view to harmonising the laws and regulations. 
2.2 Bank expansion 
7.
The  financial  sector,  primarily  comprising  commercial  banks  and  non-banking  financing 
companies, has been meeting the evolving demands of the economy and contributing significantly to 
economic diversification of the country with a view to reducing dependency on the oil sector. Currently 
there  are  27  financial  institutions  operating  in  the  banking  sector  (in  2005  there  were  only  10 
registered). Though competitive, the Angolan banking sector is also highly concentrated, with 5 banks 
alone having over 75% of combined market share. The banking sector’s liquidity remains high, about 
0.75%  of  GDP.  Angola’s  financial  system  is  dominated  by  banks  which  are  well  capitalised.  The 
banking sector has been expanding in terms of number of branches and ATMs throughout the country. 
The  average  population  per  branch  stands  at  around  13,388.  However,  the  expansion  has  been 
skewed - in December 2015 as much as 981 branches (nearly 52%) out of the 1865 branches in the 
country  were  based  in  Luanda;  (in  the  SADCP  region  are  71  branches  of  commercial  banks  in 
Kwanza  Sul  province  and  108  branches  in  Huila  province.)  There  were  2686  ATMs  and  20,313 
employees in the banking industry. The banking outlets were concentrated in Luanda and urban areas 
and  thus,  the  rural  areas  needed  greater  attention  by  way  of  differential  branch  licensing  policy  for 
ensuring  access  to  financial  services. There  is  also  need  for  alternative  modes  of  financial  services 
delivery. 
2.3 Emerging concerns 
8.
Notwithstanding the expansion, the scope of products and services offered are mostly focused 
on traditional mass-market banking products. The banking system is still not accessible to a majority 
of the population with 47% only having bank accounts. The lending to deposit rate spread increased 
from  6  %  in  2008  to  13%  in  2013  led  to  high  borrowing  costs.    Loans  are  concentrated  in  a  few 
sectors,  like  wholesale  and  retail  commerce,  personal  services/consumer  finance  and  real  estate. 
Geographically  too,  credit  is  highly  concentrated  in  the  Luanda  province  (approximately  87%).  The 
banks are vulnerable to oil price shocks and foreign exchange rate fluctuations/depreciations (about 
30%  of  total  loans  to  private  sector  are  dollar-denominated).  Even  though  the  banks  have  a  small 
direct  exposure  to  the  oil  sector  (2%  in  2015),  their  indirect  exposure is high due to  various  trickle–
down  effects. The  quality  of  credit  remains  one  of  the  main  challenges  of  the  banking  sector.  Non-
Performing loan (NPL) ratio continued to grow substantially, reaching 16.9% in March 2015 (8.59% in 
142 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
March 2014). A substantial cut in Government expenditure in 2015 is said to have hit the construction 
and commercial sectors, leading to an increase in non-performing loans. The banks focus on payment 
and transfer, deposits, foreign exchange, investments, securities and other services as compared to 
credit.  Credit  is  also  concentrated  in  urban  areas.  The  larger,  older  and  urban-based  firms  have 
greater access to credit.  High collateral is required for every loan. The share of agriculture in the loan 
portfolio of the banking sector is minimal, much less than the share of agriculture in GDP. Short- term 
finance  is  preferred  over  long-  term  finance  for  agriculture  investment.  The  banks  have  limited 
capacity  for  financing  long  term  development  projects,  as  80%  of  their  funding  is  from  short  term 
deposits. This deters capital formation in agriculture. The development of new products and services 
for low-income people has been little. Risk perception of bankers for agriculture has been very high. 
Generally,  banks  in Angola  display  high  net  non-interest  income  and  have  low  loan-deposit  ratio  of 
58.7%.  With  regard  to  liabilities,  deposits  represent  approximately  74.7%  of  the  total  value  of 
liabilities.  
2.4 Overall stability 
9.
Despite this, the banking system has displayed sound performance. The banks have sound and 
highly  liquid  balance  sheets,  with  a  large  proportion  of  the  assets  being  held  in  cash  (19%)  and 
investment  securities  (24%).  Due  to  the  large  volume  of  loan-  loss  provisions,  net  profits  of  all 
operating banks in Angola rose by 39% in 2015. Their solvency rate (CRAR) was 21.1% in 2015 (well 
above  regulatory  minimum  10%). Altogether,  the  Return-on-Equity  (ROE)  of  the  banking  institutions 
increased slightly from 3.37% in March 2014 up to 5.28% in March 2015, whilst the Return-on-Assets 
(ROA) rose from 0.37% up to 0.57% in the same period. The fact that funding is based on domestic 
deposits  rather  than  capital  means  that  the  banking  sector  has  adequate  financial  resources  to 
support and fuel economic diversification, employment generation and sustainable poverty reduction 
in Angola. On aggregate while Angolan banks have relatively sound underlying fundamentals (despite 
their balance sheets deteriorating in the recent years), at an individual bank level some banks exhibit 
more vulnerability to shocks due to narrow capital and liquidity buffers. 
3. Agricultural finance products 
  Financial  product  diversity  was  not  noticed  in  the  banking  sector,  as  the  bankers  are  hardly 
10.
financing  independently  any  small  farmers  under  value  chain/agri-business.  The  banks  have 
experience of financing government-sponsored/guaranteed schemes. Banco de Desenvolvimento de 
Angola  (BDA),  established  in  2006  as  a  state-owned  bank  has  been  a  very  important  instrument  in 
recent  years,  acting  as  a  facilitating  agency  that  drives  Government  of  Angola's  economic 
diversification  policies.  It  grants  short-term,  medium-term  and  long-term  credit  for  business 
development.  Angola  Investe  programme  was  launched  to  support  MSMEs  /single  member 
enterprises,  with  provision  of  investment  and  working  capital  finance  with  two  basic  incentive 
mechanisms of interest subsidies and government guarantee. Same kind of incentive mechanism was 
built in the seasonal loan for agriculture (Credito Angola Campanha). These had adverse bearing on 
competitive  lending  for  agri-business.  In  this  context,  there  is  emerging  need  to  have  a  business 
orientation  of  banks  and  farmers  for  commercialization  of  agriculture,  with  demand-based  support 
services, ensuring  access to financial literacy, financial services, matching grants (grant-loan-equity), 
savings products, insurance schemes, technology, inputs and markets. The overall policy and current 
approach  to  the  matching  grant  instrument  need  to  be  changed,  to  encourage  private  investments. 
Products  and  services  offered  by  banks  should  be  tailored  to  client  and  sector  specific  needs,  with 
maturities, grace periods and reimbursement calendars aligned with the cash flows generated.  
4. Rural /micro finance sector 
11.
In the absence of required policy focus, rural finance and microfinance as distinct sectors have 
not  been  adequately  developed  nor  have  there  been  separate  definitions,  data-base  and  sectoral 
review  reports  in  the  country.  Rural  finance  as  a  distinct  developmental  concept/approach  has  not 
been recognised in Angola. In Angola, 62% of the population live in urban areas and 38% live in rural 
areas. There is constant migration from rural to urban areas, which can be revered by refocusing on 
rural finance and development. A few banks have a microfinance portfolio, but the loans to individuals 
or  groups  thereunder  are  mostly  extended  under  government-sponsored  or  donor-supported 
programmes  or  under  back-up  of  external  agencies  and  not  really  micro  in  terms  of  loan  sise. 
143 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
Appropriate regulations for the segment are being awaited. Out of 25 microfinance institutions, only 5 
are operating. However, only one MFI (KixiCrédito) is delivering microcredit. There is a wide scope for 
expanding the players in this sector and widening their outreach. The sector is expected to transform 
and graduate to the next level, i.e., the formation of microfinance banks that provide a wider range of 
financial services within a conducive regulatory framework. The financial services by banks and MFIs 
should  encompass,  at  least,  deposits,  credit,  insurance,  and  pension  and  remittance  services.  The 
Financial  Institutions  Law,  ibid.,  includes  a  host  of  financial  services  including  leasing,  factoring, 
payments,  derivatives  and  guarantees  services. The  microfinance  sector  at  this  juncture,  requires  a 
comprehensive policy, regulations, developmental strategy, risk management architecture, robust MIS 
and  supervisory  framework.  MFIs  might  need  support  for  capacity  building  and  transfer  of  best 
institutional  practices,  technical  support  for  market  studies,  product  development,  MIS,  integrating 
technology  in  business  and  operations,  human  resource  management  in  the  initial  years  in  rural 
development should be given sharper focus in the developmental strategy to reverse urban migration. 
An  exclusive  institutional  outfit  for  rural  finance  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  or  the  central  bank 
would  be  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  Setting  up  of  microfinance  association  could  pave  the  way 
forward in this direction.  
5. Cooperative banking 
12.
It is reported that around 20,000 agriculture and livestock cooperatives are registered in Angola 
by  the  Ministry  of Justice.  In addition to these there  are credit, fisheries, housing, civil servants  and 
transport, but these are in insignificant numbers. 
13.
In  the  list  of  non-banking  institutions,  figured  in  the  Financial  Institutions  Law,  a  separate 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  cooperative  banking  institutions  was  missing.  Although 
cooperative societies at grassroots level are given a registration certificate by the Ministry of Justice, 
there  is  no  supervisory  intervention  to  obtain/ensure  compliance.  The  Confederation  of  Farmers 
Associations  and  Agricultural  Cooperatives  of  Angola  (UNACA),  CAPCOB  is  functional.  The 
Federation of Cooperatives does not play the expected role of providing operational and promotional 
in  governance,  supervision, 
guidance 
sustainability,  internal  control,  organisational  development,  etc.,  are  very  evident.  The  concept  of 
cooperatives  is  not  well  entrenched  in  the  country.  Some  of  the  factors  inhibiting  the  growth  of  the 
cooperative  sector  include  credit,  training,  education  and  markets,  cooperative  management  failure, 
and time consuming and expensive set up costs.  
the  grassroots  organisations. 
  Thus,  weaknesses 
to 
  A  Cooperative  Law  was  legislated  in  August  2015  (Law  No.  23/15  of  Cooperatives).  This 
14.
Cooperatives  Law,  consisting  of  13  chapters,  establishes  the  general  principles  applicable  to  the 
cooperative sector and regulates the activity of all cooperatives, based on national territory, regardless 
of  their  socio-economic  status,  including  autonomous  legal  persons.  The  cooperative  sector, 
notwithstanding their potential for decentralised lending in rural areas, is still very weak and the impact 
of  the  new  law  is  yet  to  be  felt.  Credit  cooperative  societies  /  producer  cooperatives  need  a  major 
overhaul through appropriate developmental interventions and good regulatory oversight. 
6. NGOs 
  Some  of  the  international  NGOs  (e.g.,  World  Vision,  Care,  Development  Workshop)  and 
15.
domestic  NGOs  (e.g., ADRA, ADESPOVE,  GMG)  are  associated  in  various  financial  sector-related 
programmes, particularly in agricultural value chain and livelihood finance. Given the opportunity, they 
could  play  a  supportive  role  in  the  financial  sector.  They  could  intensify  mobilisation  of  producers 
associations, farmer groups and self-help groups, with thrust on savings and bring about linkage with 
banks, service- providers and the market. The private sector, technology providers and NGOs could 
play a significant role in the financial inclusion space. The government is in the process of bringing out 
a new regulation on NGOs 
7. Developing insurance  
16.
  The insurance market overall is weak and credit/deposit insurance is not in vogue.  Agriculture 
is highly susceptible to macro-economic disturbances, disease outbreaks and adverse weather events 
such as floods and droughts, and therefore poses high credit risk to lenders and borrowers. In order to 
mitigate  these  risks,  entrepreneurs,  banking  institutions,  insurers,  regulator,  reinsurers  and  the  GOA 
144 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
have to work together to develop insurance schemes (for production, prices and weather) and other 
risk  management  instruments  to  create  an  environment  that  supports  and  promotes  investments  in 
agriculture.  They  must  also  work  towards  making  the  insurance  products  affordable  to  farmers  and 
tying the insurance product with agriculture credit. [It is understood that agriculture insurance is being 
worked on by ARSEG, Ministry of Economy and Agriculture and reinsurers and that it is expected to 
be introduced.] 
8. Financial inclusion initiatives 
  The Banco Nacional  de Angola (BNA) is in the process of implementing the  national financial 
17.
inclusion  strategy  since  2013.  It  has  become  a  principal  member  of Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion 
(AFI)  as  one  of  more  than  100  central  banks  and  regulators  and  is  committed  to  bringing  about 
financial  inclusion,  in  tune  with  the  international  declarations.  BNA  has  introduced  SB  accounts  for 
low-income  people  with  AOA100  minimum  balance  in  the  financial  sector  to  encourage  financial 
inclusion in 2013. The Bankita products include Conta Depósito Bankita (deposit account) and Conta 
Poupança  Bankita  a  Crescer  (savings  account),  ensuring  the  ownership  of  a  deposit  account,  the 
access to a Multicaixa debit card without bank fees and expenses, or payment of charges within the 
Multicaixa network. It started a financial education programme, which aims to allow the access of the 
low-income population to banking services through products and services designed to meet the needs 
of this segment. With lower access conditions, users can open accounts with identification documents 
other  than  the  identity  card,  provided  that  it  is  validated  by  the  adherent  bank.  BNA  signed  an 
adhesion  agreement  to  this  financial  education  programme  with  banks  BPA,  BCGTA,  BMA,  BANC, 
BPC, BCI, BCA, BFA, BIC, BRK, BNI, SOL and BMF, in an effort to increase the informed access of 
banking services.   
18.
  Developing the new regulation for mobile banking is in process; cabinet approval is awaited for 
the new directive. The provisions of mobile-based banking solutions and agency banking are in their 
infancy  in  Angola,  notwithstanding  considerable  expansion  of  mobile  phone  use,  including  in  rural 
areas. 
  BNA  is  negotiating  with  the  World  Bank  for  implementing  the  National  Financial  Strategy  for 
19.
building  on  reforms  in  the  areas  of  regulation,  protection  and  education.  However,  field  level  and 
institutional  level  (banking  sector)  impact  of  such  financial  inclusion  initiatives,  its  rural/agricultural 
finance focus or commitment is not yet visible. BNA’s policy and developmental interventions are yet 
to  gather  required  momentum.  A  clear  road  map  and  implementation  strategies  are  deemed 
necessary. 
9. BNA’s Financial Education Department 
The  BNA  has  set  up  Financial  Education  Department  for  spearheading  its  financial  inclusion 
campaign. It includes financial literacy to enhance the demand system of financial services. Some of 
the ministries including Ministry of Family, and banks are expected to undertake workshops/seminars 
for greater awareness-building. Promotion of mass electronic payments with payment cards is being 
pursued  as  a  means  of  increasing  access  to  financial  services  and  “bancarization”  and  reduce  the 
weight  of  the  informal  market  in  the  Angolan  economy.  Other  methodologies  for  financial  literacy, 
which could be tried could include lectures, pedagogic tools, print media, TV/radio, Films, and SMS, 
help lines, mobile van, folk theater, songs, jingles, road shows, posters, banners, literacy camps, ICT 
tools,  etc.  The  interventions  could  be  mandatory  for  banks,  government  agencies  and  educational 
institutions  (including  course  curriculum).  Different  instruments  and  channels  should  be  used  for 
spreading financial literacy, depending on the  target group. People should make an informed choice 
for  financial  services.  With  a  larger  financial  inclusion  mandate  on  both  demand  and  supply  front, 
naming  it  as  Financial  Education  Department,  connotes  a  restricted  perspective.  The  central  bank, 
commercial banks and relevant ministries could consider organising exposure visit to other countries 
to better understand the meaning and scope of financial literacy pursuits. Banks in India have set up 
Financial  Literacy  Centres  in  rural  areas  for  dissemination  of  relevant  inputs  for  farmers  and  rural 
entrepreneurs. The Indonesian Authority for Financial Services (supervisory authority) has started its 
documentation, training and visitors exposure programme more recently. 
145 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
10. Training and capacity-building 
20.
It was observed that the banks in Angola had not developed any exclusive training module on 
financing  of  agriculture,  value  chain,  commercialization  of  agriculture  and  agro-processing  etc.  for 
developing the competence of their officers in appraisal, sanction and monitoring of financial services 
for  this  sector.  Nor  was  there  any  systematic  and  structured  provision  for  training  and  exposure  for 
banks’  staff,  for  group  formation  and  linkage  as  they  are  currently  not  engaged  in  such  activities.  
There  is  no  specialised  training  institution  for  knowledge  management,  sensitisation  of  concerned 
officials  and  service  providers  in  agriculture/rural  finance.  There  has  not  been  any  training  need 
assessment  (TNA)  at  banks’  level  for  agricultural  finance.  The  Instituto  de  Formação  Bancária  de 
Angola (IFBA) is the main body responsible for the training of personnel in the banking sector. They 
along  with  ABNC  (Bankers  Association)  need  to  take  initiative  for  professional  enrichment  through 
professional courses and training programmes and sensitisation of staff in rural/agricultural finance.  
11. Grievance redressing 
21.
  BNA  had  issued  the  regulation  in  2011  widening  the  protection  of  consumers  of  financial 
services. The National Institute of Consumer Protection has been established and plays an important 
role  in  guaranteeing  the  best  conditions  for  consumers.  The  financial  institutions  need  to  ensure 
compliance with laws and regulations in this regard. They should put in place a consumer protection 
framework  that  covers  both  prevention  (interventions  that  ensure  fair  play  by  banks)  and  cure 
(addresses  customer  grievances).  The  existing  CIRC  system  with  BNA  may  be  broad-based  to 
capture  information  (good  and  negative  aspects)  on  all  borrowers  of  financial  institutions;  the 
information available now is only on defaulters.To facilitate the act of complaint, the banking institution 
has a complaints book in its facilities and a specialised area for customer service, in accordance with 
Notice No. 05/2012,  which can be contacted via electronic mail, telephone,  letter, form to fill in  your 
agency or through the institution website. These introduced instruments allow leveling of information 
asymmetries, easing the process for identification of occasion where intervention is needed, and rapid 
and  appropriate  resolution  of  conflicts  between  the  institution  and  its  customers.  The  banks  should 
evolve and implement whistle blower policy /vigil mechanism. 
12 Process re-engineering 
22.
It was observed that door-step banking had not been popularised in Angola. The farmers have 
to  cover  considerable  distance  (beyond  10km)  to  transact  their  financial  business  with  branches. 
None of the banks visited had delegated powers to branches to sanction loans at branch level and all 
sanctioning powers are centralised at the corporate office level in Luanda. The borrowers have to wait 
beyond 3  weeks to get financial  assistance. In the context of financial inclusion drive, particularly  in 
remote  rural  areas,  branchless  banking,  and  agency  banking  models  are  required  to  be  widely 
introduced.  It  requires  constant  innovations  in  business  processes  and  systems.  None  of  the  banks 
had  project  profiles  of  the  agri-business/potential  activities,  technical  and  appraisal  manual  for 
guidance of banks’ staff and perspective borrowers. 
13 KYC compliance 
  The  banks  have  prescribed  a  few  documents,  including  National  Identity  Cards  for  opening 
23.
bank  accounts.  Rural  people  find  it  difficult  to  procure  identity  cards.  Government  has  set  up  243 
regional  and  mobile  data  capture  centers  and  Card  Personalisation  Units.  The  challenges 
encountered are dispersed population with limited citizen information records, counterfeit documents, 
ID theft cases and absence of country-wide IT and communication infrastructure. There is a need to 
enhance  ID  card  technology  and  issuance  process  and  overall  efficiency.  Liberal  approach  to  KYC 
norms (Know Your Customer) is essential for low-income clients and removing bottlenecks to financial 
inclusion 
14. Group lending and savings 
24.
  The group  lending approach has not reached the scale and quality levels as observed during 
field visits and interaction with banks. Linkage banking focusing on group solidarity, saving thrust and 
continued linkage with banks for financial services is not in place. The farmer associations, which are 
mixed self-help groups (male and female) were loosely linked and lacked proper mobilisation process 
146 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
to  attain  sustainability.  EDA’s  support  mechanism  lacked  continuity  and  intensity.  Self-regulation 
system,  record-keeping,  financial  literacy  and  access  to  finance  are  very  irregular  and  inadequate. 
Apart from taking corrective measures, it would be necessary to focus on saving culture among group 
members.  Linkage  banking  model  may  be  experimented  with  the  intervention  of  selected  NGOs  to 
explore replication possibility in future.  
  Group  financing  for  farmers  to  take  up  activities  in  the  agriculture  value  chain  will  enhance 
25.
agriculture  production  and  income  generation  in  the  farmer  community.  Specialised  farmer  groups 
who have come together as producer groups or joint liability groups or farmers who have been trained 
and collectivised in FFS may be financed for taking up activities in the agriculture value chain. 
15. Assistance to women and youth 
  Farmer  associations  comprise  of  both  men  and  women  members.  However,  participation  of 
26.
youth appeared low in the associations, reportedly due to migration of youth to urban areas in search 
of  jobs/employment.  Banks  do  not  extend  any  concessions  in  financial  services  for  women  clients. 
The  supportive,  promotional  and  advocacy  role  of  organisations  like  the  Angolan  Federation  of 
Women entrepreneurs (FMEA) assumes significance. FMEA is expected to intervene at local, regional 
and  national  levels  in  all  initiatives  that  promote  sustainable  economic  development  of  women. 
However, their membership is only 3,000, which need to be augmented. 
27.
  Angola has made considerable achievement in promoting gender equality. However, inequality 
persists in female –male participation in labor force, per capita income, etc. The 2015 Angola Gender 
Diagnostic carried out with support from the European Union notes that agreements and conventions 
adopted by Angola  allow  growing parity, in  legal terms between men and  women. Customary  law  is 
however,  discriminatory  to  the  detriment  of  the  women.  It  highlights  women’s  participation  in 
production  sectors.  In  Angola,  Gender  Neutral  Trans  Human  law  has  been  passed.  Banks  should 
evolve special schemes and approaches for financing women and youth. 
16. Role of the Ministry of Agriculture, (MINAGRI), Government of Angola 
  MINAGRI is entrusted with formulating agricultural and rural development policies. It thus plays 
28.
a very significant role with respect to family farmers and coordinates with other institutions connected 
with development of agriculture. To better direct its responsibilities, MINAGRI is organised in National 
Directorates  and  works  in  coordination  with  R&D  institutes  and  specialised  services.  The  main 
services of MINAGRI are decentralised at provincial and municipal levels. The provincial directorates 
are  executives  of  the  provincial  administrations  and  work  primarily  in  partnership  with  the  central 
organs of the ministry for all matters related to technical or political issues. IIA (Institute for Agricultural 
Research) in Huambo is playing a nodal role in the research of various crops. The perspective crops 
in Angola are peanuts, beans, sweet potato, cassava, coffee, fruit tree, etc.   
17. The Agriculture Development Institute (IDA): 
29.
IDA is implementing policies and services  that focus on family farmers; the institute is headed 
by a general director at national level and by provincial directors appointed by the provincial governor 
in  consultation  with  the  central  level. At  municipal  level,  there  are Agriculture  Development  Stations 
(EDAs). The major functions of IDA (provincial), EDA (Municipal) and CDA (community level) are as 
under: 
  To  motivate  and  support  family  farming  and  encourage/facilitate  them  to  form  groups  and 
associations; 
  To facilitate introduction of new technology in farm fields; 
  To  provide  guidance,  training,  extension  and  transfer  technical  knowledge,  crop  management 
practices and relevant  information on government schemes among the target groups;  
  To  provide  various  inputs  like  supply  and  distribution  of  quality  seeds,  fertiliser,  etc.  for  farm 
families at concessional rates; and 
  To  transmit  data  and  information  on  the  progress  made  in  various  activities  from  field  level 
through proper channel to the National directorate for Development of MINAGRI. 
147 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
  The  EDAs  are  equipped  with  technicians  and  extension  persons  to  undertake  the  above 
30.
functions  at  field  level. At  the  national  level,  IDA  coordinates  various  donor  supported  (World  Bank, 
FAO,  IFAD)  /  government-sponsored  programmes  as  nodal  agency  and  extends  strategic  and 
operational guidance. With respect to  Credit Angola de Camparh of BDA, they were associated with 
the financing banks as a certifying authority for farmers so as to enable banks to release credit funds. 
Thus,  the  financial  capability  of  IDA  is  unproved,  notwithstanding  their  participation  in  various 
agricultural schemes. 
31.
IDA has been involved in the conduct of various studies. Currently, they are coordinating value 
chain  studies  in  four  different  regions,  which  may  bring  forth  critical  information  on  the  prospect  of 
family  farmers  in  undertaking  value  chain  activities.  The  discussion  with  IDA  at  the  national  and 
provincial  levels  brought  to  light  the  lack  of  adequate  technical  personnel  at  EDA  levels  and 
inadequacy  in  institutional  training  for  the  existing  staff.  There  has  not  been  any  manpower 
assessment  exercise  and  TNA  of  staff  to  address  the  above  gaps.  Further,  there  is  absence  of 
participatory  budget  exercise  at  the  government  level.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  allots  certain  budget 
annually to each of the ministries / directorates, based on the resources available and the concerned 
ministry  /  department  /  directorate  has  to  manage  its  activities  within  given  allocations. A  system  of 
participatory  budgeting  exercise  needs  to  be  introduced  to  make  the  activities  more  planned  and 
systematic.  
32.
  Overall, the IDA  set up is unique organisationally and it can be a useful partner in agricultural 
financing and development projects, including SADCP as nodal agency, in view of its past experience, 
strategic role  and  extensive network. 
18. Technology, infrastructure and innovations 
  GOA  and  the  central  bank  are  driving  initiatives  to  promote  a  diversified  economic  base  and 
33.
reforming the financial system to be aligned with generally accepted international best practices. The 
banks need to play their role and to adapt and implement changes that encourage funding of business 
opportunities  in  economic  sectors  such  as  agriculture,  agro-business,  agro-processing  and  value 
chain.  However,  productivity  of  farm  land  and  income  of  farmers  cannot  be  increased  by  only 
financing. Comprehensive and innovative measures need to be taken at various levels to accomplish 
the same. Agriculture is more integrated with the macro and global economy. It is no longer confined 
to  the  rural  economy  only.    Measures  like  efficient  land  system,  water  use  efficiency,  product 
diversification, pricing system, procurement arrangements, storage, transport, distribution, marketing, 
risk  mitigation,  improved  technology,  soft  and  hard  infrastructure,  regulatory  framework,  agriculture 
research and international trade agreements - all have bearing on productivity. There has been good 
progress in ICT and digital financial services in the banking industry. Technology would play the key 
role in bringing about innovations in agriculture and agriculture financing.  
  Donor  agencies  like World  Bank,  IFAD,  UNDP,  FAO,  etc.,  have  been  instrumental  in  bringing 
34.
about  developmental  and  policy  orientation  in  agricultural  finance  with  programmes  like  SADCP, 
MOSAP, Entrepreneurship Development; etc. 
19. Planning for value chain financing 
  Planning 
35.
entrepreneurs, which includes to: 
for  value  chain 
financing,  starts  with  a  needs  assessment  of  agricultural 
  assess the potential  (crops / produce, market) of the project areas; 
  assess / map field level needs including funding needs, to identify constraints / risks; 
and  to  strengthen  necessary  infrastructure  and  support  mechanism  along  the  value  chain  to 
optimise productivity; 
  map with respect to the above might encompass irrigation, input supply, support facilities, (seed 
production  /  processing,  nurseries,  soil  testing,  facility,  ware  housing,  pack  houses,  logistics, 
etc.),  service  providers,  technical  support  providers  (farm  management  services,  extension 
support, etc.), processing and marketing and their funding needs; 
  assess the status of various related organisations, including financial institutions to address the 
above needs; 
148 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
  assess  the  possible  role  of  coalition  of  the  key  stake  holders  with  shared  contributions  and 
commitments; 
  assess the nature and structure of financial package that could be delivered to the farmer, with 
a focus on financial inclusion and graduation of small farmers;  
  assess  the  appropriate  financial  instruments  that  can  be  developed  for  different  actors  in  the 
value chain; 
  chalk out possible project implementation strategies with participation of all stakeholders; and 
  design incentive and motivation for a committed and successful farmer or farmers’ collectives. 
  Planned  and  systematic  approach  at  the  levels  of  farmers,  service  providers  and  bankers  is 
36.
essential  for  successful  value  chain  financing.  While  value  chain  financing  is  invaluable,  it  may  not 
encompass  subsistence  farmers  who  do  not  engage  or  are  not  ready  for  commercial  agriculture. 
Separate financial products that ensure capacity building and use of better technology and inputs of 
such  farmers  will  have  to  be  included  in  the  financial  offerings  of  PFIs.  In  addition,  value  chain 
financing only focuses on credit, while complementary products that cover other financial needs such 
as  savings,  remittances  and  payments,  personal  loans  and  insurance  have  to  be  developed  along 
with value chain financing 
20. Conclusion  
37.
  The  GOA  and  the  central  bank  have  given  focus  in  recent  years  to  economic  diversification, 
deepening  of  financial  inclusion,  developing  rural  financial  system,  microfinance  and  financing 
agriculture and agri-business with focus on family farming. The country’s financial sector is yet to give 
due attention to these  emerging areas, but  there is still a long  way  to go  in  order to  achieve a truly 
diversified  economy  and  a  more  inclusive,  sustainable  and  robust  growth.  The  current  economic 
environment  has  provided  a  unique  opportunity  to  refocus  policies,  re-engineer  systems  and 
processes  foster  structural  transformation,  bring  about  institutional  development  and  upscale 
innovations  in  the  financial  sector  for  agriculture  and  rural  development.  Both  public  and  private 
institutions, including the banking sector, have to work closely to increase production and productivity 
of  smallholder  farmers  by  facilitating  access  to  finance,  technology  and  market.  A  more  conducive 
policy and enabling environment for smallholder agriculture and rural finance is deemed necessary. 
List of References: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Angola -2016   -Joel Muzima - UNDP 
Micro Finance in Angola-  Finmark Trust-2011 
 Angola Banking Survey-KPMG Angola-April 2015 
Banking Review-10 years of Ambition & 10 years of Evolution- Deloitte-2015 
Angola’s Financial Sector-A round Table Report- June 2015 
Angola Second Post Programme-Monitoring Report- IMF- February 2014 
Angola Economic Update- World Bank – June 2013 
Land,  Territorial  Development  &Farming  in  Angola-  Francisco  Carranza  &  Jordan  Treakle  - 
FAO 
9.  Websites of international agencies (IFAD, World Bank, FAO, IMF) and the financial institutions 
and ABANC (Bankers’ Association) in Angola 
10.  Country Report Angola by Economist Intelligence Unit - August 2016 
11.  Reports of agricultural projects supported by international agencies in Angola 
149 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
Annex I to Appendix 15   
Terms of Reference 
Angola Rural Financial Services Feasibility Study as part of SADCP-C&H-SAMAP 
Experts hired by IFAD under a non-staff contract 
Consultant ☒ Intern ☐ Fellow ☐ Conference Service ☐
Full Name(s): 
Specialization: 
Expected Start Date of 
Assignment: 
Expected End Date of 
Assignment: 
Total number of working days 
(max. 240 in a 12-month) 
period): 
Division/Department: 
N.N. 
Agricultural Finance and Policies; Rural Finance & Institutions 
00/00/2017 
00/00/2018 
45 working days (two months) 
ESA 
Location: 
Luanda, Republic of Angola 
Reports to (name and title): 
N.N., Project Coordinator 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF TASK(S) AND OBJECTIVES TO BE ACHIEVED 
Expected Activities: 
The Context  
1.  The World Bank and IFAD were asked by the Government of Angola (GOA) to support the Smallholder 
Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (SADCP). The SADCP is designed to address two 
critical  constraints  to  agricultural  development  in  Angola  -  to  increase  institutional  capacity  through 
capacity  building, both  nationally and in  the project  areas,  and to  upgrade smallholder  agriculture and 
improve  market  linkages.  SADCP  builds  on  a  previous  World  Bank  and  IFAD-supported  project  -  the 
Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSAP) - approved in July 2008 and implemented over 
seven years. MOSAP was designed to increase agricultural production through the provision of improved 
agricultural  services  and  investment  support  to  smallholder  farmers.  SADCP  scales  up  support  to  a 
greater  number  of  small  farmers  from  50,000  farm  families  under  MOSAP  to  at  least  235,000  farmers 
envisaged  under  the  SADCP  and  covers  five  provinces  of  Angola  as  compared  to  three  under  MOSAP. 
The  GOA  has  sought  the  implementation  of  SADCP  in  two  separate  regions  clearly  identified  for  each 
development  partner.  The  SADCP  WB  funded  (SADCP-WB)  will  be  implemented  in  Bie,  Huambo,  and 
Malanje  Provinces.  The  SADCP  IFAD  funded  (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP)  will  be  implemented  in  5 
Municipalities  of  Cuanza  Sul,  viz.,  Conda,  Amboim  (Gabela),  Cassongue,  Wacu  Congo  Cela)  and  Kibala 
and in 5 Municipalities of Huila Provinces viz.; Caconda, Caluquemba, Chicomba, Chipindo and Cacula. 
2.  Project overall goal: SADCP aims at diversifying the economy, generating revenue and improving the 
livelihoods and food security of poorer households. 
3.  The objective of the project is to increase smallholder agriculture productivity, production and marketing 
for selected crops.  
4.  Components of SADCP-C&H-SAMAP: 
Component  1:  Capacity  Building  and  Institutional  Development  (US$15.5  million).  This  component  will 
strengthen  smallholder  farmers’  technical,  organisational  and  managerial  competencies  and  support  a 
more conducive policy and enabling environment for smallholder agriculture. 
150 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
Component  2:  Smallholder  Agriculture  and  Market  Access  Investments  (US$14.7  million).  This 
component aims to improve agriculture productivity, production, market access and value addition by 
supporting  demand  driven,  investment  sub-projects  through  a  combination  of  promoter’s  own 
resources, matching grant and short and medium-term credit extended by partner financial institutions 
(PFIs,  i.e.  banks  and  micro  finance  institutions);  and  sustainably  link  smallholders  and  their  FOs  to 
buyers, input suppliers and PFIs. 
Component  3:  Programme  Management  (US$8  million).  This  component  will  ensure  timely  and 
efficient  project  coordination;  management;  monitoring  and  evaluation;  and  learning  and  knowledge 
management. 
5.  Project implementation status: The study will be conducted once the project is at the initial stages of 
implementation, with the Project Implementation Manual having been finalised. 
The Objective 
6.  Overall, the objective of the feasibility study is to provide decision making support for the SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP project coordination team who are responsible to develop and implement the proposed 
agricultural and rural finance activities of project component 2. Built on the project design 
documentation, particularly the agricultural and rural finance sector analysis (appendix 15), the 
feasibility study is to establish the project financial sector landscape (policy and key actors) and has 
the following specific objectives: 
To assess the potential of the agricultural and rural finance market (demand and supply of 
financial services) in the project Municipalities; 
To map financial services providers, their legal form, level of outreach and performance and 
products and services and other supportive institutional infrastructure in the project areas;  
To study preparedness / capacity of these institutions to play the envisaged role in 
implementation of the project; 
To identify willing and suitable financial institutions as partner financial institutions (PFIs) to 
actively participate in the project, rendering tailored financial services to the target group; 
To bring out critical information about the existing policies, government programmes products, 
processes, practices and resources, including human resources in financing agriculture and rural 
micro and small enterprises as also the potential of the identified PFIs and their commitments and 
expectations from the project; 
To identify gaps in the policy environment for PFIs and other support organizations; and 
To prepare the ground for dialogue, possible nature of the partnership and project incentives for 
collaboration with PFIs, facilitating smooth implementation as envisaged in component 2. 
Details of Tasks / Assignment 
7.  The consultant(s) will be expected to work with the SADCP-C&H-SAMAP Coordination Unit, MINAGRI 
both at national and municipal/district level, potential PFIs and other relevant stakeholders in 
undertaking the assignment. The overall duties and responsibilities during the assignment with IFAD 
will include the following specific tasks: 
Rural Finance Landscape- Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs): 
Commercial Banks 
8.  Compile the network of financial service providers and their outreach in the Municipalities identified for 
implementation of the project in Cuanza Sula and Huila Provinces through branch and other alternative 
151 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
channels, if any. (status of agency banking, mobile banking and digital services, POS, etc.) - assessing 
adequacy of the delivery channels with specific reference to target project participants-(marginal, 
smallholder and women farmers, rural youth, FOs, NGOs, service and extension providers and 
agriculture value chain players); 
9.  Make general assessment of farmers’ demand for financial services for agricultural rural business 
activities in the project areas; 
10.  Describe the extent of financial inclusion in the project areas, availability and accessibility of financial 
services (savings, credit, insurance, pension, remittances, leasing); 
11.  Determine implementation of any government-sponsored programme/guarantee scheme/donor 
supported/innovative scheme for agriculture in the project areas; 
12.  Assess the core competencies of potential PFIs and their staff in agricultural and rural finance, and 
availability of training infrastructure for training, sensitization and knowledge management in core areas 
(e.g. agriculture/value chain credit and services, risk analysis, product development and project 
formulation, delivery innovations and adopting best practices, conducting market assessment for 
agriculture and value chain projects and services, identifying and engaging with rural clientele including 
proposed project participants; marketing of rural services, credit monitoring and evaluation,  MIS, and 
running financial literacy programmes); 
13.  Assess potential PFIs’ willingness to participate in the project and the support required by them for 
meaningful participation, including capacity building, technical support, incentive mechanism such as 
medium to long-term credit lines. Identify specific gaps in capacities with relation to project 
participation; 
14.  Study the factors hindering their role as financial service providers to the project target group and 
15.   Study present arrangements for collecting borrowers’ credit history and perspectives of making credit 
information more broad-based. 
Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) 
16.  Assess potential of KixiCredito to participate in SADCP-C&H-SAMAP; 
17.  Identify specific support required by them to offer agriculture credit and other micro finance services to 
targeted population in project areas and 
18.  Study the potential of other MFIs/credit institutions to participate in the project after passage of the 
relevant regulations. 
PFIs and Grassroots Delivery/Support Institutions: 
19.  Identify the registered operational cooperative societies functioning in the project areas: credit 
cooperatives and producer cooperatives and their feasibility of participating in the project; 
20.  Ascertain the role played/potential role that can be played by these cooperatives in the agriculture value 
chain and extension/input services and also their linkage to credit from the PFIs, in the target 
provinces; 
21.  Study the status of cooperative credit societies in the project areas and explore possible support from 
PFIs; 
22.  Assess the health of such institutions and identify steps needed for improving their capacity, particularly 
with respect to governance, supervision, audit, books and accounts, MIS and disclosures; 
23.  Suggest potential for and ways of including producer cooperative societies in value chain financing; 
state the support required to be given to be in production practices, preparation of business plan and 
sub-projects, credit linkage and market access to participating producer cooperatives; 
24.  Study participation of women in credit and producer cooperative and suggesting ways of enhancing it 
within the scope of the project; 
25.  Assess FOs trained in FFS in the project areas, mapping their technical, organisational and managerial 
competencies and status of present linkage with PFIs; 
26.  Draw road map for strengthening FOs’ accessibility to PFIs’ financial and support services 
27.  Describe status of informal groups engaged in financial services in the project areas and possibility of 
their linkage with PFIs through group lending mechanism/linkage banking; 
152 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
28.  Find out the presence of potential NGOs, civil service organizations, financial agents and technology 
providers in the project areas and identify their possible role in supplementing PFIs to make financial 
services more effective in project areas and 
29.  Assess status of Financial literacy campaign including the module developed and agencies involved in 
the areas,   and possibility of its up scaling for PFIs’ clientele. 
Policy-Making Bodies: 
30.  Identify status and possible role of MINAGRI and its provincial authorities, including IDA, for forging 
better coordination and linkage with PFIs; 
31.  Ascertain the institutional capacity of both national and provincial units of MINAGRI for agricultural 
extension, capacity building, statistics, market information and irrigation development to improve 
provision of services to smallholder farmers and FOs; 
32.  Study status of existing laws and regulations pertaining to rural finance and identify gaps, which need 
to be addressed by the central bank/GOA; 
33.  Identify role expectations from the corporate offices of PFIs to ensure effective participation in the 
project. 
Process and Requirements for Undertaking the Study 
34.  The consultant(s) will undertake careful reviews of relevant documents (including documents of PFIs, 
laws and regulations, etc.), comprehensive field visits to sample institutions to discuss with and collect 
information that may be needed. Besides national and provincial units of MINAGRI and other key 
ministries participating in the project, technical institutions, financial service providers/potential rural 
financial institutions and MFIs, cooperatives, local community organisations, NGOs, input service 
providers and major agriculture extension organisations, etc. should be visited. 
35.  The consultant(s) will produce and submit an inception report to SADCP-C&H-SAMAP not later than 7 
days after the start of the assignment. The inception report will provide the preliminary findings, issues 
emanating on which the consultant(s) will need further guidance, and the table of contents for the 
study, including annotations. The consultant(s) also propose changes in the schedule for preparing the 
report if envisaged. 
36.  The assignment will be under the supervision of SADCP-C&H-SAMAP. The project will provide logistics 
support, including office accommodation, and office supplies necessary for the study/report preparation. 
The contacts and visits to the field, and meetings with ministries/agencies will also be arranged by 
SADCP-C&H-SAMAP. Facilitating meetings for briefing, debriefing and review of inception report, and 
draft reports will be arranged by SADCP-C&H-SAMAP. The consultant(s) will be responsible for the 
preparation and presentation of both the inception and the final report to designate persons/technical 
committee. 
37.  The consultant(s) may collaborate with a local development/consultant agency with experience in 
conducting feasibility studies/market analyses; the consultant(s) would be responsible for backstopping 
of and guidance to the agency. 
38.  The consultant(s) will be reporting to the XXX. XXX will also supervise the work of the consultant(s). 
Qualifications and Experience of the Consultant(s)  
39.  The consultant(s) should have the following attributes and qualifications: 
•  at least 10 years of professional experience within the financial sector; experience in microfinance 
and agricultural/rural finance will be a competitive advantage; 
•  a relevant post-graduate qualification from a recognized University (MSc/MA degree in economics, 
business administration, finance); 
•  proven track records on similar assignments in Africa; 
•  computer literacy; 
•  excellent written English and spoken proficiency in Portuguese; 
153 
The Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 15:  Agriculture & Rural Finance in Angola – A Sector Analysis 
•  competency in report writing; 
•  good understanding of agriculture, value chain development value chain finance, and rural 
development issues. 
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
Expected Outputs (please include any travel if applicable): 
Required Completion Date: 
1.  Inception report of the feasibility study, which will be presented to the 
technical committee for endorsement before actual consultancy work 
2.  Draft feasibility study report 
3.  Final draft feasibility study report 
4.  Final feasibility study report 
Tbc 
Tbc 
Tbc 
Tbc 
Name: ………………………………………………….…                      Signature……………………………………………. 
Date:………………………. 
154 
