Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AFAP                Angola Fisheries and Aquaculture Project
AfDB                African Development Bank
AOA                 Angolan Kwanza
ARP                 Agricultural Recovery Project
AWPB              Annual Work Plan and Budget
EDA                 Estacões de Desenvolvimento Agrário (IDA office at municipal level)
EIRR                Economic Internal Rate of Return
ESMF               Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESMP               Environmental and Social Management Plan
FAO                 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FFS                  Farmer Field School
GAP                 Good Agricultural Practice
GDP                 Gross Domestic Product
GNI                  Gross National Income
GoA                 Government of Angola
HDI                  Human Development Index
HDR                 Human Development Report
IDA                   Instituto de Desenvolvimento Agrário (Agricultural Development Institute)
IFAD                 International Fund for Agricultural Development
MINAGRIF        Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
MINFAMU         Ministry of Family Affairs and for the Promotion of Women
MOSAP            Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project
NPV                 Net Present Value
PDO                 Project Development Objective
PGC                 Provincial Governance Committee
PIF                   Portfolio Implementation Facility
PIM                  Project Implementation Manual
PIU                   Project Implementation Unit
PPSC               Provincial Project Steering Committee
PSC                 Project Steering Committee
SADCP            Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project
SECAP            Social Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures
SCU                 Single Coordination Unit
SLM                 Sustainable Land Management
SREP               Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☐ Gender transformational ☐ Youth sensitive ☐ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/31
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
Background
$14,827,000
$0
$14,827,000
The Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) covers two distinct geographical regions and agro-ecological zones in the
north and the south of Angola to ensure a corridor of synergistic and complementary agriculture development investments. In the
north, SREP will improve smallholders’ productivity and production and link them to markets, replicating the successful approach of
the Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSAP) in provinces adjacent to the area covered by the Smallholder
Agriculture and Market Access Project (SAMAP). In the south, SREP will facilitate smallholders’ transition from recovery (following the
2012-2016 droughts) to longer-term resilience. SREP will also aim to consolidate gains made under the Agriculture Recovery Project
(ARP). By replicating the implementation modalities and management systems of these three on-going projects, SREP ensures
simplicity and ease of execution, in recognition of the limited development capacity in Angola. The Government of Angola (GoA) is
cognizant of this challenge and is fully supportive of this approach. Coverage of both the northern and southern provinces will broaden
IFAD’s presence in the north as well as consolidate presence in the south, by creating a corridor of agricultural investment with
opportunities to scale up the approaches and proven ‘good agricultural practices’ of other donor-funded projects as well as provide
access to markets for smallholder farmers.
Rationale
SREP is a timely intervention, given the current national focus on diversifying the Angolan economy, from a strong focus on the oil
sector, towards a sustainable growth path, premised on the agriculture sector and agribusiness. SREP is designed to address some
critical constraints to agricultural development in Angola. The north and the south represent two distinct agro-ecosystems and socio-
economic conditions for family farmers (see appendices, 2, 12 and 13). Large areas of the northern provinces are characterized by
undulating to hilly topography and a cassava-based food cropping system, while the southern provinces are generally lowlands with a
mixed agro-pastoral system. The north has relatively good climatic and soil quality conditions for agricultural production, while the
south suffers from arid and semiarid conditions with high vulnerability to climate risks. As a result, the southern region relies on food
from other regions in Angola. Production improvements in the north and livelihoods diversification in the south will be beneficial for
both regions. Potential shifts in crop suitability and the need for agro-ecological based adaptation add to the interdependency among
the regions. In addition, the overall baseline situation for smallholders in both regions have similarities in terms of food and nutrition
insecurity, low agricultural productivity and vulnerability to climate change risks, albeit higher in the south than in the north. The SREP
design addresses those key issues both in the north and in the south with intervention strategies derived from a common theory of
change that takes into account the two different contexts. This is shown in the Annex: Theory of Change.
SREP also takes into account the recommendation of the 2018 CSPE on the need to make capacity building a key pillar of IFAD's
support to theGoA. The project will therefore seek to increase institutional capacity at individual and national levels, while upgrading
smallholder agricultural production and fostering resilience in the project areas. 
In the north, SREP will help small family farmers transition from mainly subsistence to semi-commercial/commercial farming. Change
will be achieved through: a) strengthening institutional capacities for improved delivery of advisory and other support services tailored
to family farmers’ needs and conditions; b) roll out of Farmer Field Schools (FFS) and other extension approaches to support adoption
of good agricultural practices for improved soil and water management and increased productivity; c) training in nutrition and healthy
family diets; d) financial literacy and provision of technical assistance to develop bankable business plans; and e) investments in rural
infrastructure and the provision of matching-grant funding. In the south, SREP will contribute to GoA efforts to enhance resilience
among rural households and will align with the strategic priorities laid out in the drought recovery framework. The GoA recovery
planning also emphasises the need to focus on promoting sustainable farming practices and agricultural technologies adapted to local
conditions; improving information systems for food security and animal health surveillance; introducing proper rangeland management
systems; and promoting income diversification activities. SREP interventions will contribute to most of these thematic areas. In the
northern areas, SREP will also be proactive in supporting smallholders to adapt to the potential long-term negative consequences of
climate change. 
Project Area
SREP project area will cover thirty five municipalities within the seven provinces; Bengo, Zaire, Uige, and Cuanza Norte in the north,
and Benguela, Cunene and Namibe in the south.
Target Group
The project will target a total of 218,000 households (just over 1 million people), 65,400 households in the south and 152,000
households in the north. The core SREP target group will primarily comprise of low-income smallholder households, which are
members of Cooperatives and Associations in the north and FFSs in the south, established during past emergency and recovery
projects. Support will be provided to strengthen already established FFSs so that the beneficiary households can transition from
recovery to long-term resilience and sustainable development.
Project Goal and Development Objective
The Project goal is to “contribute to improved food and nutrition security of targeted communities”. This underlines the importance of
ensuring food and nutrition security as a prerequisite to enable them to participate in development activities. The Project’s
Development Objective (PDO) is “to increase production and resilience of target farm households”. This is to be achieved through
strengthening cooperatives and associations, establishing FFSs and agricultural and livestock development supported by capacity
building and construction of basic supporting infrastructure.
2/31
Project Components
SREP’s PDO will be achieved through the effective implementation of two technical components focusing on strengthening the
institutional capacity & rural public infrastructure to support climate and nutrition resilient smallholder production (Component 1) and
strengthening family farming capacity and investment (Component 2). Each of these components consist, in turn, of two technical
subcomponents, supported by a cross-cutting component that will implement the project through effective coordination and
management. Under Component 1: Institutional Capacity Building, the Subcomponents are: Strengthening capacity for improved
services (Subcomponent 1.1), and Investing in public rural infrastructure (Subcomponent 1.2). Under Component 2: Family farming
strengthening and investment, the Subcomponents are: Strengthening capacity for family farming (Subcomponent 2.1) and
Investment in family farming (Subcomponent 2.2). SREP will be managed by a Coordination and Management Unit under the Institute
for Agricultural Development (IDA). The Project Design is illustrated in Figure 1:
Figure 1: Project Chart
Component 1: Institutional capacity building& rural infrastructure(US$89.4 million)
Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening capacity for improved services. The objective of this subcomponent is to strengthen the capacity
and skills of government agricultural extension specialists at provincial and municipal level, and national NGOs supporting the
development of family farming and their producer groups. This subcomponent will focus on building capacities of extension and
service provider staff at the provincial and local levels to ensure effective implementation of subcomponents 1.2 and 2.2. It will include
five major interrelated activities intended to improve the agriculture extension service delivery and strengthen the human resource
capacity of advisory and service providers in climate change, environmental management, nutrition and livestock health services. The
expected outcome is strengthened institutional capacity to deliver services to enhance food security, productivity and resilience.
Subcomponent 1.2: Investing in public rural infrastructure for resilience and market access.  The objective of this subcomponent is to
invest in construction of rural infrastructure and land development to enhance climate resilience and promote better production and
marketing conditions. Different types of investments will be supported, including: a) the construction and rehabilitation of feeder roads,
b) construction of market facilities, c) water resources development including small scale irrigation, and d) sustainable land
management. The expected outcome is rural infrastructure to build resilience and enhance productivity and market access.
Component 2: Family farming strengthening and investment(US$38.3 million)
Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthening capacity for family farming. The objective of this subcomponent is to strengthen the capacity and
skills of family farmers, through support by government agricultural extension workers and national NGOs to the development of
family farming.The FFS methodology will be used as the main instrument for reaching target households within the community. The
skills and capacities required at field level will be strengthened to ensure that the necessary support services to communities and
households will be readily available to help them become more resilient to climate-related shocks. This subcomponent will provide the
essential capacity building required to ensure effective implementation of subcomponent 2.2.The outcome will be the acquisition of
skills and technologies among family farmers for improved productivity, market access and increased resilience.
3/31
Sub-component 2.2:Investment in family farming. The objective of this subcomponent is to improve agricultural productivity, increase
value addition, link farmers to markets and increase incomes and livelihood opportunities for family farmers. Agricultural productivity
will be enhanced under rain-fed crop and irrigated systems and livelihoods diversified accompanied by the capacity building efforts.
Poor dietary diversity will be addressed by increasing the availability and consumption of nutritious and diverse foods and enhancing
income to ensure healthy eating and improved family diets. The expected outcome is improved profitability of farm and non-farm
income generating activities to improve access to food. 
Component 3: Project Coordination and Management (US$22.3 million)
The objective of this component is to strengthen SREP’s overall coordination, monitoring and evaluation through establishment of a
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) supported by specialised support services from the Single Coordination Unit (SCU) at central level.
The SCU will be responsible for coordinating, monitoring and implementation of SREPactivities, including: a) financial management
and reporting; b) coordination of procurement for goods and services; c) preparation and coordination of SREP’s Annual Work Plans
and Budgets (AWPBs); and d) monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management. The SCU will be supported by a Portfolio
Implementation Facility (PIF), set up as a technical assistance unit with the purpose of sourcing International/Regional Technical
Assistance to provide on-the-job training to Angolan counterparts. The PIF will support national counterparts through training,
mentoring and establishing portfolio management systems. SREP will contribute to the SCU operational costs, procurement of office
equipment, office consumables, vehicles and the associated equipment maintenance costs. This Component will ensure that the
Project is implemented correctly, on time, and in accordance with the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) and the Financing
Agreement. 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)
The environmental and social category assigned to SREP is B. It will support the following activities: agriculture intensification in non-
sensitive areas; integrated pest management; credit for the purchase of pesticides/other agrochemicals and training in their safe use
and Sustainable Land Management (SLM) practices. Any localised environmental impacts resulting from the agricultural production
activities and construction of livelihood-supporting infrastructure will be managed and minimised through the implementation of best
practices and site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). Feeder road rehabilitation, small-scale irrigation
schemes rehabilitation and market infrastructure investments will be developed and operated under adequate environmental and
social standards. 
The climate risk classification for the SREP is high. The northern provinces are rain-fed crop areas with significant annual variations in
rainfall and resultant fluctuations in production. The southern provinces have been severely affected by droughts and floods (e.g. La
Niña event in 2016/2017, with flooding in some parts of the region). In both areas, farmers use traditional cropping methods, with
limited awareness of soil or water conservation, replacement of soil nutrients, choice of plant varieties, irrigation, or other climate-
adaptive technologies. A detailed climate vulnerability analysis will be conducted to further inform the adaptation measures that SREP
is expected to bring, including improvements in cropping technology, which will increase farmers’ resilience to climate variability and
climate change.
Approach
The FFS is increasingly regarded as the principal extension approach in Angola and will be the main instrument to promote resilience
and sustainable agricultural development. There have been discussions at Federal and provincial levels for the FFS to be
institutionalised and provincial technical officers are familiar with the approach. Consequently, support will be provided to strengthen
FFSs set up in the south, as well as to establish new schools in all areas. Focus on the northern provinces will venture into new
territory, as previous donor support has not been available in most of the target areas.Food insecure municipalities with potential for
agricultural development will be targeted. Partners and service providers will play a critical role in implementation, which has been
seen to be a crucial factor in the success of other projects and is prevalent in all projects in the country. 
Organisational Framework
The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MINAGRIF) will be the lead executing agency and will work closely with the other line
ministries and partners whose mandates have a direct bearing on the achievement of the Project objectives. The Project delivery
systems will be integrated into the decentralised government organisational and operational structures that cascade from the national
level to communal level. IDA (Instituto de Desenvolvimento Agrário) will be charged with the responsibility of administration and
coordination of the Project. MINAGRIF will be supported by a Project Steering Committee(PSC) as an oversight body, chaired by the
Minister of Agriculture or his nominee, and composed of membership from institutions with direct relevance to the achievement of
SREP’s objectives.
Project Costs and Financing
Total SREP costs, including price contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated at about USD150 million over the six-year
implementation period. IFAD will fund the Project through a loan of around USD 43 million on ordinary terms. The IFAD loan will be
divided into two tranches; an initial funding of USD29.755 million under IFAD 11. A second tranche of USD21.755 million will be
allocated conditional to the availability under PBAS allocation for IFAD 12.  
GoA will finance taxes, duties and contributions to extension infrastructure amounting to a total of USD 10 million, representing about
6.7% of total costs. The estimate of taxes and duties is based on prevailing rates at the time of design.  In conformity with the principle
that no taxes or duties will be financed out of the proceeds of the IFAD Loan/Grant, any changes in the rates of taxes and duties
would have to be met by GoA. Beneficiaries will contribute USD 6.5 million, representing about 4.3% of Project costs, and will consist
mainly of in-kind contribution (labour[1]). BADEA will contribute about USD 40 million (26.7%) and Agence Française de
Développement (AFD) a further USD 42 million (28%).
4/31
Project Benefits
Financial benefits will be in the form of increased cash incomes of beneficiary households. Social benefits will include a reduction in
poverty rates, with special measures taken to ensure inclusion of disadvantaged groups, and increased food and nutrition security.
Environmental benefits will consist of reduced land degradation and increased carbon sequestration of rangelands in the south. Due
to limited data availability, only the increased returns to households are taken into account.
Economic Internal Rate of Return and Net Present Value
The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of the Project is estimated at 26% (base case), which is above the opportunity cost of
capital in Angola, estimated at 9.4%.It is emphasised that this EIRR is a minimum, based on conservative estimates. This is a
satisfactory result given the resilience focus of the Project, logistic and climatic difficulties in some project areas, and the country's
overall macroeconomic situation. It is based on the assumption that adoption is limited to 70% of target farmers. In case of higher
adoption rates, the EIRR will increase. The Net Present Value (NPV) is USD 91.66 million over a 20-year period.
Sensitivity Analysis
The EIRR and NPV were subject to sensitivity analyses, in order to measure variations due to unforeseen factors. Variations include:
10, 20 and 50% cost over-run; 10 and 20% increase in benefits; 10 to 50% benefit decrease; and 1 to 2 years of delay in the
implementation. The analysis indicates a relatively strong resilience to limited increases of costs and reductions of benefits as well as
benefit delays.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
The Government of Angola (GoA), together with its national and international partners, has made substantial progress since
2002, which marked the end of nearly three decades of civil war, during which time much of the country’s economy collapsed,
infrastructure was destroyed and institutions weakened. Progress has involved investment programmes, aimed at ensuring order
and security, revitalising the economy, restoring social services, rehabilitating infrastructure and addressing the threat of climate
change.
Since 2002, Angola has enjoyed a period of relative peace and political stability. Between 2002 and 2014, GDP per capita
increased from US$ 2,900 to US$ 6,800, largely driven by oil production. In 2014, the oil sector represented 35% of GDP and
accounted for 95% of exports. Since 2016, the decline of oil prices and a decrease of 3.3% in oil production between 2015 and
2016, resulted in a significant slowdown in GDP growth from 8.5% in 2012[2].to 1.1% in 2016. The decline in oil revenues
prompted the GoA to accelerate efforts to diversify the economy, with a stronger focus on agriculture, industry and services. This
stronger emphasis on agriculture aims to increase production and reduce food imports. Angola's institutional capacity, however,
has not been restored since the return of peace and bureaucratic hurdles hinder private sector growth. The GoA is committed to
facilitating private sector development and is encouraging financial institutions to support the agriculture sector. 
Food Security and Nutrition. Angola has made significant progress over the last decade in reducing food insecurity and under-
nutrition. Recent data indicates that the prevalence of undernourishment dropped from 32.1% in 2004-2006 to 14% in 2014-2016.
Over the same period, the number of undernourished people dropped from 5.8 to 3.5 million, despite the growth in population[3].
However, malnutrition remains a public health concern with a stunting rate of 38%, and 65% anaemia prevalence among children
aged 6-59 months. Higher stunting prevalence was recorded in rural populations (46%) compared to urban areas (32%). Poor
nutrition is associated with poverty, education status of mothers, as well as limited access to drinking water and poor hygiene and
sanitation practices. These drivers of malnutrition lead to inadequate calorie and nutrient intake of mothers and their children.
Poverty and inequality. Performance related to social indicators have been mixed. Since 2002, good progress has been made
in poverty reduction, primary education, and gender equality, but other social indicators are weak.The poverty rate declined from
62% in 2001 to about 37% in 2009[4]. This was a major achievement, but much more needs to be done under the shared
prosperity agenda. The rural poverty rate is 58%, in contrast with urban poverty rate of 30%. In the capital (population five
million), the poverty rate is only about 9%. The Gini-coefficient in 2013 was 42.7[5]. The average life expectancy is 51.1 years
(HDR 2017).The Human Development Index (HDI) places Angola close to the average value for Low Human Development
Countries, but above the average for Sub-Saharan Africa. The HDI for Angola increased from 0.391 in 2000 to 0.581 in 2017,
with the country ranked 150 out of 188 (HDR,2018). 
5.
Agriculture and the smallholder sector. Angola has an estimated 58 million ha of arable land, of which less than 10 per cent is
estimated to be under cultivation with a minimal area under irrigation (2017). The country used to be a major agricultural
exporter, but currently a large share of the food consumed is imported, although this figure is declining. The shift from a net
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
exporter to net importer was due in part to the destruction of the agricultural production and marketing infrastructure during the
civil war, and in part to the lack of competitiveness against imports. 
5/31
Although agriculture contributes only 10% of GDP[6], some 44% of the employed population works in the sector, while around
46% of households are engaged in some form of agricultural activity and 6% in fishing (2014 census). The rural poor depend
almost exclusively on smallholder family farming for their livelihoods. These farms are largely subsistence-based, characterised
by low yields, low prices, limited sales and low returns to labour. Improving smallholder agricultural production, productivity and
commercialisation are hence critical to rural poverty reduction. The northern provinces in Angola are characterized by cassava-
based mixed food cropping systems, with cultivated areas of between 1.5 hectares closer to the coast, and 2.5 hectares further
inland. Cassava is the most important crop grown in the north but other crops include peanuts, beans, bananas, maize and sweet
potatoes, all of which are part of the local diet. The south is largely agro-pastoral, with livestock contributing significantly to the
livelihood of rural households. Some 80% of farmers are subsistence smallholders growing maize, millet and sorghum, at low
levels of productivity. 
After nearly three decades of civil war, much of Angola’s economy had collapsed and its agricultural institutions weakened. Since
the signing of the peace Accords, the GoA has made progress in re-establishing the foundation for agricultural extension but
more is needed to reach the objective set of one extension worker for three communes. This is particularly so in those areas of
the country where donor support has been absent. Agricultural extension services are provided by IDA, and advisory services
are public sector dominated. At provincial, municipality and commune level, there is a dearth of extension staff and supporting
facilities (offices, transport) to enable extension workers to perform effectively. A major concern for GoA is to ensure the provision
of adequate services for small family farmers. 
Land tenure and access to land. In Angola, all land belongs to the State, which determines its final use. In 2004, a Land Law
was passed in order to preserve the rights of the rural communities, by taking into account the customary land use systems that
prevail in the different parts of the country[7]. The law was expected to provide security of tenure for investments in land
improvement, e.g. small-scale irrigation managed by community-based groups and associations. In terms of State ownership,
agricultural land is regulated upon a private rights basis while natural resources form part of the public right. The law foresees
that land for private agricultural investment would be regulated through perpetual land use rights, sold by auction from the State
to private actors. In this way, land use rights are transferable. At the same time, the Land Law subjects those with informal rights
to eviction if they fail to apply for a concession in a timely manner. 
Although in Angola there is no straightforward competition for scarce land, due to the still very low population density, the
weaknesses in the land legislation framework and in titling processes have resulted in conflicting interests in parts of the country
where encroachment occurs, especially amongst those communities with limited capacity to defend their rights. As part of
government policy, cooperative members can receive rights to the communal land managed by the cooperative. A single title is
granted to the cooperative as a group, within which land transfers can take place between members on an informal basis. Titles
can be given by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MINAGRIF), and at provincial level for areas of land up to 100
hectares.   
Formal land administration in the country is rudimentary or non-existent and institutional capacity is lacking at all levels, especially
outside major urban centres. The infrastructure needed for formal dispute resolution and promoting the rule of law is weak.
Informal dispute resolution does occur within communities with village elders and other leaders adjudicating and mediating
conflicts. While these traditional authorities are often successful in dispute resolution, they are not always doing so in accordance
with formal law, but rather they are following tradition. There does not appear to be a significant formal (local or provincial)
government judicial dispute resolution mechanism available. There are courts at the provincial level, but are under-staffed and
underfunded, and not accessible to most citizens.
FAO has, for decades, supported the GoA through the Angola Land Programme in the development of the country’s land tenure
management framework, which takes into account the historical occupancy and uses by local communities. Over the past 10
years, FAO and GoA, in collaboration with national NGOs and CSOs (including Global Vision Angola) have piloted participatory
land-use mapping, planning and delimitation processes with rural communities and supported them in obtaining land titles in the
centre and south of the country (Huila, Benguela, Bié and Huambo provinces). As a result, 20,000 ha of land used by local
communities have been titled and a manual for participatory land-use mapping, planning and land titling has been developed
which is now being taken up by the World Bank-supported project. A draft study of Angola’s legal framework has been prepared
for further discussion, which looks at constraints and needed reforms for implementing the Voluntary Guidelines on the
Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries, and Forests in the Context of National Food Security (VGGT) in Angola.
Gender. Almost a quarter (23%) of agricultural households are headed by women, who are responsible for 70% of traditional
subsistence agriculture and 24% of commercial agriculture. In general, women are not entitled to own property on equal terms
with men and their right to own land often depends on their marital status. Cumbersome administrative procedures are also a
constraint. 
Youth. The government defines youth as people aged 15 to 35, which represents 32.4% of the population. School completion
rates decrease after the primary level and progressively drop along the education pathway. Youth unemployment is 46% against
a general unemployment rate of 24%, and rural youth face a major challenge in seeking alternatives to subsistence farming,
while having limited employment skills. Migration levels are highest for youth within the 25-35 year age group (24.5%). Poverty,
however, is lower among the 15–35 year olds than any other age group. A significant number of households are youth-headed. 
Climate change. Agriculture, particularly in the south, is increasingly vulnerable to climate change and extreme climatic events,
such as droughts (e.g. 2012-16) and floods (e.g. 2017), recurrent cycles of which have affected the southern provinces of Angola
over the last decade. In the northern provinces, extreme heavy rain damages crops and affects living conditions, as well as
homes and infrastructure. In the south, consecutive drought years have stretched household coping mechanisms to their limit.
Most rural communities have lost their seeds and food stocks and as a result their vulnerability to climate shocks has increased.
The 2015-2016 El Niño drought led to harvest failures, with crop losses of up to 40% in parts of the south. In 2017, approximately
1.25 million people, located mostly in the southern provinces of Benguela, Cuando Cubango, Cunene, Huila, Kwanza Sul, and
Namibe, were food insecure. Projections from global climate models suggest a medium-strong increase in temperature with
average temperatures increasing by 1.2° - 3.2°C by 2060. Total rainfall through “heavy events” is projected to increase (UNDP,
2008), with an expected increase in the frequency of floods. For the end of the century a warming in the range of 1.4°C to 4.6°C
(tropical regions) and 1.6°C to 5.1°C (semi-arid regions) is likely (compared to 1971 to 2000). Furthermore, a strong increase in
the duration of heat waves, as well as a strong decrease in cold spell length, is projected (Climate Fact Sheet, 2018).In 2015,
following prolonged dry spells crop yield losses were estimated at 75% in Cunene, Huila and Namibe provinces (PDNA, 2015).
Climate change also affects, albeit less so, the more humid northern provinces, with increased temperatures, lower rainfall and a
shorter growing season predicted. 
6/31
A climate risk analysis, undertaken by the Africa Climate and Development Initiative, explained the effects of climate change and
its particular effect on cereals. A noticeable consequence is the reduced length of growing seasons. The Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has warned that decreases in crop yields of 10%-25% and more may be widespread by 2050.
Though the southern part of Angola is more affected by climatic events such as droughts and intermittent floods, the northern
regions also experience adverse impacts from late onset and early cessation of rains and prolonged dry spells. Rising
temperatures are also affecting agricultural productivity. Climate models predict Angola will experience more extreme weather
events, an expansion of arid and semi-arid regions, seasonal shifts in rainfall, localised floods, increased wildfires, sea level rise,
increased rainfall in the northern parts of the country, changes in river flows and changes in sea and lake temperatures (NAPA).
SREP will support communities to cope with extreme climatic events such as droughts, prolonged dry spells and increasing
rainfall variability. See the Annex: Country and rural development context background for more detailed analysis. 
Land degradation. Angola is rich in natural resources, although land degradation and soil fertility decline is becoming a more
acute problem, especially in the south. Land degradation is mainly due to unsustainable agricultural practices, the over-grazing of
rangelands and deforestation. The vagaries of the weather and inadequate land and water management have accentuated soil
erosion and land degradation, which has resulted in increased sedimentation in streams and water points (which are crucial for
the agro-pastoral system), a decrease in soil depth and fertility, diminishing soil organic matter and a reduction in its water and
nutrient holding capacity. Cattle keepers in the south require more land to sustain their herds due to drier conditions and
rangeland degradation. Deforestation rates over the last three decades have been high, even though movement of people from
rural to urban areas has allowed for forest recovery in areas previously under cultivation. The primary causes of deforestation are
charcoal production, land clearing for agriculture and uncontrolled fire. The annual rate of deforestation over 2005-10 was around
0.21% (FAO, 2013). 
Market infrastructure and demand: Market demand is high for most food crops and opportunities exist for expanding
smallholders’ production. However, market outlets in rural areas are insufficient and marketing systems that were severely
disrupted during the civil war are yet to be strengthened. Only a limited part of agricultural production reaches the market due to
poorly developed infrastructure, particularly farm-to market roads and electricity. 
Rural finance: The financial sector is competitive, but also highly concentrated, with five banks holding over 75% of the market
share. The products and services offered are mostly focused on traditional mass-market banking products and loans are
concentrated in a few sectors in Luanda province. The banking system is not accessible to a majority of the population and credit
is largely concentrated in urban areas. A few banks have microfinance portfolios, with loans mostly extended under government
or donor-supported programmes. The share of agriculture in the loan portfolio of banks is minimal, mainly short term and mostly
benefiting commercial farmers. The family farming sector, which cannot present land titles as collateral (among other challenges),
is largely excluded from financial services.
In recent years, GoA and the central bank, Banco Nacional de Angola (BNA), have focused on economic diversification,
deepening financial inclusion, developing rural financial systems, microfinance and financing agriculture and agri-business.
However, to date the financial sector is yet to give due attention to these emerging areas, and there is still a long way to go to
achieve a diversified economy with more inclusive, sustainable and robust growth. Policies need to be refocused and the
systems re-engineered to foster structural transformation. Both public and private institutions, including the banking sector, have
to work closely to increase production and productivity of smallholder farmers by facilitating access to finance, technology and
markets. 
National development policies and strategies. Angola has recently taken bold steps at the policy level to foster economic
diversification, by refocusing economic growth towards the agriculture sector as well as private sector development. The
economic diversification agenda is a significant part of the National Development Plan (2018-2022), PDMSA (2018 - 2022) and
the Support Programme to Production, Export Diversification and Import Substitution (PRODESI[8]). Overall, the economic
diversification drive presents important momentum to foster institutional and policy reforms, which can strengthen production by
smallholder farmers, as well as ensure that they are able to produce surplus to supply the local markets. 
The GoA has been guided by several policies and strategies to address poverty reduction: (i) 2005 Anti-poverty Strategy (ECP);
(ii) 2009 National Strategy for Food and Nutrition Security (ENSAN); (iii) Integrated Municipal Program for Rural Development and
the Fight Against Poverty (PMIDRCP), which resulted from the 2010 merger of the ECP and ENSAN; and (v) National
Development Plans (PND) 2013-2017 and 2018-2022. 
Despite building on the ECP and ENSAN, the previous PND did not result in increased allocations for agricultural development,
and in 2012, only 1%-3% of public expenditure was allocated to MINAGRIF, and less than 1.0% to the Ministry of Fisheries and
Aquaculture. The 2018-2022 PND aims to promote socio-economic and territorial development at national, sectoral and provincial
level, incorporating long-term strategic development options as set out in the Long-term Strategy (ELP) Angola 2025.The
Strategy covers two focal areas: (i) human development; and (ii) welfare and sustainable, diversified and inclusive economic
development. The PND was prepared in close coordination with the sectorial and provincial planning bodies, strengthening the
decentralization process and aiming at greater local-level ownership of the national development planning process. The PND
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
provides a framework to restore confidence and embark on a path of diversifying the economy and promoting economic growth
and development. Over the PND period the Angolan economy is expected to grow by 3% annually, with the agricultural sector a
leading driver of growth (average rate of 8.9%). 
7/31
Agricultural sector policies. The PND and 2018-2022 Medium-Term Development Plan for the Agricultural Sector (PMDSA)
anchors the goal for agricultural development to the sustainable use of natural resources and the improvement of
competitiveness, while achieving food security and self-sufficiency and taking advantage of market potentials. The medium-term
plans include four strategic objectives, which address agriculture, livestock, forestry and cross-cutting issues, including capacity
development and services to producers. The second strategic objective focuses on the development of family farming. With
regards to agricultural research and extension, the GoA acknowledged the limited resources and coverage, and recognises FFSs
as the preferred method for technology transfer. 
Environment and climate change policies. In recent years, national policies addressed sustainable management of natural
resources and the need for climate change adaptation. The PND includes environmental management among its priorities, as
one of the pillars for sustainable development; and adaptation to climate change through small-scale irrigation development is
included as a priority for the agricultural sector. At the same time, plans for the agricultural sector have moved from reliance on
the abundance of natural resources to the need for their sustainable management. The Ministry of Environment (MINAMB) has
the mandate for environmental protection and climate change adaptation. As part of the strategy to mainstream environmental
and climate risk management, ecological centres have been constructed in Namibe, Cabinda, Cuando Cubango and Huambo
Provinces. The centres will serve as capacity building and technology demonstration sites for a wide range of stakeholders
including technicians and smallholder farmers. 
25.
Specific programmes and plans for addressing climate change include the Intended Nationally Determined Contributions [INDC,
(2015)] that takes a longer-term perspective to include mitigation targets, and reiterates the priorities of the National Adaptation
Programme of Action [NAPA (2011)]. These priorities include promoting sustainable land and water management for increased
agricultural yields, soil erosion control through organic methods, diversifying crops to less climate sensitive cultivars and
implementing water-harvesting systems in drought-prone areas. SREP will contribute directly to most of these priorities, through
activities for soil and water conservation, improved water resources management and crop diversification.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
26.
Refer to the above section a. National Context.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
27.
28.
GoA and IFAD are transitioning towards a programmatic approach with a long term vision to support the national economic
diversification agenda, through interventions that strengthen rural and agriculture transformation, taking into account local
specificities. SREP seeks to support the GoA and family farmers and their organisations in achieving improved nutrition and food
security and resilient agricultural productivity. SREP has been designed to build on and complement two on-going IFAD co-
financed projects implemented by IDA. SAMAP, which is implemented in the central highlands, will be complimented by SREP in
four provinces in the north of the country. ARP supporting recovery from droughts in the south will be complemented by SREP in
three provinces to build long-term resilience to increasing climate stresses and shocks. The rationale for SREP is that there has
not been significant agricultural investments in the north of the country where there is high potential for agriculture production,
while at the same time, ARP is focused on recovery and there remains a need to strengthen the resilience of livelihoods, given
the likelihood of extreme weather recurrence. The SREP design is harmonized, in as much as possible with the SAMAP and
ARP approaches and implementation modalities already known to and applied by IDA. SREP’s replication and complementing of
these on-going projects ensures simplicity for implementing partners and takes advantage of already developed capacities.
The north and the south of Angola have different agro-ecosystems and socio-economic conditions (see the Annex: Poverty,
targeting and gender). The north has relatively good climatic and soil conditions for agricultural production, whereas the south
suffers from arid and semiarid conditions with high vulnerability to climate risks. Given the impacts of climate change, the
southern region will continue to rely on food from other regions in Angola. Prospects exist for changes to be made in the
cropping pattern in both regions. Cassava, a staple in the north is being introduced in the south as part of a risk mitigation
strategy. The area of maize, more commonly found in the south, is expanding in the central and northern areas of the country.
This illustrates the interrelationship of the two regions. Despite the differences, the overall baseline situation for smallholders
sees similarities between the two regions in terms of food and nutrition insecurity, low agricultural productivity and market access,
and general vulnerability to climate change risks. Given the diverse agro-ecological zones and vulnerability to extreme weather
and climate change, SREP will introduce a corridor of agricultural investments approach to agricultural investments. Such an
approach will take into account the specificities of each region and ensure that interventions are tailored to the challenges faced
by farmer. The corridor approach will also facilitate for developmental synergies across the regions including transfer of
experience on cassava production from the North to the South, market opportunities in the South for Cassava farmers in the
North (and vice versa for the maize producers in the South).  
29.
SREP will support small family farmers in the north and in the south in their transformation from subsistence farming to
diversified livelihoods and stable production outputs for own consumption and marketing of surplus, noting that in the south the
farming systems are more agro-pastoral based than they are in the north. This change will be achieved through: a) strengthening
institutional and private sector capacities for improved delivery of advisory and climate information services tailored to small
family farmers’ needs and conditions; b) strengthening of FFS and other extension approaches to support farmers in SLM,
introduction of drought resilient crops and varieties, adaptation of cropping calendars, and management of rainwater harvesting
and small scale irrigation; c) training in nutrition and healthy family diets; d) providing matching-grant funding which may be co-
financed by resources from a revolving fund for increased access to water, adoption of climate resilient farming practices and
establishment of alternative livelihoods.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
For both the north and the south, special attention will be given to the inclusion and targeting of women, youth and vulnerable
groups, by tailoring activities to their needs (see the Annex: Poverty, targeting and gender).The Theory of Change indicates how
SREP will pursue the common objective of increasing the productivity and resilience of farm households and contributing to the
goal of improved food and nutrition security of rural households. This is shown in the Annex: Theory of Change.
8/31
IFAD involvement brings considerable global experience and knowledge on pro-poor agriculture programmes for smallholders,
including income and employment generating activities for rural households with special focus on women and youth in conditions
of high vulnerability. SREP will apply a Community Demand-Driven (CDD) approach to ensure that project beneficiaries have a
voice in determining the activities that best meet their needs and can be sustained. The programme will also align with the
recommendation of the CSPE (2018), which indicates that capacity development becomes a key pillar of IFAD investments in the
country. SREP will therefore contribute to fill the gap in the national human capital through the systematic allocation of resources
and management provisions, that provide opportunities for capacity development at the individual and institutional level. FFS
remains the pinnacle of IFAD support to enhancing capacities of smallholder farmers to generate and use new knowledge, as
well as adopt improved agricultural practices. 
IFAD involvement will help facilitate a harmonized framework among development partners for supporting smallholder agriculture
in Angola. Because of its convening power, IFAD is attracting collaboration with other development agencies active in
smallholder agriculture, in particular in the southern provinces where much of the development assistance is being channeled. In
addition, SREP adds credibility to investment in the agricultural and rural sector and has the potential to attract additional donor
support, such as the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA and French Development Agency (AFD), and
funds to address climate change. The co-financing arrangements with government and other development agencies further
strengthen this catalytic effect and the associated opportunities for policy dialogue.
SREP is closely aligned with national priorities outlined in the PMDSA, PMIDRCP and the Long Term National Plan (PNLP). It is
consistent with the PND, which highlights agriculture and rural development as priority areas and incorporates the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). SREP contributes directly to the objective of developing the family-farming sector through farmers’
organisations and cooperatives. More specifically, in the south SREP is aligned with government priorities to strengthen the
resilience of agro-pastoralists and smallholder farmers affected by climate change through: sustainable farming technologies;
water and input supplies; rangeland management systems; income diversification activities; and early warning systems. SREP
will contribute to four of the SDGs: ending poverty (Goal 1), zero hunger (Goal 2), climate change (Goal 13) and life on land
(Goal 15).
The project is also aligned to IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and contributes directly to: Strategic Objective (SO) 1 -
increase poor rural people’s productive capacities; SO3 - strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of
poor rural people’s economic activities; and SO2 - increase target beneficiaries’ access to markets. SREP contributes to the
objective of the Country Strategy Note (2017-2018), which is “increased family-based production of basic food crops among food
and nutrition-insecure groups in selected parts of the country”. SREP is also aligned with the new COSOP (2019-2024) being
developed for Angola that supports sustainable and inclusive transformation of family farming to increase incomes, food security
and diversified livelihoods for the rural poor, thus contributing to the country’s economic diversification agenda. It will specifically
contribute to SO1: Sustainably increase production and commercialisation through access to productive resources and climate
resilient farming practices, and SO3: Strengthen institutional, community and human capacities to ensure effective
implementation and sustainability of rural development programmes, and empower the rural poor to meaningfully participate in
the transformation of the rural sector. SREP has also been informed by the preliminary findings of the recently completed Country
Strategy and Programme Evaluation (2005-17) and has taken on board lessons learned.
B. Lessons learned
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP
35.
Lessons learned from IFAD’s experience in project implementation have guided the SREP design. These include:
Design and implementation of sub (micro) projects
36.
Investing with farmers through demand-driven small investment proposals (subprojects) promotes sustainability. The modalities
for preparing and implementing demand-driven subprojects under MOSAP has generally been regarded as successful (see
project external evaluation) and investment criteria, procedures and selection mechanism have evolved over time from MOSAP
to SAMAP and MOSAP II based on lessons learned. The key elements of success were: (a) creation of ownership through
community participation in all stages of subproject preparation and implementation, as well as direct community contributions
(cash or in-kind); (b) commitment of FOs to take responsibility for O&M before disbursement of project contributions; and (c)
training of FOs and assistance with establishment of user rules and cost-sharing agreements. These elements together with the
proven investment criteria, procedures and selection mechanism already managed by IDA have been incorporated in the SREP
design.
37.
The design of micro-projects requires flexibility as well as clear eligibility criteria for the different categories of beneficiary groups.
Under MOSAP I and II, more recently SAMAP sub-projects are offered at three different levels: (a) area level for infrastructure
investments;(b) community and group level, for productive group investments; and (c) individual household level for a different
types of beneficiaries (women, youth, ex-combatants, the disabled and the ultra-poor). Flexibility is needed to ensure
inclusiveness and the ability to reach the more vulnerable households. Besides matching grants and revolving fund mechanisms,
direct cash and kind transfers can also be applied.
38.
M&E is an important management tool for project adaptation to changing contexts: Lessons learned from MOSAP and the IFAD
portfolio under implementation recognise the importance of M&E.  However, there is a dearth of skilled M&E experts in the
country. Considerable time is taken to recruit and retain M&E experts. The collection, compilation and analysis of field data for
monitoring purposes is a major challenge requiring the development of appropriate software for use at field level. Given these
lessons it is vitally important that adequate technical staffing at all levels is included in project design. Resources also need to be
made available for external Technical Assistance support in M&E design. Service providers and communities need to be
mobilised and trained to support the M&E system in the target areas.
9/31
Capacity building and incentives
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
Ensuring simplicity of design and ease of implementation: Considering the recurrent difficulties in project implementation in
Angola due to the limited human capital, there is a need for simplification in project design and implementation. Projects with
simple, flexible designs place fewer demands on the available managerial and financial resources. Effort is needed to reduce the
complexity of project design and focus on key interventions. Partnerships should be pursued with other stakeholders to achieve
and upscale results. These factors also point to the need for more intensive guidance for projects to operate efficiently and
effectively in Angola.
Strengthening the capacity of local service providers is necessary to help FOs and other beneficiaries to develop and implement
micro project proposals. While the use of local service providers to assist FOs in the preparation and implementation of sub-
projects is preferable for long term sustainability, their capacity is being stretched, particularly as donor support for the country is
expanding. Project design has to recognise this limitation and find ways to capacitate local NGOs. A cadre of specialised
international TA will be necessary to provide effective support to IDA staff, local NGOs and the private sector throughout project
implementation.
Involvement of local authorities at the provincial and municipal levels in planning and monitoring project activities: Engaging local
authorities in implementation has been vital in ensuring ownership of the project at local level, facilitating local coordination and
contributing to the decentralised planning process. Over time, it will also help to convince local authorities to make available
budgetary resources for smallholder farmer support and development.
Effective operations and maintenance of infrastructure: The need to ensure that capacity exists to sustainably operate and
maintain infrastructure works. A strategy O&M of infrastructure should involve all stakeholders and be developed before
construction is undertaken. This could be addressed through capacity building, and awareness raising through community-based
development and management plans. A community development approach to the management of infrastructure can reduce
investment costs, provide good results, and lead to strengthening of participating groups.
Building government capacity for project implementation and stronger country ownership. The pace of project implementation has
often been slow, especially during the start-up. A concerted effort will be required to build the capacity of government staff. In the
short term, efforts will be needed to develop capacity in fiduciary matters to manage and implement projects more effectively.
Technical capacity in agriculture, sustainable land management and participatory processes will similarly need to be enhanced.
Over the longer-term, capacity building efforts are needed to strengthen IDA’s field presence in these technical areas.
Incorporating an incentive system for key government staff involved in project implementation: This has proved to be effective in
helping to achieve project targets. Government staff working under the project will require a satisfactory work environment
(training, equipment and living conditions) to incentivise provincial and front-line extension staff involved in project
implementation.
Inclusivity
45.
46.
Provisions for women’s empowerment: All project design reports have made adequate provisions for the inclusion of women as
beneficiaries, including references to empowerment. In practice, however, efforts towards women’s empowerment have been
limited, with a minimal share of women in leadership roles in FFSs, associations and cooperatives and in a technical capacity as
members of PPIUs. Greater effort is needed to ensure that women play a stronger role in farmers’ organisations and influence
project investment decisions.
Targeted interventions for youth: Although youth have been identified as target beneficiaries in some of the projects, there has
been little impact. Designing interventions that target youth is recognised, nationally, as important in terms of generating
employment and ensuring national security by offering young people opportunities for decent work and sustainable livelihoods,
particularly in rural areas. Both women’s empowerment and inclusion of youth are among the fundamental pillars of the national
goals of Angola to ensure an equitable and peaceful society.
Building resilience and sustainability
47.
Community development through FFSs as a key mode of project implementation and scaling: The FFS approach has been
effective in enhancing smallholder farmers’ capacity to generate and use new knowledge and adopt improved agricultural
practices. It is also a methodology that empowers smallholders. The FFS approach has been incorporated in all IFAD projects
and those of other agencies (AfDB, EU, World Bank) and is being implemented at scale. The FFS approach is also recognised
as a mechanism to ensure institutional sustainability beyond the project life by evolving over time into farmer associations or
cooperatives, linking members and their organisations to markets and empowering smallholders to improve their livelihoods. The
approach has been accepted by Government as its national extension strategy and will be used in future project designs.
48.
Importance of linking smallholder farmers with markets. SREP Norte, in particular, needs to provide support for marketing
activities at several levels, including assistance to FOs and entrepreneurs in bulking of agricultural produce or purchase of inputs,
and in small- and medium-scale processing. Such interventions can stimulate investment diversification and the strengthening of
rural enterprises.
49.
Building resilience of smallholders: The adverse impacts of climate change are already affecting rural livelihoods in Angola,
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
particularly agriculture production in the southern regions. The recent droughts drew attention to the need for enhancing
resilience to improve livelihoods and encourage the sustainable use and management of natural resources.
10/31
Environmental Management: The FFS is an effective instrument to improve environmental management in farming activities. This
requires capacity building of the trainers and the EDA staff. Stronger collaboration is also required between the MINAMB and the
MINAGRI teams to equip various technicians with skills and tools to provide advisory services and support to smallholders.
Land degradation: Particular attention is required in some locations where soil erosion is becoming increasingly a cause of
concern such as cultivation on hill slopes and the expansion of agricultural land. Soil and water conservation measures can be
promoted to address the issues of land degradation.
Adherence to IFAD policies: SREP applies several of the core principles of IFAD's policy on Environment and NRM. The
agricultural production investments in the north will scale-up multiple-benefit approaches for sustainable agriculture that have
already been introduced under MOSAP I and are also planned under the SAMAP. In the south, SREP will promote ‘Climate-
smart’ approaches such as sustainable land and water management practices to build the resilience of the smallholder farmers.
SREP pays greater attention to risk and resilience through the criteria for selecting beneficiaries in order to manage environment
and natural resource-related shocks and thus maintain or enhance their agricultural productivity. Capacity building through the
FFSs and strengthening of FOs is expected to result in improved governance of natural assets by community-led empowerment. 
IFAD’s SEA policy requires that appropriate precautionary and remedial measures to identify/receive/remedy/report
(proportionate to level of risk) any occurrences of potential SH/SEA risks/complaints are in place. For more information see:
https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-detail/asset/40738506. 
SREP adheres to IFAD's targeting policy by using the criterion of food insecurity, which also extends to poverty and vulnerability
to climate change. SREP also adheres to the three strategic objectives of IFAD's Gender Policy. It promotes economic
empowerment to enable rural women and men to participate in and benefit from profitable economic activities. Institutional
strengthening and capacity building of FOs and the FFS approach are also expected to enable women and men to have equal
voice in rural institutions and organizations. Labour saving technologies and livelihoods diversification targeting women and youth
will also contribute to a more equitable balance in workloads and in the sharing of economic and social benefits between women
and men. SREP's targeting and gender approach is elaborated in the Annex: Poverty, Targeting and Gender.
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP): The environmental and social category assigned to
SREP is B. It will support activities including: agriculture intensification in non-sensitive areas; integrated pest management and
credit for purchase of pesticides/other agrochemicals and training in their safe use and SLM practices. The agricultural
production activities and construction of livelihood supporting infrastructure may result in localised environmental impacts which
can be managed and minimised, if required, through the implementation of best practices and environmental and social
management plans (ESMPs). Feeder road rehabilitation and market infrastructure investments will be designed, constructed and
operated under adequate environmental and social standards. Environmental management, monitoring and mitigation capacities
will be developed through awareness and training on best practices and preparing site management plans. Training will cover
waste management practices, safe handling of agro-chemicals, improved pest management, improved storage, improved soil
and water conservation measures and natural resources management. Potential conflicts with wildlife fauna may occur at
particular sites and the drafted EMSP will be finalised during early stages of implementation. The awareness and capacity
building activities for farmers will be delivered through FFSs while more technical training will be provided for IDA/EDA and
MINAMB Departments at provincial and municipal level.
SREP should follow IFAD’s Complaints Procedure to resolve concerns and complaints with respect to alleged non-compliance of
its environmental and social policies and mandatory aspects of its Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures.
These are laid out in detail in IFAD’s webpage: https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/accountability-and-complaints-procedure
The climate risk classification for the SREP is high. Rain-fed cropping in the northern provinces is subject to significant annual
variations in rainfall, and thereby productivity fluctuations, while the southern provinces have been severely affected by droughts
and floods. In both areas, farmers use traditional cropping methods, with limited awareness of soil or water conservation,
replacement of soil nutrients, choice of plant varieties, irrigation, or other climate-adaptive technologies. A detailed climate
vulnerability analysis will be conducted to further inform adaptation measures including improvements in cropping technology,
which will increase farmer’s resilience to climate variability and change.
58.
More detail on minimising the potential negative environmental and social impacts as well as climate risk is included in the
SECAP Review Note, in the Annex: IFAD policies and SECAP Review Note.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
59.
The goal of the SREP will be to contribute to improved household food and nutrition security of targeted households (152,600
households reporting improved food security, with data disaggregated by gender of household heads). The development
objective is to increase agricultural productivity and resilience of targeted households (112,000 households reporting >30%
increase in productivity disaggregated by gender of household heads; and 104,000 households reporting a >50% increase in
resilience score[9] disaggregated by gender of household heads).
60.
Project Area – SREP's focus area comprises seven Provinces, three in the southern part (Cunene, Benguela, Namibe) and four
in the northern part (Zaire, Uige, Bengo and Cuanza Norte). These provinces are all characterised by high poverty rates,
malnutrition, food insecurity and vulnerability to climate change, particularly in the south. In the seven provinces, thirty-five
municipalities have been tentatively targeted: 22 in the north and 13 in the south. The population of the target municipalities is
3.5 million - 12% of the overall population of the country and 74% of the population of the seven provinces concerned. 
11/31
61.
In the north, the main criteria for the selection of the municipalities are: (a) high incidence of food insecurity and vulnerability; (b)
potential for agricultural development; (c) high population density; and d) geographical contiguity to maximise efficiency of project
operations. In the south, the project will build on the recovery efforts of ARP and the provinces and the municipalities have been
selected as those most affected by drought and floods. Selection criteria for the municipalities include:(a) areas with a high
concentration of environmental degradation, food insecurity and poverty; and (b) areas and households affected by floods and
droughts. SREP will help build longer term resilience in the three provinces. 
62.
The project area covers three zones with different agro-ecological conditions and agricultural production characteristics: 
The Northern zone (Cuanza Norte, Bengo, Zaire, Uige) is a tropical dry to humid forest area with average rainfall greater than
1,500 mm. Cassava is the main staple crop cultivated on 65% of area planted. Other crops include mixed cropping of millet,
groundnuts and sweet potatoes. Despite the productive potential of the area, crops are grown mainly for subsistence with very
little surplus for sale.
The Central zone (Benguela) comprises tropical plateaus with an altitude, between 1,000 and 2,500 metres and rainfall of
1,250-1,500 mm. Maize is more suitable and is cultivated in association with other traditional crops such as beans, sorghum,
millet, groundnuts and sweet potatoes. The south eastern part however receives less rainfall and was affected by recent
droughts and prolonged dry spells (2014-2016).
The Southern zone (Namibe, Cunene) has a dry climate ranging from tropical desert (Namibe) to tropical dry savannah
(Cunene) with low average rainfall of 200 mm and an average temperature of 20-22°C. Livestock production is the main
activity and food crops mainly include sorghum and millet. The soils are affected by erosion and low fertility. Most households
in this zone are vulnerable to climate shocks and face declining yields and livestock production due to increased land
degradation and changing rainfall patterns.
63.
Target groups. The project will target: (i) food insecure subsistence smallholder farmers, most of whom cultivate less than 2
hectares of land but with potential for productivity increases; (ii) small and stable family farms with some level of organisation,
mainly through associations, producing at subsistence level with the potential to graduate into market-oriented production; (iii)
women (at least 40% of beneficiaries) and youth (at least 25% of beneficiaries) organised to carry out processing, marketing and
service-based income generating activities; and (iv) other vulnerable groups such as disabled persons and ex-combatants who
will receive specific attention to facilitate their social integration in agricultural production and economic activities. The project will
also specifically target agro-pastoralist in the south in recognition of the fact that the south is largely agro-pastoral, with livestock
contributing significantly to the livelihood of rural households. 
64.
In the north, SREP will target around 152,000 households i.e. 760,000 persons. In the south, SREP has a target of 65,400
households – about 327,000 persons.  The four main target subgroups are described below: 
Food insecure subsistence smallholder farmers. This is the most representative of the agricultural producer groups found in
the area and include those most vulnerable i.e. women, youth, the disabled and ex-combatants. Food-insecure smallholder
farmers account for approximately 70% of the project area population. Subsistence farmers generally own less than 2ha of
land with between 0.5 and 1 ha in production. These households are essentially characterised by: (i) low production and
productivity of the main crops (cassava, banana, peanuts, sweet potatoes, maize etc.); (ii) vulnerability to climate change; (iii)
lack of or low access to production factors (land, improved inputs, water and capital); (iv) limited access to mechanisation; (v)
weak organisational capacity; and (vi) low income levels. In general, they do not produce enough to cover their food needs
and, in the south, are highly vulnerable to climate shocks. The objective for these farmers is to increase production for home
consumption and sales in local markets through adapted production technologies, improved access to water and inputs and
enhanced income generation.
Market oriented family farms with some level of organisation. These are family farmers with diversified farming systems that
comprise around 30% of the farming population in the project areas. Some of these households have up to 5 ha of farm land
and are able to produce surpluses for the market. They are normally able to fulfil their own family consumption needs and are
able to secure seeds, casual labour and access to animal traction (albeit to a limited extent). They also lack agricultural inputs,
irrigation systems, and access to credit, markets and extension services. The objective for this group is to increase production
through the use of improved technologies in the north; improved natural resources management conservation and climate
smart agriculture in the south and income generation through access to markets in both regions.
Women and youth. Womenheads of household, widows and young women are socially, culturally and economically
disadvantaged but are responsible for ensuring the well-being of their families and agricultural activities. SREP will promote
specific activities for women and youth organized into groups for processing (using labour saving technologies), marketing and
service provision. Other activities targeting women concern nutrition, where women are at the centre of food preparation for
the family. Particular attention will be given to the youth who lack opportunities in rural areas leading to their migration to urban
centres.
Other vulnerable groups (disabled persons and ex-combatants). The disabled are a significant disadvantaged social group
due to their physical and or mental disabilities. The ex-combatants are generally more elderly, between the ages of 50 and 80,
and are both socially and economically disadvantaged. They will be targeted through training and capacity building activities
linked to service provision, income-generation and off-farm income opportunities.
65.
Targeting strategy– The project will ensure the participation of poorer rural households, whilst being inclusive of the so-called
‘better-off’ smallholder farmers and specific vulnerable groups. The mechanisms include: (i) geographic targeting, (ii) self-
targeting; and (iii) direct targeting. SREP design includes empowering, enabling and procedural measures to promote sustainable
socio-economic development with particular focus on the youth, women and other vulnerable groups (ex-combatants and the
disabled). 
66.
67.
68.
Geographic targeting will be used to select the provinces, municipalities and communes. Direct targeting will be used to choose
activities, taking into consideration the accessibility, relevance and impacts of the different technologies for women, men, youth,
the disabled and ex-combatants. Quotas will ensure the effective participation of vulnerable groups in project activities. Mentoring
will be done to ensure proper participation, achievement and sustainability of interventions, especially for the vulnerable groups. 
12/31
Women make up about 51% of the population and in rural areas they are mainly involved in agricultural production and the
keeping of small livestock. Women and female-headed households are poor compared to men and male-headed households.
Women do farm work such as tillage, planting, harvesting, transportation and processing, and also take care of the family
nutrition as well as the reproductive roles. They, however, face the following challenges: (i) unequal access to resources (land,
water, credit); (ii) low levels of literacy and numeracy; (iii) lack of business development and management skills; and (iv) limited
voice, leadership and decision-making capacity in associations, cooperatives and other groups. Specific training to enhance
women’s empowerment and effective participation in activities and household welfare will be included in the FFS curricula.
Investments that reduce women’s workload such as provision of potable water and milling machines will be supported. Women-
headed households will be given special attention based on their needs and constraints. 
The majority of youth reside in urban areas due to rural-urban migration. The lack of incentives in the agricultural sector (lack of
land and capital to invest) leads to a large number of rural youth migrating to urban areas where some go to school and gain
formal employment. The project will use quotas to ensure participation of these youths. The project will develop women's and
youths’ skills in preparation of business plans, which may be co-financed by a matching grant following specific eligibility criteria
and approval procedures. It will also educate women and men about ownership and inheritance rights, including land. In areas
where female groups and youth’s groups do not exist, the project will conduct gender awareness training at community level and
set up women’s and youth based self-help groups for knowledge-sharing on GAP and SLM practices. Special topics on youth
development will be integrated into FFS curricula. 
69.
SREP will define targeting mechanisms, and the various activities for the different target groups. Geographic targeting will be
used to select sites for infrastructure development, self-targeting will occur through participation in the FFS and investment
planning and direct targeting will be used for specific activities directed to women, youth, ex combatants, the disabled and other
vulnerable groups in the communities. The proposed activities for these different categories of beneficiaries are summarised in
the Annex: Detailed Project Description, Attachment 2.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
70.
SREP targets three agro-ecological zones – four Northern provinces (Bengo, Zaire, Uige and Cuanza Norte); and three southern
provinces (Benguela, Namibe and Cunene) covering two agro-ecological zones). The project comprises two technical
components divided into four sub-components: Component 1: Institutional Capacity Building and Sub-components 1.1
Strengthening capacity for improved services and 1.2 Investing in public rural infrastructure, and Component 2: Family farming
strengthening and investment divided into the following sub-components: 2.1 Strengthening capacity for family farming and 2.2
Investment in family farming. SREP will be managed by a Project Coordination and Management Unit under IDA under a cross-
cutting programme coordination and management component.
71.
The Project will pursue its objective through four major outcomes:
Outcome 1: Strengthened institutional capacity to deliver services to enhance food security, productivity and resilience -
125,000 farmers reporting regular use of advisory and support services.
Outcome 2: Rural infrastructure to build resilience and enhance productivity and market access– 40,000 households reporting
improved access to water, land and road infrastructure.
Outcome 3: Farming families acquire skills and technologies for food and nutrition security, enhanced resilience/ productivity
and market access– 80,000 households applying climate resilient technologies and practices, disaggregated by gender.
Outcome 4: Improved profitability of farm and non-farm income generating activities to improve access to food – 80,000
households reporting at least 30%increase in the percentage of agriculture output sold at market.
72.
The project represents a two-pronged approach to food and nutrition insecurity alleviation. The components are summarized
below, with further details presented in the Annex Detailed Project Description. 
Component 1:Institutional Capacity Building& Rural Infrastructure (US$85.2 million)
73.
Component 1 will be implemented through two sub-components, each with specific activities which are outlined in the box
below. 
Component 1: Institutional Capacity Building
Sub-Component 1.1: Strengthening capacity for improved services to family farmers
The objective of this subcomponent is to strengthen the capacity and skills of government agricultural extension specialists at
provincial and municipal level, and national NGOs supporting the development of family farming and their producer groups. This
subcomponent will concentrate on building capacities at the provincial and local level, focusing on extension and service provider
staff. It will provide the essential capacity building to ensure effective implementation of subcomponents 1.2 and 2.2. This
Subcomponent will include four major interrelated activities intended to improve the agriculture extension service delivery and
strengthen the human resource capacity of advisory and service providers in climate change, environmental management, nutrition
and livestock health services. The expected outcome is strengthened institutional capacity to deliver services to enhance food
security, productivity and resilience. Activities include: 
13/31
Agricultural Extension Service Delivery and Capacity Building: The project will support the recruitment and deployment of
front line EDA extension staff in the target project areas. EDA staff and other actual/potential service providers will be trained
in a range of technical subjects that include participatory extension, community organization, natural resource and
environmental management and adaptation to climate change. Initial exposure to the concepts will be through classroom
training followed up by in-service training. 
Strengthening of the Agro-Meteorological Network. Investments will be made in strengthening the collection and analysis of
data by agro-meteorological networks, improve forecasting models taking into account historic climate data and trends, and
improve the provision of weather and climate information services to smallholders. This will allow them to optimize water use
in irrigation, soil conservation and erosion prevention practices as well as adapting decisions on planting dates, crops and
varieties. Participatory approaches will be adopted for developing weather and climate information services and formats
relevant for smallholders and build their capacities in selecting adaptation actions based on different forecasts and alerts and
long term adaptive changes in their farming systems and management of NR based on historic and future climate trends.
The activity will be coordinated by an Environmental expert recruited by the project. 
Nutrition education and training. The focus will be on training extension workers and service providers in understanding the
relevance of better nutrition to climate resilient productivity and livelihoods diversification. The activity will support the
government’s national school meal programme in coordination with other line Ministries. 
Strengthening of Animal Health Services: Technical training and equipment will be offered to field staff of the Veterinary
Service Institute (ISV) at provincial and municipal level to build a cadre of Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWs). This
activity will be targeted to the southern provinces. Qualified veterinary oversight will be made available to support the
CAHWs through the veterinary institute and local private veterinarians. 
Sub-Component 1.2: Investing in public rural infrastructure for resilience and market access
The objective of this subcomponent is to invest in construction of rural infrastructure and land development to enhance climate
resilience and promote better production and marketing conditions. Different types of investments will be supported including: a) the
construction and rehabilitation of feeder roads, b) construction of market facilities, c) water resources development including small
scale irrigation, and d) sustainable land management. The investments will be identified taking into account the needs identified in
the NRM and small business planning process in subcomponent 2.1 and the creation of synergies and maximizing benefits of
investments made under subcomponent 2.2. The expected outcome is rural infrastructure to build resilience and enhance
productivity and market access. Activities include: 
Feeder Road rehabilitation and maintenance: Investments will be made to improve the condition of selected feeder roads and
to construct drainage infrastructure (culverts) where needed. Road gangs will be formed for road rehabilitation, and
provincial road maintenance plans will be prepared. 
Market Infrastructure and Stakeholder Platforms: Market infrastructure will be provided at commune and municipal level in
the form of aggregation and storages facilities (warehouses) and platforms for stakeholders to convene. Investments will
include collection points, storage and package facilities and field shops.  A Civil Engineer will be recruited to oversee the
public works. 
Water Infrastructure: Small scale water harvesting structures will be developed to increase water quality and availability for
multi-purpose usage. Successfully proven technologies will be replicated and scaled. The infrastructure will be linked to the
creation of community water users groups (subcomponent 2.1) for the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure and
implementation of catchment management and conservation. This will be important for the sustainability and effectiveness of
the infrastructure including reduced siltation and as such maintenance costs and increased lifetime. 
Small-Scale Irrigation: Small scale irrigation will be extended through low-cost technologies that are easy to operate and
maintain. Schemes will be funded based on investment proposals incorporating prefeasibility studies, feasibility studies,
detailed design, and environment management plans. WUAs will be set up and supported to ensure sustainability in the
operation and management and negotiate and implement governance scheme to ensure equitable access to water and to
avoid possible conflicts. 
Sustainable Land Management: Interventions to redress land degradation will include (a) rehabilitating rangelands and
pastures and implementing rangeland management schemes and (b) undertaking soil and water conservation measures.
International and national consultants will be recruited to provide technical assistance in Water Resources Development
(water harvesting and small scale irrigation), Sustainable Land Management and Pasture/ Rangelands Development.
Component 2: Family Farming Strengthening and Investment (US$37.9 million)
74.
Component 2 will be implemented through two sub-components, mutually reinforcing each other, each with specific activities,
which are outlined in the box below. 
Sub-Component 2.1: Strengthening capacity for family farming
The objective of this Subcomponent is to strengthen the capacity and skills of family farmers and their communities through
government agricultural extension workers and national NGOs supporting the development of family farming. The FFS methodology
will be used as the main instrument for reaching target households within the community and create groups learning together
through experimenting and adoption of new practices. The skills and capacities required at field level will be strengthened to ensure
that communities become more resilient to climate-related shocks and that the necessary support services to communities and
households will be readily available.
The outcome of Sub-Component 2.1 will be the acquisition of skills and technologies among family farmers for improved food
security, productivity, and increased resilience. Activities include: 
14/31
Community organization, Planning and Mentoring:  SREP will assist crop farmers and agro-pastoralists and their
communities to prepare and implement business development plans especially in the north and natural resource
management plans, mobilise the community and organise farmers into self-help producers and user groups. A social
mobilization process will be followed that develops self-reliance among community members. A cadre of Community
Development Facilitators will be selected from within the target communities to lead the social mobilisation and group
formation/strengthening and mentoring processes. 
Training of farmers and community members: The FFS approach will be replicated and extended throughout the project
target areas. Approximately 5,000 schools will be established with 3,500 in the northern provinces and 1,500 in the southern
provinces. The activity will be implemented through service provider contracts with experienced national NGOs. The project
will also provide technical assistance support through the recruitment of two national FFS officers supported by an
international FFS specialist.
Sub-Component 2.2: Investment in family farming
The objective of this Subcomponent is to improve agricultural productivity, increase value addition, link farmers to markets and
increase incomes and livelihood opportunities for family farmers. Agricultural productivity will be enhanced under rain-fed crop and
irrigated systems and livelihoods diversified in alignment with the NRM plans developed under subcomponent 2.1 and  accompanied
by the capacity building efforts to ensure sustainability of activities (Subcomponents 1.1 and 2.1). Poor dietary diversity will be
addressed by increasing the availability and consumption of nutritious and diverse foods and enhancing income to ensure healthy
eating and improved family diets. 
The outcome of Subcomponent 2.2 will be improved profitability of farm and non-farm income generating activities to improve
access to food. To prioritize investments, farmers and producer groups will be supported in developing small investment proposals
(subprojects or micro projects) including a simple business plan aligned with the NRM plans (subcomponent 2.1). Activities to be
financed include: 
Agricultural Diversification and Improved Productivity: SREP will address food insecurity and malnutrition by enhancing the
production and sales of staple food surpluses (maize, millet, sorghum) while diversifying the rainfed system and household
diets by including cassava, sweet potato and beans. Small livestock will also be offered to provide a safety net for the more
vulnerable households with limited access to land. Approximately 55,000 farm households will be targeted for this activity. 
Post-harvest Management and Value Addition: Activities will include piloting and demonstrating new PHM and VA
technologies. Small PHM investment grants will be offered to households to fund investment in new PHM or value adding
technologies that are not commercially available or accessible. Approximately 6,000 households will be targeted for this
activity.
Rural Micro and Small-Scale-Agri-Business Promotion: Matching grants will be offered to youth, women, able bodied
persons, and entrepreneurial small farmers to provide commercial goods and services (input supplies, mechanization,
spraying, transportation etc.) to farm households. Approximately 4,500 businesses will be supported, mainly in the higher
potential northern provinces. Comprehensive eligibility criteria will be established as part of pre-start-up activities of the
project to ensure effective implementation of matching grants
Component 3: Project Coordination and Management (US$21.7 million)
75.
76.
Component 3 is a cross cutting component to the technical components described above. The lack of institutional capacity is well
recognised as a limitation to the effective implementation of projects in Angola. Institution strengthening measures in project
management, finance and procurement are crucial to ensure that the Project objectives are achieved. 
Component 3 is divided into two sub-components: a) the SREP Project Implementation Unit (PIU); and b) the Single
Coordination Unit and Portfolio Implementation Facility (PIF). Detailed implementation arrangements are described in the Annex:
Institutional approach and implementation arrangements.
Sub-component 3.1: SREP Project Implementation Unit (PIU): MINAGRI will establish a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at
national level, led by a National Project Manager. MINAGRI-IDA will work very closely with the PIU to oversee the implementation.
The unit will be responsible for project coordination. Implementation will be led by two Team Leaders – one to be stationed in one of
the northern provinces and the other in the south – responsible for day to day implementation.  
15/31
Sub-component 3.2: Single Coordination Unit/ Portfolio Implementation Facility:  The Single Coordination Unit (SCU) will be
set up to strengthen the capacity of the management staff of the IFAD-financed programme in management, M&E and fiduciary
issues. The SCU will be led by the current SAMAP and ARP Coordinator who will oversee SREP implementation and will be
responsible for strategic management of the IFAD programme. 
A Portfolio Implementation Facility (PIF) will be set up to support the SCU with the timely sourcing of national personnel to fill key
management and fiduciary positions in the IFAD programme and provide technical assistance in training and mentoring of national
counterparts and the set-up of management, procurement and financial systems. 
77.
Project Sequencing. The Project will be implemented over six years using a gradual approach to establish operational
modalities, train staff, set up and implement farmer field schools, engage with communities and screen/evaluate micro and sub-
projects and develop partnerships and coordination arrangements. An interim review of SREP will be conducted after several
years of operations to inform decisions on expansion to additional municipalities. A mid-term review will be undertaken in year 4.
E. Theory of Change
78.
For both the north and the south, special attention will be given to the inclusion and targeting of women, youth and vulnerable
groups, by tailoring activities to their needs (see Annex - Poverty, targeting and gender).The Theory of Change indicates how
SREP will pursue the common objective of increasing the productivity and resilience of farm households and contributing to the
goal of improved food and nutrition security of rural households. This is shown in Annex 2.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
79.
Collaboration with other Development Partners’ Programmes/Projects. SREP will coordinate and harmonise with
Programmes/Projects financed by government and various development partners that support SREP-related thematic areas.
This is aimed at taking advantage of synergies and avoiding duplications. Some of such Programmes/Projects include:               
Strengthening Resilience and Food and Nutrition Security in Angola – an EU funded project costing EUR 70 million, with the
objective to contribute to the reduction of hunger, poverty and vulnerability to food and nutrition insecurity, in the provinces
most affected by climate change – Cunene, Huila and Namibe. The project focuses on: (a) basic nutrition; (b) water and
sanitation; (c) agriculture (land, water, inputs, extension, services, cooperatives); (d) environmental protection; (e) disaster
prevention and preparedness; and (f) developmental food security assistance. Given the overlap in two of the SREP provinces
(Cunene and Namibe), coordination will be critically important to ensure that different municipalities and/or communes are
targeted and that there is complementarity of activities. The resilience focus of this project will complement ARP and
supplement the SREP activities in cognisance of the number of drought affected households exceeding 200,000. Climate
vulnerability mapping will be part of the project to further inform the resilience building activities, which will be beneficial also
for the municipal level targeting of SREP.
Some UN agencies and NGOs are working closely with the GoA within the Drought Recovery Framework established by the
National Plan for Preparation, Contingency Response and Recovery 2015-2017. SREP will contribute especially to pillars on
socio-economic activities, water management and agriculture.
The AfDB will be supporting the operationalisation of the four agro-ecological centres established by MINAMB in Namibe,
Cuando Cubango, Huambo and Cabinda. The centre in Namibe (Bibala) could be used for training of smallholders on climate
resilient agricultural practices and livelihood diversification options once operational. This will enhance the collaboration
between MINAMB and MINAGRI as extension officers could also benefit from the training. The project will benefit from Global
Environment Facility financing and the smallholders targeted under the SREP could benefit from the capacity building that will
be provided through the centre.
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) has prioritised support to energy, agriculture and water sectors in Angola.
Discussions with the AFD representative confirm interest in co-financing SREP activities relating to resilience in both the
northern and southern provinces. AFD investment priorities include developing water resources and related infrastructure and
thus applying an ecosystem-based adaptation approach to contribute to the resilience building of the communities.
Since the mid 1970’s BADEA provided GoA with a total funding of US$64.9 million for 11 projects. Two loans have been
approved for the education sector with some impact on capacity building of the IDA extension system at national level. BADEA
has indicated synergies with SREP in the formal training of agricultural middle school participants a human resource reservoir
for the IDA extension service.
80.
A map of the IFAD project portfolio location and activities is given below.
Figure 2: Map of Development Projects and Partners
16/31
G. Costs, benefits and financing
17/31
a. Project costs
81.
The total SREP investment and incremental recurrent costs, including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at USD
150 million (AOA 34.5 billion). The table below presents a breakdown of the costs by components.The investment in Component
1: Institutional capacity building in base costs totals USD 85.2 million (59% of base total base costs). Within this first component
the investment in public rural infrastructure accounts for USD 62.3 million (43% of base costs) and strengthening capacity for
improved services to family members at USD 22.9 million (16% of base costs). Component 2, Family farmer strengthening and
Investment in base costs totals USD 37.9 million (26% of base costs).  Within this second component, strengthening capacity for
family members in base costs totals USD 21.6 million (15% of base costs). Investing in family farming in base costs totals USD
16.3 million (11% of base costs).  Component 3 Project coordination and management in base costs totals USD 22.0 million (15%
of base costs) of which the SREP Project Implementation Unit (PIU) accounts for USD 15.9 million (11%) and the Single
Coordination Unit (SCU)- Portfolio Implementation Facility (PIF) accounts for USD 6.1 million (4% of total base costs). The
costing has been done in USD but price contingencies (USD 3.2 million) have been provided. Physical contingencies amount to
USD 1.6 million.
Table 1: Project Costs by Component
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
82.
Total SREP costs, including price contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated at about USD150 million over the six-year
implementation period. IFAD will fund the Project through a loan of around USD 43 million on ordinary terms. The IFAD loan will
be divided into two tranches; an initial funding of USD 29.755 million and a second disbursement of USD21.745 million. The
second tranche will kick-in in year 3 of project implementation and will be conditional on the performance of the IFAD portfolio.
This implies a financing gap of USD 21.745 million or 14.2% of project costs. GoA will finance taxes, duties and contributions to
extension infrastructure amounting to a total of USD 10 million, representing about 6.7% of total costs. The estimate of taxes and
duties is based on prevailing rates at the time of design.  In conformity with the principle that no taxes or duties will be financed
out of the proceeds of the IFAD Loan, any changes in the rates of taxes and duties would have to be met by GoA. Beneficiaries
will contribute USD 6.5 million, representing about 4.3% of Project costs, and will consist mainly of in-kind contribution
(labour[10]). BADEA will contribute about USD 40 million (26.7%) and Agence Française de Development (AFD) a further USD
42 million (28%).
Table 2: Financing Plan by Components (USD’000)
18/31
c. Disbursement
83.
84.
Disbursements Arrangements. The disbursement methods available to IDA for the withdrawal of financing proceeds from the
loan account shall be: advances, direct payments and reimbursement. The ceiling of the Designated Account, the limits of
contracts subject to prior review and detail of supporting documentation required to accompany the application for disbursement
will be defined in the Letter to the Borrower. Due to severe difficulties in the processing of payments to accounts abroad, and to
the difficulty in the availability of USD resources for bank-to-bank transfers within Angola, pending the opening of an off-shore
bank account, SREP shall need to use more frequently the direct payment method for contractors and suppliers abroad, and
within Angola. As such, the threshold for direct payments will be set at amount of USD 20,000. IDA shall liaise with Ministry of
Finance and Bank of Angola on the opportunity of opening an offshore bank account for the processing of USD payments to
accounts abroad. Once this account is opened, direct payment threshold will be revised.
Flow of Funds IFAD. IDA shall open a bank account in USD in Luanda to receive the proceeds of the financing (Designated
Account). Mandatory joint authorized signatories of the account will be the National Coordinator, the SREP Project Director, one
between the FMO and the Financial Controller of the SCU and an authorized representative at MINFIN. Two operational
accounts, one in AOA and one in USD, will be opened in a commercial bank in Luanda. This second USD account is needed in
order to limit the number of operations in the Designated Account in each fiscal year. Authorized signatories on these accounts
will include the SREP Project Director and one between the FMO and the Financial Controller SCU. The local USD account shall
be closed when the USD off-shore account becomes operational. Another bank account in AOA shall be opened to receive
Government of Angola counterpart funds. Four bank accounts in AOA (one per province) shall be open to manage expenditures
at local level. The Area Coordinator will have signatory powers with the local accountant managing all the disbursement,
accounting and reporting requirements. Deatiled procedures shall be outlined in the FMPM.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
85.
86.
87.
SREP will improve the livelihoods and nutrition status of 218,000 household beneficiaries, create employment at farm and farmer
organization levels and boost the development of crop and livestock production and market linkages. SREP is planned for five
categories of beneficiaries and benefits flow streams: (i) Benefits exclusively through extension support and FFS; (ii) Benefits of
FFS receiving both extension advice plus investment grants; (iii) Benefits to farmers in the form of higher (premium) prices as a
result of feeder road construction and rehabilitation; (iv) Benefits from farm and off-farm Income Generating Activities (IGAs); (v)
Benefits to youth and women in operating hire service enterprises; and (vi) Benefits from reduced transport costs/efficiency gains
as a result of road investments. In addition, benefits will flow from the adoption of SLM practices and application of knowledge
related to nutrition, climate resilience and gender empowerment, which are difficult to quantify.
Financial analysis: The financial analysis of SREP is based on six farm models, derived from ten crop/enterprise models. The
purpose of these financial models is to assess whether the proposed improved technology packages are commercially viable and
will enable the targeted smallholders to generate sufficient additional income, to increase their food security and resilience to
shocks and stresses whist raising their asset base and creditworthiness.
Crop and farm models: Ten crop/livestock models have been developed for the main crops cultivated by the targeted
smallholders: (i) Cassava FFS plus Grants; (ii) Cassava FFS only; (iii) Beans FFS and Grants; (iv) Beans FFS only; (v) Maize
FFS plus grants; (vi) Maize FFS only; (vii) Sweet Potatoes; (viii) Irrigated tomatoes; (ix) Goats, and (x) Poultry. Based on the
observed cropping patterns and farm sizes, six farm models were developed to test the financial viability at potential beneficiary
household levels. The six models (below) all show substantial increases in income that should attract smallholders in adopting
improved technologies. 
SREP-North
ha
19/31
Financial IRR
NPV (USD’000)
Bengo/Zaire-FFS only
1.0-2.5
40%
Uige/Cuanza Norte-FFS only
2.0-2.5
42%
Bengo/Zaire-FFS + Grant
1.0-2.5
25%
Uige/Cuanza Norte-FFS + Grant
2.0-2.5
30%
SREP-South
Farm type 1 - drier areas
Farm type 2 - smallholders in wetter areas
Off-farm
0.8
1.5
30%
27%
33
5,835
7,013
3,850
4996
1,916
2,504
10,244
88.
The average cost per beneficiary of SREP is approximately USD 683 per household and USD 133 per person. This is considered
reasonable given the high cost structure for key inputs in Angola.
89.
90.
Economic analysis: The economic cost-benefit analysis aims to assess the economic viability of the proposed project from the
overall national economic standpoint. The analysis was conducted over a 20-year period in constant 2018 prices, aggregating
additional benefits as derived from the various models developed in the financial analysis. Financial prices were converted to
economic prices except where Conversion Factor (CF=1) was justified. The following CFs were used based on analyses
conducted by SAMAP and ARP: (i) Labour CF= 0.85; (ii) Improved seed CF= 0.9; (iii) packaging CF = 0.9; and (iv) fertilisers and
chemicals CF= 0.85. Economic costs were generated from SREP COSTAB excluding taxes and duties and using constant 2018
prices. Incremental costs after the Project implementation period, in particular for maintenance of irrigation schemes and other
infrastructure, as well as costs to follow up farmers were taken into account. An adoption rate of improved technologies of 60%
has been used for FFS beneficiaries.
Results of the economic analysis: The Project yields an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 26% and an Economic
Net Present Value (ENPV) of US$91.6 million (at 9.35% discount rate). The Project is, therefore, highly profitable from an
economic standpoint. A sensitivity analysis was carried out to assess the likely impact of a variation of some key factors on the
economic return of the project. It indicates a strong resilience to increases of costs and reductions of benefits. The project would
still yield an EIRR of respectively 22.4% and 21.6% if benefits were reduced by 10% and 20%. In the extreme case of benefits
being reduced by 50%, the EIRR would establish at 20.4%, a value above the social discount rate. If benefits lag by two years a
20% EIRR would still be achieved.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
91.
92.
Sustainability is built-into SREP through: (i) the FFSs and other extension approaches which will create large numbers of trained
farmer facilitators who will continue to provide technical assistance long after the project has ended; (ii) a focus on developing
competencies and skills of potential extension workers and service providers; (iii) investment support to smallholder farmers and
their organisations to enhance productivity, increase income and develop better linkages with traders, input suppliers and agro-
processors; and (iv) enhanced the capacity of IDA staff and technical support services. The support provided to the Government
institutions will greatly enhance implementation capacity and will ensure a greater project sustainability.
SREP’s exit strategy relies on building capacity at different levels; at farmers/FOs level but also at public services, agricultural
service providers and technical support service institutions level. Capacity building will be undertaken at the institutional,
community and household levels. The skills and capacities required at the different levels will be strengthened to ensure
communities are resilient to climate variability and climate change, particularly within the southern region, and that the relevant
institutions are able to provide the necessary support and services.
93.
SREP interventions will contribute to environmental sustainability through the enhanced resilience and improved community-
based natural resources management which will contribute to the strengthening of social networks. The sustainability of the
community level management institutions will be ensured through the capacity building and benefits from strengthening the local
level networks. In addition, the proposed linkages with municipality-level strategies will also ensure sustainability of the
community level structures.
20/31
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
94.
The overall risk of SREP is assessed as significant due to weak capacity for implementation and fiduciary matters (procurement,
financial management, agricultural, veterinary and environmental extension/local services) as well as to limited capacities at
community level and environmental and climate change potential impacts. The Table below identifies main risks and proposed
mitigation measures to address them. 
Table 3: Main Risks and Mitigation Measures
Main risks
Mitigation measures
Limited Public Sector Capacity: The provincial and
municipal levels will have important roles in planning,
coordination/management and supervision. The
municipalities, and communes in particular, have limited
capacity in terms of staff numbers, skills, experience and
facilities.
Limited Availability of Qualified Financial Management and
Procurement Staff: The extremely competitive market for
the few qualified FM staff might render difficult for the
hiring of experienced FM staff, unless competitive salaries
are offered.
Capacity building and technical assistance/training will be provided to
IDA and other governmental agencies including MINAMB staff at
provincial and municipality level in project design, coordination,
monitoring and overseeing.
SREP will receive fiduciary support from the Single Coordination Unit.
In addition, IFAD will provide detailed FM training and frequent FM
support during the first three years.
Limited Capacity at Community Level: lack of service
providers with knowledge and skills for social mobilisation,
community development and income generation.
Provision of technical assistance and local level community support.
The Project will be responsible for identifying, selecting and training
community level staff.
Creation of Dependency Syndrome: The transition between
emergency, recovery and longer-term development needs
to be managed with care. If this is not properly managed,
this could create a dependency syndrome.
A good M&E system will identify households struggling with the
transition. These will be supported by the proven individual household
mentoring approach to assist them in overcoming the dependency
syndrome.
Lack or weak coordination with other Projects: Failure to
develop partnerships for local level planning and M&E
Project management will be implemented through Provincial and
Municipal departments promoting effective targeting (with regard to
areas of focus and beneficiaries) and benefiting from other ongoing
projects and experiences. Stakeholder platforms at municipality level
will be set up to include  implementation partners and service providers
to ensure effective coordination
Negative Impacts on the Environment and natural
resources management:  Implementation of some activities
may lead to undesirable consequences on the environment
including water contamination, soil degradation,
deforestation and wildlife conflicts.
The Project will analyse and minimise negative impacts through the
ESMP. Training will be provided on environmental assessment,
planning, management and monitoring.
Climate related extreme events: Climate variability
continues be to pronounced
Diversification of livelihoods will enhance social resilience,
complemented by capacity building of smallholders in climate
adaptation to reduce vulnerability to extreme events.
Scarcity of Foreign Currency and Emergence of a Parallel
Exchange Market with the parallel exchange market rate
doubling the official exchange rate.
Adequate planning and execution of funds flow from Designated
Account in USD to Operational Account in AOA to mitigate the risk of
eroding purchasing power.
Main risks
Mitigation measures
21/31
Elite capture of resources intended for the smallholders
particularly the investments
PGCs will be established including representatives from traditional and
community leaders as well as civil society. Grievance mechanisms will
be elaborated.
Co-financing through revolving fund schemes might
potentially risk leaving out the poorest and most vulnerable
among target beneficiaries, including women and youth.
Criteria will be developed to insure inclusion of the ultra-poor and other
beneficiary groups that would include more direct financial support e.g.
in the form of (un)conditional cash transfers and/or in-kind assistance
may be more appropriate. Consideration will also be given to
eliminating the requirement of co-financing for such vulnerable groups,
as they may be unable to fulfill it.
Mindset of receiving free inputs from Government remains.
Mentoring and social mobilisation are emphasised. Community groups
and the FFS approach will also maximise the social cohesion among
the smallholders.
Management challenges due to dispersed nature of
activities.
The approach of clustering municipalities will reduce the risk of
dispersed activities. In addition the improved mobility of the EDA and
the Service providers will improve the reach of the Project.
Key Financial Management element
Risk level
Mitigation measure
Staffing: scarcity of highly qualified
Financial Management
Specialists/accountants in-country
High
SREP (as part of SCU) to hire a qualified and experienced finance
team for the SCU positions. SREP to request support from the
Ministry of Finance to guarantee widest coverage of vacancy
announcement and to receive a pool of potentially qualified
professionals with financial management background. Furthermore,
and as part of the support granted by the SCU, project financial
management staff shall receive on-the-job   training from a qualified
and experienced accounting and auditing firm.
Budgeting: potential high variances
between budget and actuals
High
SREP to prepare realistic AWPBs based on the experience of the
ongoing projects SADCP-WB and SADCP-C&H. SREP team to
acquire the PRIMAVERA budget module for continuous monitoring.
Budgeting: existence of a thriving parallel
market for foreign currency with higher
exchange rates than the official exchange
rate
High
Funds transfers to operational account in AOA will need to be
planned in advance to cover commitments due within a relatively
short period of time to mitigate the risk of currency depreciation.
Disbursement: difficulties in processing
payments to accounts outside Angola from
local commercial banks. Near impossibility
of bank transfers in USD between different
banks
High
IFAD to lower the threshold for direct payment to USD 20,000
Internal control environment: as part of the
newly established SCU, the SREP FM unit
could face difficulties in establishing an
effective internal control environment
High
IDA to quickly establish operational manuals for the SCU, which
shall be incorporated into the SREP PIM. Staffing of the SCU should
also proceed the staffing of SREP to guarantee proper segregation
of duties.
I. Environment and Social category
95.
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP): The environmental and social category assigned to
22/31
SREP is B. It will support activities including: agriculture intensification in non-sensitive areas; integrated pest management and
credit for purchase of pesticides/other agrochemicals and training in their safe use and SLM practices. The agricultural
production activities and construction of livelihood supporting infrastructure may result in localised environmental impacts which
can be managed and minimised, if required, through the implementation of best practices and environmental and social
management plans (ESMPs). Feeder road rehabilitation and market infrastructure investments will be designed, constructed and
operated under adequate environmental and social standards. Environmental management, monitoring and mitigation capacities
will be developed through awareness and training on best practices and preparing site management plans. Training will cover
waste management practices, safe handling of agro-chemicals, improved pest management, improved storage, improved soil
and water conservation measures and natural resources management. Potential conflicts with wildlife fauna may occur at
particular sites and the drafted EMSP will be finalised during early stages of implementation. The awareness and capacity
building activities for farmers will be delivered through FFSs while more technical training will be provided for IDA/EDA and
MINAMB Departments at provincial and municipal level. 
96.
SREP should follow IFAD’s Complaints Procedure to resolve concerns and complaints with respect to alleged non-compliance of
its environmental and social policies and mandatory aspects of its Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures.
These are laid out in detail in IFAD’s webpage: https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/accountability-and-complaints-procedure
J. Climate Risk classification
97.
The climate risk classification for the SREP is high. Rain-fed cropping in the northern provinces is subject to significant annual
variations in rainfall, and thereby productivity fluctuations, while the southern provinces have been severely affected by droughts
and floods. In both areas, farmers use traditional cropping methods, with limited awareness of soil or water conservation,
replacement of soil nutrients, choice of plant varieties, irrigation, or other climate-adaptive technologies. A detailed climate
vulnerability analysis will be conducted to further inform adaptation measures including improvements in cropping technology,
which will increase farmer’s resilience to climate variability and change. 
98.
More detail on minimising the potential negative environmental and social impacts as well as climate risk is included in the
SECAP Review Note, in the Annex: IFAD Policies and SECAP Review Note.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
Approach
99.
SREP is divided between three distinct geographical and agro-ecological locations in Angola – on in the northern provinces (4)
and two in the southern provinces (3). In the north, SREP will cover provinces where the agro-ecological potential and socio-
economic conditions are conducive to more market-oriented approaches to farming. The strategy will replicate the experience of
MOSAP and SAMAP operating in the higher potential areas of the country, focusing on productivity increases and linking farmers
to markets. In the south, SREP will build resilience in three of the drought affected southern provinces. SREP will also target the
beneficiaries covered by ARP which builds on previous emergency programmes and supports the recovery of the production
capacities of family farmers most affected by the droughts and floods over the period 2012-2016.
100.
The FFS is increasingly regarded as the principal extension approach in Angola and will be the main instrument to promote
resilience and sustainable agricultural development. FFSs will be used to create social and financial capital whilst acting as a
delivery mechanism for community infrastructure development and new technologies. FFSs have proved to be an effective
means under emergency and recovery conditions to mobilise the community, undertake communal public works and provide
training and extension support. Notwithstanding these benefits, there are noticeable weaknesses in household adoption of
improved practices and in reaching the most vulnerable households[11]. In the southern provinces, SREP will work with existing
FFSs to fill identified gaps and strengthen their resilience to climate change. Additional FFSs will also be established to reach
beneficiaries not served by previous programmes. 
101.
In the northern provinces, SREP will venture into new territory, targeting food insecure municipalities with potential for agricultural
development. The northern provinces have also been impacted by climate change evidenced by extended dry period and dry
spells. The inclusion of the northern provinces, which came as a request by GoA, broadens IFADs presence in the country by
creating a corridor of agricultural investment with opportunities to scale up the GAPs introduced through other donor funded
projects. 
102.
SREP will harmonize with SAMAP and ARP, with partners and service providers playing a critical role in implementation, possibly
including UN organizations, such as FAO, UNDP, international and local NGOs, consultancy firms and/ or individual consultants.
This has been a crucial factor in the success of previous projects.
Sequencing
103.
SREP will be implemented over a period of six years, concentrating on priority areas within the target municipalities where there
is high population density and higher incidence of vulnerable households. In the north, implementation will start in two provinces
(Uige and Cuanza Norte) and eight municipalities will receive intensive support. In PY2 another five municipalities within these
same provinces will be added. In PY3, a further two provinces (Bengo and Zaire) will be added, with implementation in eight
municipalities. In the south, implementation will begin from PY1 in the three provinces simultaneously, starting in the same
municipalities where ARP is being implemented. The interventions in the south are designed to complement the recovery efforts
of ARP by strengthening the resilience of households and communities.
23/31
104.
Criteria for the selection of municipalities will be included in the PIM, and the AWPBs for PY1, PY2 and PY3 (subject to approval
by IFAD) will indicate the proposed municipalities and communes to be covered. Any decision to expand target areas will only be
justified by satisfactory progress in the initial target areas, as evidenced by annual implementation reviews. 
105.
The approach to project implementation is based on recognition that: (i) project implementation capacity of IDA and NGO service
providers is limited; (ii) many of the FOs and associations already set up are weak and at a fledgling stage of organizational
development; and (iii) pro-community policies, such as local empowerment, targeting and promoting gender equity are incipient
in Angola’s rural development sector. As such, SREP will focus on strengthening the capacity of IDA/EDA, other government
institutions, and local NGO service providers to, in turn, strengthen the capacity of family farmer groups, associations and
cooperatives locally. Implicit to the design is to develop a “training of trainers’’ programme for FFS implementation together with a
longer-term strategy of capacitating EDA extension workers and NGO service providers.
106.
Given the capacity limitations and the need to closely involve and empower communities and FOs to ensure longer term
sustainability, the approach will focus initially on (a) capacity building of extension workers and service providers, (b) a planning
process that identifies sites and appraises infrastructure; and (c) investments in infrastructure and community, group and
household activities.
107.
SREP will need to rely on service providers for the implementation of activities outside the core competencies of IDA, and the
capacity-building of these service providers by the project will be essential to ensure effective and sustainable implementation.
The sequencing of implementation in the SREP-supported provinces is presented in the figure below.
108.
Initial efforts will concentrate on capacity building of service providers (IDA extension staff and NGOs) through a concerted
training programme that will involve a needs assessment and the design and organisation of a series of training programmes in
agricultural production, natural resource management, climate change, environmental management and nutrition. As new
vacancies for extension workers become filled over the course of the first year of implementation, additional training programmes
will be organised. In the northern provinces, SREP will target, as a priority for implementation, Uige and Caunza Norte, where the
highest concentration of farm households can be found. Other capacity building activities will include planning for rural
infrastructure: site selection and the preparation of feasibility studies. In the northern provinces investments in infrastructure, FFS
establishment and investment will take place from year 2. From year 3, SREP will move into the remaining 2 provinces in the
north – Bengo and Zaire.
109.
In the southern provinces, SREP will build on the community development/FFS activities of ARP. Immediately following support
staff organization and capacity building, investments to support resilience at household level will be made. Rural infrastructure
site selection and feasibility study preparation will begin immediately and investments could be made in the last six months of
year 1. Community and household investments will similarly be made at that time. For non-ARP areas, the process of social
mobilization, planning and FFS establishment will begin towards the end of the first year, and investments made from year 2. FO
consolidation will occur from the end of year 4. A two-year period is assumed for consolidation following the full 30 months of FFS
implementation. During the consolidation period, focus will be placed on linking farmers to markets and building the management
and financial capacity of FOs.
24/31
Project Management Structure
110.
SREP has been designed to ensure simplicity in project implementation by building on the implementation arrangements for
SAMAP and ARP in the central and southern regions, respectively. An innovative element to these arrangements is the
establishment of the Single Coordination Unit (SCU) to coordinate and oversee the IFAD investment portfolio being implemented
through MINAGRIF. These considerations are also a response to the IFAD CSPE which noted the need to adjust to the limited
implementation capacity in Angola and build on lessons learned from project implementation in the country.
111.
SREP will be coordinated through the establishment of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU), staffed by a Project Manager, a
Finance Officer, a Procurement Officer, and an M&E officer. The Project Manager will be supported by two Team Leaders, one
for the north and another for the south, deployed in provincial offices. The Teams will be responsible for the day-to-day
management of SREP in the north and south. 
112.
The Project will be implemented by the IDA, from the National to the Municipal level, and there will be strong coordination and
consultation mechanisms with the relevant government stakeholders and authorities at different levels. The institutional
framework for execution is as follows:
113.
Provincial Project Implementation Units (PPIUs): Four Provincial Project Implementation Units (PPIUs) will be established. In
the four northern provinces, two Provincial Units will be set up; one in the town of Mbanza Congo covering Bengo and Zaire
region; and another in the town of Uige covering the Uige and Cuanza Norte region. For the south, two more Provincial Units will
be set up in Benguela and Namibe. The units will be located in EDA offices. Given the distances involved, three sub-unit offices
will similarly need to be set up in the provinces where there is no project representation. Tentative locations include sub-offices
in Bengo province (the town of Caxite), Cuanza Norte, (Mdalatondo), and in Cunene (the town of Ondjiva). Selection of locations
were made considering criteria such as: easy access to other target municipalities, presence of IDA/EDA staff and current office
conditions. These locations, however, should be regarded as tentative with a final decision to be made by IDA in collaboration
with the Provincial Governments. 
25/31
114.
The PPIUs will be lightly staffed, as most of the investment and technical support duties will be implemented by service providers,
and fiduciary management will mostly be done centrally. The four main PPIUs will include an Area Manager, an Assistant
Finance Officer, an Assistant Procurement Officer; an Administrative Assistant, a Secretary and a Driver. For the Sub-offices the
personnel will include an Area Manager, an Administrative Assistant and driver. See Figure 6 below. The Area Managers will
work in close collaboration with the Provincial Directors of IDA and the Heads of EDA Offices in the target municipalities and will
be expected to assist in strengthening local capacities. There will be two M&E officers, one for each of the project areas – north
and south – and three M&E Assistants (one in the south and two in the north). Decisions regarding their deployment will be made
later. 
115.
SREP implementation staff, at all levels, will receive capacity-building assistance from the SCU to support subproject
implementation technically, operationally and administratively, and especially to strengthen M&E capacity. The responsibilities of
the SREP Team Leaders will include technical supervision and coordination, overall project planning, quality oversight,
communication, reporting of Project activities and progress on a regular basis. Fiduciary issues will be managed in conformity
with the standards and requirements agreed upon with IFAD, in accordance with the Financing Agreement and other Project
documents, such as the Project Design Report and the PIM. Support in fiduciary matters will be provided by the SCU. The
designated team leaders will come under the supervision of the SREP National Project Manager and will accountable to the
Director General of IDA. SREP staff, at all levels, will receive capacity-building assistance from the SCU to support project
implementation technically, operationally and administratively, and especially to strengthen M&E capacity.
116.
Single Coordination Unit. The SCUwill be established to ensure ease of coordination and oversight, cost efficiencies through
shared functions, and developing capacity of IFAD project management staff in fiduciary issues for more effective
implementation. The SCU will be responsible for the overall coordination of the IFAD programme portfolio implemented through
MINAGRI, including SAMAP, ARP and SREP[12]. The SCU will be led by the current SAMAP-and ARP Coordinator who will
oversee SREP implementation and will be responsible for effective coordination of day-to-day operations. The Unit will be
responsible for fiduciary management, planning, monitoring and evaluation. The SCU will be staffed by a team comprising, the
SCU National Coordinator, a Senior Financial Controller, a Senior Procurement Officer and a Senior M&E Officer. These
positions will initially be financed by SAMAP and once SREP will enter into force, the costs will be shared between the two
projects. Technical support will be provided to strengthen the management and fiduciary capacity of IFAD’s programme, as
recommended by IFAD’s CSPE. Technical assistance in key subject areas will also be available within the SCU to support the
technical capacity of project staff, service providers and beneficiaries. These will include, amongst others, experts in Civil
Engineering, Environmental Management, FFS (agronomy), Social Development, Agribusiness and Marketing and Water
Resources Development. The SCU will host the SREP Manager, two M&E Officers (for the two subprojects), a Procurement
Officer and a Finance Management Officer. As the SCU will be working with IFAD’s ongoing portfolio, the costs of establishment
and operation will be divided proportionately between SREP and SAMAP.
117.
Portfolio Implementation Facility (PIF): The PIF will be established to support the SCU by sourcing International/Regional
Technical Assistance to set up implementation frameworks and systems and provide on the job training to Angolan counterparts.
The PIF will also support national counterparts through training, mentoring and establishing portfolio management systems (in
administration and day-to day management, M&E/result reporting, Financial Management and Procurement).[13] An “internship”
programme will be established to support Angola in establishing and reinforcing its institutional capacity to attract, absorb and
manage external development assistance[14]. Technical assistance will also be provided through the SCU in identified technical
subjects – FFS development (agronomy), civil engineering, social development, agribusiness development and marketing.
26/31
Oversight bodies
118.
The oversight bodies at two different levels, national and provincial, are described below, and summarised in Figure 4.
119.
Project Coordination Committee(PCC). At the national level, MINAGRIF will be supported by a Project Coordination
Committee (PCC). The PCC will be chaired by the Minister of Agriculture or his nominee, and composed of membership from
institutions with direct relevance to the achievement of SREP’s goal and development objective. The PCC will be responsible for
the strategic direction, operational oversight of project activities and implementation progress, communication, and overall good
governance of the project. It will: a) provide political and strategic guidance and facilitate inter-sectoral coordination for activities
not directly under MINAGRI; b) review and approve the Annual Work Plans and Budget for the Project Implementation Teams;
and, c) review annual project reports and support problem resolution. The Director General of IDA will be the Secretary of the
PCC, which will meet at least twice a year or more frequently, as and when need arises.
120.
Implementation Sub-committee. Implementation Sub-Committees will be set up for each of the project areas – north and south.
The sub-committees will have executive and technical responsibilities. The implementation sub-committees will consist of (at
least) the IDA Director General, the Project Manager, the respective Team Leader and the Financial Management Officer. Its task
will be to: (i) speed-up decisions and procedures; (ii) approve micro-projects under Sub-components 1.2 and 2.2 that may require
central level decision making (based on the feasibility studies prepared by the PIT); (iii) propose the agenda for the PCC
meetings and prepare the support documents; (iv) propose the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) to PCC for analysis and
decision; and (v) submit Annual Report of micro projects. The implementation sub-committees will, in addition, include
representatives of NGO or civil society and a representative of the private sector, when deciding on the approval of micro-
projects.
121.
Provincial Project Coordinating Committee (PPCC). In each participating province, there will be a Provincial Project
Coordinating Committee (PPCC), the composition and tasks of which will reflect those of the PCC. The PPCC will include the
Provincial Director of Agriculture, the Provincial Director of IDA and the Area Project Manager, a representative of civil society or
NGO, a representative of the private sector and two (minimum) representatives of beneficiaries/producers’ organisations. The
PPCC will also meet biannually, or more frequently if required. The responsibilities of the PPCC will include: a) speeding up
decisions and procedures; b) review and approval of the beneficiary and micro-project selection processes; c) review the
provincial level AWPB prepared by the Provincial Directorates of Agriculture and the main area service providers; and d) review
the provincial level annual Project implementation progress reports.
122.
Provincial Governance Committees (PGC). In addition to the PPCCs, PGCs will be established in each of the participating
provinces to ensure good governance and accountability during micro-project implementation. They will be composed of local
authorities and traditional leaders who will be supported, as and when the need arises, by a representative of the oversight
agents. The role and functions of the PGCs will be to oversee implementation from a good governance and accountability
perspective. With the micro-projects being demand responsive with the preparation of business plans and micro-project
proposals, the process of deciding on the approval of plans/proposals and the selection of beneficiaries could, potentially,
generate some grievances. The PGCs will establish a grievance mechanism which will be used to address any complaints that
could arise during the course of SREP implementation. The PGCs will keep records of evidences and complaints with minutes of
the discussions, recommendations and decisions taken. The PGCs will establish detailed mechanisms for the grievance and
complaint process, describing format, language, time for reply and alternative resources, including access to Courts of Law as a
last resort after exhausting all the viable peaceful local alternatives/options. Permanent and open dialogue will also be promoted
as this is the most suitable way of peacefully addressing any grievances expressed. A team of oversight agents will be
designated and entitled to spot-check the approval process at the PGC level to ensure fairness and transparency and will report
to the PCC. The PGC for Uige and Cuanza Norte will include as a PGC member a representative of the wildlife authority.
27/31
123.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
124.
Overall implementation arrangements. The Leading Implementation Agency for SREP will be the Institute for Agricultural
Development (IDA). The SREP Project Management Unit will be embedded in the Single Coordination Unit (SCU) that shall be
established by IDA in Luanda to coordinate the implementation of all IFAD projects implemented through the Ministry of
Agriculture: SADCP-C&H, ARP and now SREP. The SCU will also be responsible for the overall fiduciary management of the
IFAD financed projects implemented through the Ministry of Agriculture in close collaboration with the fiduciary team of the World
Bank project SADCP-WB, which is also implemented by IDA and has garnered several years of experience in financial
management procedures of IFAD and WB financed projects. The overall structure of the SCU shall include a “core team” of
experienced specialists made up of a SCU Coordinator, a Financial Controller,, a Senior Procurement Specialist, a Senior
Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist. Furthermore, the SCU shall be established and initially financed by the IFAD
project SADCP-C&H, which will guarantee that upon the start of implementation of SREP the necessary organizational structure
shall already be in place.
125.
Financial Management Staffing. SREP shall create a small financial management team embedded in the SCU composed of a
Financial Management Officer (FMO), a Finance Specialist (FS) and an Accountant. that shall be responsible for the day-to-day
accounting and financial management arrangements of SREP. The FMO will report to the Financial Controller of the SCU and will
work in close coordination with the SREP Component Managers. Four additional accountants shall be hired for the four PPIUs
These accountants shall respond to the PPIU Area Manager and the FMO at SCU. The sub-offices to be established by IDA at
provincial level will only handle small transactions to be managed by the sub-office Administrative Assistant. The selection of the
FMO and the FS will be carried out by IDA, in accordance with Government practices for appointment of staff and with IFAD’s No
Objection. The selection of the SREP Accountant at SCU and the 4 Accountants of the PPIUs will be carried out by IDA, in
accordance with Government practices for appointment of staff.
1.  The selection criteria will be based on professional qualification with considerable relevance given to a consolidated
experience in financial management of investment projects of International Financial Institutions. Knowledge of accounting
software should also be taken into account in selecting the candidate. The selection of the project accountants will be based
28/31
on a competitive process open to staff of the Ministry of Agriculture as well as external candidates.
2.  As part of the overall set-up of the SCU, IDA shall hire an accounting and/or auditing firm with international reputation, and
experienced in the project financial management arrangements of IFIs and other bilateral institutions, to provide on-the-job
training to project financial management staff. It is envisioned that this support encompasses the first 2 years of project
implementation.
3.  In addition, a Financial Expert shall be hired as International Technical Assistance (member of the Portfolio Implementation
Facility-PIF team) to provide training on the job and mentoring to SCU finance team
126.
Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB). The annual project budget will be prepared on the basis of guidelines and regulations
reflecting government policy and in coordination with the preparation of Project’s AWPB. The procedures for preparing the annual
budget and project financing needs will be documented in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The budget will cover all
project activities and will be prepared no later than two months prior to the end of each fiscal year. This proposal will be endorsed
by IDA, and approved by the Programme Coordination Committee (PCC) and submitted to IFAD prior to implementation. The
AWPB will describe all the activities to be implemented, description of expenditures by component, category, funding sources and
timelines for implementation. It will also contain a procurement plan for the relevant implementation period. Timely preparation
and approval of AWPB will be key to guarantee budgetary control. The budget information should be entered and available in the
accounting system to allow for the timely recording of commitments, payments. Finally, IDA will send to IFAD the first AWPB for
no-objection as a condition of first disbursement as per IFAD’s General Conditions for Agricultural Financing.
127.
Accounting Policies and Procedures. The Project will comply with the International Public Accounting Standards (IPSAS). The
Financial Statements will be prepared in accordance with the IPSAS “cash basis” method of accounting. A Financial
Management Procedures Manual (FMPM) will be adopted by the SCU and shall be incorporated as an annex of the Project
Implementation Manual. The FMPM will be prepared by the SCU Finance Controller and FMO and will be based on
internationally recognised best experiences. The FMPM will contain the accounting policies and procedures including a tailored
chart of accounts, method of determination of the exchange rates and the financial management arrangements, evaluation
methodologies for beneficiaries’ and government in kind contributions. The FMPM should also lay down the precise internal
control arrangements of the project. SREP will procure and install the accounting software PRIMAVERA, which is widely used by
the IFAD financed projects in country. PRIMAVERA shall be installed and used for day-to-day accounting entries at the PIU and
PPIU. Customization of the software will include the installation of the budget module.The sub-offices to be established by IDA
will only handle small transactions to be managed by a petty cash system in Excel. A similar system is already in use in the
World Bank financed project SADCP-WB, and shall be adopted by SREP. The system will be managed by the sub-office
Administrative Assistant, and the PPIU accountant within the same province shall regularly travel to the sub-office to reconcile the
petty cash system, and record all transactions on PRIMAVERA at the PPIU level. Due to the scarcity of highly trained
accountants, it is envisioned that at the start of implementation the SCU Financial Controller and FMO provide significant
capacity building to the SREP finance team on accounting policies and procedures. Furthermore, regular workshops on the use
of accounting software shall be organized by the SCU to bring all accounting staff to a common level of minimum knowledge.
Finally, the acquisition and installation of the software shall be a pre-condition for first disbursement.
128.
Financial Reports. The project’s accounting system will generate the necessary financial information for the Project financial
progress reports as well as the year-end Financial Statements that will identify sources of financing, expenses by component and
category against the project’s AWPB and the cumulative expenditures to date. Available resources will be applied exclusively for
the achievement of project objectives supported by complete supporting documentation and presented to IFAD in hard copy until
the IFAD Client Portal has become operational. The format and content of these reports will be presented in the Letter to the
Borrower and elaborated in the FMPM. The withdrawal application data should be an output from the accounting software.
129.
Government contribution. In addition to the counterpart funds deposited in an account held by IDA for the payment of taxes by
the project, Government will also contribute in the form of office space for the project in Luanda, as part of the establishment of
the SCU. The contribution will be assessed by the project based on the prevailing market rate for a comparable office area in
Luanda. The rate may be evaluated by independent real estate agents operating in the city, and should be reviewed annually. As
it is envisioned that Government will also contribute in the form of logistics and personnel, this contribution shall be evaluated pro-
rata. Furthermore, and in order to better reflect Government’s contribution to the project in the project yearly financial statements,
the project PIM shall detail all measures to account for Government’s in-kind contribution, based on IFAD’s in-kind domestic
cofinancing technical note. The amount so quantified shall be disclosed in the Notes to the Financial Statements rather than in
the main body.
130.
Financial records. SREP shall keep accurate records of all financial and procurement transactions. All original documents
related to the project transactions should be safeguarded, and the project will continuously sensitize IDA on the need to
safeguard all supporting documentation related to project activities for a period of 10 years following project closure. To mitigate
the risk of loss of financial and procurement documentation, SREP should employ the use of electronic archiving already from
inception. The project team should procure the services of a competent archiving company for the digitization of supporting
documentation. This process should be done with a 12 month frequency at the beginning of the project to be scaled up to a
quarterly frequency by the last 24 months of project implementation to guarantee that all project records are correctly digitally
archived.
131.
Assessment, risk mitigation and internal controls. The Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment
for Angola was carried out in 2016, and as at May 2018 is still due for publication. Angola ranks 167 out of 180 countries in the
2017 Transparency International Corruptions Perception risk[15], a 3 point decrease in the scale from 2016 rating, signaling a
worsening of perceived corruption risk. The African Development Bank carried out an assessment of the public financial
management systems of Angola during the elaboration of its Country Strategy Paper 2017-2021[16] and concluded that the
country has taken important steps to improve the fiscal framework and public financial management systems. However, the
report notes some important areas of concern in budget execution and internal controls, as well as on significant variances
29/31
between actuals and budgets, which may signal some issues in the absorption capacity to implement public investment projects.
The overall risk of public financial management systems is ranked as substantial. As such, and based on this analysis the
inherent financial management risk of the SREP is classified as high. The creation of a new layer of project management
(including fiduciary management) poses an additional risk, as the SCU will still need to develop its internal capacity, procedures
and guidelines. To mitigate the internal control risk the following measures will be employed by IDA: 1) preparation of the FMPM
upon approval of design report by Government; 2) purchase an accounting system and 3) hiring an internal auditor within six
months after entry into Force. Internal controls will be insured through effective segregation of functions, monthly reconciliation of
accounts, and different levels of approvals required depending on amounts of expenses. Physical management of cash is
discouraged, with the use of bank transfers and checkbooks employed for the majority of expenditures. The PIU will detail the
internal control arrangements, flow of funds, and roles, responsibilities and procedures in the FMPM. The FMPM should specially
detail the minimum acceptable supporting documentation, and project approvals needed to process a payment, and the
supporting documentation that must be presented for justification of expenditures such as travel, perdiem and fuel. It should also
stipulate that advances are not to be treated as expenses until justified. 
132.
Internal Audit. The SCU will contract the services of an internal audit company through competitive bidding. This internal audit
will then provide their services to all ongoing IFAD projects implemented through IDA. The internal auditor should be hired soon
as possible following project effectiveness. The internal auditor should have relevant work experience with projects funded by
International Financial Institutions. As the level of perceived risk of the project is high, the project should be internally audited at
least twice per project year. The internal auditor should report to the Project Steering Committee and the contract administration
should be facilitated by the Project Coordinator.
133.
External Audit. Project financial statements will be audited by independent, private audit firms, satisfactory to IFAD, in
accordance with International Standards of Auditing (ISA). The selection of the auditor should be on an open competitive
process, and an important selection criteria should be experience in auditing projects of IFIs operating in Angola. The auditor’s
report will be submitted to IFAD no later than six months after the closing of the borrower’s fiscal year. The external audit will be
conducted in accordance with Terms of Reference (ToR) acceptable to IFAD. Draft ToR can be found in Attachment 2. Auditors
will be required to issue an opinion on project financial statements and the audited financial statements will be publicly disclosed
as per IFAD’s Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed projects.
134.
Procurement. SREP's procurement of goods, works and services will be undertaken in accordance with IFAD Procurement
Guidelines and “Policy on preventing fraud and corruption in activities and operations”. All procurement will be executed only
against approved AWPBs which align with the procurement plans, specifying items to be procured under each component, the
agency responsible for such procurement, the procurement method to be used (as defined in IFAD Procurement Handbook and
Guidelines), and the sequencing/timing and total cost involved. All larger procurements are expected to be through national
competitive bidding contracts, with the exception of international competitive bidding for contracts above an agreed threshold,
which will use the appropriate World Bank Guidelines and bidding documents templates. All procurements financed by IFAD will
be exempt from duties and taxes. IFAD prior review threshold will be established at US$75,000 for goods and works and
US$50,000 for consultancy services. These will be described in the PIM with additional requirements of IFAD's Prior Review
procedures specified in the Letter to the Borrower. Robust implementation arrangements will be put in place to ensure effective
project execution. Timelines included in the approved procurement plan will be closely monitored during implementation to
minimize delays.
135.
AFD will follow the IFAD procurement procedures. The review of withdrawal applications will be initially conducted by IFAD but
disbursement will be done by AFD directly. BADEA will be using their own procurement and disbursement procedures. These
are described more fully in the Annex: Procurement.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
136.
SREP will collect quality data and analyse it in order to monitor project performance and produce reports that inform the country
policy makers and development partners on the performance of the project.For monitoring and evaluation to be effective, SREP
will use the following guidelines: 
Harmonise its M&E framework with other M&E systems under the IFAD portfolio and especially the SAMAP and ARP projects
as well as capturing key indicators that contribute to government action plans and strategies;
Setup modalities to capture output and outcome indicators on SLM systems, GAP, ecosystem status, and to follow-up on food
security enhancement and income increases as well as progress made by vulnerable groups (gender, youth and other
vulnerable people);
Use of Logical Framework and AWPB for planning, monitoring and evaluation;
Involve beneficiary communities and implementing partners in data collection and analysis;
Develop learning, innovation and knowledge management mechanisms to support, in particular, policy processes and scaling-
up.
137.
Planning of project activities will be an on-going and participatory process coordinated by the SCU with support from the
provincial and municipality offices of the southern and the northern provinces. Consolidated AWPBs of the two sub-regional
offices will be the basis for planning. This consolidated AWPB will report on the project progress at national level. The AWPB,
together with the Logical Framework’s results-based indicators, will be the basis for monitoring project progress. Monitoring will
capture all four levels of results (activities, outputs, outcomes and impact at development objective and goal level) on a
continuous basis. M&E will be will be carried out in specific periods and the findings will be enriched with feedback from the on-
going generation of lessons learned, best practices, beneficiary and stakeholder stories (also defined as learning and knowledge
management).
30/31
138.
The AWPB will be the base for implementation and operational control. The AWPB for the first year will be based on the SREP
Design Report and its Attachments and will be revised by the project team and PCC at start-up. Training will be given to the SCU,
the project team leaders and the PPIU staff, on the preparation of AWPBs. The subsequent AWPB will follow the project overall
planning and design with adjustment made when necessary based on recommendations from joint IFAD-GoA supervision
missions.
139.
The AWPB will be elaborated in collaboration with all the stakeholders. The head of the SCU will coordinate the AWPB process
and ensure that all stakeholders are fully involved. The two M&E Officers under the supervision of the head of the SCU will be
responsible for coordinating the preparation of AWPB, its consolidation, and presentation to the PCC for validation and
submission to IFAD. The Financial Management Officer will provide costs for incorporation in the financing plan and
disbursement arrangements. The PIU’s Project Manager together with the Financial Manager will prepare the procurement plan.
The AWPB approved by the PCC and IFAD will be the instrument giving the SCU the authority to conduct activities and incur
expenditures. The Director General of IDA will act as the chairperson of the PCC, while the head of the SCU will be the Secretary
of the Committee. The PCC will meet twice a year to discuss issues concerning the project.
140.
Monitoring and evaluation. A baseline study will be carried out within the first year of project implementation. Another survey
will be carried out at mid-term to capture the mandatory/core indicators levels as demanded by the new IFAD Operational
Results Management System (ORMS).
141.
The SCU Senior M&E Officer will be responsible for planning, monitoring, reporting, evaluation and assessment, learning,
knowledge management and communication, as well as ensuring appropriateness and efficiency of implementation related to
targeting. An M&E Officer will be recruited to take responsibility for SREP. The M&E Officer, supported by the Project
implementation team leaders of the Provincial Project Implementation Unit (PPIU), will ensure that information is collected on a
regular basis and registered on a database. Capacity for M&E is quite low in Angola and therefore capacity building will need to
be provided, particularly for the M&E officer and assistants for the provincial units. Functional monitoring will be through monthly
coordination meetings at the level of the SCU, PIT and PPIU. There will be quarterly implementation review joint meeting of SCU,
PIT and PPIU to prepare and validate data needed for progress reports. Results will be submitted in quarterly, half-yearly and
annual reports to PCC, PPCC and IFAD. Consultants will be hired to develop an M&E software that will be linked to the financial
management software for easy consolidation. Project staff and executing partners will be trained on the use of the software.
142.
Mid-Term Review (MTR). An MTR will be conducted halfway through implementation (beginning of PY4) to assess the
performance of the project, results attained against the established objectives, and the efficiency and effectiveness of SREP
management. Recommendations for revisions to the activities and approach as well as the Logical Framework targets will be
made if necessary.  In order to gather pertinent information for the MTR, the project will need to conduct, at about three months
prior, an evaluation of its key outcome indicators to measure progress towards project impact and outputs.
143.
Project Completion Report (PCR). At the end of the implementation period, a PCR will be compiled following IFAD standards to
provide an overview of the accomplishments of SREP.
144.
Learning and knowledge management. Knowledge Management (KM) will be a process by which value is generated from
project intellectual and knowledge-based assets. It will include a detailed plan on how information will be obtained and
disseminated through project reports and reviews, development of knowledge products, policy workshops and the use of
communication channels. To share lessons learned and promote scaling-up, the PCU is expected to use different types of media
and approaches (M&A), such as FFS, farmer field visits, website, radio, video, press releases and articles for local and
international newspapers and for IFAD website. The project will benefit from and contribute to the GEF Food Security Programme
knowledge network. The regional knowledge network, IFAD Africa, will provide opportunities to participate in regional thematic
workshops, visit sites of similar projects, and guidance for the start-up of KM activities. With support from IFAD, other relevant KM
expertise could be mobilized to support the project in developing knowledge products. Tools, such as case studies and
stakeholder interviews, will complement the M&A tools described above to deepen the understanding of factors contributing to
adoption of SLM practices and success or failure to show impacts on ecosystems services and food security. One of the main
purposes of knowledge creation and sharing will be to support policy making by building a comprehensive body of evidence,
lessons learned, and good practices. The M&A tools will provide a cost-effective way of building strong cases and inform policy
makers for further up-scaling.
b. Innovation and scaling up
145.
Attention will be given to scaling-up activities proven within SAMAP and ARP. In particular the Farmer Field School approach to
extension as well as improving access for herders in the southern provinces to veterinary services through the Community
Animal Health Worker concept.
M. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
146.
Supervision and implementation support will be jointly undertaken by IFAD and GoA. During Year 1 supervision will be
undertaken every three months. Depending on progress and the level of risk assessed, subsequent supervision missions will be
fielded at least twice, but preferably three times a year. Considering the perceived Financial Management risk, IFAD will
undertake an additional financial management Implementation Support Mission in conjunction with the other IFAD-supported
Projects (AFAP, SAMAP, ARP) in the first two years of implementation. This will support capacity building of financial
management staff, as well as on-site review of SOEs, supporting documentation and procurement arrangements. Supervision
and implementation support will be based on IFAD’s operational modalities and practices. Supervision will not be conducted as a
general inspection or evaluation but, rather, as an opportunity to assess achievements and lessons learned and to jointly reflect
on ways to improve implementation and increase the likelihood of achieving the Project’s objectives. IFAD will also provide
implementation support either during the Supervision Missions or as and when needed. Key features likely to require attention by
the missions will include: a) preparing the PIM; b) setting up of a functional M&E system; c) procedures and systems causing
implementation and reporting delays; d) the procurement function; e) process of selecting the qualifying beneficiaries; and f)
effective delivery of capacity building interventions.
31/31
Footnotes
[1] https://tradingeconomics.com/angola/minimum-wages
[2]  General National Budget 2016
[3]FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO. 2017. The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2017. Building resilience for
peace and food security. Rome, FAO.
[4]Angola 2014”, Instituto Nacional de Estatística.
[5] World Bank Indicators
[6]Average calculated based on available national data from 2006 to 2012. Source: Government of Angola (2016) Nota de Imprensa
N. 02 – Contas Nacionais Provisórias 2014 e Preliminares 2015, Instituto Nacional de Estatística
[7]These include: residential, traditional shifting agriculture and transhumant grazing, forestry, access to water and communication
ways use.
[8]Programa de Apoio à Produção, Diversificação das Exportações e Substituição das Importações.
[9]Resilience of beneficiary household will be monitored using a resilience scorecard presented in the Annex: Planning, M&E learning
and knowledge management.
[10]https://tradingeconomics.com/angola/minimum-wages
[11]In many of the cases the FFS under the emergency programmes experienced weaknesses of low adoption at household level
because of the short time frame of the programme and the primary focus on activities implemented through the common plot. The
programme also experienced challenges of lack of mentoring support of the Master Trainers that did not have adequate operational
funds to support the FFS at community level.
[12]SAMAP staffing includes a Project Manager, a Financial Management Specialist, a Procurement Specialist, an Accountant and an
M&E and Knowledge Sharing Specialist. These positions will be absorbed by the Single Coordination Unit. The SAMAP Project
Coordinator will take on the role of Single Coordination Unit, Programme Manager. ARP is being implemented at provincial level
through an office in Lubango, Huela. The project team consists of a Project Manager; Accountant; Procurement Assistant; Monitoring
and Evaluation Assistant; and Project Assistant with SAMAP playing an oversight role. The fiduciary specialist responsibilities will be
extended to provide support to SREP.
[13] AFD, BADEA and IFAD will to provide financial support to the PIF
[14]Each year 18 interns (6-finance, 6-project management, 6-procurement) will be competitively hired to form the Luanda based
internship programme and a further 9 interns (3 project management, 3 finance, 3 procurement) will be selected to attend a one year
training abroad.
[15] https://www.transparency.org/news/feature/corruption_perceptions_index_2017#table
[16] https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Project-and-Operations/Angola_-__Country_Strategy_Paper_2017-
2021.pdf
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Logical Framework
1/5
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households members
Household
members
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Women-
headed
households
Non-women-
headed
households
Households
0 100 000 218 000
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Indigenous
people
Non-
Indigenous
people
Reference
studies and
HH surveys
Baseline;
MTR; End-
line
PIU/ SCU
Extreme climate
change shocks do
not occur
Reference
studies and
HH surveys
Baseline;
MTR; End-
line
PIU/ SCU
Reference
studies and
HH surveys
Baseline;
MTR; End-
line
PIU/ SCU
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Indicators
2/5
End
Target
Mid-
Term
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Total number
of persons
receiving
services
Project Goal 
Contribute to improved household
food and nutrition security of
targeted communities
No. of HH reporting improved food security as measured by Food Insecurity
Experience Scale (FIES)
Non-women-
headed HHs
Households
0
42 000 152 600
Women-
headed HHs
No. of women of reproductive age reporting good dietary diversity (MDD-W)
Females
25 000
61 000
Development Objective 
Increased productivity and resilience
of targeted households
HH report a 30% increase in agriculture productivity for selected food crops
Households
40 000 112 000
No. of HH report a > 50% increase in resilience score
Female-
headed HHs
Male-headed
HHs
Households
30 000 104 600
Baseline
study, MT and
impact
assessment
Baseline;
MTR; End-
line
PIU/ SCU
Extreme climate
change shocks do
not occur
PIU/ SCU
Baseline;
MTR; End-
line
Annual
PIU/ SCU
Annual
PIU/ SCU
Household
surveys
Project M&E
system,
Production
and yields
survey,
Specific
technical and
activity report
Specific
technical and
project activity
reports
A).Extreme climate
change shocks do
not occur;
(R).population
increases may
jeopardize
sustainability of
management
systems
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Indicators
3/5
End
Target
Mid-
Term
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outcome 
1. Strengthened institutional capacity
to deliver services to enhance food
security, productivity and resilience
No. of family farmers reporting regular use of advisory and support services
0
40 000 125 000
Number of
farmers
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
No. of family farmers reporting use of climate information services
0
20 000
49 000
Number of
farmers
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Annual
PIU/SCU
Specific
technical and
project activity
report
(R) GoA unable to
recruit the additional
extension staff
needed to ensure
effective project
delivery
Annual
PIU/SCU
Specific
technical and
project activity
reports
Output 
1.1 Technical, organizational and
managerial competencies of
advisory and support service staff
improved
No. of government-employed staff participating in training programmes run by the
project during the period under review
Project M&E
system
Annual
PIU/SCU
Number of staff
1 500
3 000
Males
Females
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to improve their nutrition
M&E reports
Annual
PMU
Household
members
benefitted
Total persons
participating
25 000
61 000
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Males
Indicators
4/5
End
Target
Mid-
Term
Households
25 000
61 000
Females
Young
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outcome 
2. Rural infrastructure to build
resilience and enhance productivity
and market access
Output 
2.1 Identification, prioritization
construction/ rehabilitation of feeder
roads
Output 
2.2 Land sustainably managed
under climate resilient practices
Output 
2.3 Water infrastructure managed
under climate resilient practices
No. of households with improved access to water, land and road infrastructure
Households
15 000
40 000
Project M&E
system
Annual
PIU/SCU
Extreme climate
change shocks do
not occur
2.1.5 Roads constructed, rehabilitated or upgraded
Length of
roads
0
200
510
3.1.4 Land brought under climate-resilient practices
Hectares of
land
10 000
21 000
No. of households reporting improved access to water resources for productive and
domestic use
10 000
30 000
Households
Non-women-
headed HHs
Women-
headed HHs
Contractor
reports
Bi-annual
PIU/SCU
Annual
PIU/SCU
Bi-annual
PIU/SCU
Specific
technical and
project activity
reports
Specific
technical and
project activity
reports
Project resources
are mobilised
accordingly
Extreme climate
change shocks do
not occur
Outcome 
3. Farming families acquire skills and
technologies for food and nutrition
security, enhanced resilience/
productivity and market access
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate-
resilient technologies and practices
Males
Females
Households
30 000
80 000
Bi-annual
PIU/SCU
Specific
technical and
project activity
reports
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Indicators
5/5
End
Target
Mid-
Term
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
3.1 Family farmers, technical,
organizational and managerial
competencies Improved
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or technologies
Total number
of persons
trained by the
project
0
40 000
95 000
Outcome 
4. Improved profitability of farm and
non-farm income generating
activities to improve access to food
No. of HH reporting 30% increase in percentage of agriculture output sold in market
Households
30 000
80 000
1.2.8 Women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDDW)
Women
(number)
25 000
61 000
Output 
4.1 Family farmers are investing in
improved production and marketing
1.1.3 Rural producers accessing production inputs and/or technological packages
Total rural
producers
45 000 120 000
Bi-annual
PIU/SCU
Annual
PIU/SCU
PIU/ SCU
Baseline;
MTR; End-
line
Bi-annual
PIU/SCU
Specific
technical and
project activity
reports
Specific
technical and
project activity
reports
Household
surveys
Specific
technical and
project activity
reports
(R) Cultural factors
could hinder the
long-term uptake of
GAP technologies
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Project Cost and Financing 
A.  Main Assumptions 
1. 
Contingencies. Physical contingency of 5% has been applied to works only (road rehabilitation, 
roads  maintenance,  irrigation  systems,  etc.)  and  whereas  price  contingencies  have  been  applied 
throughout the whole project cost tables.  
2. 
Inflation. The statistics show the average inflation rate in Angola from 2012 to 2015 was 10.2%. 
Over the years and until inflation has rose to range of 20% in 2018 but projected to decline to 7.2 by 
2022. The effect of inflation has been considered in the determination of the project costs. 
Exchange Rate. The Angolan Kwanza has continued to gain the grounds against the US dollar. 
3. 
During the design mission the prevailing exchange rate was 233 to trade at 247 by the end of 2018.  
4. 
Taxes and Duties. Import  duties (on  vehicles, office  furniture,  equipment, etc.) and  VAT are 
applied to costs of transactions were appropriate. The standard rate of VAT in Angola is 10%. This tax 
is levied on the supply of goods and services as well as on the import of goods into Angola. The tax 
rate ranges from 2% to 30%, depending on the goods or service. 
B.  Project costs 
The  total  SREP  investment  and  incremental  recurrent  costs,  including  physical  and  price 
5. 
contingencies,  are  estimated  at  US$ 150  million  (AOA  34.5  billion).  Table 9  below  presents  a 
breakdown of the costs by post MTR components. The detailed cost tables and additional summary 
tables are presented in section D and E to this Annex.  
6. 
Institutional  capacity  building  in  base  costs  totals  USD  85.2  million  (59%  of  base  total  base 
costs). With  this  first  component  the  investment  in  public  rural  infrastructure  accounts  for  USD  62.3 
million (43% of base costs) and strengthening capacity for improved services to family members at USD 
22.9 million (16% of base costs). Component 2 Family Farmer Strengthening and Investment in base 
costs  totals  USD  37.9  million  (26%  of  base  costs).    Within  this  second  component,  Strengthening 
capacity for family members in base costs totals USD 21.6 million (15% of base costs). Investing in 
Family  Farming  in  base  costs  totals  USD  16.3  million  (11%  of  base  costs).    Component  3  Project 
coordination and management in base costs totals USD 22.1 million (15% of base costs) of which the 
SREP Project Implementation Unit accounts for USD 15.9 million (11%) and the Single Coordination 
Unit  (SCU)–  Portfolio  Implementation  Facility  (PIF)  accounts  for  USD  6.1  million  (4%  of  total  base 
costs). The costing has been done in USD but still price contingencies (USD 3.2 million) have been 
provided. Physical contingencies amount to USD 1.6 million. 
Table 9: Project Costs by Component 
C.  Financing Plan 
Total  SREP  costs,  including  price  contingencies,  duties  and  taxes,  are  estimated  at  about 
7. 
USD150 million over the six-year implementation period. IFAD will fund the Project through a loan of 
around USD 51 million on ordinary terms.  The IFAD loan will be divided into two tranches; an initial 
funding of USD29.755 million and a second disbursement of USD21.245 million. The second will kick-
in in year 3 of project implementation and will be conditional on the performance of the IFAD portfolio. 
This implies a  gap funding of USD million 21.245 or  14.2%  of project costs.  GoA  will finance  taxes, 
duties and contributions to extension infrastructure amounting to a total of USD 10 million, representing 
about 6.7% of total costs. The estimate of taxes and duties is based on prevailing rates at the time of 
design.  In conformity with the principle that no taxes or duties will be financed out of the proceeds of 
the IFAD Loan, any changes in the rates of taxes and duties would have to be met by GoA. Beneficiaries 
will contribute USD 6.5 million, representing about 4.3% of Project costs, and will consist mainly of in-
kind contribution (labour1). BADEA will contribute about USD 40 million (26.7%) and Agence Français 
de Development (AFD) a further USD 42 million (28%). The summary of the financing plan is presented 
in the table  below: 
Table 10: Financing Plan by Components (USD’000) 
1https://tradingeconomics.com/angola/minimum-wages 
Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) Project Components by Year -- Base Costs (USD '000) Base CostPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalA. Component 1: Institutional capacity building 1. Strengtening Capacity for Improved Services to Family Farmers Investment costs 5,5075,9145,5851,4358911218,642Recurrent costs- Extension staff deployment 7157157157157157154,291Subtotal 6,2226,6296,3002,15080482722,9332. Investing in Public Rural Infrastracture Feeder road rehabilitation & Maintenance 2,5647,9647,2146,9668,7065,20038,614Market infrastructure 1,0681,068918658114643,890Sustainanble land & water management 1,3555,6785,8305,75176538419,761Subtotal 4,98714,71013,96213,3759,5855,64862,265Subtotal 11,20921,33920,26215,52410,3896,47585,197B. Component 2: Family Farmer Strenthening and Investment 1. Strengthening Capacity For Family Farmers 2,8344,0904,4004,5393,9081,88521,6552. Investing in Family Farming 1,2552,1273,4063,4383,4082,64016,273Subtotal 4,0896,2177,8067,9777,3154,52537,928C. Component 3: Programme Cordination 1. SREP Project implementation unit 3,3482,4222,5472,5032,4472,67215,9382. Single Coordination Unit (SCU)-Programme Implementation Facility (PIF) 1,4291,2131,0879799434666,115Subtotal 4,7763,6343,6333,4813,3893,13722,052Total BASELINE COSTS 20,07431,19031,70126,98321,09314,137145,178Physical Contingencies 1593753463262711681,645Price Contingencies Inflation Local 402073353623382591,541Foreign 422203563843592751,636Subtotal Inflation 824276917466985353,178Devaluation -------Subtotal Price Contingencies 824276917466985353,178Total PROJECT COSTS 20,31631,99232,73828,05422,06214,839150,000  Taxes 1,2972,3292,2141,8231,48285310,000Foreign Exchange 10,15916,00216,37914,03811,0417,42875,048Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) Components by Financiers Local(USD '000) IFAD 1BADEAAFDGoABeneficiariesIFAD 2TotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Component 1: Institutional capacity building 1. Strengtening Capacity for Improved Services to Family Farmers Investment costs 5,51829.1--8,39444.31,1306.0--3,91720.718,96012.69,4858,3441,130Recurrent costs- Extension staff deployment 2,14650.0--------2,14650.04,2912.92,1462,146-Subtotal 7,66433.0--8,39436.11,1304.9--6,06326.123,25115.511,63010,4901,1302. Investing in Public Rural Infrastracture Feeder road rehabilitation & Maintenance --36,60388.5--4,76311.5----41,36627.620,70615,8964,763Market infrastructure 1,15028.0--1,74942.73849.4--81619.94,0992.72,0511,664384Sustainanble land & water management 5,70927.6--8,68541.91,6467.96173.04,05319.620,71113.810,3648,7001,646Subtotal 6,85910.436,60355.310,43415.86,79410.36170.94,8697.466,17644.133,12226,2606,794Subtotal 14,52216.236,60340.918,82821.17,9258.96170.710,93212.289,42759.644,75236,7507,925B. Component 2: Family Farmer Strenthening and Investment 1. Strengthening Capacity For Family Farmers 6,35029.3--9,65944.51,0684.91120.54,50820.821,69714.510,8499,7801,0682. Investing in Family Farming 3,29619.9--5,01330.31470.95,77134.82,34014.116,56611.08,2878,132147Subtotal 9,64625.2--14,67338.31,2153.25,88315.46,84717.938,26325.519,13617,9121,215C. Component 3: Programme Cordination 1. SREP Project implementation unit 3,67423.03,39721.25,58934.97334.6--2,60816.316,00110.78,0017,2677332. Single Coordination Unit (SCU)-Programme Implementation Facility (PIF) 1,91330.3--2,91146.11272.0--1,35821.56,3104.23,1583,024127Subtotal 5,58725.03,39715.28,49938.18603.9--3,96617.822,31114.911,16010,291860Total PROJECT COSTS 29,75519.840,00026.742,00028.010,0006.76,5004.321,74514.5150,000100.075,04864,95310,000 
D.  Summary Cost Tables 
Table 11:  Components Project Cost Summary 
Table 12:  Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary 
Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) %% TotalComponents Project Cost Summary (Kwanza Million)(USD '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Component 1: Institutional capacity building 1. Strengtening Capacity for Improved Services to Family Farmers Investment costs 2,1442,1444,2899,3219,32118,6425013Recurrent costs- Extension staff deployment 4944949872,1462,1464,291503Subtotal 2,6382,6385,27611,46611,46622,93350162. Investing in Public Rural Infrastracture Feeder road rehabilitation & Maintenance 4,4424,4428,88319,30719,30738,6145027Market infrastructure 4474478951,9451,9453,890503Sustainanble land & water management 2,2732,2734,5469,8809,88019,7615014Subtotal 7,1627,16214,32431,13231,13262,2655043Subtotal 9,8009,80019,60042,59942,59985,1975059B. Component 2: Family Farmer Strenthening and Investment 1. Strengthening Capacity For Family Farmers 2,4912,4914,98210,82810,82821,65550152. Investing in Family Farming 1,8721,8723,7448,1378,13716,2735011Subtotal 4,3634,3638,72518,96418,96437,9285026C. Component 3: Programme Cordination 1. SREP Project implementation unit 1,8331,8333,6677,9697,96915,93850112. Single Coordination Unit (SCU)-Programme Implementation Facility (PIF) 7037031,4073,0573,0576,115504Subtotal 2,5372,5375,07311,02611,02622,0525015Total BASELINE COSTS 16,69916,69933,39872,58972,589145,17850100Physical Contingencies 1891893788228221,645501Price Contingencies 3553767311,5411,6363,178512Total PROJECT COSTS 17,24317,26534,50874,95375,048150,00050103Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) %% TotalExpenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary (Kwanza Million)(USD '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCosts I. Investment Costs A. Works 7,0447,04414,08830,62030,62061,2405042B. matching grant 2,4512,4514,90210,65510,65521,3095015C. Vehicles 2882885751,2501,2502,500502D. Goods, Services & Inputs 1,8831,8833,7668,1868,18616,3725011E. Consultancies 1,1251,1252,2494,8894,8899,777507F. Trainings 1,5531,5533,1056,7496,74913,499509Total Investment Costs 14,34314,34328,68762,34862,348124,6965086II. Recurrent Costs A. Operating costs 5525521,1042,4002,4004,800503B. Salaries and allowances 1,8041,8043,6087,8417,84115,6825011Total Recurrent Costs 2,3562,3564,71210,24110,24120,4825014Total BASELINE COSTS 16,69916,69933,39872,58972,589145,17850100Physical Contingencies 1891893788228221,645501Price Contingencies 3553767311,5411,6363,178512Total PROJECT COSTS 17,24317,26534,50874,95375,048150,00050103 
Table 13:  Project Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (US $ 000) 
Table 14:  Components by Financiers (US $ 000) 
Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (USD '000) Totals Including ContingenciesPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalA. Component 1: Institutional capacity building 1. Strengtening Capacity for Improved Services to Family Farmers Investment costs 5,5356,0085,7361,4748911718,960Recurrent costs- Extension staff deployment 7157157157157157154,291Subtotal 6,2516,7236,4512,18980583223,2512. Investing in Public Rural Infrastracture Feeder road rehabilitation & Maintenance 2,6498,3517,6637,4919,4795,73341,366Market infrastructure 1,1061,121974706122704,099Sustainanble land & water management 1,4145,8856,1126,10079740320,711Subtotal 5,16815,35614,74914,29810,3986,20766,176Subtotal 11,41922,07921,20016,48611,2037,03989,427B. Component 2: Family Farmer Strenthening and Investment 1. Strengthening Capacity For Family Farmers 2,8364,0984,4134,5483,9181,88521,6972. Investing in Family Farming 1,2682,1563,4493,4863,4892,71816,566Subtotal 4,1056,2537,8628,0347,4074,60238,263C. Component 3: Programme Cordination 1. SREP Project implementation unit 3,3542,4242,5552,5122,4562,69916,0012. Single Coordination Unit (SCU)-Programme Implementation Facility (PIF) 1,4371,2351,1211,0229964986,310Subtotal 4,7923,6603,6763,5343,4523,19722,311Total PROJECT COSTS 20,31631,99232,73828,05422,06214,839150,000Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) Components by Financiers Local(USD '000) IFAD 1BADEAAFDGoABeneficiariesIFAD 2TotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Component 1: Institutional capacity building 1. Strengtening Capacity for Improved Services to Family Farmers Investment costs 5,51829.1--8,39444.31,1306.0--3,91720.718,96012.69,4858,3441,130Recurrent costs- Extension staff deployment 2,14650.0--------2,14650.04,2912.92,1462,146-Subtotal 7,66433.0--8,39436.11,1304.9--6,06326.123,25115.511,63010,4901,1302. Investing in Public Rural Infrastracture Feeder road rehabilitation & Maintenance --36,60388.5--4,76311.5----41,36627.620,70615,8964,763Market infrastructure 1,15028.0--1,74942.73849.4--81619.94,0992.72,0511,664384Sustainanble land & water management 5,70927.6--8,68541.91,6467.96173.04,05319.620,71113.810,3648,7001,646Subtotal 6,85910.436,60355.310,43415.86,79410.36170.94,8697.466,17644.133,12226,2606,794Subtotal 14,52216.236,60340.918,82821.17,9258.96170.710,93212.289,42759.644,75236,7507,925B. Component 2: Family Farmer Strenthening and Investment 1. Strengthening Capacity For Family Farmers 6,35029.3--9,65944.51,0684.91120.54,50820.821,69714.510,8499,7801,0682. Investing in Family Farming 3,29619.9--5,01330.31470.95,77134.82,34014.116,56611.08,2878,132147Subtotal 9,64625.2--14,67338.31,2153.25,88315.46,84717.938,26325.519,13617,9121,215C. Component 3: Programme Cordination 1. SREP Project implementation unit 3,67423.03,39721.25,58934.97334.6--2,60816.316,00110.78,0017,2677332. Single Coordination Unit (SCU)-Programme Implementation Facility (PIF) 1,91330.3--2,91146.11272.0--1,35821.56,3104.23,1583,024127Subtotal 5,58725.03,39715.28,49938.18603.9--3,96617.822,31114.911,16010,291860Total PROJECT COSTS 29,75519.840,00026.742,00028.010,0006.76,5004.321,74514.5150,000100.075,04864,95310,000 
Table 15 Project costs by expenditure category by financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars)  
Table 16 Summary for Co-financing  
Financier  
BADEA 
AFD 
Geographic focus  
Investment areas/priorities 
SREP North and SREP South 
Rural infrastructure 
development  
SREP South 
Ecosystem  based  adaptation 
and 
infrastructure 
rural 
development  
Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) Components by Financiers Local(USD '000) IFAD 1BADEAAFDGoABeneficiariesIFAD 2TotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Component 1: Institutional capacity building 1. Strengtening Capacity for Improved Services to Family Farmers Investment costs 5,51829.1--8,39444.31,1306.0--3,91720.718,96012.69,4858,3441,130Recurrent costs- Extension staff deployment 2,14650.0--------2,14650.04,2912.92,1462,146-Subtotal 7,66433.0--8,39436.11,1304.9--6,06326.123,25115.511,63010,4901,1302. Investing in Public Rural Infrastracture Feeder road rehabilitation & Maintenance --36,60388.5--4,76311.5----41,36627.620,70615,8964,763Market infrastructure 1,15028.0--1,74942.73849.4--81619.94,0992.72,0511,664384Sustainanble land & water management 5,70927.6--8,68541.91,6467.96173.04,05319.620,71113.810,3648,7001,646Subtotal 6,85910.436,60355.310,43415.86,79410.36170.94,8697.466,17644.133,12226,2606,794Subtotal 14,52216.236,60340.918,82821.17,9258.96170.710,93212.289,42759.644,75236,7507,925B. Component 2: Family Farmer Strenthening and Investment 1. Strengthening Capacity For Family Farmers 6,35029.3--9,65944.51,0684.91120.54,50820.821,69714.510,8499,7801,0682. Investing in Family Farming 3,29619.9--5,01330.31470.95,77134.82,34014.116,56611.08,2878,132147Subtotal 9,64625.2--14,67338.31,2153.25,88315.46,84717.938,26325.519,13617,9121,215C. Component 3: Programme Cordination 1. SREP Project implementation unit 3,67423.03,39721.25,58934.97334.6--2,60816.316,00110.78,0017,2677332. Single Coordination Unit (SCU)-Programme Implementation Facility (PIF) 1,91330.3--2,91146.11272.0--1,35821.56,3104.23,1583,024127Subtotal 5,58725.03,39715.28,49938.18603.9--3,96617.822,31114.911,16010,291860Total PROJECT COSTS 29,75519.840,00026.742,00028.010,0006.76,5004.321,74514.5150,000100.075,04864,95310,000 
E.  Detailed Cost Tables 
Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) Table 1.1. Component 1: Extensional service strengthening: Strengthening Capacity for Improved Services for Family Farmers Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (USD)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total(USD)PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalExpenditure Account I. Investment Costs A. Agriculture extension service delivery 1. Transport (vehicles) No156----2140,000603,733244,498----848,231VEHICLES_12. Motorbikes No1425038---2306,000857,300305,621235,162---1,398,083VEHICLES_13. Rehabilitation of offices /a No4332--1275,000301,866229,216232,068156,636--919,786WORKS_14. Rehabilitation of offices /b No4552--16200,000804,9761,018,7381,031,411417,697--3,272,822WORKS_15. Rehabilitation of residential houses No452---11100,000402,488509,369206,282---1,118,139WORKS_16. Construction of new residential houses No489---21300,0001,207,4642,444,9712,784,811---6,437,246WORKS_17. MoU with provincial office of infrastructure and technical services (Supervision of works) No43----720,00080,49661,121----141,617CONSULTANCIES_1Subtotal 4,258,3234,813,5344,489,734574,334--14,135,924B. Training of extension staff 1. Training in FFS No5332--1340,000200,000120,000120,00080,000--520,000TRAININGS2. Training in technical subjects No5444111940,000200,000160,000160,000160,00040,00040,000760,000TRAININGS3. Training in NRM planning No32----525,00075,00050,000----125,000TRAININGSSubtotal 475,000330,000280,000240,00040,00040,0001,405,000C. Capacity building for climate change 1. Training in climate change adoption /c Sessions10202010--6018,000180,000360,000360,000180,000--1,080,000TRAININGS2. Equipment purchase /d Ls11----250,00050,00050,000----100,000GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS3. Technical assistance Environmental expert p-m64222-1618,000108,00072,00036,00036,00036,000-288,000CONSULTANCIES_1Subtotal 338,000482,000396,000216,00036,000-1,468,000D. Nutrition 1. Culinary unit, recipe development and communication materials Province34----72,8008,40011,200----19,600GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS2. Training extension workers on nutrition persons50505050101022020010,00010,00010,00010,0002,0002,00044,000TRAININGS3. Food KAP surveys and home grown school feeding Food KAP surveys Study2222--840,00080,00080,00080,00080,000--320,000CONSULTANCIES_1Training of school meals managers and cooks on food preparation Sessions36666-275001,5003,0003,0003,0003,000-13,500TRAININGSSubtotal 81,50083,00083,00083,0003,000-333,500Subtotal 99,900104,20093,00093,0005,0002,000397,100 
Detailed Table 1.1: Strengthening capacity for improved services to family members… continued 
Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (USD)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total(USD)PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalExpenditure AccountE. Gender 1. National Gender study /e Study1-1--1370,00070,434-72,193--74,913217,539GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTSF. Animal health 1. Solar freezer (1 per municipality) No4441--132,50010,06210,18710,3132,610--33,172GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS2. CAHW technicians (kit + motor bike) /f No22304040--1327,000154,955213,924288,770292,352--950,001GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS3. CAHW (kit + bike) /g No25252525--1001,80045,27945,84146,40946,985--184,515GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS4. Training of CAWH municipal level No3-2---525,00075,465-51,566---127,031TRAININGS5. Training of CAHW community level No11111-58,0008,0508,1498,2518,3538,457-41,259TRAININGSSubtotal 293,811278,101405,309350,3018,457-1,335,979Total Investment Costs 5,535,4686,007,8355,736,2361,473,63489,457116,91318,959,542II. Recurrent Costs A. Provision of working conditions for efficiency of government extension staff 1. Extension staff deployment /h No1491491491491491498944,800715,200715,200715,200715,200715,200715,2004,291,200SALARIES_AND_ALLOWANCES_1Total Recurrent Costs 715,200715,200715,200715,200715,200715,2004,291,200Total 6,250,6686,723,0356,451,4362,188,834804,657832,11323,250,742 _________________________________\a Estimated 1/3 of construction cost for new building.\b Cost estimated from experience with MOSAP1\c training includes agro ecology mapping, climate risk analysis and climate modelling\d seed money for equipment to be used in the event that metro france project doesn't link up to SREP\e focus on targeting and gender in all areas\f 6 per municipality with proirity in the south\g 1 per 10 communities in the south\h Year 1 IFAD 100%, year 2 IFAD 100%, year 3 IFAD 60%, year 4 IFAD 40%, year 5and 6 GoA 100% funding. 
Detailed Table 1.2: Investing in climate resilient public rural infrastructure 
Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) Table 1.2. Component 1: Institutional Capacity Building: Investing in public rural infrastracture Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (USD)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total(USD)PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalExpenditure Account I. Investment Costs A. Feeder road rehabilitation and maintenance 1. Rehabilitation Design and supervision /a Km140140140---4203,200464,315470,100475,958---1,410,373WORKS_1Feeder roads rehabilitation works Km-130130130119-50940,000-5,456,5225,524,5125,593,3515,183,868-21,758,253WORKS_1Construction of stractures/ crossings /b Ls2211--6800,0001,658,2671,678,929849,925860,515--5,047,636WORKS_1Subtotal 2,122,5827,605,5516,850,3956,453,8665,183,868-28,216,2622. Maintenance Development of (including support to) road gangs /c Unit1035353525-1402,00021,13174,87975,81276,75755,510-304,090GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTSRoutine maintenance Km501001502002003001,0004,000207,283419,732637,444860,516871,2381,323,1424,319,356WORKS_1Development of province roads maintenance plans Unit43----750,000201,243152,808----354,051GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTSPeriodic maintenance /d Km----15020035020,000----3,266,9954,410,2297,677,224WORKS_1Subtotal 429,657647,420713,256937,2734,193,7435,733,37112,654,7203. Technical assistance Civil engineer per months1212121212-608,00096,59797,79899,015100,246101,493-495,149CONSULTANCIES_1Subtotal 2,648,8368,350,7707,662,6667,491,3859,479,1045,733,37141,366,132B. Market Infrastracture 1. Dialogue platforms between actors of valve chains Review of existing platforms and mechanisms /e Study1-----130,00030,187-----30,187GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTSSupporting platforms and decision mechanisms Meetings444444241,0004,0254,0754,1264,1774,2294,28224,914GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTSStudy tour in country and abroad Ls--111-350,000--51,56652,20652,853-156,625TRAININGSSubtotal 34,2124,07555,69256,38357,0834,282211,7262. Construction of storage and other market facilities Design and supervision Ls4444--161,0004,1464,1974,2504,303--16,895WORKS_1Construction works Ls5543--17200,0001,036,4121,049,316849,904645,365--3,580,996WORKS_1Collection points storage and other facilities No122-22930,00031,09262,95763,740-65,33466,146289,269WORKS_1Subtotal 1,071,6501,116,470917,893649,66765,33466,1463,887,160Subtotal 1,105,8611,120,545973,585706,050122,41670,4284,098,886C. Sustainable land and water management 1. Development of Small scale water infrastructure a. Studies, Design and Supervision /f Ls2,0004,0008,0008,0004,000-26,000CONSULTANCIES_1b. Construction works /g Ls-50,000100,000200,000200,000100,000650,000WORKS_1c. Support to Water User Associations (WUAs) establishment /h Ls2,0001,0001,0001,0001,000-6,000TRAININGSSubtotal 4,00055,000109,000209,000205,000100,000682,000 
Detailed Table 1.2: Investing in climate resilient public rural infrastructure…Continued 
Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (USD)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total(USD)PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalExpenditure Account2. Development of small scale water irrigation a. Studies, designs and supervision /i Ha-100200200200-7001,100-112,064226,922229,749232,612-801,348CONSULTANCIES_1b. Construction/ rehabilitation works Ha100200200---50010,0001,056,5422,139,4132,166,071---5,362,026WORKS_1c. Construction/ rehabilitation works Ha---200--20010,000---2,193,062--2,193,062WORKS_1d. Support to development of Water User Association (WUAs) No-5101010-352,000-10,18820,62920,88621,146-72,847TRAININGSe. Technical assistance Water resource expert p-m331---711,00033,20533,61911,346---78,170CONSULTANCIES_1Water resource officer p-m121212---3611,000132,822134,475136,150---403,447CONSULTANCIES_1Subtotal 166,027168,094147,495---481,617Subtotal 1,222,5692,429,7592,561,1172,443,696253,758-8,910,8993. Sustainable land management a. Rehabilitation of pastures Ha-6,0006,0006,000--18,000500-3,056,1503,094,1283,132,578--9,282,856MATCHING_GRANT_1b. Water and soil conservation Ha-7507507507507503,750250-191,003193,373195,772198,200200,659979,007MATCHING_GRANT_1c. Technical assistance Sustaianble land management expert p-m22211-818,00036,22436,67437,13018,79519,029-147,852CONSULTANCIES_1Sustainable land management officer p-m121212121212728,00096,59697,79799,012100,242101,488102,749597,885CONSULTANCIES_1Pasture expert p-m311-1-618,00054,33618,33718,565-19,029-110,266CONSULTANCIES_1Subtotal 187,156152,808154,706119,038139,546102,749856,003Subtotal 187,1563,399,9613,442,2073,447,387337,747303,40911,117,866Subtotal 1,413,7245,884,7206,112,3246,100,084796,504403,40920,710,765Total 5,168,42215,356,03514,748,57514,297,51910,398,0256,207,20766,175,782 _________________________________\a Estimated at 8% (it shouldn't be more than 10%) of construction costs\b An average of 20% of total road rehabilitation cost will be allocated to construct crossings\c Based on an average of 1 gang set up every 4 kms along the road\d Every 3 years from rehabilitation\e As a baseline investigation to indentify types and location fo facilities, as well as designs\f Estimated to 8% (should not be more than 10% of construction cost)\g Based on assumption of one WUA per SSI (average 20 Ha per SSI)\h Based on assumption of one WUA per SSI (average 20 Ha per SSI)\i Estimated to 8% (it shouldnot be more than 10%of construction cost) 
Detailed Tables 2.1: Strengthening capacity for family farmers 
Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) Table 2.1. Component 2: Family Farmer Strengthening and Investment: Strenthening capacity for family farming Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (USD)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total(USD)PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalExpenditure Account I. Investment Costs A. Community organisation, planning and mentoring 1. Training of social facilitators No1326262618-10920,000260,000520,000520,000520,000360,000-2,180,000TRAININGS2. Refresher training of social facilitators No--132626269120,000--260,000520,000520,000520,0001,820,000TRAININGS3. Training of FFS facilitators in NRM planning No533---1115,00075,00045,00045,000---165,000TRAININGS4. Preparation of natural resource management plans No10405050--1507,00070,000280,000350,000350,000--1,050,000CONSULTANCIES_15. In kind incentive to social mentoring champions Ls95,00095,00095,00095,00095,00095,000570,000GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS6. Technical assistance Social development expert p-m123----1518,000216,00054,000----270,000CONSULTANCIES_1Community development experts (2) p-m1624242424-1128,000128,000192,000192,000192,000192,000-896,000CONSULTANCIES_1Subtotal 344,000246,000192,000192,000192,000-1,166,000Subtotal 844,0001,186,0001,462,0001,677,0001,167,000615,0006,951,000B. Training of farmers and community members 1. Establishment of FFS (Uige/ Cuanza Norte) No332664664664581-2,905500166,000332,000332,000332,000290,500-1,452,500MATCHING_GRANT_12. Establishment of FFS (Bongo/ Zaire) No-68136136136119595500-34,00068,00068,00068,00059,500297,500MATCHING_GRANT_13. Establishment of FFS (in southern provinces) No-3003003003003001,500500-150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000750,000MATCHING_GRANT_14. Training of master trainers/ a /a No43----740,000160,000120,000----280,000TRAININGS5. Training of FFS facilitators/ b /b No61313139-5420,000120,000260,000260,000260,000180,000-1,080,000TRAININGS6. Refresher training of FFS facilitators/ c /c No--61313134520,000--120,000260,000260,000260,000900,000TRAININGSSubtotal 446,000896,000930,0001,070,000948,500469,5004,760,000C. Support to FSS/FO's and household mentoring 1. Service provider contracts Cluster per year34444221400,0001,200,0001,600,0001,600,0001,600,0001,600,000800,0008,400,000GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS2. Technical assitance FFS Expert (2) p-m1624242424-1128,000128,797195,600198,036200,501202,998-925,932CONSULTANCIES_1Farmer field school specialist p-m121212---3618,000217,345220,051222,790---660,185CONSULTANCIES_1Subtotal 346,141415,651420,826200,501202,998-1,586,118Subtotal 1,546,1412,015,6512,020,8261,800,5011,802,998800,0009,986,118Total 2,836,1414,097,6514,412,8264,547,5013,918,4981,884,50021,697,118 _________________________________\a 20 persons for 3 months divided over 6 months\b 20 persons for 14 days\c 1 per municipality; 2 trainings over 6 years 
Detailed Table 2.2: Investment in Family Farming 
Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) Table 2.2. Component 2: Family Farmer Strengthening and Investment: Investment in family farming Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (USD)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total(USD)PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalExpenditure Account I. Investment Costs A. Agriculture Diverstification and Improved Productivity 1. Agriculture production (Uige/ Cuanza Norte) hh-4006,6006,6006,6005,00025,200100-40,000660,000660,000660,000500,0002,520,000MATCHING_GRANT_12. Agriculture production (Bengo/ Zaire) hh--1,4001,4001,4008205,020100--140,000140,000140,00082,000502,000MATCHING_GRANT_13. Agriculture production packages (resillience areas) hh6001,0002,0002,0002,0005008,10010060,000100,000200,000200,000200,00050,000810,000MATCHING_GRANT_14. Livestock activities (Uige/ Cuanza Norte) hh-8001,1001,4001,4001,4006,100300-240,000330,000420,000420,000420,0001,830,000MATCHING_GRANT_15. Livestock activities (Bengo/ Zaire) hh--4006006006002,200300--120,000180,000180,000180,000660,000MATCHING_GRANT_16. Livestock activities (resillience areas in the south) hh9001,5001,5001,5001,5991,5008,499300270,000450,000450,000450,000479,700450,0002,549,700MATCHING_GRANT_17. Technical assistance Aquaculture expert p-m-2----28,000-16,000----16,000CONSULTANCIES_1Livestock officers (2) p-m2424242424-1204,00096,00096,00096,00096,00096,000-480,000CONSULTANCIES_1Subtotal 96,000112,00096,00096,00096,000-496,0008. Contracts Institute of agronomic research/ a /a per year2222--8100,000200,000200,000200,000200,000--800,000GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTSSubtotal 626,0001,142,0002,196,0002,346,0002,175,7001,682,00010,167,700B. Post-harvest Management and Value Addition (household level) 1. Market studies, designs and supervision No221-229100,000211,307213,938108,301-222,029224,793980,368WORKS_12. Value chain/ market studies Studies1-----1200,000201,241-----201,241GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS3. Post harvest activities (Uige/ Cuanza norte) hh-5009009007006003,600300-152,803278,457281,911221,984192,6331,127,788GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS4. Post harvest activities (Bengo/ Zaire) hh--3004004004001,500300--92,819125,294126,848128,422473,383GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS5. Post harvest activities (Cunene, Namibe, Benguela) hh151502002002002009653004,52845,84161,87962,64763,42464,211302,530GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS6. Technical assistance Post harvest technologist p-m366---158,00024,14948,89849,506---122,554CONSULTANCIES_1Marketing officer p-m-24242424-968,000-195,594198,024200,485202,976-797,079CONSULTANCIES_1Agriculture and marketing officer /b p-m-----668,000-----51,37551,375CONSULTANCIES_1Subtotal 24,149244,492247,530200,485202,97651,375971,007Subtotal 441,225657,074788,986670,337837,262661,4334,056,317C. Rural micro and small scale agri- business promotion 1. Service provider enterprises (Uige/ Cuanza Norte) No400500300200200-1,600500201,241254,671154,698104,412105,707-820,728GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS2. Servicer provider enterprises (Bengo/ Zaire) No--3003003003001,200500--154,698156,617158,560160,527630,403GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS3. Service provider services (Southern provinces) No-200300---500500-101,868154,698---256,567GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS4. Service provider services (Southern provinces) No---4004004001,200500---208,823211,414214,036634,273GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTSSubtotal 201,241356,540464,095469,852475,681374,5642,341,971Total 1,268,4652,155,6133,449,0813,486,1893,488,6432,717,99716,565,988 _________________________________\a contractural supply of cassava cuttings, sorgum, millet, maize varieties of seed as well as pasture and fodder varieties\b costs covered for first 5 years by SAMAP 
Detailed Table 3.1:  SREP Project Implementation Unit 
Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) Table 3.1. Component 3: Programme cordination: SREP project implementation unit Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (USD)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total(USD)PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total I. Investment Costs A. Vehicles and equipment Vehicles No7-----740,000281,743.0-----281,743.0Computer sets Sets27--27--541,50040,752.1--42,293.3--83,045.4Printers/ photocopiers Sets8-----82,50020,124.5-----20,124.5Furniture sets Sets27--27--541,50040,752.1--42,293.3--83,045.4Subtotal 383,371.7--84,586.5--467,958.3B. Monitoring and evaluation, studies, training and workshops 1. Setting the M&E system Finalisation of project implementation manual p-m3-----325,00075,465.2-----75,465.2Preparation of M&E software p-m2-1-1-425,00050,310.1-25,783.0-26,426.7-102,519.9M&E training of project staff and implement Workshop3-----315,00045,279.1-----45,279.1Project supervision mission2222221210,00020,124.120,373.720,626.420,882.321,141.421,403.6124,551.5Subtotal 191,178.520,373.746,409.520,882.347,568.121,403.6347,815.72. Surveys, studies and audit Baseline survey survey1-----1100,000100,620.3-----100,620.3Project RIMS and census study p-m2-----225,00050,310.1-----50,310.1Study on women vulnability, youth and handcaped p-m1-----1100,000100,620.3-----100,620.3Study and food and nutriation security status of HH p-m1-----125,00025,155.1-----25,155.1Backstocking missions missions111111630,00030,186.130,560.530,939.631,323.531,712.132,105.5186,827.2Midterm review Is--1---1100,000--103,132.2---103,132.2Project completion report Ls-----11250,000-----267,545.5267,545.5Audit report preparation p-y111111630,00030,186.130,560.530,939.631,323.531,712.132,105.5186,827.2Subtotal 337,077.861,121.1165,011.462,646.963,424.1331,756.41,021,037.83. Workshops Regional start up workshops (North and southern region) workshop2-----230,00060,372.2-----60,372.2National start up workshops workshop1-----140,00040,248.1-----40,248.1Preparation of AWPB Workshops777777425,00035,217.135,654.036,096.336,544.036,997.437,456.4217,965.1National consolidation Workshops2222221210,00020,124.120,373.720,626.420,882.321,141.421,403.6124,551.5Subtotal 155,961.456,027.656,722.757,426.458,138.858,860.0443,136.8Subtotal 684,217.7137,522.4268,143.6140,955.6169,130.9412,020.11,811,990.3Total Investment Costs 1,067,589.4137,522.4268,143.6225,542.1169,130.9412,020.12,279,948.6 
Detailed Table 3.1:  SREP Project Implementation Unit…continued 
Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (USD)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total(USD)PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalII. Recurrent Costs A. Recurrent Costs- SREP- PIU 1. SREP PIU /a SREP Project Manager p-m121212121212728,00096,000.096,000.096,000.096,000.096,000.096,000.0576,000.0Finance management officer p-m121212121212726,50078,000.078,000.078,000.078,000.078,000.078,000.0468,000.0Finance specialist p-m121212121212725,00060,000.060,000.060,000.060,000.060,000.060,000.0360,000.0Accountant p-m121212121212724,00048,000.048,000.048,000.048,000.048,000.048,000.0288,000.0Procurement officer person-months121212121212727,00084,000.084,000.084,000.084,000.084,000.084,000.0504,000.0M&E Officer (senior) p-m121212121212726,00072,000.072,000.072,000.072,000.072,000.072,000.0432,000.0Administrative assistant p-m121212121212721,50018,000.018,000.018,000.018,000.018,000.018,000.0108,000.0Driver p-m121212121212728009,600.09,600.09,600.09,600.09,600.09,600.057,600.0Subtotal 465,600.0465,600.0465,600.0465,600.0465,600.0465,600.02,793,600.02. Provincial PIUs /b Team leaders (2) /c p-m2424242424241447,000168,000.0168,000.0168,000.0168,000.0168,000.0168,000.01,008,000.0Assistant finance officers (4) p-m4848484848482883,000144,000.0144,000.0144,000.0144,000.0144,000.0144,000.0864,000.0Assistant procurement officers p-m4848484848482883,000144,000.0144,000.0144,000.0144,000.0144,000.0144,000.0864,000.0M&E officers (2) p-m2424242424241444,00096,000.096,000.096,000.096,000.096,000.096,000.0576,000.0M&E assistants (3) p-m3636363636362163,000108,000.0108,000.0108,000.0108,000.0108,000.0108,000.0648,000.0Area coordinators (7) /d p-m8484848484845042,500210,000.0210,000.0210,000.0210,000.0210,000.0210,000.01,260,000.0Adminstrative assistants (7) p-m8484848484845041,00084,000.084,000.084,000.084,000.084,000.084,000.0504,000.0Drivers (7) p-m84848484848450480067,200.067,200.067,200.067,200.067,200.067,200.0403,200.0Annual operation cost P-Y1111116800,000800,000.0800,000.0800,000.0800,000.0800,000.0800,000.04,800,000.0Subtotal 1,821,200.01,821,200.01,821,200.01,821,200.01,821,200.01,821,200.010,927,200.0Total Recurrent Costs 2,286,800.02,286,800.02,286,800.02,286,800.02,286,800.02,286,800.013,720,800.0Total 3,354,389.42,424,322.42,554,943.62,512,342.12,455,930.92,698,820.116,000,748.6 _________________________________\a location in the SCU\b 4 provincial project implementation units will be set up in Buanza, Uige, Benguela and Namibe and 3 sub- unit offices in Bengo, Cuanza norte and Cunene\c One for each of the two regions- north and south.  Designed to a selected provincial capital\d One area Coordinator for each province 
Detailed Table 3.2:  Single Coordination Unit (SCU)- Portfolio Implementation Facility (PIF) 
Angola Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) Table 3.2. Component 3: Programme cordination: Single cordination unit (SCU) Programme implementation facility (PIF) Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (USD)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total(USD)PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total I. Investment Costs A. Establishment of PIF /a Development support service specialist /b p-m42----618,00072,447.336,673.8----109,121.2Project management and M&E specialist p-m12631112418,000217,344.6110,025.355,697.618,797.019,031.019,268.0440,163.5Financial management specialist p-m8542112118,000144,894.791,684.574,259.137,590.919,029.019,265.5386,723.7Procurement specialist p-m6542111918,000108,671.091,684.574,259.137,590.919,029.019,265.5350,500.1Subtotal 543,357.7330,068.1204,215.793,978.957,089.157,799.01,286,508.4B. Training and internship SCU capacity building internships (Luanda based) /c No1818181818-901,50027,167.527,504.527,845.728,191.128,540.8-139,249.6SCU capacity building (overseas based) /d No99999-4550,000452,791.1458,408.0464,094.7469,852.0475,680.8-2,320,826.6Subtotal 479,958.6485,912.5491,940.4498,043.1504,221.6-2,460,076.2Total Investment Costs 1,023,316.3815,980.6696,156.1592,022.0561,310.757,799.03,746,584.6II. Recurrent Costs A. Recurrent costs SCU /e Financial Controller p-m1212121212127211,000132,820.1134,470.6136,141.6137,833.4139,546.3141,280.4822,092.4Senior Procurement Officer p-m1212121212127211,000132,818.7134,466.4136,134.4137,823.2139,533.0141,264.0822,039.8Senior M&E specialist p-m1212121212-6010,000120,744.3122,242.1123,758.6125,293.9126,848.2-618,887.1Senior M&E specialist p-m-----121210,000-----128,421.8128,421.8Administrative assistant p-m121212121212721,50018,111.618,336.318,563.818,794.119,027.219,263.3112,096.3Driver p-m121212121212728009,659.59,779.49,900.710,023.510,147.910,273.759,784.7Total Recurrent Costs 414,154.4419,294.8424,499.1429,768.1435,102.6440,503.32,563,322.3Total 1,437,470.61,235,275.41,120,655.21,021,790.1996,413.3498,302.36,309,906.9 _________________________________\a SCU will be established by SAMAP and cofinanced between SAMAP and SREP\b to be provided under UNDP funding. Will support MINAGRIF to develop ToR\c Each year 18 interns (6-finance, 6-project management, 6-procurement) will be competitively hired to form the Luanda based internship programme\d Each year 9 interns (3 project management, 3 finance, 3 procurement) will be selected to attend one year training abroad\e SCU will be established by SAMAP and cofinanced between SAMAP and SREP 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
This Annex presents the economic and financial  analyses Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) proposed for IFAD funding  with co-
1. 
financing from BADEA, AFD, the Government of Angola and a climate fund co-financier yet to be confirmed.  
A.  
Project beneficiaries and benefits 
2. 
SREP is planned for five categories of beneficiaries and benefits flow streams: 
a)  Benefits and beneficiaries exclusively from extension services using Farmer Field Schools (FFS) but without investment grants. 
b)  Benefits and beneficiaries from extension services through Farmer Field Schools (FFS) plus investment grants. 
c)  From field interviews, potential beneficiary farmers reported that with road construction or rehabilitation a premium price for farm produce is received. 
Without the community access roads sometimes even sales of products from crops such as the popular cassava  in the target  project area  is very 
difficult or happens at about half the price. The target is that at least one-fourth of direct agricultural grant beneficiaries will receive a premium price 
attributable to project investment in community access roads. 
d)  Another cluster of benefits and beneficiaries will flow from the lined-up support of Income Generating Activities (IGAs) and service contracts in the 
higher end value chain activities. 
e)  There are some beneficiaries who will benefit from reduced transport costs/ efficiency gains out of the roads investments. In addition, benefits will flow 
from the training related to nutrition, climate resilience and gender which are difficult to quantify. 
3. 
SREP is targeting to reach 218,000 households in the two sub-projects and others as follows. 
Table 1: Target household beneficiaries 
B. Financial analysis 
4. 
The financial analysis of SREP is based on 6 farm models, derived from 10 crop/ enterprise models. The purpose of these financial models is to assess 
whether the proposed improved technology packages are commercially viable and enable the targeted smallholders to generate sufficient additional income, 
to increase their food security and resilience to shocksand to raise their asset base and creditworthiness 
Crop models 
5. 
Ten (10) crop/ livestock models have been developed for the main crops cultivated by the targeted smallholders.  These crops are as  follows: 
Table 2: Crop/ livestock models yield (Kgs/ha) and gross margins per ha (AoA) 
6. 
 The respective crop patterns and farm sizes based on information collected from the targeted geographical areas are estimated as follows: 
Summary of crop/ enterprise models (AoA)Yields Kgs/ ha Without ProjectYields Kgs/ ha with ProjectGross margins Without Project (WOP)- AoAGross Margins With Project (WP)- AoAIncremental IncomeIRRNPV @ 15.56 %- AOABenefit Cost Ratio1Cassava FFS plus Grants15,000            27,000        224,613     341,428               116,815      23%86,502       2.09      2Cassava FFS only14,000            26,000        205,488     334,157               128,669      34%270,161      2.21      3Beans FFS and Grants450                 810             45,847       118,776               72,928       21%102,474      1.66      4Beans FFS only450                 720             45,847       95,522                 49,675       63%188,412      1.84      5Maize FFS plus grants1,000              2,000          146,021     234,953               88,932       14%57,379       1.74      6Maize FFS only1,000              1,900          134,708     205,054               70,346       23%137,276      1.71      7Sweet potatoes10,000            19,000        130,163     221,790               91,627       46%291,647      1.99      8Irrigated Tomatoes5,000              10,000        139,607     292,182               152,576      51%523,859      1.63      9Goats118,277     141,003               22,726       44%18,071       2.81      10Poultry130,364     170,003               39,638       33%94,846       2.46       
Table 3: Summary of farm sizes and respective crop/ enterprise mix 
FFS ONLYBengo/ Zaire-FFS onlyUnitWOPWPPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Farm size: ha22.5Cropping patterns:   Cassava- 65%ha0.651.625             (192,035)   (157,457)        69,286   146,974      185,821      221,274      221,274      221,274      221,273      221,273      221,273           221,273      221,273      221,273      221,273      221,273      221,273      221,273      221,273      221,273    Beans-30%ha0.30.75               (44,619)      16,551         35,824     36,477        37,130        37,130        37,130        37,130        37,130        37,130        37,130             37,130        37,130        37,130        37,130        37,130        37,130        37,130        37,130        37,130    Maize-5%ha0.050.125               (19,628)       (6,681)          9,278        9,222          9,076          9,020          9,297          9,297          9,297          9,297          9,297               9,297          9,297          9,297          9,297          9,297          9,297          9,297          9,297          9,297 Total Annual incremental income (AOA)             (256,282)   (147,587)      114,389   192,673      232,026      267,424      267,701      267,701      267,700      267,700      267,700           267,700      267,700      267,700      267,700      267,700      267,700      267,700      267,700      267,700 IRR40%NPV (AOA)1,364,777 Financing Analysis (AoA)UnitY1Y2Y3Y4TotalMinimum cash flow needed (can be called investment)AoA256,282        493,167              -            -              Expected Savings to be in Project 637,500        433,115              241,854    LoanAoA70%179,398        345,217              -            -              Own savingsAoA30%76,885          147,950              -               Investment loanAoA179,398        345,217              -            -              Initial Savings  Utilised to Repay  Loan127,500        43,312                Repayment Periodyears2.00Grace Periodyears0.50Interest Rate%14.35%25,743.54     49,538.59          WithoutWith ProjectProject12345678910Long-term LoanPrincipal Repayments Loan 1AoA179,39859,799119,5980Principal Repayments Loan 2AoA345,217115,072230,144Principal Repayments Loan 3AoA-           -              -          Principal Repayments Loan 4AoA-           -          -             Total Loan Interest RepaymentsAoA75,2828,58133,67533,026-          -             Total Principal Loan RepaymentsAoA524,61459,799234,671230,144-          -             Loan OutstandingAoA119,598230,144-              -          -             Cash Flow AnalysisItemsWithoutWith ProjectProject12345678910InflowAny positive income from productionAoA-                      -            114,389192,673232,026267,424267,701267,701267,700267,700LoansAoA179,398345,217-          -             -             -             -             -             -             Beneficiary's ContributionAoA204,385191,262241,854-          -             -             -             -             -             -             Contributory GrantTotal Inflow383,782536,478356,243192,673232,026267,424267,701267,701267,700267,700OutflowProduction & Investment CostsAoA256,282147,587-              -          -             -             -             -             -             -             Repayment of LoansAoA59,799234,671230,144-          -             -             -             -             -             -             Repayment of Interest on LoansAoA8,58133,67533,026-          -             -             -             -             -             -             Total Outflow324,663415,932263,170-          -             -             -             -             -             -             Net Cash flowAoA59,120120,54693,072192,673232,026267,424267,701267,701267,700267,700Incremental cash flow after financing & Savings 59,120120,54693,072192,673232,026267,424267,701267,701267,700267,700Farm areaIncremental Household ( HH) Income (AOA) 
Uige/ Cuanza -FFS onlyUnitWOPWPPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Farm size: ha22.5Cropping patterns:   Cassava- 65%ha1.31.625             (192,035)   (157,457)        69,286   146,974      185,821      221,274      221,274      221,274      221,273      221,273      221,273           221,273      221,273      221,273      221,273      221,273      221,273      221,273      221,273      221,273    Irrigated vegetable- 15%ha0.30.375               (72,246)         1,299         57,216     57,216        57,216        57,216        57,216        57,216        57,216        57,216        57,216             57,216        57,216        57,216        57,216        57,216        57,216        57,216        57,216        57,216    Sweet potatoes- 10%ha0.20.25               (26,653)       (4,829)        17,844     23,429        23,168        22,907        22,907        22,907        22,907        22,907        22,907             22,907        22,907        22,907        22,907        22,907        22,907        22,907        22,907        22,907    Beans- 10%ha0.20.25               (14,873)         5,517         11,941     12,159        12,377        12,377        12,377        12,377        12,377        12,377        12,377             12,377        12,377        12,377        12,377        12,377        12,377        12,377        12,377        12,377 Total Annual incremental income (AOA)             (305,808)   (155,470)      156,287   239,778      278,581      313,774      313,774      313,774      313,772      313,772      313,772           313,772      313,772      313,772      313,772      313,772      313,772      313,772      313,772      313,772  IRR 42% NPV (AOA)      1,640,522 Financing Analysis (AoA)UnitY1Y2Y3Y4TotalMinimum cash flow needed (can be called investment)AoA305,808        155,470              -            -              Expected Savings to be in Project 637,500        450,133              133,412    LoanAoA70%214,065        108,828.77        -            -              Own savingsAoA30%91,742          46,640.90          -               Investment loanAoA214,065        108,829              -            -              Initial Savings used to Repay Loan95,625          270,080              Repayment Periodyears2.00Grace Periodyears0.50Interest Rate%14.35%30,718.39     15,616.93          WithoutWith ProjectProject12345678910Long-term LoanPrincipal Repayments Loan 1AoA214,06571,355142,7100Principal Repayments Loan 2AoA108,82936,27672,553Principal Repayments Loan 3AoA-           -              -          Principal Repayments Loan 4AoA-           -          -             Total Loan Interest RepaymentsAoA46,33510,23925,68510,411-          -             Total Principal Loan RepaymentsAoA322,89471,355178,98772,553-          -             Loan OutstandingAoA142,71072,553-              -          -             Cash Flow AnalysisItemsWithoutWith ProjectProject12345678910InflowAny positive income from productionAoA-                      -            156,287239,778278,581313,774313,774313,774313,772313,772LoansAoA214,065108,829-          -             -             -             -             -             -             Beneficiary's ContributionAoA187,367316,721-              -          -             -             -             -             -             -             Contributory GrantTotal Inflow401,433425,549156,287239,778278,581313,774313,774313,774313,772313,772OutflowProduction & Investment CostsAoA305,808155,470-              -          -             -             -             -             -             -             Repayment of LoansAoA71,355178,98772,553-          -             -             -             -             -             -             Repayment of Interest on LoansAoA10,23925,68510,411-          -             -             -             Total Outflow387,402360,14182,964-          -             -             -             -             -             -             Net Cash flowAoA14,03065,40873,324239,778278,581313,774313,774313,774313,772313,772Incremental cash flow after financing14,03065,40873,324239,778278,581313,774313,774313,774313,772313,772Farm areaIncremental Household ( HH) Income (AOA) 
 Farm type 1 - drier areas (FFS only)UnitWOPWPPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Farm size: ha0.80.8Cropping patterns:Maize0.40.4               (66,224)     (34,891)      (14,068)    16,033        35,753        35,573        36,461        36,461        36,461        36,461        36,461             36,461        36,461        36,461        36,461        36,461        36,461        36,461        36,461        36,461 Cassava0.1               (15,412)       (8,662)         (4,400)       7,422          7,096          7,031          7,031        11,747        11,681        11,681        11,681             11,681        11,681        11,551        11,551        11,551        11,551        11,551        11,551        11,551 BeansGoat keeping0.40.3               (53,393)            213         12,570     28,905        31,821        57,575        75,002        52,765        41,892        45,826        49,760             53,694        57,628        63,326        63,326        63,326        63,326        63,326        63,326        63,326 Free range poultry keepingTotal Annual incremental income (AOA)             (135,029)     (43,340)         (5,897)    52,361        74,670      100,178      118,493      100,973        90,034        93,968        97,902           101,836      105,770      111,337      111,337      111,337      111,337      111,337      111,337      111,337 IRR30%NPV448,058 Financing Analysis (AoA)UnitY1Y2Y3Y4TotalMinimum cash flow needed (can be called investment)AoA135,029        43,340                5,897        -              Savings Expected Savings to be in Project 318,750        230,429              113,734    66,471       LoanAoA70%94,520.02     30,338.23          4,128.08   -              Own savingsAoA30%40,508.58     13,002.10          1,769.18   -               Investment loanAoA94,520          30,338                4,128        -              Initial Savings  Utilised to Repay  Loan47,813          103,693              45,494      Repayment Periodyears2.00Grace Periodyears0.50Interest Rate%14.35%13,563.62     4,353.54             846.26      WithoutWith ProjectProject12345678910Long-term LoanPrincipal Repayments Loan 1AoA94,52031,50763,013-              Principal Repayments Loan 2AoA30,33810,11320,225Principal Repayments Loan 3AoA5,897.26 1,9663,931.51 Principal Repayments Loan 4AoA-           -          -             Total Loan Interest RepaymentsAoA18,7634,52110,4943,184564.17    -             Total Principal Loan RepaymentsAoA130,75631,50773,12622,1913,931.51 -             Loan OutstandingAoA63,01320,2252,162.33    -          -             Cash Flow AnalysisItemsWithoutWith ProjectProject12345 to 10678910InflowAny positive income from productionAoA-                           -                 -                  52,361    74,670       100,178    118,493    100,973    90,034       93,968       LoansAoA94,520                30,338      -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Beneficiary's ContributionAoA88,321                116,695    47,263       -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Contributory GrantTotal Inflow182,841              147,033    47,263       52,361    74,670       100,178    118,493    100,973    90,034       93,968       OutflowProduction & Investment CostsAoA135,029              43,340      5,897          -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Repayment of LoansAoA31,507                73,126      22,191       3,932      -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Repayment of Interest on LoansAoA4,521                  10,494      3,184          564         -                  -                  -                  Total Outflow171,056              126,960    31,273       4,496      -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Net Cash flowAoA11,785                20,073      15,990       47,865    74,670       100,178    118,493    100,973    90,034       93,968       Incremental cash flow after financing11,785                20,073      15,990       47,865    74,670       100,178    118,493    100,973    90,034       93,968       Farm areaIncremental Household ( HH) Income (AOA) 
  Farm type 2 - smallholder in wetter areas (FFS only)UnitWOPWPPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Farm size: ha1.51.5Cropping patterns:Maize0.80.5               (82,779)     (43,614)      (17,584)    20,042        44,691        44,466        45,576        45,576        45,576        45,576        45,576             45,576        45,576        45,576        45,576        45,576        45,576        45,576        45,576        45,576 Cassava0.20.3               (46,235)     (25,986)      (13,200)    22,267        21,288        21,092        21,092        35,240        35,044        35,044        35,044             35,044        35,044        34,653        34,653        34,653        34,653        34,653        34,653        34,653 Beans0.20.3               (31,227)       (7,876)            (762)       3,782        16,891        22,031        22,031        22,031        22,031        22,031        22,031             22,031        22,031        22,031        22,031        22,031        22,031        22,031        22,031        22,031 Goat keeping0.30.2               (35,596)            142           8,380     19,270        21,214        38,383        50,001        35,177        27,928        30,551        33,174             35,796        38,419        42,217        42,217        42,217        42,217        42,217        42,217        42,217 Free range poultry keeping0.2               (12,639)         1,603           1,738        4,583          7,985          7,928          7,928          7,928          7,928          7,928          7,928               7,928          7,928          7,928          7,928          7,928          7,928          7,928          7,928          7,928 Total Annual incremental income (AOA)             (208,475)     (75,731)      (21,428)    69,944      112,069      133,900      146,628      145,951      138,507      141,129      143,752           146,375      148,997      152,404      152,404      152,404      152,404      152,404      152,404      152,404 IRR27%NPV585,720 Financing Analysis (AoA)UnitY1Y2Y3Y4TotalMinimum cash flow needed (can be called investment)AoA208,475        75,731                -              Expected Loan to be in Project318,750        256,207              105,384    -              LoanAoA70%145,932.56   53,011.70          -            -              Own savingsAoA30%62,542.53     22,719.30          -               Investment loanAoA145,933        53,012                -            -              Initial Savings  Utilised to Repay  Loan-                 128,103.74        105,384    Repayment Periodyears2.00Grace Periodyears0.50Interest Rate%14.35%20,941.32     7,607.18             WithoutWith ProjectProject12345678910Long-term LoanPrincipal Repayments Loan 1AoA145,93348,64497,2880Principal Repayments Loan 2AoA53,01217,67135,341Principal Repayments Loan 3AoA-           -              -          Principal Repayments Loan 4AoA-           -          -             Total Loan Interest RepaymentsAoA28,5496,98016,4975,071-          -             Total Principal Loan RepaymentsAoA198,94448,644114,95935,341-          -             Loan OutstandingAoA97,28835,341-              -          -             Cash Flow AnalysisItemsWithoutWith ProjectProject12345 to 10678910InflowAny positive income from productionAoA-                           -                 -                  69,944    112,069    133,900    146,628    145,951    138,507    141,129    LoansAoA145,933              53,012      -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Beneficiary's ContributionAoA62,543                150,823    105,384     -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Contributory GrantTotal Inflow208,475              203,835    105,384     69,944    112,069    133,900    146,628    145,951    138,507    141,129    OutflowProduction & Investment CostsAoA82,779                43,614      -                  -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Repayment of LoansAoA48,644                114,959    35,341       -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Repayment of Interest on LoansAoA6,980                  16,497      5,071          -               -                  -                  -                  Total Outflow138,404              175,069    40,413       -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Net Cash flowAoA70,071                28,765      64,972       69,944    112,069    133,900    146,628    145,951    138,507    141,129    Incremental cash flow after financing70,071                28,765      64,972       69,944    112,069    133,900    146,628    145,951    138,507    141,129    Farm areaIncremental Household ( HH) Income (AOA) 
GrantsBengo/ Zaire-GrantUnitWOPWPPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Farm size: ha22.5Cropping patterns:   Cassava- 65%ha0.651.4             (215,763)   (121,267)      (61,601)  103,914        99,345        98,431        98,431      164,455      163,541      163,541      163,541           163,541      163,541      161,713      161,713      161,713      161,713      161,713      161,713      161,713    Beans -30%ha0.30.66               (68,698)     (17,327)         (1,677)       8,320        37,161        48,467        48,467        48,467        48,467        48,467        48,467             48,467        48,467        48,467        48,467        48,467        48,467        48,467        48,467        48,467    Maize-5%ha0.050.11               (18,211)       (9,595)         (3,869)       4,409          9,832          9,782        10,027        10,027        10,027        10,027        10,027             10,027        10,027        10,027        10,027        10,027        10,027        10,027        10,027        10,027    Livestock0.3               (26,697)            106           6,285     14,452        15,911        28,787        37,501        26,383        20,946        22,913        22,913             22,913        22,913        22,913        22,913        22,913        22,913        22,913        22,913        22,913 Total Annual incremental income (AOA)             (329,369)   (148,083)      (60,862)  131,095      162,248      185,469      194,426      249,331      242,981      244,948      244,948           244,948      244,948      243,120      243,120      243,120      243,120      243,120      243,120      243,120 IRR25%NPV897,648 Financing Analysis (AoA)UnitY1Y2Y3Y4TotalMinimum cash flow needed (can be called investment)AoA329,369        148,083              60,862      -              Expected Savings need to be in Project637,500        538,689              224,920    LoanAoA70%230,559        103,658              42,603      -              Own savingsAoA30%98,810.83     44,425                -               Investment loanAoA230,559        103,658              42,603      -              Initial Savings  Utilised to Repay  Loan-                 269,345              224,920    Repayment Periodyears2.00Grace Periodyears0.50Interest Rate%14.35%33,085.16     14,874.94          WithoutWith ProjectProject12345678910Long-term LoanPrincipal Repayments Loan 1AoA230,55976,853153,7060Principal Repayments Loan 2AoA103,65834,55369,105Principal Repayments Loan 3AoA60,86220,287.17  #######Principal Repayments Loan 4AoA-           -          -             Total Loan Interest RepaymentsAoA54,07411,02827,01516,030-          -             Total Principal Loan RepaymentsAoA395,07876,853188,25889,393#######-             Loan OutstandingAoA153,70669,105-              -          -             Cash Flow AnalysisItemsWithoutWith ProjectProject12345 to 10678910InflowAny positive income from productionAoA-                           -                 -                  131,095  162,248    185,469    194,426    249,331    242,981    244,948    LoansAoA230,559              103,658    -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Beneficiary's ContributionAoA98,811                313,769    267,523     -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Contributory GrantTotal Inflow329,369              417,428    267,523     131,095  162,248    185,469    194,426    249,331    242,981    244,948    OutflowProduction & Investment CostsAoA68,698                17,327      -                  -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Repayment of LoansAoA76,853                188,258    89,393       40,574    -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Repayment of Interest on LoansAoA11,028                27,015      16,030       -               -                  -                  -                  Total Outflow156,580              232,601    105,423     40,574    -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Net Cash flowAoA172,790              184,827    162,100     90,521    162,248    185,469    194,426    249,331    242,981    244,948    Incremental cash flow after financing172,790              184,827    162,100     90,521    162,248    185,469    194,426    249,331    242,981    244,948    Incremental Household ( HH) Income (AOA)Farm area 
Uige/ Cuanza  GrantUnitWOPWPPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Farm size: ha22.5Cropping patterns:   Cassava- 65%ha1.31.43             (220,386)   (123,866)      (62,921)  106,141      101,474      100,541      100,541      167,979      167,045      167,045      167,045           167,045      167,045      165,179      165,179      165,179      165,179      165,179      165,179      165,179    Irrigated vegetable- 15%ha0.30.33               (63,576)         1,143         50,350     50,350        50,350        50,350        50,350        50,350        50,350        50,350        50,350             50,350        50,350        50,350        50,350        50,350        50,350        50,350        50,350        50,350    Sweet potatoes- 10%ha0.20.22               (23,455)       (4,250)        15,703     20,617        20,388        20,158        20,158        20,158        20,158        20,158        20,158             20,158        20,158        20,158        20,158        20,158        20,158        20,158        20,158        20,158    Beans- 10%ha0.70.22               (22,899)       (5,776)            (559)       2,773        12,387        16,156        16,156        16,156        16,156        16,156        16,156             16,156        16,156        16,156        16,156        16,156        16,156        16,156        16,156        16,156    Livestock0.3               (26,697)            106           6,285     14,452        15,911        28,787        37,501        26,383        20,946        22,913        22,913             22,913        22,913        22,913        22,913        22,913        22,913        22,913        22,913        22,913 Total Annual incremental income (AOA)             (357,014)   (132,641)          8,858   194,333      200,509      215,992      224,705      281,025      274,655      276,622      276,622           276,622      276,622      274,755      274,755      274,755      274,755      274,755      274,755      274,755 IRR30%NPV3,889,888 Financing Analysis (AoA)UnitY1Y2Y3Y4TotalMinimum cash flow needed (can be called investment)AoA357,014        132,641              -              Expected Savings need to be in Project318,750        211,646              34,139      LoanAoA70%249,909.77   92,849                -            -              Own savingsAoA30%107,104.19   39,792                -               Investment loanAoA249,910        92,849                -            -              Initial Savings  Utilised to Repay  Loan-                 84,658                34,139      Repayment Periodyears2.00Grace Periodyears0.50Interest Rate%14.35%35,862          13,324                WithoutWith ProjectProject12345678910Long-term LoanPrincipal Repayments Loan 1AoA249,91083,303166,6070Principal Repayments Loan 2AoA92,84930,95061,899Principal Repayments Loan 3AoA-           -              -          Principal Repayments Loan 4AoA-           -          -             Total Loan Interest RepaymentsAoA49,18611,95428,3498,883-          -             Total Principal Loan RepaymentsAoA342,75983,303197,55661,899-          -             Loan OutstandingAoA166,60761,899-              -          -             Cash Flow AnalysisItemsWithoutWith ProjectProject12345 to 10678910InflowAny positive income from productionAoA-                           -                 8,858          194,333  200,509    215,992    224,705    281,025    274,655    276,622    LoansAoA249,910              92,849      -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Beneficiary's ContributionAoA107,104              124,451    34,139       -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Contributory GrantTotal Inflow357,014              217,300    42,996       194,333  200,509    215,992    224,705    281,025    274,655    276,622    OutflowProduction & Investment CostsAoA-                 -                  -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Repayment of LoansAoA83,303                166,607    -                  -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Repayment of Interest on LoansAoA11,954                30,950      -                  -               -                  -                  -                  Total Outflow95,257                197,556    -                  -               -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Net Cash flowAoA261,757              19,744      42,996       194,333  200,509    215,992    224,705    281,025    274,655    276,622    Incremental cash flow after financing261,757              19,744      42,996       194,333  200,509    215,992    224,705    281,025    274,655    276,622    Incremental Household ( HH) Income (AOA)Farm area 
OFF-FARMTotal benefits (AOA'Millions)NorteY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20PY1(6)            (2.63)                       0.98              3.41                      3.93                      4.42                               4.50                            5.00                        4.95            4.96       4.96       4.96       4.96       4.95      4.95      4.95      4.95      4.95      4.95      4.95      PY2(115)                        (54)                20                          70                         81                                  91                                93                           103             102        102        102        102        102       102       102       102       102       102       102       PY3(225)              (105)                      39                         136                                157                             177                         180             200        198        199        199        199       199       198       198       198       198       198       PY4(218)                      (102)                      38                                  133                             153                         172             175        195        192        193        193       193       193       192       192       192       192       PY5(115)                      (54)                                 20                                70                           81               91          93          103        102        102       102       102       102       102       102       102       PY6(187)                               (88)                              33                           114             131        147        150        167        165       165       165       165       165       165       165       Total SREP-IGAs and service contracts benefits (AOA) Million(6)            (118)                        (278)              (300)                      (104)                      19                                  318                             530                         654             704        739        751        767        765       766       765       764       764       763       763       IRR33%NPV2,392Financing Analysis (AoA)UnitY1Y2Y3Y4Year 5Year 6Minimum cash flow needed (can be called investment)AoA5,618            118,111               277,741               299,926                        104,250                     -                               Expected Savings to be in Project 318,750       301,127               265,694               182,372                        92,394                        33,401                   LoanAoA70%3,932.69      82,677.56            194,418.62         209,948.00                  72,975.30                  Own savingsAoA30%1,685            35,433.24            83,322.27            89,977.71                     31,275                         Investment loanAoA3,933            82,678                  194,419               209,948                        72,975                        Initial Savings  Utilised to Repay  Loan15,938          -                             -                             -                                      27,718                        33,401                   Repayment Periodyears2.00Grace Periodyears0.50Interest Rate%14.35%564               11,864                  27,899                 30,127.54                     10,472                        -                          WithoutWith ProjectProject12345678910Long-term LoanPrincipal Repayments Loan 1AoA3,9331,311                    2,622                    Principal Repayments Loan 2AoA82,67827,559                 55,118                          Principal Repayments Loan 3AoA194,41964,806                          129,612                     Principal Repayments Loan 4AoA209,94869,983                        139,965                 Principa Repayment Loan 5AoA72,97524,325                   48,650       Total Loan Interest RepaymentsAoA80,927188                       4,331                    17,209                          28,642                        23,576                   6,981         -             -         -         -         Total Principal Loan RepaymentsAoA563,9521,311                    30,181                 119,925                        199,595                     164,290                 48,650       -             -             -             -             Loan OutstandingAoA2,621.79              55,118                 129,612                        139,965                     48,650                   -             Cash Flow AnalysisItemsWithoutWith ProjectProject12345678910InflowAny positive income from productionAoA-                        -                        18,623530,181654,333703,767LoansAoA1,31130,181119,925199,595.08                164,290.43           55,631.50 -         -         -         -         Beneficiary's ContributionAoA17,62335,43383,32289,977.71                  58,993.28              33,400.56 -         -         -         0Contributory GrantTotal Inflow18,93465,614203,247289,573223,28489,03218,623530,181654,333703,767OutflowProduction & Investment CostsAoA-                        -                                 -                              -                          -              -         -         -         -         Repayment of LoansAoA1,31130,181119,925199,595.08                164,290.43           48,650.20 -         -         -         -         Repayment of Interest on LoansAoA1884,33117,20928,641.89                  23,575.68              6,981.30    -         Total Outflow1,49934,512137,134228,236.98                187,866.11           55,631.50 -         -         -         -         Net Cash flowAoA17,43531,10266,11361,33635,41833,40118,623530,181654,333703,767Incremental cash flow after financing & Savings 17,43531,10266,11361,33635,41833,40118,623530,181654,333703,767 
In the “without project (WOP)” situation  targeted beneficiaries follow a traditional cropping pattern as indicated in table 3 above with the following 
7. 
characteristics. 
a)  use of locally or own produced seeds, seedlings and planting material;  
b)  no or limited use of fertiliser and pesticide,  
c)  some use of manure, however at inappropriate rates to maintain soil fertility as these smallholders generally have insufficient livestock.  
8. 
In the “with project (WP)” situation: The smallholder will increase production by improving yields, cultivated area or both as with the estimates as 
indicated in table 3. Table 3 above shows a distinction between farmers who will benefit from FFS support and those who will  receive both FFS support and 
investment grants. The project will be providing extension services through FFS, matching grants including irrigation and investments in infrastructure such as 
roads which will result in efficiency gains. 
Financial analysis farm models 
As  indicated  in  table  3  above  all  crop/  livestock  models  have  high  IRRs,  NPVs  and  benefit  cost  ratios.  It  is,  therefore,  not  surprising  that  all  the 
9. 
corresponding farm models also have high financial return estimates with FIRRs ranging from 25 to 40%.  In the northern area, farm size range is from 2 to 2.5 
ha. In southern area, the farm size range is from 0.8 for lesser rain fall areas to 1.5 for higher rainfall areas.  
Table 4: Financial analysis of farm models 
WOPWP IRRNPVBengo/Zaire-FFS only22.540%1,364,777        UIGE/Cuanza Norte -FFS only22.542%1,640,522        Bengo/Zaire-FSS+Grant22.525%900,493           UIGE/Cuanza Norte -FFS +Grant22.530%1,168,715        Sul: Farm Type 1 - drier areas0.80.830%448,058           Sul: Farm Type 2 - wetter areas1.51.527%585,720           Off Farm 33%2,391,594        Farm Sizes (ha)Financial Results AoA 
Table 5: Financial performance of the farm models  
 Bengo/ Zaire FFS only  Uige/ Cuanza Norte FFS only  Bengo/ Zaire FFS +grants  Uige/ Cuanza Norte FFS + grants   Sul: Farm type 1 - drier areas  Sule:  Farm type 2 - smallholder in wetter areas  Off-farm PY1(256,282)(305,808)(329,369)(357,014)(135,029)(208,475)(5,618)PY2(147,587)(155,470)(148,083)(132,641)(43,340)(75,731)(118,111)PY3114,389156,287(60,862)8,858(5,897)(21,428)(277,741)PY4192,673239,778131,095194,33352,36169,944(299,926)PY5232,026278,581162,248200,50974,670112,069(104,250)PY6267,424313,774185,469215,992100,178133,90018,623PY7267,701313,774194,426224,705118,493146,628317,893PY8267,701313,774249,331281,025100,973145,951530,181PY9267,700313,772242,981274,65590,034138,507654,333PY10267,700313,772244,948276,62293,968141,129703,767PY11267,700313,772244,948276,62297,902143,752739,360PY12267,700313,772244,948276,622101,836146,375750,822PY13267,700313,772244,948276,622105,770148,997767,017PY14267,700313,772244,948276,622111,337152,404765,456PY15267,700313,772244,948276,622111,337152,404765,704PY16267,700313,772244,948276,622111,337152,404765,040PY17267,700313,772244,948276,622111,337152,404764,393PY18267,700313,772244,948276,622111,337152,404764,051PY19267,700313,772244,948276,622111,337152,404763,497PY20267,700313,772244,948276,622111,337152,404763,49740%42%25%30%30%27%33%5,835           7,013             3,850                4,996            1,916                   2,504                                   10,224        1,364,777   1,640,522     900,493           1,168,715    448,058              585,720                               2,391,594   IRR  NPV (USD'000)  FIRR'000 (@ 9.35% ) Farm models' net incremental benefits(in 'AOA Million) 
D. Project costs and indicators of the logical framework 
10.  Table 6 below summarises the project costs and indicators of the logical framework. The average cost per beneficiary of SREP, is approximately US$ 
683 per household and USD 137 per person. 
Table 6: Project costs and number of benefitting households 
E. Economic analysis 
11.  The economic cost-benefit analysis aims to assess the economic viability of the proposed project from the overall national economic standpoint. The 
analysis was conducted over a 20-year period in constant 2018 prices, aggregating additional benefits as derived from the various models developed in the 
financial analysis. Financial prices were converted to economic prices except where Conversion Factor (CF=1) was justified. Economic costs were generated 
by COSTAB software. Incremental costs after the Project implementation period, in particular for maintenance of irrigation schemes and other infrastructure, 
as well as costs to follow up farmers were taken into account. An adoption rate of improved technologies of 70% has been used for FFS beneficiaries. 
Table 7: Conversion Factors: Financial prices to Economic prices 
Item 
Financial 
price 
Conversion 
Factor 
Economic 
Price 
Labour 
Skilled Labour  
Maize (improved seeds) 
Beans 
405 
21121 
300 
680 
0.80 
0.9 
0.9 
0.8 
324 
1690 
270 
544 
1 https://tradingeconomics.com/angola/minimum-wages 
PROGRAM149Base costs142           1,090,000 people218,000 Households                       137  USD x person                      683 USD x HHCost per beneficiaryBeneficiariesTOTAL PROGRAMME COSTS (in million USD) 
12.  Weighted Average Cost of Capital (Discount rate). A discount rate of 9.35% has been used based on the following source and derivation2 
Aggregation and sequencing of implementation 
13.  The following table presents the phasing of implementation with the number of households to be reached by year. 
Table 8: Aggregation of beneficiaries (# of households)
Results of the economic analysis 
The Project would yield an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 26% and an Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) of US$91.66.8million (at 21% 
14. 
discount rate). The Project is, therefore, highly profitable from an economic standpoint.  
2 Reference: http://cbonds.com/emissions/issue/428653 
BENEFICIARIES AND PHASINGPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalFFS onlyhh12,825                 30,391      30,600          31,500          30,000               12,500            147,816           Grantshh15003700130001350013599982055,119             Off-farm  No. of post harvest enterpriseshh1565014001500130012006,065                 No. of service provider enterpriseshh0120022002000180018009,000                 Sub-total15                       1,850       3,600           3,500            3,100                 3,000             15,065            TOTAL14,340                 35,941      47,200          48,500          46,699               25,320            218,000           D)  
15.  The graphs below depicts and compares over time the Project’s net benefits and incremental costs alongside the Project cash flow  
 COSTSCash flowPY1(2,904)(4,921)(6)(7,831)3,8663,866(11,697)PY2(8,234)(14,347)(118)(22,699)5,5295,529(28,228)PY3(9,355)(21,616)(278)(31,249)5,5695,569(36,818)PY4(6,733)(21,871)(300)(28,904)4,6804,680(33,585)PY5(1,804)(15,612)(104)(17,521)4,3364,336(21,856)PY68,077572198,6672,3632,3636,304PY719,11821,90431841,340917                   91740,423PY825,73836,54653062,814917                   91761,898PY928,75245,45965474,865917                   91773,949PY1030,07049,68970480,463917                   91779,546PY1130,46153,05973984,259917                   91783,342PY1230,39855,66475186,813917                   91785,897PY1330,37656,87176788,014917                   91787,097PY1430,54856,77576788,090917                   91787,174PY1530,78856,75876788,313917                   91787,397PY1630,97856,67176788,416917                   91787,499PY1731,11856,58176788,467917                   91787,550PY1831,20656,49576788,468917                   91787,552PY1931,23456,44876788,450917                   91787,533PY2031,23447,14276779,143917                   91778,226NPV@ 20.94 % ('AOA million)29,217NPV@ 20.94 % ('000 USD)91,660EIRR26%NET INCREMENTAL BENEFITSTotal Net Inc. Benefits  Grants  FFS only  Project year  Economic O&M Costs  *      ('Million AOA) Total Incremental Costs Off-farm Economic Costs      ('Million AOA) 
Figure 9: Economic Cash Flow of the Project 
The EIRR and NPV were subjected to sensitivity analysis in order to measure variations due to unforeseen factors. Variations include: 10, 20 and 50% 
16. 
cost over-run; 10 and 20% increase in benefits; 10 to 50% benefit decrease; and 1 to 2 years of delay in the implementation. The analysis indicates a relatively 
strong resilience to limited increases of costs and reductions of benefits as well as benefit delays. A summary of the sensitivity analysis is presented in Table 
25 below. 
Table 9: Results of Sensitivity Analysis 
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS (SA) 
base scenario 
costs +10% 
costs +20% 
costs +50% 
benefits +10% 
benefits  +20% 
benefits  -10% 
benefits  -20% 
benefits  -50% 
benefits delayed 1 yr 
benefits  delayed 2 yrs 
EIRR 
26.07% 
25.66% 
25.21% 
23.30% 
26.39% 
26.67% 
25.69% 
25.24% 
23.03% 
25.55% 
23.62% 
NPV 
91,660 
84,991 
77,244 
41,581 
106,153 
120,833 
77,292 
63,009 
6,509 
82,996 
48,843 
Economy does not fully recover or stabilize 
Economy does not fully recover or stabilize 
Economy does not fully recover or stabilize 
Economy grows faster than expected 
Economy grows faster than expected 
Implementation capacity does not improve as fast as expected 
Implementation capacity does not improve as fast as expected 
Implementation capacity does not improve as fast as expected 
Delayed in getting positive benefits due to slow Economy 
Delays in getting positive  benefits  due to slow Economy 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
IFAD policies and SECAP Review Note 
Compliance with IFAD policies 
OVERVIEW  
1. 
This Annex  elaborates  on  IFAD’s  relevant  policies  and  strategy  documents  and  procedures 
applicable to the SREP, which include environment and natural resources, climate change, targeting, 
gender,  land,  knowledge  management  and  the  Social  Environment  and  Climate  Assessment 
Procedures (SECAP). The compliance with the policies and strategies is summarised in the table below 
while the SECAP is addressed in the Review Note that is included as a separate document.  
RELEVANT IFAD POLICIES AND STRATEGIES 
2. 
The  SREP  aims  to  increase  production  and  resilience  of  farm  households  and  therefore 
contribute  to  improved  food  and  nutrition  security  in  rural  households.  These  aims  will  be  achieved 
through strengthening of institutional and smallholder capacities to produce for the markets and respond 
to climate change. The response to climate change focuses on building the resilience of smallholders 
using  ecosystems  based  adaptation  measures  particularly  under  SREP  Sul  activities  that  include 
sustainable land and water management. The Project activities will also address land degradation by 
promoting  soil  and  water  conservation  measures.  These  objectives  also  follow  the  principles  of  the 
related IFAD policies and strategy priorities as summarised below: 
Policy 
Environment and 
Natural 
Resources 
Management 
Targeting and 
Gender 
Project Response 
SREP applies several of the core principles of IFAD's policy on Environment and NRM. 
The agricultural production investments in the northern provinces will scale-up the 
multiple-benefit approaches for sustainable agricultural that have already been 
introduced under MOSAP I and are also planned under the SAMAP. In the south SREP 
will promote ‘Climate-smart’ approaches such as sustainable land and water 
management practices to build the resilience of the target smallholder farmers. SREP 
pays greater attention to risk and resilience through the criteria for selecting target 
beneficiaries in order to manage environment- and natural-resource-related shocks and 
thus maintain or enhance their agricultural productivity. The capacity building targeted at 
smallholders through the FFS and strengthening of Farmer Based Organisations is 
expected to result in improved governance of natural assets for poor rural people by 
community-led empowerment. SREP also focuses on livelihood diversification to reduce 
vulnerability and build resilience for sustainable natural resource management. SREP will 
also increase access by poor rural communities to environment and climate finance by 
targeting resources from the Green Climate Fund or Adaptation Fund. The Environment 
and Natural Resources risk management approach for the SREP is further elaborated in 
the SECAP Review Note. 
SREP adheres to IFAD's targeting policy by using the criteria of food insecurity in the 
approach adopted, which also extends to poverty and vulnerability to climate change. 
SREP's targeting strategy includes geographic and direct targeting as well as enabling, 
empowerment and capacity building measures.  
SREP also adheres to the three strategic objectives of IFAD's Gender Policy. Through 
the investments in agricultural production and livelihoods diversification it promotes 
economic empowerment to enable rural women and men to participate in and benefit 
from profitable economic activities. The institutional strengthening and capacity building 
of Farmer Based Organisations and the FFS approach is also expected to enable women 
and men to have equal voice and influence in rural institutions and organizations. 
Specific labour saving technologies that SREP will promote and the livelihoods 
diversification targeted at women and youth will also contribute to achieving a more 
equitable balance in workloads and in the sharing of economic and social benefits 
between women and men. SREP's targeting and gender approach is elaborated in the 
Annex: Poverty, targeting and gender. 
Policy 
Climate Change 
Strategy 
Land 
Knowledge 
Management 
Sexual 
Harassment/ 
Sexual 
Exploitation and 
Abuse 
Project Response 
SREP's development objective includes building the resilience to climate change of 
smallholder farmers and also strengthening institutions to respond to climate change. It is 
therefore fully aligned with purpose 1of IFAD's climate change strategy. The inclusion of 
climate finance ensures that SREP is also aligned with purpose 2 of the Strategy to 
support smallholders to take advantage of available funding. Though the focus is on 
climate change adaptation the SREP investments in improved agricultural practices will 
also provide mitigation co-benefits. The climate change risks and the management 
proposed is further elaborated in the SECAP Review Note. 
SREP will not directly address land tenure in its activities. However it is aligned to IFAD's 
land policy and recognize the plurality of the forms of access to and control over, land in 
Angola. Most of the SREP activities will be implemented through Provincial Directorates 
and Municipal authorities where access to the land resources is determined. As such the 
access to land for the smallholders that are target beneficiaries is not expected to be an 
issue. SREP will also adhere to the ‘do no harm’ principle with regards to the land tenure 
interests of the rural poor, especially those of women, tribal peoples and other vulnerable 
groups. The Provincial Governance Committees that include traditional leaders and other 
key stakeholders are part of the grievance mechanisms incorporated in SREP to avoid 
elite capture or forced displacement of people, and to address conflicting claims. The 
capacity building for the Farmer Groups and Organisation will contribute to the 
empowerment of community representatives, which is a pre-requisite for their sustainable 
access to land resources. In addition any infrastructure development will apply the 
principle of free prior and informed consent. 
SREP will contribute to the learning on thematic areas such as resilience building for 
smallholder farmers. Though this may be context specific the Project provides 
opportunities for capturing the learning on these themes for areas with similar agro-
ecological zones and also for application in future interventions. The knowledge 
management approach and the monitoring and evaluation of the SREP are elaborated in 
the Annex: Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management. 
IFAD prioritises no tolerance for Sexual Harassment/Sexual Exploitation and Abuse in its 
supported operations. IFAD’s SEA policy requires that appropriate precautionary and 
remedial measures to identify/receive/remedy/report (proportionate to level of risk) any 
occurrences of potential SH/SEA risks/complaints are in place. For more information, 
visit the IFAD webpage: https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-
detail/asset/40738506. 
SECAP REVIEW NOTE 
Procedures Review Note 
Major landscape characteristics and Issues - The Smallholder Resilience Enhancement 
3. 
Project (SREP) will intervene in seven provinces; three in the south (Cunene, Namibe and Benguela, 
which is central) and four in the north of Angola (Bengo, Kwanza Norte, Uige and Zaire). The farming 
system zones that will be covered by SREP from south to north are: agro-pastoral, cereals and cassava 
based, maize based, and a mixed cassava and plantation crop system that includes coffee. 
4. 
The southern province of Cunene is generally lowland with mixed crop livestock farming while 
Namibe is characterised by desert and savannah forest vegetation. In Benguela, the main dominant 
crops are maize and sorghum. The northern provinces of Zaire, Uige, Bengo and Kwanza Nortelie at a 
lower altitude, forming a line of dry forest of tangled bush to high humid tropical forest.  
5. 
The southern provinces were severely affected by recurrent droughts during the recent El-Nino 
event.  Although the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is a natural cycle, climate change and the 
mismanagement of natural resources, is progressively causing the impacts of the oscillation to intensify 
and  to  increase  in  frequency.  Each  iteration  exacerbates  Southern  Africa's  vulnerability  to  future 
disasters and depletes both the environment and the social systems that depend on it (Response Plan 
for the El Niño-Induced Drought in Southern Africa, 2016). Like in the southern provinces, the northern 
provinces are facing an increase of mean temperatures and changes in rain patterns, including early 
dry season and more frequent heavy rains. 
6. 
The  affected  agro-ecological  zones  in  southern  Angola  are  mainly  arid,  semi-arid  and  sub-
humid while the northern intervention areas are included in the sub-humid and humid agro-ecological 
zones (see Figure 10).  
Figure 10 Agro-ecological zones of Angola, Source: FAO 2005 
7. 
Angola’s climate is tropical, hot and humid, with a longer hot and wet season (September to 
April) and a shorter cool and dry season (May to August). Short dry spells, usually lasting about two 
weeks, are common during the hot and wet season. The mean temperature in Angola is between 25ºC 
and 33ºC in the rainy season and between 18ºC and 22ºC during the dry season. The size, topographic, 
geologic, geomorphological, hydrologic, and ecological diversity influences the main climatic features 
of Angola (Figs 11&12). 
Figure 11– Mean Annual Temperature Isoclines (Source: MADRP, 2010) 
Figure 12– Mean Annual Rainfall Isoclines (Source: MADRP, 2010) 
8. 
Mean  annual  temperature  and  precipitation  variability  in  the  different  regions  of  the  country 
illustrate these conditions leading to the occurrence of 5 climate types according with Koppen-Geiger 
System (Fig. 13). 
Figure 14–Koppen-Geiger climate type map of Angola (Adapted from Peel et al., 2007) 
9. 
Angola  faces  a  climate  risk  profile  characterized  by  intermittent  shortage  and/or  excess  of 
water,  with  droughts  and  floods  affecting  the  whole  country  and  in  particular  the  most  vulnerable 
communities. The Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), the Botswana Upper High and the El Niño 
phenomenon (UNEP, 2006) are reported as the main factors determining rainfall patterns  in Angola 
with several extreme events reported during the last 35 years including 8 droughts.  Climate projections 
for Angola vary based on differences between models and assumptions about future greenhouse gas 
emissions.  Without  significant  emission  reductions  mandated  by  regulatory  or  policy  changes,  the 
climate changing scenarios for Angola are (McSweeney et al., 2008): 
  Median temperature  projections for the  2090s fall  between 2.3°C  and 4.5°C  higher than the 
1970-1999 average; 
  Most  climate  models  project  average  temperature  increase  of  more  than  1°C  by  the  2030s 
compared to the 1970-1999 mean; the  projected rate of warming  is faster in the continental 
interior and eastern regions of Angola, and slower in the western, more coastal areas; 
  Extremely hot days will become two to four times more frequent by the 2060s. 
10. 
Like for temperature, changes in precipitation will not occur uniformly throughout the country 
since  topography,  geomorphology  and  land  cover  have  a  direct  influence.  Also,  the  frequency  and 
intensity of high-precipitation events is likely to increase with increasing temperature, elevating the risk 
of flooding and other damaging events such as landslides. Associated with an increased risk of extreme 
precipitation  is  an  increase  in  the  risk  of  land  drying  and  drought;  since  warming  accelerates  land 
surface drying while also increasing the water holding capacity of the atmosphere, the result is more 
intense and heavy episodic rainfall events interspersed with earlier and longer relatively dry periods. 
The southern project target zones are located in the lower rainfall region where the main livelihoods are 
centred on agricultural systems including livestock, maize, sorghum, millet and cassava. The northern 
zones  are  located  in  the  sub  humid  region  with  some  diversity  of  agriculture  production,  including, 
among others, cassava, beans, peanuts, banana, maize, coffee, fruits and vegetables (see Figure 15).  
Figure 15. Livelihood zones of Angola, Source: FEWSNET 
11. 
Recurrent cycles of droughts and floods have affected the southern provinces of Angola over 
the last decade while in the northern provinces extreme heavy rain is damaging crops and disturbing 
life conditions, including house and  infrastructure damages. In  the south, consecutive drought  years 
have stretched  household  coping mechanisms to their limits. Most rural communities have  lost their 
seeds and food stocks and as a result their vulnerability, to climate shocks has increased. The most 
recent El Niño drought (2015-2016) led to harvest failures with anticipated crop losses of up to 40% in 
parts of the south. In 2017, approximately 1.25 million people were food insecure most of these were 
located in southern provinces of Benguela, Cuando Cubango, Cunene, Huila, Kwanza Sul, and Namibe. 
Malnutrition has been exacerbated by the poor harvest with increasing number of children below the 
age of five in need of treatment for severe and acute malnutrition. An increasing number of infants and 
children under age five are exposed to preventable diseases and common childhood illnesses such as 
malaria, diarrhoea, cholera and  pneumonia. The drought and resultant  waterborne diseases caused 
the death of an estimated 500,000 livestock. In Cunene province an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease 
restricted  cattle  sales  for  over  a  year  (Response  Plan  for  the  El  Niño-Induced  Drought  in  Southern 
Africa, 2016). In the northern province loss of crops is reported due to early dry season and disturbance 
of infrastructures and soil erosion due to increased occurrence of intense rainfall events. During the last 
decade there  was  a significant  increase of the  number of people affected by  extreme events  with  a 
consequent  increase  on  economic  loss.  Fig.  16  (CNPC,  2016)  shows  the  recurrent  effects  in  six 
provinces. 
Figure 16: population affected by draught between 2012-2016 
During the first 3 months of 2016, 1,2 million people were affected by drought, in particular in 
12. 
three provinces: 1755,930 in Cunene, 205,507 in Huila and 177,627 in Namibe. Total damages for all 
sectors accounted for 297,2 million USD with 452,4 million USD in losses. Agriculture, livestock and 
Fisheries were the most affected sectors accounting 244,7 million USD (82% of all damage). 
The contingency planning (preparedness and response) led by the inter-sectorial National Civil 
13. 
Protection Commission with technical support from the UN have identified the key drivers of vulnerability 
that include inequality, poor nutrition diversification, high illiteracy rates in rural areas, poor quality of 
basic  services,  salinization  of  ground  water  and  limited  fresh  water  resources,  desertification  and 
deforestation, monoculture, agro-pastoralist production systems with heavy environmental effects on 
the  natural  resources,  low  purchasing  power,  illegal  occupation  of  land  in  the  risk  zones,  weak 
implementation of land occupation policies, weak implementation of disaster prevention, contingency 
and preparedness policies/directives, weak research, data collection and analysis and predictions of 
disasters and risks and lack of environmental management culture and capacity within the agriculture 
sector. 
14. 
The  current  La  Niña  event  is  compounding  the  adverse  impacts  of  the  El  Niño;  areas  most 
effected by rainfall deficits during the El Niño are faced with a large surplus in La Niña years. Average 
rainfall enhancement from February to April representing the peak deviation from the neutral average, 
highlight that the south of Angola is at greatest risk from La Niña related climate shock (see Figure 15). 
As with the drought, Cunene, is the most affected province with flooding along the riverine areas. This 
coincides with crops coming towards the main harvest period, grain development enhances the risk of 
lodging  (crops  falling  over).  Soil  saturation  and  flooding  can  induce  this  affect  and  increase  toxicity, 
resulting  in  the  loss  of  crops.  Additionally,  heavy  rain  washes  away  feeder  roads  interrupts  market 
access and reduces dispersal; results in reduced profitability and food security (Angola, ENSO Profile, 
IFAD/WFP, 2016). 
Figure 17 Average rainfall enhancement from February to April 
Potential project’s social, environmental and climate change impacts and risks 
The  SREP  is  primarily  focused  on  increasing/ed  resilience  as  well  as  production  and  food 
15. 
insecurity  risk  management  capacity  reducing  community  vulnerability  and  creating  market 
opportunities. The activities promoted by the project are likely to have environmental and social impacts 
that can be addressed through the implementation of best practices and local-based environmental and 
social  management  plans.  The  potential  positive  impacts  of  the  SREP  include  improved  livelihoods 
through  improved  productivity  and  resource  use  efficiency  leading  to  increased  resilience  to  climate 
change effects and, in particular, extreme events. Potential expected negative impacts are water and 
soil contamination, deforestation and land degradation due to increase use of inputs and lack of land 
and water management capacity. Land tenure conflicts and lack of technical capacity on mechanized 
production, irrigation infrastructures management and marketing services may also potentiate negative 
impacts.  Lack  of  capacity  in  integrating  environmental  and  climate  change  concerns  and  routine 
management  practices  reduces  the  environmental  profile  of  the  interventions.  Environmental  quality 
monitoring is still far from being a regular practice and lack of base line information related with water 
and soil quality limits the potential of monitoring. Environmental awareness and technical capacity in 
the  agriculture  sector  is  weak.  Some  climate  change  risks  and  potential  impacts  on  the  livelihoods 
sources in the targeted provinces are summarised below. SREP will aim to build the resilience to these 
stresses.  
Livelihood 
system 
Crop 
production 
Livestock 
production 
Fisheries  and 
Aquaculture 
Climate variable 
Potential impacts 
Rising temperatures 
Increased rainfall 
variability  
Increased rainfall 
intensity 
Increased variability in 
rainfall patterns:  
Rising temperature 
Increased 
intensity of 
rainfall  
Temperature increase 
Increased rainfall 
variability 
Increased incidence of pests and diseases, low crop yield; 
changing cropping calendar/dates, late harvest, crop failure, gully 
& sheet erosion, loss of farmland and soil fertility, water logging 
leading to the loss of deep rooted crops; increased 
sedimentation; siltation of water bodies 
Lack of water availability for livestock; reduced forage availability; 
poor livestock health linked with heat stress which reduces the 
market value of affected livestock, reduction in livestock 
productivity; loss of livestock; loss of pasture land and; increased 
incidence of diseases; damage and/or loss on infrastructures 
Drying up of waterways, drawing down of water levels in 
reservoirs, wetlands and ground water; loss of biological diversity 
of fisheries resources due to habitat degradation; increase in 
aquatic vegetation; along the edge of waterways; 
pollution/eutrophication of fresh water through the decay of 
aquatic vegetation  
16. 
Criteria for guiding selection of beneficiaries in the northern area includes: (a) a high incidence 
of  food  insecurity  and  vulnerability,  b)  a  potential  for  agricultural  development;  (c)  a  high  population 
density;  and  d)  geographical  contiguity  to  maximise  efficiency  of  project  operations.  For  the  south, 
SREP will target the municipalities that are included in ARP which were selected as the most critically 
affected  by  drought  (8  municipalities)  as  well  5  municipalities  in  Namibe.  Within  the  municipalities 
communes will be targeted that are vulnerable to food insecurity and have potential for development. 
The  target  beneficiaries  are  smallholder  farmers,  with  a  special  focus  on  women,  youth  and  rural 
vulnerable  groups.  Special  attention  will  also  be  given  to  the  needs  and  priorities  of  handicapped 
persons  and  the  reintegration  of  ex-combatants.  The  selection  will  be  informed  by  more  detailed 
assessment of needs within target communities. 
17. 
Environmental  and  social  category  –  The  environmental  and  social  category  assigned  to 
SREP  is  B.  It  will  support  activities,  including:  agriculture  intensification  in  non-sensitive  areas1; 
integrated  pest  management  and  credit  for  pesticides/other  agrochemicals  purchase  and  training  in 
their safe use and SLM practices. The agricultural production activities and construction of livelihood 
supporting  infrastructure  may  result  in  localised  environmental  impacts  which  can  be  managed  and 
minimised  through  the  implementation  of  best  practices  and  ESMP  if  required.  Feeder  road 
rehabilitation and market infrastructure investments will be designed, constructed and operating under 
adequate environmental and social standards. Environmental management, monitoring and mitigation 
capacities  will  be  developed  through  awareness  and  training  on  best  practices  and  preparing  site 
management plans. Contents on the awareness and training will cover waste management practices, 
safe handling of agro-chemicals, improved pest management, improved storage and improved soil and 
water conservation measures and natural resources management. Potential conflicts with wildlife fauna 
may occur at particular sites. These impacts will, moreover, be mitigated by providing training on good-
use  practices  and  preparing  site  management  plans.  If  required,  the  site  specific  Environment  and 
Social Management Plan will be developed for the project during design. The awareness and capacity 
building  activities  for  farmers  will  be  delivered  through  Farmer  Field  Schools  while  more  technical 
training will be provided for IDA/EDA and Environment Ministry Departments at provincial and municipal 
level. 
1Although for some areas potential conflict swith wildlife is expected 
Climate  risk  category  –  The  climate  risk  classification  for  the  SREP  is  high.  The  northern 
18. 
provinces  correspond  to  rain-fed  crop  regions,  which  are  subject  to  significant  annual  variations  in 
rainfall, and therefore productivity fluctuations. The southern provinces have been severely affected by 
droughts and floods (e.g. La Niña event in 2016/2017 resulted in floods in some parts of the region). In 
both  areas  farmers  use  traditional  cropping  methods,  with  limited  awareness  of  soil  or  water 
conservation, replacement of soil nutrients, choice of plant varieties, irrigation, or other climate adaptive 
technologies. A detailed climate vulnerability analysis will be conducted to further inform the adaptation 
measures that SREP is expected to bring including improvements in cropping technology, which will 
increase farmer’s resilience to climate variability and climate change.  
19. 
Recommended  features  of  project  design  and  implementation  –  As  a  project  aiming  to 
promote  resilience  SREP  should  promote  improved  community  livelihoods  and  encourage  the 
sustainable  use  and  management  of  ecosystems  and  natural  resources  in  general.  Awareness  and 
capacity  building  on  environmental  management  will  be  provided  to  extension  officers  as  well  as  to 
farmers (through Farmer Field Schools) enabling them to carry out the assessment of environmental 
and  climate  change  related  risks  and  the  development  of  local  based  landscape,  water  and  natural 
resources management plans. Better land and water-use planning as part of integrated environmental 
management will contribute to increase resilience. These local based management plans will include 
disaster  risk  reduction  (drought  and  floods),  appropriate  management  of  inputs,  soil  conservation, 
management of fragile ecosystems and biodiversity species relevant for conservation. 
20. 
Climate  sensitive  technologies  such  as  drought  tolerant  varieties,  water  harvesting  and 
diversified livelihoods will contribute to building the resilience of communities. The SREP can ensure 
that  good  quality  drought  tolerant  varieties  are  included  in  the  packages  to  be  provided  to  the 
smallholders  especially  in  the  southern  areas.  In  addition,  purchase  of  well-labelled  seed  of  known 
varieties of reliable origin should be encouraged. The input supply systems will need to be developed 
and can be incorporated in the seed production activities to promote community multiplication areas of 
selected varieties or commercial multiplication. 
21. 
SREP  can  also  contribute  to  the  improved  use  of  climate  information  services  both  by  the 
extension services, who advise farmers and also by the smallholders themselves. The starting point will 
be improved climate data collection that will entail a strengthening of the agro-meteorology network in 
collaboration with INAMET. Data analytical capacity will also need to be enhanced both in INAMET and 
MINAGRIF. Participatory approaches for climate information services will promote the use of climate 
information at the farm level. The climate information will include both the future projections and historic 
trends analysis. 
22. 
Poultry  rearing,  aquaculture,  horticulture  and  apiculture  activities  are  part  of  the  livelihoods 
diversification and will require capacity building activities to enable the target communities attain the 
benefits of the technologies that will be promoted. The Farmer Field Schools will include application of 
fertiliser  to  early-planted  and  well-weeded  crops  as  well  as  climate  change  adaptation  measures 
including  water  and  soil  management  and  maintenance  of  production  support  infrastructures.  The 
capacity building should be extended to cover waste management and also explore the possibility of 
using some of the organic  waste for manure and promoting integrated crops and livestock systems. 
Technical  services  and  staff  at  local  (municipal  and  provincial  level)  should  also  receive  training  on 
environmental management, monitoring and impact assessment.  
23. 
Consideration  should  be  given  to  appropriate  livestock  breeds  that  are  tolerant  to  heat  and 
water stress conditions. In addition, efforts to promote improved husbandry should include reliable water 
and feed resources and limit reliance on exotic breeds. Particularly in the southern areas, the cultural 
context is also important to consider as the agro-pastoral groups tend to value livestock as household 
wealth and therefore numbers matter more than the health status of the livestock. 
24. 
Mainstreaming  environmental  and  climate  risk  management  in  the  agriculture  sector  is  a 
decisive  element  for  ensuring  adaptation  and  increase  resilience  of  communities  and  activities. 
Awareness and technical training in environmental management and climate change adaptation options 
should be provided for the smallholders and technicians applying the concept of building resilience of 
the local communities under a more long-term perspective. EIA screening and assessment as well as 
environmental management training for technicians (MINAGRI and MINAMB) at provincial level should 
be  provided  in  order  to  promote  adequate  environmental  performance  to  the  project  and  transfer 
knowledge to farmers on natural resources management. 
25. 
Analysis of alternatives – The alternatives considered in the design were in the approach to 
rebuild and/or improve livelihoods and the related activities to be included that initially had a stronger 
focus on resilience building. The prioritisation of the activities proposed was  based on the livelihoods 
assessment,  with  a  decision  to  streamline  the  intervention  with  a  focus  on  improvement,  build  on 
existing interventions and not to introduce completely new crops or livelihood options in the target areas. 
Effective capacitation and implementation immediate production activities, job diversification and best 
practices on environmental and natural resources management were given priority in relation to other 
potential interventions requiring longer duration.  
26. 
Institutional  analysis  –The  Civil  Protection  Agency  led  the  Development  of  Pilot  Provincial 
Strategies for Building Resilience of vulnerable communities and local institutions in the most drought 
affected  provinces.  These  provincial  government  owned  pilot  strategies  (2015-2017)  aim  to  support 
inter-sectorial coordination mechanisms for planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation as well 
as joint mapping of vulnerable groups, and analysis of risks (hazards, vulnerabilities, and capacities); 
improving  the  capacities  of  provincial  government  staff  to  guide  the  planning  and  implementation  of 
integrated  resilience  building  activities  at  municipal  and  community  levels  and;  support  enhanced 
information  management.  Various  on-going  initiatives  providing  support  for  income  generation, 
sustainable land management, disaster risk management, animal health services and building climate 
resilience  among  vulnerable  communities  have  also  been  mapped  to  indicate  areas  of  reach  and 
available resources. 
27. 
Following emergency interventions from the Ministry for Social Assistance and Reintegration 
that  included  distribution  of  food  packages  to  vulnerable  groups,  particularly  the  aged,  SREP  will 
contribute to increase resilience and adaptive capacity at community level through capacitation that will 
complement investments in small infrastructures, equipment and inputs. Capacitation of MINAGRI and 
MINAMB  technical  staff  at  provincial  level  will  support  the  assistance  to  the  establishment  and 
development  of  farmers  organizations  (associations  and  cooperatives)  and  to  the  use  of  improved 
agriculture  techniques  and  integrated  management  of  land,  water  and  natural  resources.  After  the 
drought event in 2015/16 associated to El Niño, that followed four consecutive dry years (2012-2015), 
The Government of Angola (GoA) requested technical assistance to the United Nations (May 2016), for 
developing a Post- Disaster Assessment Needs (PDAN) in the provinces of Cunene, Huíla e Namibe 
and, subsequently to develop a Resilience Building Framework. Following this assessment, the GoA 
requested  technical  support  to  implement  the  measures  proposed  in  the  PDAN.  This  included  a 
consultation  process  with  meetings  and  workshops  with  representatives  of  several  ministries  who 
decided on the actions and budget for the implementation of the Resilience Building Framework. 
Regarding the disaster risk management, a National  Disaster Loss Database, ‘DesInventar’, 
28. 
was launched by the CNPC in Angola in April 2016 to facilitate evidence-based policy decisions and 
reporting internationally against the targets set in the Sendai Framework on DRR 2015-2030 and the 
SDGs.  The  database  was  established  with  technical  support  of  UNISDR  facilitated  by  UNDP. 
DesInventer was installed in the UNISDR server in Geneva, facilitating data entry in a single server with 
maps, hazard list and indicators configured. 
29. 
MINAGRI  through  IDA  extension  services  at  provincial  and  municipal  level  provides 
capacitation and technical support to farmers’ activities but logistic and technical limitations are evident. 
Environmental capacity is far from being mainstreamed within the agriculture sector and extensionists 
lack sufficient knowledge to promote and enhance environmental management and integrated natural 
resources management. Capacity building and training will be essential on the screening process for 
project activities and sites in order to identify potential impacts of the project and determine appropriate 
environmental and social category of the project leading to identification of impacts. However, logistic, 
technical and human resources of MINAMB at provincial and municipal level and weak cooperation with 
other governmental departments limits environmental screening, assessment and monitoring. INAMET 
stations network is still far from being able to generate accurate meteorological information at local level 
including early warning. 
30. 
Monitoring and Evaluation – The implementation period for the project is six years with an 
assessment  envisaged  after  year  3.  Priority  should  be  given  to  monitoring  the  implementation  of 
capacity  building  and  awareness  on  environmental  management  and  climate  change  adaptation 
techniques and strategies as a central element of building resilience and adaptive capacity and how 
farmers  understand  and  implement  adequate  best  practices  and  environmental  management 
measures. The number of extension officers trained and able to train farmers on best practices and 
natural resources management as well as the number of local based natural resources management 
plans developed and implemented and area covered by these plans should also be measured. Other 
primary impacts should be also monitored, like number of farmers using improved seeds, whether the 
seed was planted, how much additional land was planted and how much produce was harvested.and 
the  number  of  households  with  improved  access  to  water  resources  for  farming  and  domestic  use. 
Levels of income generated at household level can be monitored and use of the packages received for 
this purpose. Diversification of jobs, the creation and number of operative associations and cooperatives 
should also be included in monitoring and evaluation. Project planning and tracking can benefit from 
the  creation  of  a  calendar  of  activities,  which  will  need  to  be  linked,  ultimately,  back  to  the  farming 
calendar. Further specific environmental and social related issues will be monitored within the ESMP 
implementation. 
31. 
Further  information  required  to  complete  screening,  if  any  –  No  further  information  is 
required for screening However as the climate risk classification is high, an in-depth climate risk analysis 
will be undertaken before the Project implementation starts. An ESMP will also be developed based on 
the B categorisation.  
32. 
Budgetary resources and schedule – Resources for an in-depth climate risk will be allocated 
separately. The ESMP resources have been included as part of the design. However, where further site 
specific ESMPs are required for the infrastructure developed, these will be incorporated in the Project 
costs. 
Record  of  consultations  with  beneficiaries,  civil  society,  general  public  etc.  – 
33. 
Consultations were undertaken during all stages of the preparation and design of the project (including 
missions in April and July 2018 with field visits to the Provinces of Zaire, Kwanza Norte, Bengo and 
Uíge)  involving  potential  beneficiaries,  government  agencies  at  national  provincial  and  municipality 
levels,  development  agencies  and  NGOs.  More  in-depth  consultations  were  also  held  with  potential 
beneficiaries in the form of a needs assessment for profiling the households as part of the targeting 
approach  and  data  collection.  A  stakeholder  workshop  will  be  organized  during  the  second  design 
mission promoting discussion and obtaining feedback. Specific consultations will also be made in the 
field during the development of the ESMP. 
Mitigation and monitoring plan 
34. 
The  Table  1  below,  identifies  a  set  of  mitigation  and  monitoring  measures  addressing  the 
expected negative impacts that will be part of the overall ESMP and that will be fine-tuned in the final 
ESMP as well as according with the experience and results of monitoring their implementation. Most of 
the expected negative environmental and social impacts may be effectively mitigated through measures 
that should be established for the different sequencing and components of the project. The mitigation 
measures  will  ensure  compliance  with  the  national  and  international  environmental  and  social 
guidelines and procedures. The preliminary ESMP presents a generic set of mitigation measures that 
should be included and complemented in the Environmental and Social Management Plans for each 
subproject.  Each  ESMP  will  be  budgeted  in  the  technical  specifications  of  each  subproject. 
Responsibilities, indicators and monitoring conditions are also suggested for implementation during the 
different stages of the project. 
Table 1 - Resume of the Environmental and social mitigation measures, monitoring and indicators. 
Environmental/ 
Social Impacts 
Loss of 
vegetation 
Loss of Soil 
Loss of fragile 
ecosystems and 
relevant 
biodiversity 
species 
Soil and water 
pollution 
resulting from 
the accumulation 
of solid and 
liquid waste 
Soil and water 
pollution from 
chemicals & 
fertilizers 
Loss of natural 
and cultural 
heritage. 
Dust, Emissions, 
Strong Light, 
Noise and 
Vibration 
Disturbance of 
marginal areas 
Recommended Mitigation 
Selective clearing of project sites, 
reforestation, preservation of 
protected plant species, use of 
alternative sources of energy, use 
of environmental friendly 
technologies, awareness 
campaigns. 
Stabilization of loose soil, controlled 
excavation, preservation of 
vegetation cover, controlled 
transportation of raw materials, 
appropriate landscaping. 
Conduct feasibility studies before 
construction, use expert knowledge 
of ecologists, introduction of 
ecosystem conservation projects, 
fencing 
Controlled disposal of waste and 
effluent by use of appropriate 
disposal facilities, use of 
appropriate drainage structures, 
use of cleaner technologies, proper 
storage of materials, awareness 
campaigns 
Responsible Institution 
(Design Stage) 
Contractors, Project staff, 
Province/Municipal 
District Agric. Officers 
Responsible Institution 
(Implementation Stage ) 
Contractors 
Project Coordination 
Means of 
Verification/Indicators 
Increase in area of land 
cultivated and deforested  
Frequency of 
verification 
Monthly  
Contractors, Project staff, 
Province/Municipal 
Officers, Forestry 
Department 
Project Coordination, 
Province/Municipal, 
Environment and Forestry 
Departments 
Project Coordination, 
Province/Municipal, 
Environment 
Departments 
Contractors 
Project Coordination 
Area and size of gullies 
formed 
Amount of silt deposited 
in watercourses 
Monthly 
Contractors 
Project Coordination 
Size of area and species 
affected 
Monthly 
Contractors 
Project Coordination 
Change in chemical and 
biological water quality 
Number of reported 
pollution events 
Bi-annually 
Annually 
Conduct feasibility studies, fencing, 
introduce proper antiquity 
education programmes 
Project Coordination, 
District Agric. Env and 
Cultural Officers, NGOs  
Contractors 
Project Coordination 
Number or size of 
property lost 
Contractors 
Project staff 
Contractors 
Project Coordination 
Number of complaints  
Extent of property and 
vegetation soiling 
Before project 
implementation 
During project 
implementation 
Monthly 
Controlled operation times, use of 
appropriate equipment, proper 
orientation of lights, use of 
alternative materials, use water 
sprinklers to control dust, use of 
scrubbers  
Avoid extraction of raw materials 
from marginal areas, no 
Project Coordination, 
Province/Municipal, 
Project Coordination, 
Province/Municipal 
Authorities and NGOs  
Size of area affected 
Bi-annually 
Environmental/ 
Social Impacts 
Recommended Mitigation 
Water logging 
construction of structures in 
marginal areas. 
Provide water management training 
to farmers 
Responsible Institution 
(Design Stage) 
Environment 
Departments 
Project Coordination 
Project Coordination 
Responsible Institution 
(Implementation Stage ) 
Means of 
Verification/Indicators 
Frequency of 
verification 
Incidence of 
Flooding 
Forestation of the catchment areas 
of the irrigation schemes 
Project Coordination, 
Province/Municipal, 
Environment 
Departments 
Forestry Department 
Project Coordination, NGO’s, 
Province/Municipal 
Authorities 
Disruption of 
footpaths 
Good irrigation scheme designs 
Relocation of the footpaths 
Project Coordination 
Scheme Management 
Project Coordination 
Scheme Management 
Waste 
generation 
Spread of 
HIV/AIDS 
Water-borne and 
/ or water 
related diseases 
Exposure to 
Agro-chemicals 
Work related 
accidents 
Salinization 
Awareness Campaigns, assignment 
of adequate sites and equipment 
for waste collection and temporary 
storage 
Strengthen HIV/AIDS Awareness 
Campaigns in Schools, Training of 
school administrators and staff in 
HIV/AIDS issues, encouraging 
participation of the private and 
public sectors in HIV/AIDS issues 
and reinforcement of school 
curriculum with HIV/AIDS issues. 
Provision of potable water supplies 
and sanitation facilities, capacity 
building in sanitation and health 
issues, awareness campaigns 
Encourage organic farming, and 
limit the use of Agro-chemicals. 
Conduct awareness training & 
workshops 
Encourage organic farming, limit 
the use of agro-chemicals and 
Project Coordination, 
Province/Municipal, 
Environment and 
Education 
Departments/Schools 
Ministries 
Project Coordination, 
NGOs, Gender and 
Community Services, 
Local institutions and 
committees, Community, 
Municipal and Provincial 
authorities 
Project Coordination, 
Province/Municipal, 
Environment and Health 
Departments 
Project Coordination 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Scheme Management 
Project Coordination, 
Province/Municipal, 
Authorities 
Project Coordination, 
Province/Municipal, 
Authorities  
Project Coordination 
Province/Municipal, 
Environment 
Project Coordination 
Ministries (Health and 
Education) 
Local institutions and 
committees 
Contractors, Project 
Coordination, 
Provincial/Municipal 
Authorities, NGOs 
Project Coordination 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Scheme Management 
Project Coordination 
Prolonged presence of 
water 
Poor growth of crops  
Presence of salts on the 
soil  
Number of trees planted 
Area planted with trees 
Number of people or 
properties affected by 
floods 
Number of footpaths in 
use 
Problems of accessibility 
Number of campaigns 
% of good use of waste 
collection equipment 
Annually 
Annually 
During design 
During construction 
Monthly 
Number of campaigns 
% increase in those 
affected. 
Annually 
Monthly  
(Monthly statistics from 
hospital and clinics) 
Increase in water related 
ailments  
Bi-annually 
Number of people 
affected by agro-
chemicals 
Annually 
Number of reported 
accidents 
Annually 
Project Coordination 
Farm productivity (per 
hectare) 
Annually 
Environmental/ 
Social Impacts 
Recommended Mitigation 
Responsible Institution 
(Design Stage) 
Responsible Institution 
(Implementation Stage ) 
Means of 
Verification/Indicators 
Frequency of 
verification 
Disputes over 
water resources 
provide water management training 
to farmers 
Provide water management training 
to farmers and introduce 
alternative sources of water such as 
boreholes. 
Project Coordination 
Project Coordination, 
Province/Municipal, 
Authorities 
Project Coordination 
Water availability 
Crop productivity  
Number of complaints 
Annually 
A complete Environmental and Social Management Plan that incorporates the above listed mitigation measures has been prepared and is included in the 
Project Life Files. 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Draft Project Implementation Manual 
The draft of the PIM is in the process of preparation and will be ready before the start of 
implementation but the outline is described below. 
1. 
The Project Implementation Manual (PIM) describes the modalities and procedures to be used 
for implementation of the Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP). The Manual provides 
a  checklist  of  procedures  and  tasks  to  be  executed  during  routine  loan  administration  and  project 
implementation activities. In particular, the PIM clarifies procedures and requirements regarding, project 
implementation,  loan  administration  and  flow  of  funds,  reporting,  accounting  and  participatory 
implementation  procedures.  The  PIM  aims  to  provide  the  project  management  and  implementing 
partners  with  procedural  guidance  to  implement  the  Project. The  PIM  is  intended  to  be  a  functional 
document  to  be  adapted  and  amended  as  necessary  to  incorporate  the  lessons  learned  from 
implementation experience. 
55. 
The PIM presents a general description of the project planning design, project costs, benefits 
and  sustainability,  its  implementing  partners,  organisational  arrangement,  staffing,  and  their 
responsibilities. The PIM will cover the implementation guidelines and procedures for implementation 
of each project component and preparation of annual work plan & budget and procurement planning, 
reporting, monitoring and evaluation and supervision.  
56. 
Preparation  and submittal  of the  draft Project Implementation Manual (PIM) for IFAD review 
and “No Objection” is a key condition for the project to enter-into-force. While the Project Coordination 
Committee (PCC) will adopt the PIM substantially in the form approved by IFAD, it does not replace the 
definitive  Project  Documents.  Where  there  are  inconsistencies  with  any  provision  of  the  Financing 
Agreement, the provision of the Agreement shall govern. 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS1 
I. 
II. 
INTRODUCTION 
A.  Purpose and Contents the PIM 
B.  Overall Approach to Project Implementation 
C.  ARP Summary 
D.  Country and rural development context 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A.  Project area and Target group 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
C.  Project Outcomes and Components 
D.  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
III. 
PROJECT COSTS, FINANCING, BENEFITS AND SUSTAINABILITY 
A.  Project costs 
B.  Project financing 
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
D.  Sustainability 
1 Draft PIM will be prepared and included as a separate document. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
IMPLEMENTATION AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 
(PLANNING, MONITORING & EVALUATION AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT) 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Background 
Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Annual Work Planning and 
Budgeting 
Knowledge Management 
Supervision 
Risk identification and mitigation 
D. 
E. 
F. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTING MODULE  
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 
L. 
M. 
N. 
O. 
P. 
Purpose of Financial Management Manual 
Roles and responsibilities of key actors in financial management of ARP 
General Institutional Set-Up and Governing Regulations 
Types of Accounts, Special Account and Project Accounts 
IFAD Disbursement Procedures 
Check List for Withdrawal Applications 
Annual Financial Statements 
Designated Account Reconciliation Statement 
Project Completion 
Financial management team responsibilities in procurement 
Treasury management 
Accounting software and chart of accounts 
Financial reporting and management accounting 
Audit arrangements (Internal and External) 
Funds flow – including management of withdrawal applications 
Other internal controls 
Purpose of Procurement Management Manual 
General Conditions of Procurement 
Procurement Procedures 
Procurement Committees 
Procurement Methods 
Review of Procurement Decisions 
PROCUREMENT MANAGEMENT  
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G.  Guidelines for Evaluation of Bids 
Bid Evaluation Summary Checklist 
H. 
Procurement Method: Goods and Work 
I. 
Procurement Method: Services 
J. 
Procurement through community 
K. 
L. 
Review of Procurement Decisions 
M.  Grievance/complaint redressal system  
VII.  MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS… 
Introduction 
A. 
B. 
Approach 
C.  Measuring results 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 
L. 
ARP Monitoring Indicators 
Learning 
Impact Measurement 
Assessing RIMS Indicators 
ARP Management Information System 
Logical Framework Planning 
Establishing Participatory MIS 
Indicative List of Baseline Data for Scheme 
ARP Logical Framework 
VIII.  RESULT-ORIENTED ANNUAL WORK PLAN & BUDGET 
Introduction 
A. 
B.  Model Format for AWP&B 
C.  Pointers for Preparation of AWP&B 
D.  AWP&B 
E.  Result-oriented AWP&B 
F.  Procurement Plan 
G.  Training Schedule 
H.  Staff Deployment 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Risk categories
Risk Probability
1/1
Risk Impact
Mitigations/comments
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
1/1
 Gender transformational  
 Youth sensitive
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
 National gender policies, strategies
 National youth policies, strategies
 National nutrition policies, strategies
Situation
analysis
and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems and
youth group
opportunities, by gender
 Use (pro-WEAI) assessment for
M&E baseline
and actors
and actors
 Main youth groups
 Key nutrition problems and
 Challenges and opportunities by
underlying causes, by group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
 Nutrition pathways
empowerment
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Youth employment included in
outcomes and impacts
 Policy engagement on GEWE
project objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
Human
and
financial
resources
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Outreach disaggregated by age
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Women are > 40% of outreach
beneficiaries
Pro-WEAI indicator
Further details to be confirmed
 Staff with gender TORs
 Staff with youth TORs
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for youth activities
 Funds for nutrition activities
 Funds for Pro-WEAI surveys in M&E
budget
IFAD Adaptation
Finance
IFAD Mitigation
Finance
$14,827,000
$0
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$14,827,000
ECG
Remarks
Gender
Nutrition
Youth
 No social inclusion themes
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Organogram for SCU
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Organogram for the Single Coordination Unit 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Country context
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Country and rural context background 
Country and rural development context  
1. 
The Government of Angola (GoA), together with its national and international partners, have 
made substantial progress following the end of nearly three decades of civil war in 2002 during which 
much  of  the  country’s  economy  collapsed,  infrastructure  was  destroyed  and  institutions  weakened. 
Progress  has  involved  programmes  aimed  at  ensuring  order  and  security,  revitalising  the  economy, 
restoring social services, rehabilitating infrastructure and addressing the threat of climate change. 
2. 
Since 2002, Angola has enjoyed a period of relative peace and political stability. Between 2002 
and 2014 the GDP per capita increased from US$2,900 to US$6,800, largely led by oil production. In 
2014, the oil sector represented 35% of the national Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and accounted for 
95% of the country’s total exports. Since 2016, the dramatic decline of oil prices on the world market 
and a decrease of 3.3% in the daily national production between 2015 and 2016, have caused a slowing 
down in the GDP growth to 1.1% in 2016, from 8.5% in 20121. The decline in oil revenues prompted 
the  government  to  accelerate  efforts  to  diversify  the  economy  with  a  stronger  focus  on  agriculture, 
industry and services. A stronger emphasis on agriculture aims to increase production and reduce food 
imports. Angola's institutional capacity, however, has not been restored since the return of peace and 
bureaucratic  hurdles  inhibit  private  sector  growth.  The  government  is  facilitating  private  sector 
involvement and is encouraging financial institutions to support the agriculture sector. 
3. 
Food Security and Nutrition: Angola has made significant progress over the last decade in 
reducing food insecurity and undernourishment. Recent data available indicate that the prevalence of 
food undernourishment in the total population dropped from 32.1% over the period 2004-06, to 14% in 
2014-2016. Over the same time-span, the number of undernourished people dropped from 5.8 to 3.5 
million, despite the growth in population2. However, malnutrition remains a public health concern with 
stunting rate of 38% and 65% anaemia prevalence among children aged 6-59 months. Higher stunting 
prevalence was recorded in rural populations (46%) compared to the urban areas (32%).The associated 
factors to poor nutrition included poverty, education status of mothers, inadequate daily meal intake and 
child feeding practices.  
4. 
Poverty and inequality. Performance related to social indicators, however, has been mixed. 
Since  2002,  good  progress  has  been  made  in  poverty  reduction,  primary  education,  and  gender 
equality, but other social indicators are weak.The poverty rate declined from 62% in 2001 to about 37% 
in 20093. This was a major achievement, but much more needs to be done under the shared prosperity 
agenda.  The  rural  poverty  rate  is  58%,  in  contrast  with  urban  poverty  rate  of  30%.  In  the  capital 
(population five million), the poverty rate is only about 9%. The Gini-coefficient in 2013 was 42.74. The 
average life expectancy of 51.1 years (HDR 2017). The UN Human Development Index (HDI) places 
Angola close to the average value for Low Human Development Countries but above the average for 
Sub-Saharan  Africa.  The  HDI  for  Angola  increased    from  0.391  in    2000  to  0.533  in  2015,  with  the 
country ranked 150 out of 188 (HDR,2015). 
Agriculture and the smallholder sector.Angola has an estimated 58 million ha of arable land, 
5. 
of which less than 10 per cent has been estimated to be under cultivation with a minimal area under 
irrigation (2017). Although in the past the country used to be a major agricultural exporter, currently a 
large share of the food consumed is from imports, although this figure is declining. The shift from net 
export  to  net  import  was  due  in  part  to  the  destruction  of  the  agricultural  production  and  marketing 
1  General National Budget 2016 
2FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO. 2017. The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2017. 
Building resilience for peace and food security. Rome, FAO. 
3Angola 2014”, Instituto Nacional de Estatística. 
4 World Bank Indicators  
infrastructure during the civil war, and in part to the lack of competitiveness of the national production 
against imports.  
Although agriculture contributes only 10% of GDP5, some 44% of the employed population work 
6. 
in the sector and around 46% of households are engaged in some form of agricultural activity and 6% 
in  fishing  (2014  census).The  rural  poor  depend  almost  exclusively  on  smallholder  family  farming  for 
their livelihoods. These farms are largely subsistence-based, characterised by low yields, low prices 
and  low  returns  to  labour  and  land  with  low  productivity  and  limited  sales.  Improving  smallholder 
agricultural production,  productivity  and commercialisation are  hence critical to reduce rural poverty. 
The northern provinces in Angola are characterized by cassava based mixed food cropping systems, 
with a cultivated of between 1.5 hectares, closer to the coast and 2.5 hectares, further inland. Cassava 
is the most important crop grown in the area but other crops include peanuts, beans, bananas, maize 
and sweet potatoes, all of which are part of the local food diet. The production system in the south is 
largely agro-pastoral with livestock contributing significantly to the livelihood of rural households. Some 
80%  of  farmers  are  subsistence  smallholders  growing  maize,  millet  and  sorghum,  at  low  levels  of 
productivity. 
7.  Land tenure and access to land: In Angola all land belongs to the State which determines its final 
use. In 2004, a Land Law was passed in order to preserve the rights of the rural communities by taking 
into account the customary land use systems that prevail in the different parts of the country6. The law 
was expected to provide security of tenure for permanent land investments, e.g. small-scale irrigation, 
managed by community-based groups and associations. In terms of State ownership, agricultural land 
is regulated upon a private rights basis while natural resources form part of the public right. The law 
foresees that  land for private agricultural investment would be regulated through perpetual  land  use 
rights transfers of ownership, sold by auction from the State to private actors. In this way land use rights 
are transmissible. At the same time, the Land Law subjected those with informal rights to eviction if they 
fail to apply for a concession in a timely manner.  
8. 
Although in Angola there is no straightforward competition for scarce land, due to the still very 
low population density, the weaknesses in the land legislation framework, and in the titling processes, 
have  resulted  in  conflicting  interests  in  parts  of  the  country  where  encroachment  occurs,  especially 
amongst  those  communities  with  limited  resources  and  capacities  to  defend  their  rights.  As  part  of 
government policy, cooperative members can receive land rights to the communal land managed by 
the cooperative. A single title is given to the cooperative as a group. Within the cooperative land transfer 
can occur between members on an informal basis. Title can be given by MINAGRIF and for areas of 
land up to 100 hectares can be issued at Provincial level.    
9. 
Formal  land  administration  in  the  country  is  rudimentary  or  non-existent  and  institutional 
capacity is lacking at all levels and the situation is worse outside major urban centres. The infrastructure 
needed for formal dispute resolution and promoting the rule of law is weak. Informal dispute resolution 
does  occur  within  communities  with  village  elders  and  other  leaders  adjudicating  and  mediating 
conflicts.  While  these  traditional  authorities  are  often  successful  in  dispute  resolution,  they  are  not 
always doing so in accordance with formal law, but rather they are following tradition. There does not 
appear to be a significant formal (local or provincial) government judicial dispute resolution mechanism 
available. There are courts at the provincial level, but these courts are under-staffed and underfunded, 
and they are not accessible to most citizens. Furthermore, the majority of citizens do not understand 
the court system and do not have access to courts as a practical matter.  
FAO  has  for  decades  supported  the  GoA  through  the  Angola  Land  Programme  in  the 
10. 
development of the country’s land tenure management framework that takes into account the historical 
occupancy and uses of local communities. Over the last 10 years FAO and GoA in collaboration with 
national NGOs and CSOs (including Global Vision Angola) have piloted participatory land-use mapping 
and planning and delimitation processes with local rural communities and supported them in obtaining 
the  title  to  their  lands  in  the  center  and  south  of  the  country  (Huila,  Benguela,  Bié  and  Huambo 
5Average calculated based on available national data from 2006 to 2012. Source: Government of Angola (2016) 
Nota de Imprensa N. 02 – Contas Nacionais Provisórias 2014 e Preliminares 2015, Instituto Nacional de 
Estatística 
6These include: residential, traditional shifting agriculture and transhumant grazing, forestry, access to water and 
communication ways use. 
provinces).  As  a  result  20,000  hectares  of  land  used  by  local  communities  have  been  titled  and  a 
manual for participatory land-use mapping, planning and land titling has been developed which is now 
being taken up by the World Bank supported project. A draft study of Angola’s legal framework have 
been prepared for further discussion which looks at constraints and needed reforms for implementing 
the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries, and Forests in 
the Context of National Food Security (VGGT) in Angola. 
11. 
Gender. More than a fifth (23%) of agricultural households are headed by women. Women are 
responsible for 70% of traditional subsistence agriculture and 24% of commercial agriculture. In general, 
women are not entitled to own property on equal terms with men. The right of women to own land often 
depends on their marital status and cumbersome administrative procedures is another constraint.  
12. 
Youth: The government defines youth as people aged 15 to 35, which represent 32.4% of all 
citizens in the country. School completion rates decrease after the primary level and progressively drop 
along  the  education  pathway.  Youth  unemployment  is  pronounced  at  46%,  against  a  general 
unemployment rate of 24% and rural youth face a major challenge of seeking alternatives to subsistence 
farming while having limited employment skills.  Migration  levels are highest for youth  within the age 
group of 25 to 35 years (24.5%). Poverty, however, is lower among the 15 – 35 year olds than any other 
age group. A significant number of households are youth headed.  
13. 
Climate  change:  Agriculture,  in  particular  in  the  south,  is  increasingly  vulnerable  to  climate 
change and extreme climatic events, such as droughts (e.g. 2012-16) and floods (e.g. 2017) caused by 
El Niño and La Niña climate events. Over the last 30 years, there was no substantial change in annual 
mean  temperature.  For  the  future,  projections  from  global  climate  models  suggest  a  medium-strong 
increase in temperature. According to estimates, mean annual temperatures will increase by 1.2 - 3.2 
degrees Celsius by 2060, and the total rainfall through “heavy events” is projected to increase (UNDP, 
2008). This is expected to increase the occurrence of floods. For the end of the century a warming in 
the range of 1.4°C to 4.6°C (tropical regions) and 1.6°C to 5.1°C (semi-arid regions) is likely (compared 
to the reference period from 1971 to 2000). Furthermore, a strong increase in the duration of heat waves 
as  well  as  a  strong  decrease  in  cold  spell  length  is  projected  (Climate  Fact  Sheet,  2018).In  2015, 
following  prolonged  dry  spells  yield  losses  were  estimated  at  75%  in  Cunene,  Huila  and  Namibe 
provinces (PDNA, 2015).  Climate change affects, albeit  less so, the more humid  northern  provinces 
with increased temperatures, lower rainfall and a shorter growing season predicted.  
14. 
A climate risk analysis undertaken by the Africa Climate and Development Initiative illustrated 
the effects of climate change such as reduction in the length of growing seasons, particularly affecting 
maize  and  other  cereals.  The  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC)  has  warned  that 
decreases in crop yields of 10-25% and more may be widespread by 20507. The increased frequency 
of warmer nights in most regions is also damaging for many crops, with observed impact on rice yields 
and quality. The number of crop varieties has decreased dramatically  over the latter part of the 20th 
century,  raising  concerns  for  adaptive  capacity,  genetic  vulnerability  and  nutritional  diversity.  The 
government has placed high importance on improving the resilience of food and agricultural systems to 
shocks and threats from climatic and other causes. 
Evidently the agriculture, coastal zones, forests, water resources, ecosystems and biodiversity 
15. 
are extremely vulnerable to impacts resulting from the extreme climatic events, which will pose not only 
serious livelihood and direct health risks but can also affect national food security (INDC). Though the 
southern part of Angola is more affected by climatic events such as droughts and intermittent floods, 
the northern regions also have adverse impacts from late onset and cessation of rains and prolonged 
dry  spells.  Rising  temperatures  are  also  impacting  on  agricultural  productivity.  Mean  annual 
temperature is projected to increase in the region by 1.2 to 3.2°C by the 2060s. Climate models predict 
Angola  will  experience  more  extreme  weather  events,  an  expansion  of  arid  and  semi-arid  regions, 
seasonal shifts in rainfall, localised floods, increased wildfires, sea level rise, increased rainfall in the 
northern parts of the country, changes in river flows and changes in sea and lake temperatures (NAPA). 
SREP will support communities to cope with extreme climatic events such as droughts, prolonged dry 
spells and increasing rainfall variability. 
7IPCC, 2014. http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/wg2/WGIIAR5-Chap7_FINAL.pdf 
Land  degradation:  Angola  is  rich  in  natural  resources,  although  land  degradation  and  soil 
16. 
fertility decline is becoming a more acute problem especially in the south. Land degradation is mainly 
due to unsustainable agricultural practices, the over-grazing of rangelands and deforestation and the 
unsustainable use of forest resources and deforestation. The vagaries of the weather and inadequate 
land and water management have accentuated soil erosion and land degradation, which has resulted 
in increased sedimentation in streams and water points (which are crucial for the agro-pastoral system), 
a decrease in soil depth and fertility, diminishing soil organic matter and a reduction in its water and 
nutrient holding capacity. Cattle keepers in the south require more land to sustain their herds due to 
drier conditions and decrease in grassland productivity. Deforestation rates over the last three decades 
have been high, even though movement of people from rural to urban areas have allowed for forest 
recovery  in  areas  previously  under  cultivation.  The  primary  causes  of  deforestation  are  charcoal 
production, land clearing for agriculture and fire. The annual rate of deforestation over 2005-10 was 
around 0.21% (FAO, 2013). 
17. 
Market infrastructure and demand: Only a limited part of agricultural production reaches the 
market due to poorly developed infrastructure (especially roads and electricity). Market demand is high 
for most food crops and opportunities exist for expanding smallholders’ production. However market 
outlets in rural areas are insufficient and marketing systems that were severely disrupted during the civil 
war, are yet to be strengthened.  
18. 
Rural finance: The financial sector is competitive, but also highly concentrated, with five banks 
holding over 75% of market share. The scope of products and services offered are mostly focused on 
traditional  mass-market  banking  products  and  loans  are  concentrated  in  a  few  sectors  in  Luanda 
province.  The  banking  system  is  not  accessible  to  a  majority  of  the  population  and  credit  is  largely 
concentrated  in  urban  areas.  A  few  banks  have  microfinance  portfolios,  with  loans mostly  extended 
under  government  or  donor-supported  programmes.  The  share  of  agriculture  in  the  loan  portfolio  of 
banks  is  minimal,  mainly  short  term  and  mostly  benefiting  commercial  farmers.  The  family  farming 
sector, which among other challenges cannot present land titles as collateral, is largely excluded from 
these opportunities. 
19. 
GoA and the central bank, Banco Nacional de Angola (BNA) have focused, in recent years, on 
economic diversification, deepening financial inclusion, developing rural financial systems, microfinance 
and  financing  agriculture  and  agri-business.  However,  to  date  the  financial  sector  is  yet  to  give  due 
attention to these emerging areas, and there is still a long way to go to achieve a diversified economy 
with more inclusive, sustainable and robust growth. Policies need to be refocused and the systems re-
engineered to foster structural transformation. Both public and private institutions, including the banking 
sector, have to work closely to increase production and productivity of smallholder farmers by facilitating 
access to finance, technology and markets. 
20.  National development policies and strategies. The government of  Angola has been fighting 
poverty  on  various  fronts  including:  (i)  the  2005  Anti-poverty  Strategy  (ECP);  (ii)  the  2009  National 
Strategy  for  Food  and  Nutrition  Security  (ENSAN);  (iii)  the  Integrated  Municipal  Program  for  Rural 
Development and the Fight Against Poverty (PMIDRCP), which resulted from the 2010 merger of the 
ECP and ENSAN; and (v) the National Development Plans (PND) 2013-2017 and 2018-2022. 
21.  The  main  policies  of  GoA  to  reduce  poverty  were  first  embodied  in  the  ECP  followed  by  the 
ENSAN.  The  main  goal  of  the  ECP  was  to  cut  the  country’s  poverty  level  in  half  by  2015  and  to 
consolidate peace and national unity through the sustained improvement of the living standards of all 
Angolans. It also highlighted rural development with a focus on the improvement of food security and 
the  revitalization  of  the  rural  economy  and  the  reconstruction  of  infrastructure.  The  goal  set  out  by 
ENSAN was to ensure that all Angolans would have at all times physical and economic access to food 
of  adequate  quantities  and  variety  to  permit  them  to  contribute  to  the  human,  economic  and  social 
development of the country. 
22. 
In 2010, the  ECP and the ENSAN  were merged into the PMIDRCP,  which aims: “to reduce 
levels of extreme poverty particularly in rural areas, promoting access to basic public services and turn 
Angola into a prosperous country with social justice.” This programme, implemented countrywide and 
led  by  the  Secretariat  of  Social  Issues  of  the  Presidency,  includes  several  social  development 
programmes. Both ECP and ENSAN were also reflected in Angola’s, PND, which established as main 
goals,  the  promotion  of  economic  growth  and  increased  employment.  In  2012,  the  latter  assigned 
between 1 to 3% of public expenditure to MINAGRI, and less than 0.99% to the Ministry of Fisheries 
and Aquaculture.  
23. 
Angola’s  PND,  2013-2017,  placed  emphasis  on  intensifying  the  process  of  economic 
diversification  supported  through  investments  in  rehabilitating  and  developing  new  infrastructure.  In 
addition,  the  government  targeted  the  development  of  macroeconomic  policies  to  stimulate  private 
investment  and  the  creation  of  a  more  efficient  and  flexible  public  institutional  structure.  The  latter 
include  restructuring  of  the  central  and  local  administrative  bodies  for  purposes  of  rationalisation  of 
resources and increased efficiency. 
24. 
The  PND,  2018-2022,  aims  to  promote  the  Country's  socio-economic  and  territorial 
development at national, sectoral and provincial level. It provides a framework for the implementation 
of long-term strategic development options as set out in the Long-term Strategy (ELP) Angola 2025.The 
strategy covers two focal areas: i) Human Development; and ii) Welfare and Sustainable, Diversified 
and Inclusive Economic Development. The PND was prepared in close coordination with the sectorial 
and provincial planning bodies, strengthening the decentralization process and aiming at greater local 
level  ownership  of  the  national  development  planning  process.  The  PND  provides  a  framework  to 
restore confidence in the economy and embark on a path of diversifying the economy and promoting 
economic growth and development. Over the planned period the Angolan economy is expected to grow 
by 3% annually, with the agricultural sector a leading driver of growth (average rate of 8.9%).  
25.  Agricultural sector policies. The PND 2018-2022, and Medium Term Development Plan for the 
Agricultural  Sector  (PMDSA),  2018-2022,  anchored  the  goal  for  agricultural  development  to  the 
sustainable  use  of  natural  resources  and  the  improvement  of  competitiveness,  while  aiming  at  the 
achievement  of  food  security  and  self-sufficiency  and  taking  advantage  of  market  potentials.  The 
medium-term  plans  include  four  strategic  objectives  that  address  agriculture,  livestock,  forestry  and 
cross-cutting issues including capacity development and services to producers. Not least, the second 
strategic objective, in both 2013-2017 and 2018-2022 medium-term plans, focuses on the development 
of family farming. With regards to agricultural research and extension, the Government acknowledged 
the limited resources and coverage; and in the more recently, referred to Farmer Field Schools as the 
method for technology transfer. 
26. 
Environment  and  climate  change  policies.  In  more  recent  years,  national  policies  also 
started integrating among their concerns, the sustainable management of natural resources and the 
need for climate change adaptation. The PND included environmental management among its priorities, 
as one of the pillars for the national sustainable development; and adaptation to climate change through 
small scale irrigation development was part of the priorities for the agricultural sector. At the same time, 
the medium-term plans for the agricultural sector have moved from full reliance on the abundance of 
the  national  natural  resources,  to  an  incipient  and  more  cautious  attention  to  the  need  for  their 
sustainable  management.  The  Ministry  of  Environment  (MINAMB)  has  the  mandate  to  ensure 
environmental  protection  and  climate  change  adaptation.  As  part  of  the  strategy  to  mainstream 
environmental and climate risk management and demonstrate activities in specific sectors, ecological 
centers have been constructed in Namibe, Cabinda, Cuando Cubango and Huambo Provinces. The 
centers  will  serve  as  capacity  building  and  technology  demonstration  sites  for  a  wide  range  of 
stakeholders including technicians and smallholder farmers.  
27. 
Specific programmes and plans for addressing climate change include the Intended Nationally 
Determined  Contributions  (INDC,  (2015))  that  takes  a  longer  term  perspective  to  include  mitigation 
targets  and  reiterates  the  priorities  set  out  in  the  National  Adaptation  Programme  of  Action  (NAPA 
(2011)).  These  priorities  include  promoting  sustainable  land  and  water  management  for  increased 
agricultural  yields,  soil  erosion  control  through  organic  methods,  diversifying  crops  to  less  climate 
sensitive cultures and implementing water-harvesting systems in drought-prone areas. The SREP will 
directly contribute to most of these priorities through activities for soil and water conservation, improved 
water resources management and crop diversification. 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Poverty, gender and targeting
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Poverty, targeting and gender 
Poverty 
1. 
Since the end of the civil war in 2002, Angola has registered progress in its efforts to increase 
economic  growth  and  social  wellbeing.  The  country  saw  a  steady  economic  growth,  with  per  capita 
Gross National Income (GNI) increasing from US$ 330 in 2002 to US$  4,470 in 2014 (UNDP, 2015 
human  development  report).  The  dynamics  of  the  Angolan  economic  growth  is  associated  with  the 
exploitation of natural resources mainly mining and hydrocarbons, where oil accounts for 30% of the 
GDP, 95% of total exports and 50% of public revenues. Agriculture accounts for only 12% of GDP and 
employs nearly 70% of the population (African economic outlook, AfDB, OECD, UNDP 2017).  
The poverty rate declined from 62% in 2001 to 36.6% in 2009 but remained high in rural areas, 
2. 
at  58%  (Instituto  Nacional  de  Estatística).  Recent  figures  indicate  that  43.4%1  of  the  population  live 
below the poverty line (less than 1.25 USD per day).2As shown by the 2014 Household Budget Survey, 
the  incidence  of  poverty  is  also  associated  to  high  fertility  rate3(larger  families),  low  education  rate, 
unequal distribution of wealth, low access to infrastructure as well as inequality in income which was 
28.9% in 2015 
3. 
Education rates are low with enrolment in tertiary education at only 8.2% for women and 10.6 
% for men. This is largely because of the large household sizes and high fertility rates. Some 42 percent 
of Angola’s 25 million inhabitants were under 15 years old in 20154 and many of these children do not 
complete their education. The country`s education expenditure is around 3.5 percent of GDP. Because 
of lack of education, many young people cannot find good jobs to help improve their standard of living. 
The  pace  of  poverty  reduction  is  not  as  fast  as  might  have  been  expected,  due  to  the 
4. 
underperformance of the agricultural sector (12% of GDP) compared to the rest of the economy. The 
basic needs poverty rate declined from 49% in 2002 (55% in rural areas) to 44% in 2014 (51% in rural 
areas), while food poverty declined only marginally from 13.2% in 2004/2005 to 13% in 2010.  
5. 
Despite the country’s vast mineral wealth and agricultural potential, the Human Development 
Index  (HDI)  for  Angola  rose  from  0.391  in  2000  to  0.533  in  2015  with  a  ranking  of  150  out  of  188 
countries.  This increase was due to an increase in life expectancy (58.1 to 61.2years), GNI (USD 4 941 
to UAD 6 822) and years of schooling (4.1 to 4.7) due to the enrolment of the younger population. 
6. 
Urbanization  is  an  increasingly  common  trend.  From  1990  to  2014  the  percentage  of  rural 
population dropped from 75% to 37% ((Instituto Nacional de Estatística, 2014), on account of the high 
rural exodus. Many youth leave the village to urban areas in search of better living conditions. The main 
causes being high unemployment, low agricultural productivity and production and  low incomes from 
farming.  
According to the 2014 census figures, despite its  low contribution  to  GDP5some 44% of the 
7. 
employed population still work in agriculture related activities. Some 23% of agricultural households in 
1Population Well-being Survey - IBEP, 2008-09), 
2UNICEF statistics on Angola, http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/angola_statistics.html 
3A high birth rate is problematic because it strains resources. The more children a family has, the harder it is for 
families to give all children the nutrition their bodies need. This is evidenced by the high child mortality rate. One 
in four children do not reach their fifth birthday. A lower birth rate increases the number of female workers and 
output per capita 
4 weform.org/doc/WEF-GGGR-2017 
5Average calculated based on available national data from 2006 to 2012. Source: Government of Angola (2016) 
Nota de Imprensa N. 02 – Contas Nacionais Provisórias 2014 e Preliminares 2015, Instituto Nacional de 
Estatística 
rural  Angola  are  female  headed  and  women  are  responsible  for  70%  of  the  family  farm  subsector 
production.  
8. 
The incidence of HIV infection in 2016  was 1.9, which is comparatively low compared to the 
regional average of 4.3. However, the rate of infection in the urban areas and in certain rural areas is 
on the rise.  With little being done to address HIV/AIDS concerns the disease is beginning to impact 
negatively on agricultural production.   
9. 
Malnutrition  is  still  a  concern  and  30%  of  children  less  than  five  years  are  suffering  from 
stunting, and 16% are underweight.  The rural poverty rate is 58%, in contrast with  an urban poverty 
rate  of  30%.  The  Gini-coefficient  in  2013  was  42.7.  The  rural  areas  have  more  chronic  malnutrition 
(46%) compared to urban areas (32%).  
10. 
However, Angola has taken measures to reduce rates of disease and infection, such as child 
vaccinations in the capital. But Angola still has one of the lowest health expenditures in the world at 3.1 
percent of the country’s GDP. Due to Angola’s poor healthcare, the life expectancy remains low at 61 
years old. 
A  number  of  social  and  economic  welfare  indicators  reveal  significant  gaps  in  the  living 
11. 
standards between residents of urban areas and those in rural areas. Only 32% of rural population have 
access to good drinking water compared to 67% in the urban areas; 7% of rural households have access 
to  electricity,  compared  to  64%  of  households  in  urban  areas,  and  finally,  11%  of  households  have 
access  to  improved  sanitation  facility  compared  to  46%  in  urban  areas  (2015-16  Angola  Multiple 
Indicator and Health Survey) 
Gender, youth and other fragile social categories 
12. 
Overview of gender inequality in Angola context. Despite efforts made to integrate gender 
into Government policies and strategies, wide gender inequalities persist. The country ranked 123 from 
140 countries according to the WEF, gender gap report 2017.6 Women face under-representation in 
formal  politics  which  has  negatively  affected  representation  in  the  country’s  decision-making  bodies 
(Human Development Report, 2015). At local level, women representation in decision making  is also 
extremely low. In rural areas of Angola, only 26% of women can read and write compared to 65% of 
men. In Parliament, 38% of members are women and out of 18 governors, 8 are women (44.44%). At 
municipal  level,  from  the  163  administrators  43  were  women  (26%)  and  among  the  163  deputy 
administrators just 34 were women i.e. 21% (MINFAMU, 2016Relartarioanalitico de genero de Angola). 
13. 
The  Population  and  Housing  Census  carried  out  in  2014  in  Angola  reveals  that  51%  of  the 
population is made up by women. However, despite being the majority, women are more likely than 
men to be poor and illiterate and they usually have lower access to medical care, property ownership, 
credit, training and employment. The GNI per capita (2011 PPP $) shows a value of 5.073 for women 
and 7,527 for men and the expected years of schooling are 8.7 for women and 14 for men.  The literacy 
rate for men is 80% while that for women stands at 53%. Distribution of income among men and women 
is disproportionate, with men owning all major means of production such as land, livestock and financial 
capital,  while  women  provide  most  of  the  labour.    Women-headed  households  have  lower  incomes 
compared to those headed by men. The disparity is consequently, quite marked.  
14. 
In  addition  to  these  examples  there  are  other  discriminations  that  refer  to  access  to  basic 
resources  and  services  (land,  education,  health  etc.)  as  well  as  the  level  of  violence  faced  (39%  of 
women  experienced physical violence since the age of 15) and 44% of married women experienced 
physical or sexual violence committed by their husband or partners (INE, 2014). 
About 1.9% of Angolan population is HIV positive (2.65% of women and 1.2% of men), with the 
15. 
highest prevalence in Cunene (6.1%) and the lowest in Zaire (0.5%). HIV prevalence by age shows that 
the most affected are between the ages of 30-45 which constitute the main work force. HIV affects the 
output of women who participate in all household farming activities and household chores. Women’s 
6World Economic Forum : https://www.Weforum.org/doc/WEF-GGGR-2017 
average age at first marriage is 19, over five years earlier than that of men7 with 30% of women aged 
20 to 24 years getting married or entering into union before the age of 18 and having an average of 6.2 
children. Age at first marriage is significantly higher among more educated women. Also, only, 13% of 
Angolan women use family planning. This coupled with the prevalence of undernourishment, have a 
negative impact on their health and education  
16. 
Gender policies. With regards to the Promotion of Gender Equality, the general objective of 
the National Development Plan (PND) is the promotion of equal opportunities, rights and responsibilities 
for men and women in all areas of economic, social, cultural and political life. Its policy measures aim 
to promote the full realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms for men and women, promote 
all equal-opportunity aspects in employment policies, including reducing occupational segregation and 
helping reconcile work and family life, as well as counter the persistent under-representation of women 
in all decision-making spheres, promote equal access and full enjoyment of social rights for men and 
women,  eliminate  gender  disparities  in  primary  and  secondary  education  by  2017  and  at  the  other 
educational levels  by  2025, promote equality  in civic  life and contribute  to change gender roles and 
stereotypes.  
17. 
Angola  is  in  compliance  with  its  international  commitments,  namely  the United  Nations 
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the Protocol to the African 
Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights regarding the Rights of Women in Africa, the SADC Gender 
and Development Protocol, the Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa, the United Nations 
Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child  and  the  Beijing  Declaration  and  Platform  for  Action  to  which 
Angola is a party.  
18. 
The Ministry of Social affairs, family and the promotion of women developed a gender policy 
and the implementation of strategy for the development of rural women. The document comprises a set 
of actions that respect and encourage positive cultural values, promote solidarity, non-discrimination 
and effective participation of men and women in political, economic, social, sports and cultural activities. 
Despite all  these  policies and  actions, customary law  still favors men  with regard to the control and 
access over production resources (land, labor, credit. etc.) 
Youth.  SREP  will  define  youth  as  per  the  African  Union’s  broader  definition,  which 
19. 
encompasses  individuals  aged  between  15  and  35.  By  this  definition,  youth  make  up  over  26%  of 
Angola’s population, with a youth dependency ratio of 93.  
20. 
Statistics show that the majority of youth reside in urban areas. The rural areas  were highly 
affected by the civil war having a devastating effect on the physical and social infrastructure, particularly 
in terms of education and health. Equally, it disrupted the agricultural economy that was the foundation 
of their livelihoods and the dominant cultural mode of life for a majority of rural Angolans. Left with few 
life choices, a large number of rural youth continue to migrate into urban areas where some go to school 
and gain formal employment. Migration levels are highest for youth within the 25 to 35 years age group 
(24.5%).  Most  of  the  household  heads  in  Angola  are  made  up  of  men.  Some  42%  of  the  heads  of 
household are below 34 years of age and 52%  between the ages of 24 and 44 years old (INE,2014). 
Youth unemployment is pronounced at 46%, against a general unemployment rate of 24%. The youth 
in  rural  areas  are  informally  employed  in  subsistence  agriculture  and  are  involved  in  family-based 
livelihood  activities  such  as  handicraft,  fishing,  or  small  shops.  Youth  seeking  to  start  their  own 
enterprises are faced with challenges in obtaining access to credit, and education levels are also low, 
with only 37% of young men and 28% of young women aged 15-24 having attended secondary school 
or higher education, as of 2010. Poverty, however, is lower among the 15 – 35-year-olds than any other 
age group.  
21. 
Overall, 0.9% of Angolans between the ages of 15 to 24 are HIV positive. HIV prevalence is 
higher among young women (1.1%) than young men (0. 7%). HIV prevalence among youths is twice 
as high in urban areas than in rural areas, 1.2 vs. 0.5.8 
7  Statistics show that fertility is higher with women with little or no education 7.8 children compared to women 
with  secondary  or  higher  education  4.2  children.  These  larger  families  often  lead  to  low  living  conditions  and 
poverty. (INE:2014). 
8 Source; 2015-2016 multiple indicator and health survey (IIMS) 
In order to create job opportunities for youth, it is necessary to provide them with some financial 
22. 
support  in  the  form  of  matching  grants  and  full  grants  to  promote  rural  activities  and  job  creation.  
However, engagement of youth in business development needs further support to build their technical 
and  managerial  capacities  in  relevant  domains.  This  may  include  business  training  to  engage  in 
agricultural  activities.  Specialized  training  or  technical  assistance  could  focus  on  a  variety  of 
agribusiness topics such as crop production, distribution, processing and sales. Social mentoring will 
be done to enable all members of the community to support youth development by enabling their access 
to productive resources.  
23. 
combatants. 
Other  fragile  social  categories.  These  categories  are  mainly  disabled  persons  and  ex-
  Disabled persons. Angola has a total of about 656,258 disabled persons of which 56% are 
male and 44% female,9 representing about 2.5% of the population. Of these, 56% are found in 
the rural areas. These handicapped persons are made up of those with intellectual impairments 
and physical ones including the blind, deaf, dumb, and paralysed and amputees. However, the 
main causes of handicaps are diseases 42(%), followed by the war and mines victims (35%), 
and finally the other handicap groups (congenital, work, home, car accidents and others,).  The 
horrors of the civil war led to severe physical and emotional stress resulting in human handicap 
and  physical  suffering.    In  2011  the  government  put  in  place  a  law  mandating  the  social 
inclusion  of  handicapped  children  and  the  regulation  of  open  spaces  for  individuals  with 
disabilities.  These  handicapped  persons  are  also  organized  into  18  federations  and 
associations, to represent their social categories and advocate for more support from the state 
and development partners. They are involved in all walks of life and those in the rural areas live 
on agricultural and livestock production. In May 2014 the government ratified the Convention 
on  the  Rights  of  Persons  with  Disabilities  (CRPD)  and  developed  a  framework  to  provide 
various  support  to  the  disabled  including  the  rapid  establishment  of  the  national  council  for 
persons with disabilities. 
  Ex-combatants.  The  civil  war  in  Angola  lasted  from  1975  to  2002  and  resulted  in  the 
demobilization of close to 80,537 ex-combatants in all the 18 provinces of the country.  The 
total  number  of  ex-combatants  in  the  target  area  is  29,762  representing  37%  of  total  ex-
combatants  in  Angola.  In  1995  the  Government  created  a  ministry  in  charge  of  Former 
Combatants  and  Motherland  Veterans.  An  Inter-ministerial  Commission  for  Coordination  of 
Socioeconomic Reintegration Actions of Ex-Combatants and Homeland Veterans was formed 
so as to support the integration of these ex-combatants into civil life. Its specific role was to 
provide support in the domains of Health, Finance, Agriculture, and social affairs. 
SREP Gender strategy. 
Gender analysis of production activities and decision making in rural households. Men 
24. 
and women in the rural areas of Angola have differing roles both at household and community levels. 
Commercial agricultural production and cattle rearing is mainly a male responsibility, while women are 
in charge of food crop cultivation, e.g.  leguminous, beans, sweet potatoes, cassava. Men are mostly 
involved  in  land  preparation,  mechanisation  and  irrigation  activities  and  are  responsible  for  trading 
cattle, cutting, hauling and selling timber from forests and fishing. Men are also employed in mining and 
carpentry. The primary role of women is to maintain the household and raise children, grow and prepare 
food, keep poultry and goats, and collect fuel wood and water. Women also work on farms by providing 
labour for tillage, planting, weeding, harvesting and forest food gathering. A lot of energy and time is 
spent processing produce for home consumption and for sale. This work is often either underpaid or 
unpaid and time consuming. Women usually manage to earn a small income for themselves by selling 
vegetables from home gardens and forest products (firewood, charcoal, wild fruits).The income is spent 
mainly for manufactured products, family food needs and children’s education.  Officially, women have 
equal land rights to men, but in practice customary laws are followed. Men have rights to land through 
inheritance and women, through marriage, albeit restricted to land used for food crop only. Farms run 
by female-headed households tend to have less labour available for farm work because of the limited 
resources  to  hire  labour.  Female  smallholders  have  little  access  to  loans  compared  to  their  male 
9 INE survey; 2014 
counterparts since they do not generally have control over the types of fixed assets needed, as collateral 
for loans.  
25. 
Education,  technology  and  information. Women  are  more  illiterate  than  men  in  all  of  the 
municipalities targeted. The average years of schooling are 8.3 for women and 14 for men. Women are 
also less likely to have access to information and to improved technologies.  
26. 
Gender  issues  related  to  food  security.  The  lack  of  ownership  access,  and  control  of 
livelihood assets, and the effect of HIV AIDS, and illiteracy negatively affect women’s food production 
and increase their food insecurity. In general, women’s role in food utilization for food security is critical 
as they are typically responsible for food processing and preparation and therefore are crucial to the 
dietary diversity of their household and overall nutrition status of the family. 
27. 
Gender differences and climate change impacts. Although climate change impacts on land 
resources and food availability in general, men and women perceive them differently10.While women 
perceive droughts in terms of water shortage for domestic use, men tend to perceive it in terms of lack 
of pasture for livestock. This causes men to migrate in search of green pastures. The ARP (Agricultural 
Recovery Project) design mission in the south perceived this migration as a major issue because men 
tend to set up families in new places and do not return. As men exit, women move into agriculture and 
the inequities in rights over resources including land, water, trees, livestock, grazing and fisheries raise 
serious constraints to the sustainability of their families. 
Gender,  youth,  disabled,  and  ex-combatants  mainstreaming  in  SREP  components.  In 
28. 
light of the premises described above and of the context specific gender analysis, SREP activities will 
address the problems of food and nutrition insecurity in the northern provinces as well as the challenges 
of climate change experienced by provinces in the south, through the adoption of a gender-responsive 
approach11.In general, the project will target 40%12 of women and 26%13 of youths as well as 2%14 of 
ex-combatants and 5%15of the disabled. SREP gender strategy will be mainstreamed in all the three 
components within the 2 sub-projects as described below. 
29. 
Proposed  interventions:  The  project  will  adopt  training  approaches  that  increase  women’s 
participation  (i.e.  increasing  the  use  of  female  extension  staff  and  trainers;  selecting  appropriate 
materials,  language  and  media;  and  ensuring  that  the  timing  and  venues  are  also  convenient  for 
women). Specific topics particularly important to women will be added in the FFS curriculum such as 
awareness raising on nutrition and diversification in the family diet, Family planning methods, maternity 
health care, and the prevention of HIV AIDS. 
30. 
SREP  will  provide  trainings  for  women  and  youth  in  group  formation,  leadership  skills, 
confidence  building  and  negotiating  skills  to  enhance  gender  balance  at  institutional  level  which 
currently  is  very  low  due  to  illiteracy  in  women.  Gender  awareness  trainings  will  be  conducted  at 
community  level  through  FFS  to  increase  general  understanding  about  the  importance  of  including 
women in investments to build resilience of family farms. 
31. 
Considering  the  gender  gaps  highlighted  above,  and  in  particular  the  i)  unequal  access  to 
resources (land, water, credit) in favour of men, ii) women’s low levels of literacy and numeracy, iii) lack 
of business development and management skills, and iv) limited voice, leadership and decision-making 
capacity  in  associations  and  cooperatives  and  other  groups,  the  project  will  support  the  following 
initiatives: a)  develop women's and youths’ in community planning and sustainable land management; 
10 ARP design mission findings show that men tend to focus more on fodder for animals and water for farming and 
production; whereas women focus on food and drinking water for their families as well as on their increased work 
burden. Men usually migrate in order to secure income. 
11 A growing body of evidence demonstrates that more equal gender relations within households and communities 
leads to better agricultural and development outcomes, including increases in farm productivity and improvements 
in family nutrition. (World Bank, FAO and IFAD, 2015). 
12 40 % of women will be targeted by the project. Despite the fact that women account for about 51% of the rural 
population they usually illiterate and face a lot of challenges; Reduced access to production resources. 
13 From calculations using the 2014 housing survey. The youths represent 26% of the population 
14 Though the ex-combatants represent just 0.003% of the population, 2% will be targeted due to their high 
vulnerability 
15 Though the disabled represent 2.5% of the population, 5% will be targeted due to their high vulnerability 
b) educating women and men about ownership and inheritance rights, including land; c) developing and 
strengthening  the    business  and  entrepreneurship  skills  of  women  and  youth  in  particular  in  small 
livestock, aquaculture, apiculture, and trading. For women, in particular, the Project will assist in the 
acquisition of cassava and maize milling machines and improved cooking stoves. This will reduce the 
time women spend in milling cassava and maize as well as  cooking for the family and give room for 
other  productive  activities.  Improved  storage  and  packaging  technologies  to  extend  shelf  life  will 
contribute  to  increasing  cassava  root  and  maize  availability  and  reliability,  stabilizing  prices  and 
facilitating market access and improve income. Youth will also be offered a range of income generating 
activities, and in particular providing support services such as mechanization, herbicide spraying, as well 
as seed agents. 
Targeting 
Project area and geographic targeting process 
32. 
Project Area – The SREP focus area will comprise of 7 Provinces - three in the southern part 
of Angola (Cunene, Benguela, Namibe) and four in the north (Zaire, Uige, Bengo and Cuanza Norte). 
These provinces are all characterised by high poverty rate, malnutrition, food insecurity and vulnerability 
due to climate change. The area in the north has a high agricultural potential (sufficient land, favourable 
climate and good soils.).  Thirty-five (35) municipalities have been targeted in the 7 provinces. Twenty-
two from the north and thirteen from the south. 
33. 
The  7  provinces  have  a  population  of  5.8  million,  some  23%  of  the  country`s  total.  The 
population of the target municipalities is 3.5 million - 12% of the country and 74% of the population of 
provinces concerned. These areas all have a high incidence of poverty. 
34. 
In the north, the main criteria for the selection of the municipalities are: (a) a high incidence of 
food  insecurity  and  vulnerability;  b)  a  potential  for  agricultural  development;  (c)  a  high  population 
density; and d) geographical contiguity to maximise efficiency of project operations. 
In the south the project  will build on the recovery  efforts of ARP (Angola  Recovery  Project). 
35. 
These provinces have been the most affected by drought and floods due to climate change. SREP will 
help build longer term resilience in the three provinces. 
36. 
characteristics:  
In terms of crop production, the project area can be divided into three zones with the following 
  The Northern zone (Cuanza norte, Bengo, Zaire, Uige) is a tropical dry to humid forest area 
with annual rainfall greater than 1500 mm. Cassava is the main staple covering 75% of area 
planted.  Other  crops  include  mixed  cropping  of  millet,  groundnuts  and  sweet  potatoes.  This 
zone has the most productive land in Angola. However, crops are grown mainly for subsistence 
with very little excess for sale. 
  The Central zone (Benguela) falls under the tropical plateaus with an altitude, between 1000 
and  2500  metres.  These  plateaus  have  rainfall  between  1250  and  1500  mm/year  and  an 
average  temperature  between  18-20°C.  Maize  is  more  suitable  here  and  it  is  cultivated  in 
association with other traditional crops such as beans, sorghum, millet, groundnuts and sweet 
potatoes.  
  The  Southern  zone  (Namibe,  Cunene).  It  has  a  dry  climate  ranging  from  a  tropical  desert 
(Namibe) to tropical dry savannah (Cunene) with low rainfall of 200 mm/year on average and 
an average yearly temperature of 20-22°C.) Livestock production is mainly developed in this 
zone. Food crops mainly include sorghum and millet. The soils in this desert climate zone suffer 
from the combined effect of erosion by rains and sun shining and are generally less fertile. Most 
households located in this zone are vulnerable to climate shocks (drought and flood) and face 
declining  yields  and  declined  livestock  production  due  to  increased  land  degradation  and 
changing rainfall patterns.  
37. 
summarized in the table below.
The  detailed  agro-ecological  and  livelihood  characteristics  of  the  project  target  area  are 
Table 7 : Agro-ecological and Livelihoods characteristics of the Project Target Area 
Province  Municipalities 
Agro-ecological zone 
Cuanza 
north 
Ambaca; Samba 
cajui; Lucala; 
Cazengo; 
Cambambe 
Uige 
Quitexe; Uige; 
Mucaba; Bungo; 
Damba; Maquela 
do Zombo; Sanza 
pombo; Mucaba 
Zaire 
Mbanza Congo; 
Cuimba; Nogui; 
Tombocco 
Consist of savannah grasslands and 
scrub brush with pockets of 
deciduous forest. Precipitation is 
around 800-1,200mm per annum. 
Rains last from October to April with 
a dry season from May to August. 
 Average temperatures range from a 
minimum of 16° Celsius to a 
maximum of 32 ° Celsius. 
This zone is on the high-altitude 
plateau. Vegetation is broad leaf and 
hard wood forests (The area 
includes the great Maiombe tropical 
rain forest in Cabinda province. 
Precipitation is around 1,000-
1,400mm per annum. Rains 
normally commence in October and 
last until April with a dry season from 
May to August. Average 
temperatures range from a minimum 
of 20° Celsius to a maximum of 32 ° 
Celsius 
This zone is on the high-altitude 
plateau. Vegetation is broad leaf and 
hard wood forests. The area 
includes the great Maiombe tropical 
rain forest in Cabinda province. 
Precipitation is around 1,000-
1,400mm per annum. Rains 
normally commence in October and 
last until April with a dry season from 
May to August. Average 
temperatures range from a minimum 
Crop production and food 
security. 
Mainly savanna forest and 
market-oriented cassava 
and fruits (plantain and 
sweet/table banana, 
pineapple, etc.).  
High agricultural productivity 
due to soil fertility and 
abundance of water. But 
agricultural potential 
insufficiently valued. 
Tropical forest cassava, 
banana coffee. 
High agricultural productivity 
due to soil fertility and 
abundance of water. But 
agricultural potential 
insufficiently valued. 
Main Problems 
Coping strategies 
Excessive rainfall and flooding 
occur during the rainy season; 
Strong winds and storm occur 
during the dry season.  
Human and wild life conflicts 
occur from February to April and 
during the dry season. Crop pests 
and diseases such as cassava 
mosaic and banana wilt occur 
annually throughout the year. Low 
crop prices especially for 
cassava. 
The main hazards are excessive 
rainfall, flooding, strong winds 
and storms, human-wild life 
conflict, crop pests and diseases, 
such as cassava mosaic and low 
prices of crops especially of 
coffee 
In addition to cassava farming, 
collection of wild foods, sale of 
local crafts for the less poor.  Sale 
of livestock and reliance on self-
employment such as trade. 
Obs: IDA thinks that cereals such 
as sorghum and millet can also 
be promoted for food and animal 
feed, which can be sold in 
southern provinces affected by 
droughts. 
Collection of wild foods and sale 
of local crafts and help from 
family members 
Tropical forest cassava, 
banana coffee. High 
agricultural productivity due 
to soil fertility and 
abundance of water. But 
agricultural potential 
insufficiently valued. 
The main hazards are excessive 
rainfall, flooding, strong winds 
and storms, human-wild life 
conflict, crop pests and diseases, 
such as cassava mosaic and low 
prices of crops specially of coffee. 
Collection of wild foods and sale 
of local crafts and help from 
family members 
Province  Municipalities 
Agro-ecological zone 
Crop production and food 
security. 
Main Problems 
Coping strategies 
Transitional lowland. Maize, 
cassava, beans (The main 
food crops grown are maize, 
cassava, sweet potatoes, 
groundnuts, beans, 
bananas, and vegetables; 
citrus fruits are 
grown on a smaller scale. 
The livestock kept are 
mainly goats 
and a few poultry. There is 
no significant cattle 
ownership, even among the 
better-off group.). 
 High agricultural 
productivity due to soil 
fertility and abundance of 
water. But agricultural 
potential insufficiently 
valued. need diversified 
livelihood 
options at household level 
Coastal fishing, horticulture 
and non-farm income. 
 Medium food security risk, 
need diversified livelihood 
options at household level. 
Bengo 
Nambuangongo; 
Dembos-Quibaxe; 
Dande; 
Pango- 
aluquiem 
of 20° Celsius to a maximum of 32 ° 
Celsius.  
The topography of this livelihood 
zone is characterized by highlands 
in the north, rolling hills in the center 
and mainly lowlands towards the 
south. The vegetation is forest and 
grassland. There are two distinct 
seasons: rainy season from 
September to April and a short dry 
season from May to August. 
Temperatures reach a maximum of 
about 30-35° Celsius and minimum 
of 20-25° Celsius. 
Benguela  Chongorai; 
Ganda, 
Balombo 
Cubal, 
The zone lies on the coast line, 
stretching along Namibe, Benguela, 
Kwanza Sul, Kuanza Norte, Zaire 
and abinda Provinces. It is 
characterized by arid and semi-arid 
conditions in the south, the 
topography is characterized by a 
narrow coastal flatland plain with an 
altitude of 0-400 meters, which rises 
abruptly to an inland plateau. 
Vegetation cover is mainly grass and 
woodlands with pockets of 
mangroves, steppe and old stands 
of olives and oil palms dating from 
colonial days. Precipitation ranges 
from 50-100mm per annum in the 
arid and semi-arid south increasing 
The main hazards are excessive 
rainfall, flooding, strong winds 
and storms, human-wild life 
conflict, crop pests and diseases, 
such as cassava mosaic and low 
prices of crops especially of 
coffee. (with respect to coffee I 
would say low productivity and 
quality of products) 
Collection of 
wild foods; Sale of local 
crafts and help from family 
members; (migration to urban and 
suburban Lunda city is also a 
coping strategy for Bengo 
citizens) 
to 
Labor  migration 
urban 
areas such as Luanda; Trading in 
manufactured goods; Reliance on 
self-employment 
Rough seas during the rainy 
season· Invasion by large 
numbers of seals as pests during 
the rainy season. 
 Sea floods with salty water 
flooding into fresh water during 
the period March to April.  
Oil spills occur throughout the 
year. 
Vegetable crop pests and 
diseases occur during end of 
rainy season in March to April 
Province  Municipalities 
Agro-ecological zone 
Crop production and food 
security. 
Main Problems 
Coping strategies 
Namibe 
Tombwa; Virei, 
Mocamedes, 
Camucuio, Bibala 
to about 800mm in the tropical north 
particularly in Zaire and Cabinda 
Provinces. 
Lies in the southern area, within the 
arid and semi-arid agroecological 
zones. Has a unimodal rainfall 
pattern, with average precipitation of 
about 200-400mm per annum. There 
are two seasons, the rainy season 
which lasts from mid-October to 
March and the dry season from April 
to early October.  
Southern livestock, millet 
and sorghum. 
High food security risk due 
to semi-arid conditions and 
low crop productivity need 
diversified livelihood 
options at household level 
Cunene 
Cahama; Curoca; 
Cuvelai; Ombanja 
Lies in the southern area, within the 
arid and semi-arid agroecological 
zones. Has a unimodal rainfall 
pattern, with average precipitation of 
about 200-400mm per annum. There 
are two seasons, the rainy season 
which lasts from mid-October to 
March and the dry season from April 
to early October.  
Southern livestock, millet 
and sorghum. 
 High food security risk due 
to semi-arid conditions and 
low crop productivity. Need 
diversified livelihood 
options at household level 
Sale of labor and collection of wild 
fruits for the poor and for the 
better off. Livestock sale and 
migration to Namibia border. 
Sale of labor and collection of wild 
fruits for the poor and for the 
better off. Increased livestock sale 
and migration to Namibia border. 
Livestock diseases occurs during 
the dry season. Reduced forage 
availability, lack of water 
availability for livestock, reduced 
market value due to affected 
livestock health, loss of livestock 
Low food prices occur during 
harvest season. Drought events 
are becoming more frequent 
instead of the usual 10 years 
cycle with dry spells registered 
once in two or three years during 
the last 10 years. 
 Livestock diseases occurs during 
the dry season. Reduced forage 
availability, lack of water 
availability for livestock, reduced 
market value due to affected 
livestock health, loss of livestock 
Low food prices occur during 
harvest season. Drought events 
are becoming more frequent 
instead of the usual 10 years 
cycle with dry spells registered 
once in two or three years during 
the last 10 years. 
Target Groups and Subgroups 
38. 
Target  groups.  Overall,  the  project  will  target:  (i)  food  insecure  subsistence  smallholder 
farmers most of whom cultivate less than 2 hectares of land but having potential for production and 
productivity increases; (ii) small and stable family farms with some level of organisation, mainly through 
associations,  producing  at  subsistence  level  with  the  potential  to  graduate  into  market-oriented 
production with focused direct support; (iii) women (at least 40% of beneficiaries) and youth (at least 
25%  of  beneficiaries)  organised  to  carry  out  processing,  marketing  and  service  provision  income 
generating  activities;  and  (iv)  other  rural  vulnerable  groups  such  as  the  disabled  persons  and  ex-
combatants will receive specific attention to facilitate their social integration in agricultural production 
and economic activities. 
39. 
In  the  north  SREP  will  target  around  152,000  households  i.e.  760,000  persons.  In  the  south 
project  has  as  target  of  65,400households  reaching  around  327,000  persons.   The  four  main  target 
subgroups are described below: 
  Food  insecure  subsistence  smallholder  farmers.  This  is  the  most  representative  of  the 
agricultural producers found in the area and include the most vulnerable groups i.e. women, 
youth,  the  disabled  and  ex-combatants.  Food  insecure  smallholder  farmers  account  for 
approximately 70% of the  project area.  Subsistence farmers  generally own less  than  2ha  of 
land with between 0.5 and 1 ha in production. These households are essentially characterised 
by:  (i)  low  production  and  productivity  of  the  main  crops  (cassava,  banana,  peanuts,  sweet 
potatoes, maze…etc.); (ii) vulnerability to climate change; iii) lack or low access to production 
factors (land, improved inputs, water and capital); (iii) limited access to mechanisation; (iv) weak 
organisational capacity; and (v) low income levels. In general, the target group does not often 
produce enough to cover their food needs and, in the south, are highly vulnerable to climate 
shocks. The project’s primary objective for these farmers is to increase production for home 
consumption  and  sales  in  local  markets  through  adapted  and  good  production  technologies 
and practices (conservation and climate smart agriculture and GAP),improved access to water 
and inputs and enhanced income generation.  
  Market-oriented  family  farms  with  some  level  of  organisation.  These  are  family  farmers  with 
diversified  farming  systems.  The  category  accounts  for  approximately  30%  of  the  farming 
population in the project areas. Some of farm households have up to 5 ha of farm land and are 
able  to  produce  surpluses  for  the  market.  They  are  normally  able  to  fulfil  their  own  family 
consumption needs and are able to secure seeds, casual labour and access to animal traction 
(albeit at a limited extent. They also lack, agricultural inputs, irrigation systems, access to credit 
and markets and extension services which impact their agricultural production, productivity and 
livelihoods. The objective for this group is to increase production outputs through the use of 
improved technologies in the north; conservation and climate smart farming in the south and 
income generation through access to markets.  
  Women and youth. Women, in particular heads of household, widows and young women are 
socially, culturally and economically disadvantaged  but are responsible for ensuring the well-
being  of  their  families  by  securing  a  large  part  of  the  household  income  from  agricultural 
activities. SREP will promote specific activities for women and youth organized into groups for 
processing (using labour saving technologies), marketing and service provision. Other activities 
targeting women concern nutrition where women are at the centre of food preparation for the 
family. Particular attention will be given to the youth who lack opportunities in rural areas leading 
to their migration to urban centres.  
  Other  vulnerable  groups  (The  disabled  persons  and  ex-combatants).  The  disabled  are  a 
significant disadvantaged social group due to their physical and/or mental disabilities compared 
to the rest of the population. The ex-combatants are more elderly between the ages of 50 and 
80 and are both socially and economically disadvantaged. This will be targeted through training 
and  capacity  building  activities  linked  to,  service  provision,  IGA  and  off-farm  income 
opportunities.  
40. 
Targeting  strategy.  The  targeting  strategy  follows  closely  the  national  and  IFAD  targeting 
approaches  and  guidelines.  These  targeting  mechanisms  ensure  the  participation  of  poorerrural 
households, whilst being inclusive of so-called ‘better- off’ smallholder farmers and specific vulnerable 
target  groups.  The  mechanisms  include:  (i)  geographic  targeting,  (ii)  self-targeting;  and  iii)  direct 
targeting.  Project  design  includes  empowering,  enabling  and  procedural  measures  to  promote 
sustainable  socio-economic  development  with  particular  focus  on  the  youth,  women  and  other 
vulnerable groups (ex-combatants and the disabled).  
41. 
Geographic  targeting.  The  selection  of  the  7  provinces  and  35  municipalities  has  been 
country-driven and is consistent with national priorities. At least 90% of the project’s beneficiaries will 
come from households falling into a sub-group of food insecure subsistence farmers that include women 
and youth.  
42. 
In the north, based on national priorities, SREP focuses on geographic areas and municipalities 
with: (a) a high incidence of food insecurity and vulnerability, b) a potential for agricultural development; 
(c) a high population density; and d) geographical contiguity to maximise efficiency of project operations.  
43. 
In  the  south,  criteria  for  targeting  include  areas  with  a  high  concentration  of  environmental 
degradation,  food  insecurity  and  poverty  as  well  as  areas  and  households  affected  by  floods  and 
droughts.  Within  the  municipalities,  the  project  will  target  communes  that  are  vulnerable  to  food 
insecurity. The 13 selected municipalities in the south are low income households that work in farming 
or pastoralism, of which over 18 percent are expected to be organised into Farmer Field Schools by the 
beginning of implementation. SREP will complement the activities of ARP in the Benguela and Cunene 
provinces.  In  Namibe,  SREP  will  build  on  the  recovery  activities  of  the  FAO  RETESA  project  which 
terminated in June 2008 (Land Rehabilitation and Pasture Management in Agro-Pastoral  Production 
Systems).  
44. 
Self-targeting.  The  farmers’  field  school  (FFS)  approach  will  ensure  self-targeting.  After 
receiving  information  on  the  FFS  approach,  smallholder  farmers  in  the  selected  municipalities  and 
communes  can  decide  if  they  want  to  become  member  of  a  FFS.  The  project  will  support  the 
establishment of as many FFS as requested by the farmers. Learning process and tools in the FFS will 
place emphasis on women and youth empowerment. For a second target group, attention will be given 
to  organising  women  and  youth  (including  the  disabled)  into  smaller  interest  groups  following 
participatory  processes  to  ensure  that  project  interventions  will  be  demand-driven  and  respond 
effectively to needs of the beneficiaries.  
45. 
Direct targeting of youth, women, ex-combatants and the disabled will also be implemented 
through established quotas ensuring that all of these groups are represented within the project main 
activities. As noted, above, the project will target 40%16 of women and 26%17 of youths as well as 2%18 
of ex-combatants and 5%19of the disabled: 
a)  The different groups of FFS members should include at least 70% coming from households in 
the food insecure subsistence farmer subgroup. At project level, at least 40% of women, 26% 
youth,5%  disabled  and  2%  ex-combatants  will  be  represented  in  the  field  school  training 
activities (FFS/FBS/Junior FFS). 
b)  The  same  proportions  of  women,  youth,  disabled  and  ex-combatants  will  be  targeted  to 
participate  in  community  natural  resources  management,  water  harvesting  and  sustainable 
land and water management at landscape and farmer field level, in the south. 
c)  The  same  proportions  will  participate  in  cooperative  business  planning,  investment  in 
production, diversification and market development in the north. 
Criteria for inclusion of women and youth 
46. 
Criteria for determining the eligibility of women and youth for group level investment support 
are: (a)completion of the first year of FFS/FBS/Junior FFS training and/or specific group level training 
around a common interest which may fall outside the interests of the mainstream FFS members; (b) 
16 40 % of women will be targeted by the project. Despite the fact that women account for about 51% of the rural 
population they usually illiterate and face a lot of challenges; Reduced access to production resources. 
17 From calculations using the 2014 housing survey. The youths represent 26%of the population 
18 Though the ex-combatants represent just 0.003% of the population, 2% will be targeted due to their high 
vulnerability 
19 Though the disabled represent 2.5% of the population, 5% will be targeted due to their high vulnerability 
group members follow good governance practices, follow a savings first principle and have dynamic 
leaders and members who respect the rules established by the groups; and (c) groups are willing and 
able to provide matching grant contributions for implementing envisaged micro-projects. 
For non-group members, transparency in their selection should be ensured by involving local 
47. 
leadership and local influential persons in the community in selecting beneficiary households. Some of 
the criteria that will be used in the selection of Project beneficiary households and communes include: 
a)  communes  within  the  target  municipalities  selected  to  include  vulnerable  households  and  food 
insecurity (and the south vulnerable to drought); b) households that are most vulnerable (economically 
and socially) and that have not received assistance from other programmes; c) households with signs 
of malnutrition; d) size of the households; e) female-headed households; f) youth headed households 
g) youth that are not integrated in the schooling system; and h) youth that are unemployed. 
48. 
Selection criteria for households eligible for individual mentoring include: 
  Willingness and capacity to respond to the mentoring process 
  Few household assets 
  Many dependants, including caring for orphans, the chronically ill, persons with disabilities 
and/or the elderly 
  Headed by women or children 
  Limited or no income-generating activities 
  Access to land and/or other natural resources that are not being used productively 
  Poor nutrition and shelter, malnourished children, and socially isolated from community and 
development activities 
  Women and children are the main sources of family labour 
  School dropouts (before completing primary school) 
49. 
Implementation: The Technical  Assistance  team of the  SCU  will consist  of an  International 
consultant  in  Social  Development  supported  by  two  national  consultants  –  for  the  north  and  south, 
respectively. However, implementation of the targeting strategy will be the responsibility of the entire 
project technical team: central project management unit staff, municipal and provincial officers and field 
level service providers. The TA cadre will train IDA staff at all levels, and other service providers.  At 
start-up, Projectstaff and technical service providers will be trained in approaches to targeting, social 
inclusion  and  gender  mainstreaming.  .Ultra-poor  households  will  be  selected  through  community 
participation and mentored so that they can participate in development initiatives. Data will be collected 
at  field  level  in  collaboration  with  the  FFS  facilitators  and  social  mobilisers  on:  (i)  the  number  of 
beneficiaries  including  women,  youth,  disabled,  ex-combatants;  (ii)  the  level  of  participation  of  the 
different target groups in the planned activities; and (iii) the impact of project interventions on the poverty 
/  vulnerability  of  beneficiaries.  Compliance  with  targeting  in  accordance  with  the  strategy  will  be  a 
criterion for selecting and renewing contracts / partnership agreements with stakeholders and  project 
staff.  The  National  Consultative  Council  for  ex-combatants,  as  well  as  women's  associations  / 
organizations and disabled associations and youth associations will be directly involved in the project 
targeting activities. 
50. 
targeting strategies. The measures will be mainstreamed at all levels of the project: 
Empowerment and capacity building measures will complement the self-targeting and direct 
(a)  Household level.  
  Reduce women’s unpaid workload (e.g. in collecting water and fuel wood and weeding, and 
harvesting, and processing, as well as child caring and nutrition) through the adoption of labour-
saving  post-harvest  and  value  adding  practices  such  as  milling  machines  for  processing  of 
cassava  and  maize.  Other  activities  could  include,  agricultural  mechanisation  especially  for 
female headed households and the use of fuel efficient cook stoves and the availability of water 
points, especially in the south, for household consumptive use. These interventions will reduce 
enormously the time women spend in gathering firewood, cooking, fetching water and planting 
and processing of food.  
  Encourage division of labour among household members. Children and men will be encouraged 
to participate in certain household chores such as gathering firewood, cooking, fetching water. 
This will be incorporated to the FFS curricula. 
  Encourage  household  members to assist the  disabled and ex-combatants in tasks that  they 
may have difficulty performing.  
(b)  Community level 
  Raise gender awareness at provincial (and commune) level to enhance understanding of the 
importance of including women, youth, the disabled and ex-combatants in rural development. 
This will also be done through social mentoring at the community level. 
  Mobilize  women,  youth,  the  disabled  and  ex-combatants,  to  actively  participate  in  project 
 
activities. 
Increase  community-based  consultation  on  public  investment  in  infrastructure  and  Good 
Agricultural  Practices  relating  to  environmental  management,  climate  change  and  land 
degradation processes. 
  Establish  and/or  strengthen  FFSs,  farmer  associations  and  cooperatives  and  networks  by 
providing financial literacy and leadership training in selected production and post-production 
activities, as well as small entrepreneurship development for the women and youth (e.g. milling 
machines,  apiculture,  aquaculture,  vegetable  production).  Youth  will  be  encouraged  to 
participate  in  service  provision  and  farming  and  non-businesses  such  as  repair  and 
maintenance  service  workshops,  transportation,  construction  as  well  as  the  processing  of 
traditional medicines from plants and trees, and other non-timber forest products- s wild fruits, 
mat  and  basket  making.  Tailoring  and  carpentry  workshops,  mushroom  cultivation  amongst 
others should provide opportunities for the disabled. 
  Work with women leaders in communities through mentoring processes for vulnerable groups 
and individuals. 
 
(c)  Service delivery 
  There will be climate change monitoring and data analysis, vulnerability analysis and mapping, 
identification of adaptation measures for family farmers relevant in the different agro-ecological 
zones, and the availability on time of climate forecasting and establishment of an early warning 
drought and floods system. 
Information will be made available on community organisation, FFS establishment, facilitation 
and  curriculum  development,  climate  change  awareness  raising  and  adaptation  measures 
relevant for family farmers and their cooperatives; complementary irrigation and establishment 
of  water  users  associations  (WUA),  community  natural  resources  management,  water 
harvesting and sustainable land and water management at landscape and farmer’s field level 
(mainly  for  the  south);  and  cooperative  business  planning  and  development  (mainly  for  the 
north).  
  Farmer  Field  School  curricula  will  be  elaborated  to  take  into  consideration  special  needs  of 
smallholders,  women  and  youths  to  reflect  Sustainable  Land  Management  (SLM)  and  GAP 
practices for improved production and food security. 
  The GALS approach in FFS will be adopted. 
51. 
Enabling measures will be implemented through the sensitisation and training of government 
staff (i.e. National, Provincial and  Municipality level staff on i)the establishment and strengthening of 
groups  and  associations;  (b)  enhancing  the  skills  of  beneficiaries  in  agricultural  production, 
transportation, processing, and marketing; and (c) assisting beneficiaries to prepare development plans 
and investment proposals (Subproject proposals);d) training in SLM and climate change adaptation; e) 
biodiversity conservation; and f) monitoring and evaluation of project achievements against expected 
results20 
52. 
Gender-sensitive  training  delivery  processes  will  be  applied,  by  selecting  suitable  location, 
language, timing and duration of the trainings; training couples and entire households rather than just 
single spouse and ensuring language and literacy levels that reflect the abilities of the participants. (see 
Attachment 1 – Targeting Checklist). 
53. 
Procedural measures; Procedures have been put in place for the effective management of 
key project activities such as functional and financial literacy, as well as entrepreneurship training for 
20 The targeting performance will be monitored using participatory M&E and assessed at mid-term review. All 
data will be disaggregated by sex and age as appropriate, with due qualitative analysis.  Gender-sensitive 
indicators will be part of the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) data collection and reporting.  
small holder farmers. Procedures and conditions for application and selection of households to receive 
matching  grants  and  participate  in  the  revolving  funds  will  be  simplified  for  ease  of  beneficiary 
understanding particularly for the most vulnerable. Application forms and subproject proposal formats 
will be prepared and made available in Portuguese with possible translation into local languages, as 
necessary, in particular for illiterates.  
54. 
Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS).  The  proposed  adoption  of  the  Gender  Action 
Learning  System  (GALS)  aims  to  facilitate  addressing  unequal  gender  and  social  relations  and 
enhancing ownership of project activities by the target groups. GALS is a versatile methodology that 
uses a set of tools that can reach both literate and illiterate people, it can be integrated with a variety of 
interventions (such as rural finance, natural resource management, value chain development), and can 
be used for households and groups and in FFS. In SREP it will be applied in the context of FFS, where 
at  least  90%  of  the  beneficiaries  participating  in  the  FFS  should  come  from  households  in  the  food 
insecure subsistence farmer subgroup.  
Attachments to Appendix 2 (SREP Poverty, targeting and gender) 
Attachment 1 - Targeting checklist 
Targeting checklist 
Design 
1. Does the main target group – those expected 
to benefit most – correspond to IFAD’s target 
group  as  defined  by  the  Targeting  Policy 
(poorer households and food insecure)? 
2.  Have target sub-groups been identified and 
described  according  to  their  different  socio-
economic 
and 
livelihoods  –  with  attention  to  gender  and 
youth differences? 
characteristics, 
assets 
3. Is evidence provided of interest in and likely 
uptake  of  the  proposed  activities  by  the 
identified  target  sub-groups?  What  is  the 
evidence? 
4.  Does  the  design  document  describe  a 
feasible and operational targeting strategy in 
line with the Targeting Policy, involving some 
or all of the following measures and methods: 
4.1  Geographic  targeting  –  based  on 
poverty data or proxy indicators to identify, for 
programmes, 
area-based 
geographic  areas 
these, 
communities) with high concentration of poor 
people; 
4.2 Self-targeting – when good and services 
respond  to 
the  priority  needs,  resource 
endowments  and  livelihood  strategies  of 
target groups; 
(and  within 
projects 
or 
Yes,  primary  beneficiaries  of  SREP  are  smallholder 
farmers with high incidence of food and nutrition insecurity 
and  vulnerability  to  climate  change.  The  geographical 
areas  targeted  in  the  south  are  among  those  facing  the 
greatest threat of climate change with recurrent floods and 
droughts. For the north the targeted areas are those having 
the greatest agricultural potential in terms of availability of 
land, climate and soil.  
SREP target group comprises four main subgroups: i) (food 
insecure subsistence  farmers with access to less than two 
hectares  of  land  but  having  potential  for  production  and 
productivity increases; (ii) market oriented family farms with 
some  level  of  organisation,  mainly  through  associations, 
with  access  to  up  to  2-5  hectares  of  land  producing  at 
subsistence  level  with  the  potential  to  graduate  into  a 
market-oriented  level;  (iii)  women  and  youth  organised  to 
carry  out    production,  processing,  marketing  and  service 
provision  income  generating  activities.  The  project  will 
target 40% of women and 26% of youths; (iv) Other rural 
vulnerable groups such as the disabled persons (5%) and 
ex-combatants (2%) will received specific attention by the 
project  to  facilitate  their  social  integration  in  agricultural 
production and economic activities. 
For the south SREP will add to the ARP recovery activities 
building more long-term resilience for people in the climate 
change  vulnerable  provinces.  ARP  was  designed 
to 
augment recovery of the drought affected target households 
by  building  on  the  emergency  operations  conducted  by 
government and Development Partners. SREP in the south  
will similarly build on the recovery efforts of ARP and other 
development partners to build longer term resilience to the 
vagaries  of  climate  change. 
Interventions  aimed  at 
strengthening  the  community  and  household  productive 
infrastructure  whilst  supporting 
the  development  and 
diversification of rural livelihoods. 
In  the  north,  the  project  activities  were  designed  in  a 
participatory  way  together  with  IDA  officers  the ministry  of 
Agriculture who represented the interests and needs of their 
communities.  The design  field  mission in  April 2018  came 
out clearly with the needs of the population which were 1) 
increased  of  mechanisation  and  irrigation  systems,  ii) 
improved  soil  health  and  increased  productivity  of  agro 
ecosystems  through  the  use  of  GAP;  iii)  diversified  and 
climate resilient production systems that increase all-season 
income generation. iv) diversification of income 
Targeting  strategy.  The  geographic  targeting  has  been 
used  to  select  provinces  and  municipalities  with  high 
climatic shocks for the south; Food insecurity and poverty, 
and high agriculture potential for the north. The selection 
of the 7 provinces and thirty-five municipalities has been 
country-driven and consistent with national priorities.  
The project main aims are to address the priority needs of 
the  Food  insecure  subsistence  agro-pastoral  farmers  by 
increasing  the  production  for  home  consumption  through 
improved  access  to  water  and  conservation  and  climate 
Targeting checklist 
Design 
4.3  Direct  targeting  –  when  services  or 
resources  are  to  be  channelled  to  specific 
individuals or households; 
smart farming for the south; and improved GAP for the north, 
and  some  selling  of  surplus  for  income  generation.  SREP 
also  aims  to address  the needs of the  mostly  food secure 
farmers  by  diversifying  production  and 
subsistence 
improving  on  their  income  generation  through  access  to 
markets with a diversified choice of products.  
SREP activities will use quotas as follows: 
   (40%  women;  26%  youth;  5%  disabled;  2%  ex-
combatants)  to  ensure  women  and  youths  and  other 
vulnerable group are represented among the membership 
and/or leadership of producer groups, cooperatives, FFS, 
trade associations, WUA. etc. 
  Introduce  technical  training  specifically  targeting  women 
and  youth  such  as  training  on  co  leadership  skills, 
business  planning, 
literacy 
confidence building, and entrepreneurship and negotiation 
skills, maternal health care, nutrition.  
functional  and 
financial 
4.4  Empowering  measures  –  including 
information  and  communication, 
focused 
capacity- and confidence-building measures, 
organizational  support,  in  order  to  empower 
and encourage the more active participation 
and  inclusion  in  planning  and  decision-
making of people who traditionally have less 
voice and power; 
  Promote women and youth visits, exchange programmes 
at FFS and other Associations.  
SREP activities will aim to: 
  Reduce women’s unpaid workloads through labour-saving 
technologies, such as irrigation systems, minimum tillage, 
processing  facilities  (milling  machines  and  huskers), 
efficient cook stoves, water points etc.  
  Encourage  women`s  participation  in  the  executive  of 
mixed  associations  and  FFS;  At  least  30%  should  be 
women.) 
  Disseminate public information about the project to ensure 
activities and services are accessible to all and to enhance 
transparency; 
  Raise  gender  awareness  in  the  community  through 
introduction  of  certain  topics  such  as  the  distribution  of 
labour in households during trainings in the FFS and other 
associations.  
  Mobilize  women,  youths,  disabled,  ex-combatants  to 
actively  participate  in  project  activities  as  for  improved 
livelihoods through the use of Quotas” and mentors; 
  Establish 
  Increase  community-based  consultation  on  public 
investment in infrastructure and research related to GAP 
and climate change; 
and/or 
groups, 
strengthen 
associations,  FFS  and  networks,  providing  financial 
literacy and leadership training for each vulnerable group 
and support the development of the small businesses (e.g. 
apiculture,  aquaculture,  processing,  Transportation,  and 
basket making); 
producer 
4.5  Enabling  measures  –  to  strengthen 
stakeholders’  and  partners’  attitude  and 
commitment  to  poverty  targeting,  gender 
equality 
empowerment, 
including  policy  dialogue,  awareness-raising 
and capacity-building; 
and  women’s 
  Integrate  gender  sensitisation 
training  of 
agricultural  staff  and  extension  workers  and  farmer 
training programmes. 
SREP activities will aim to: 
into 
the 
  Support  national  level  authorities  to  help  reduce  climate   
shocks by using GAP and SLM practices; 
  Ensure  gender-orientated  training  sessions  (selecting  a 
suitable location, timing and duration; training couples and 
other  family  members  on  certain  aspects  of  family  and 
home care instead of just one person;  
  Sensitise  and 
train  government  staff  (i.e.  national, 
provincial,  Commune),  agricultural,  research;  service 
providers,  microfinance  institutions,  the  SCU,  PIT,  PPIU 
and other implementing partners on gender empowerment 
and social inclusion.  
  Encourage 
female 
extension  staff  to  participate  in  training  and  field  visits, 
the  recruitment  and 
training  of 
Targeting checklist 
Design 
both to develop  their capacity  and  to encourage  women 
participation. 
  Promote 
the  use  of  participatory  processes 
(e.g. 
participatory  needs  assessment,  community  action 
planning and participatory implementation processes). 
  Ensure  the  participation  of  youths,  women  and  other 
vulnerable  groups  in  community-based  natural  resource 
management,  watershed  management,  small-scale 
range  management,  Transportation  and 
irrigation, 
processing, and other income-generating activities. 
4.6  Attention  to  procedural  measures  – 
that could militate against participation by the 
intended target groups; 
SREP will have to: 
  Simplify  and  streamline  application  procedures  and 
record-keeping. 
  Provide technical support by NGOs to assist groups, and 
FFS  in  project  activities.  Such  as  trainings  and  the 
preparation of business plans. 
  Make  beneficiary  contribution  requirements  (e.g.  the 
provision of labor or cash) realistic. (in the matching grant).  
  Lay  emphasis  on  endogenous  technologies  to  ensure 
4.7  Operational  measures  –  appropriate 
project management arrangements, staffing, 
selection  of  implementation  partners  and 
service providers. 
that 
5.  Monitoring  targeting performance.  Does  the 
design  document  specify 
targeting 
performance  will  be  monitored  using 
participatory  M&E,  and  also  be  assessed  at 
mid-term  review?  Does  the  M&E  framework 
allow 
the  collection/analysis  of  sex-
disaggregated  data  and  are  there  gender-
sensitive 
to 
monitor/evaluate  outputs,  outcomes  and 
impacts? 
indicators  against  which 
for 
least 
Financial  Management  Officer, 
sustainability of project activities.  
A  Project  Single  Coordination  Unit  (SCU)  will  be 
responsible for the day-to-day management of the project. 
the  Programme  
The  SCU  comprise  of  at 
Coordinator, 
a 
Procurement  Officer  and  a  Monitoring  and  Evaluation 
(M&E) Officer. Technical assistance will be provided at the 
level  of  the  SCU  in  selected  technical  subjects  –  FFS 
development, sustainable land management, rangelands 
development,  small  scale 
livestock 
husbandry, post-harvest management and marketing and 
curriculum  development  The  SCU  will  consolidate 
progress,  do  the  monitoring  and  evaluation  reports  and 
receive  advice    from  the  various  committees  such  as 
Programme  Coordination  Committee(PCC).T  Provincial 
Project  Coordinating  Committee 
(PPCC)  Provincial 
Governance Committee (PGC) 
irrigation,  small 
The  targeting  performance  will  be  monitored  and  report 
produced based on participatory M&E. The Monitoring and 
Evaluation Officer and his assistants will be directly involved 
in  collecting  data  on  Gender  and  reporting.”  This  will  be 
assessed  at  mid-term  review  and  final  evaluation  of  the 
project.  All  data  will  be  disaggregated  by  sex  and  age  as 
appropriate,  with  due  qualitative  analysis  (women,  youths, 
disabled, ex-combatants).   
Attachment 2 - Gender checklist 
Gender checklist 
Design 
1.  The  project  design  report  contains  –  and  project 
implementation is based on – gender-disaggregated 
poverty data and an analysis of gender differences in 
the  activities  or  sectors  concerned,  as  well  as  an 
analysis  of  each  project  activity  from  the  gender 
perspective  to  address  any  unintentional  barriers  to 
women’s participation. 
2.  The  project  design  articulates  –  or  the  project 
implements – actions with aim to: 
  Expand women’s economic empowerment through 
to  and  control  over  productive  and 
access 
household assets; 
  Strengthen  women’s  decision-making  role  in  the 
household and community and their representation 
in membership and leadership of local institutions; 
  Achieve  a  reduced  workload  and  an  equitable 
workload balance between women and men. 
3. The project design report includes one paragraph in 
the targeting section that explains what the project will 
deliver from a gender perspective. 
4. The project design report describes the key elements 
for operationalizing the gender strategy, with respect 
to the relevant project components. 
5. The design document – and the project implements 
–  operational  measures  to  ensure  gender-equitable 
participation  in,  and  benefit  from,  project  activities. 
These will generally include:  
5.1 Allocating adequate human and financial resources 
to implement the gender strategy. 
5.2  Ensuring  and  supporting  women’s  active 
in  project-related  activities,  decision-
participation 
making  bodies  and  committees, 
including  setting 
specific targets for participation. 
of 
5.3  Ensuring  that  project  management  arrangements 
(composition 
project  management 
unit/programme  coordination  unit,  project  terms  of 
reference  for  staff  and  implementing  partners,  etc. 
reflect  attention  to  gender  equality  and  women’s 
empowerment concerns. 
the 
Yes.  Gender  analysis  was  conducted,  which 
includes poverty, livelihoods and analysis of specific 
social risks and barriers faced in rural communities. 
For analysis of each project activity from the gender 
perspective see main text of PDR. 
The project will raise awareness among women and 
men  and  youths  about  ownership  and  inheritance 
rights through FFs and other associations. Also the 
project will promote joint land titling of Associations 
/FFS  of  which  women  are  part.  Market-oriented 
women  and  youths  as  well  as  other  vulnerable 
groups  will  receive  functional  and  financial  literacy 
and  leadership  trainings  and  will  be  facilitated 
access 
to  extension  advice  and  credits  and 
marketing, transportation and processing facilities  
SREP  will  work  with  different associations  such  as 
water/land/forest/livestock/agriculture association to 
increase  women’s  participation  as  members  and 
leaders (at least >30% of total beneficiaries). Women 
will be trained in leadership skills, financial literacy, 
entrepreneurship,  nutrition  ,  Maternal  health  care 
etc. 
SREP  will  help  reduce  women’s  unpaid  workloads 
through 
technologies,  such  as 
irrigation and mechanisation technologies, minimum 
tillage  in  conservation  agriculture,  efficient  cook 
stoves,  Cassava  and  maize  milling  machines, 
improving  water  management  and  availability  for 
households. 
YES. See paragraph 65; Direct targeting of youths, 
women,  Ex-combatants  and  disabled  will  also  be 
done through the established of quotas ensuring that 
both  youths,  women,  Ex-combatants  and  disabled 
are represented among the project main activities: 
YES.  See  paragraphs  on  gender  strategy  and 
components.  
labour-saving 
  This  has  been  budgeted 
Training on gender sensitive approaches has been 
incorporated  into  the  curricula  of  FFS  and  other 
in 
organisations. 
component 1 and 2. At SCU level, the Programme  
Coordinator  and  the  monitoring  and  Evaluation 
Officerwill  have  the  responsibility  for  ensuring  that 
the  gender  strategy  are  incorporated  in  the  project 
management tools such as AWPB, PIM, etc.  
SREP will use quotas as seen below: 
30%  women  in  leading  positions  within  FFS  and 
associations;  At  least  40%  of  women  trained 
through FFS on SLM and GAP; 
SCU,  PIT,  PPIU  will  aim  to  have  a  balanced 
representation  of  men  and  women  among  its 
staffing.  Within  the  SCU,  the  M&E  Officer  will  be 
responsible  for  ensuring  that  the  targeting  and 
gender  strategy  are  taken  into  consideration  in 
project implementation;( planning and monitoring of 
the gender mainstreaming in the project). This will be 
Gender checklist 
Design 
5.4  Ensuring  direct  project  outreach  to  women  (for 
example through appropriate numbers and qualification 
of  field  staff),  especially  where  women’s  mobility  is 
limited. 
the  general  supervision  of 
done  under 
programme coordinator of the SCU 
At least 40% of FFS participants will be women. FFS 
trainings will facilitate women attendance by selecting 
location, timing and duration of the trainings suitable 
to  them.  Appropriate  communication  tools  will  be 
used such as posters and demonstrations 
the 
6.  The  project’s  logical  framework,  M&E,  MIS,  and 
learning systems specify in design – and project M&E 
unit  collects,  analyses  and  interprets  sex-  and  age-
disaggregated  performance  and 
impact  data, 
including  specific  indicators  on  gender  equality  and 
women’s empowerment. 
 Indicators  of  the  logframe  are  disaggregated  by 
gender  and  age.  Gender  and  youth  disaggregated 
performance and impact indicators will be monitored 
from  the  baseline  studies,  to  quarterly  reports, 
annual  report,  supervision  and  evaluation  reports, 
final project report. 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Country performance and lessons learned
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Country performance and lessons learned 
Country Performance 
IFAD's first project in Angola, in 1991 was the Malanje Smallholder Sector Rehabilitation Project. 
1. 
A Country Strategic Opportunities Paper (COSOP) and new projects were formulated after the signing 
of the Lusaka Peace Accord in November 1994. At the time, there were two active loan-funded projects, 
the  Northern  Region  Food  Crops  Development  Project  (PRODECA)  and  the  Northern  Fishing 
Communities Development Programme (PESNORTE). PESNORTE became effective in 1999. The new 
outbreak of war in late 1998, meant it was impossible to work in the field and operations all but ceased. 
At  the  end  of  the  war  in  early  2002  the  security  situation  improved  and  the  project  area  became 
accessible again. PESNORTE objectives were re-evaluated and judged to still be valid, therefore the 
implementation period was subsequently extended to the end of 2007.  
2. 
Following  the  preparation  of  the  COSOP,  a  new  project,  the  Market  Oriented  Smallholder 
Agriculture Project (MOSAP), was formulated by the World Bank for an amount of USD 49.5 million to 
be co-financed by IFAD  with a loan of USD  8.5 million. MOSAP  became effective in  2009,  however 
implementation fell behind schedule early on, with field activities having started only around mid-2012, 
some 2.5 years after effectiveness. Delays were attributed to the difficulties in recruiting and retaining 
project staff, as well as extremely limited capacity in the Ministry of Agriculture to guide, manage and 
monitor  the  project.  The  project  was  restructured  and  FAO  recruited  to  run  a  smallholder  farmer 
education program (“Farmer Field Schools”, FFS). Consequently project implementation accelerated 
and by the project closing date in March 2016, 91% of IFAD funds were disbursed and results in terms 
of  smallholder  farmer  adoption  of  improved  technologies  were  highly  encouraging.    During  the 
implementation of the programme the MOA managed to establish criteria and procedures for supporting 
the development, selecting and monitoring of small investment projects with small family farmer’s FOs 
and gain experience from their implementation. The Angola Fisheries and Aquaculture Project (AFAP) 
became  effective  in  July  2016,  more  than  a  year  after  IFAD  approval.  The  Smallholder Agriculture 
Development  and  Commercialisation  Project  in  Cuanza  Sul  and  Huila  Provinces  (SADCP-C&H-
SAMAP) was approved by the IFAD Executive Board of April 2017 and implementation commenced in 
February  2018.  The  project  contributes  to  increasing  smallholder  productivity  by  providing  capacity 
building to subsistence farmers to improve their technical, organisational and managerial competencies 
whilst  supporting  a  more  conducive  policy  and  enabling  environment.  SAMAP  also  invest  with  FOs 
presenting  small  investment  projects  following  criteria  and  procedures  and  a  selection  mechanism 
established  based  on  the  lessons  learned  from  MOSAP.  Finally,  the  Agricultural  Recovery  Project 
(ARP), was formulated in 2017 with implementation expected to commence in the near future The ARP 
supports the restoration productive assets and droughts in the Southern Provinces.  
3. 
The strategic emphasis of IFAD’s programme in Angola, to date has been twofold: (i) supporting  
increased smallholder agriculture, fisheries and aquaculture productivity and production while building 
on lessons learned from earlier projects; and (ii) helping farmers and pastoralists in Southern Angola to 
recover from a five-year drought through a re-capitalisation of agricultural production. A commonality 
between  all  projects,  in  the  IFAD  portfolio,  has  been  the  Farmer  Field  School  as  the  principal 
implementation  and  extension  modality  for  recovery,  resilience  and  longer  term  development.  The 
SREP design builds on these two strategic thrusts.    
4. 
SREP has also been informed by the preliminary findings of the recently completed Evaluation 
of the Country Strategy and Programme (2005-17) (CSPE) and has taken on board the principal lessons 
learned. Foremost is the need for intensive capacity development at all levels. CSPE noted that “little 
has been done to address the dearth of human resources in Angola that emerges every time a staff 
member of a PCU or PIU has to be recruited, and to support the development of a pool of experienced 
professionals, in particular in the management of development initiatives and on fiduciary issues, and 
in some technical areas of key importance in agricultural and rural development.” The CSPE proposed 
that IFAD makes capacity development one of the pillars and cross-cutting principles for the programme 
portfolio. It goes on to recommend that IFAD contributes to fill the gap in the national human capital in 
the areas and sectors that are relevant to the implementation of its portfolio and that it should be done 
through “the systematic allocation of resources and management provisions within the portfolio, that 
provide opportunities for capacity development at the individual and institutional level.” 
5. 
IFAD,  has  also  been  engaged  in  non-project  activities,  supporting  the  Government  of Angola 
(GoA)  to  strengthen  its  institutional  capacity  in  agricultural  research  and  extension  to  enhance 
smallholder  access  to  agricultural  innovations  and  technologies  that  address  emerging  issues  of 
productivity,  production,  and  commercialisation  of  priority  crops.  Consultations  with  GoA  are  being 
conducted to design the Results Based - Country Strategic Opportunities Programme (RB-COSOP) for 
the period 2019 – 2022. The COSOP process is participatory with multi-stakeholder consultations to 
identify and work towards addressing policy related constraints to the provision of effective support to 
increase  smallholder  agriculture,  fisheries  and  aquaculture.  Consultations  with  the  Government  and 
other relevant stakeholders commenced in April 2018 with an objective of taking stock of lessons learnt 
in the implementation of the country’s rural agriculture support programme, whilst identifying challenges 
and  creating  a  vision  for  the  RB-COSOP.  During  the  preliminary  consultations,  GoA  highlighted  key 
contextual considerations: i) the increasing importance of agriculture as a critical part of GoA's economic 
diversification  strategy;  ii)  the  emerging  focus  on  inter-sectorial  coordination  and  collaboration  in 
delivering  rural  agricultural  development  programmes;  iii)  GoA's  preference  for  IFAD  to  consider  an 
integrated programmatic approach in future interventions in the country; and iv) the continued need to 
build capacities at Government (national, provincial and municipal), community and household levels 
for effective implementation of agriculture development programmes and sustainability of impact.  
6. 
The  RB-COSOP  is  expected  to  focus  on  contributing  to  the  sustainable  and  inclusive 
transformation of family farming, to raise incomes and improve food security, and in this way contribute 
to  economic  diversification.  The  goal  is  expected  to  be  achieved  through  three  focus  areas  i.e.  (i) 
sustainably increase production and commercialisation through access to productive and post-harvest 
assets,  knowledge  and  technology,  (ii)  promote  agricultural  value  chains  and  agribusiness  through 
investments that  stimulate rural economic activity and employment for the rural poor, and (iii) strengthen 
institutional, community and human capacities to ensure effective implementation and sustainability of 
rural  development  programmes,    and  empower  the  rural  poor  to  meaningfully  participate  in  the 
transformation of the rural sector. The feedback from the COSOP formulation process as well as other 
factors have been taken into account in the SREP design. 
Lessons Learned 
Further lessons generated from IFAD’s experience in project implementation have also guided 
7. 
SREP design. These include: 
Design and implementation of sub (micro) projects 
Investing  with  farmers  through  demand-driven  small  investment  proposals  (subprojects) 
8. 
promotes  sustainability.  The  modalities  for  preparing  and  implementing  demand-driven  subprojects 
under  MOSAP  has  generally  been  regarded  as  successful  (see  project  external  evaluation)  and 
investment  criteria,  procedures  and  selection  mechanism  have  evolved  over  time  from  MOSAP  to 
SAMAP and MOSAP II based on lessons learned. The key elements of success were (a) creation of 
ownership through community participation in all stages of subproject preparation and implementation, 
as well as direct community contributions (cash or in kind); (b) farmers’ organisations’ commitment to 
engage in O&M before disbursement of project contribution; and (c) training of farmers’ organisations 
and assistance with establishment of user rules and cost-sharing agreements. These elements together 
with the proven investment criteria, procedures and selection mechanism already managed by IDA have 
been incorporated in the SREP design. 
Flexibility  is  required  in  the  design  of  micro-projects  and  the  criteria  set  for  eligibility  for  the 
9. 
different categories of beneficiary groups. The experience of MOSAP I and II, more recently SAMAP 
show that sub-projects are offered at three different levels: a) area level for infrastructure investments 
b) community and group level, for productive group investments and c) individual household level for a 
diversified  range  of  beneficiaries  (women,  youth,  ex-combatants,  the  disabled  and  the  ultra-poor. 
Flexibility is needed in micro project design to ensure inclusiveness and the ability to reach the more 
vulnerable households. Besides matching grants and revolving fund mechanisms direct cash and kind 
transfers should also be applied. 
Monitoring and Evaluation is an important management tool for project adaptation to changing contexts: 
Lessons learned from the MOSAP project implemented to date and the IFAD portfolio currently under 
implementation recognise the importance that needs to be given to M&E. As with the limited institutional 
capacity within Angola as a whole, there is a dearth of skilled M&E experts in the country. Considerable 
time is taken to recruit and keep M&E experts. The collection, compilation and analysis of field data for 
monitoring purposes is a major challenge requiring the development of appropriate software for use at 
field  level.  Given  these  lessons  it  is  vitally  important  that  adequate  technical  staffing  at  all  levels  is 
included in project design. Resources also need to be made available for external Technical Assistance 
support in M&E design. Service providers and communities need to be mobilised and trained to support 
the M&E system in the target areas. 
Capacity building and incentives 
10.  Strengthening  the  capacity  of  local  service  providers  will  be  necessary  to  help  farmer 
organisations  and  other  target  beneficiaries  to  effectively  develop  and  implement  micro  project 
proposals. While the use of local service providers to assist FOs in the preparation and implementation 
of sub-projects is preferable for long term sustainability, their capacity is being stretched, particularly as 
donor support for the country is expanding.  Project design has to recognise this limitation and ways 
sought to train and capacitate local NGOs on a regular basis. A cadre of specialised international TA 
will be necessary to provide effective support to IDA staff, local NGOs and the private sector throughout 
project implementation.  
Involvement of local authorities at the provincial and municipal levels in planning and monitoring 
11. 
project  activities:  Engaging local authorities  in implementation has been seen to  be vital  in ensuring 
ownership of the project at local level, facilitating local coordination and contributing to the decentralised 
planning process. Over time, it will also help to convince local authorities to make available budgetary 
resources for smallholder farmer support and development.  
12.  Ensuring simplicity of design and ease of implementation: Considering the recurrent difficulties 
in project implementation in Angola due to the limited human capital, there is a need for simplification 
in project design and implementation. Projects with simple, flexible designs place fewer demands on 
the scarce managerial and financial resources available in the rural sector. Effort will need to be made 
to reduce the complexity of project design and focus on key and prioritised interventions. Partnerships 
should be pursued with other development stakeholders to achieve and upscale results. These factors 
also  point  to  the  need  for  more  intensive  and  closer  guidance  for  projects  to  operate  efficiently  and 
effectively in Angola. 
13.  Effective operations and maintenance of infrastructure: The need to ensure that capacity exists 
to sustainably operate and maintain infrastructure works. Development of a strategy for the operation 
and maintenance of infrastructure should involve all stakeholders and be developed before construction 
is  undertaken.  This  could  be  addressed  through  capacity  building,  awareness  raising  and  the 
development  and  implementation  of  community-based  development  and  management  plans.  A 
community development approach to the management of infrastructure can provide good results, lead 
to strengthening of participating groups and, if more intensively used, can provide reductions in the cost 
of investments. 
14.  Building  government  capacity  for  more  rapid  project  implementation  and  stronger  country 
ownership.  The  pace  of  project  implementation  in  the  country  has  been  seen  to  be  slow,  especially 
during  the  start-up.  To  accelerate  implementation  and  ensure  sustainability  of  project  results,  a 
concerted effort will be required to build the capacity of government staff over the short and longer term. 
Over  the  short  terms  efforts  will  be  needed  to  develop  capacity  in  fiduciary  matters  to  manage  and 
implement projects more effectively. Simultaneously technical capacities in agriculture, sustainable land 
management  and  participatory  processes  will  similarly  need  to  be  enhanced.  Over  the  longer  term 
capacity building efforts are needed to strengthen IDA’s field presence in these technical areas.  
Incorporating an incentive system for key government staff involved in project implementation: 
15. 
This has proved to be an effective element in promoting project performance and helping to achieve 
project targets. Government staff working under the project will require a satisfactory work environment 
(training, equipment and living conditions) to incentivise provincial and front line extension staff involved 
in project implementation.  
Inclusivity 
16.  Provisions for women’s empowerment: All project design reports have made adequate provisions 
for the inclusion of women as beneficiaries, including some references to empowerment. In practice, 
however, efforts towards women’s empowerment have been limited with a minimal share of women in 
leadership roles in Farmer Field Schools, associations and cooperatives and in a technical capacity as 
members  of  PPIUs.  Greater  effort  is  needed  to  ensure  that  women  play  an  equal  role  in  farmers’ 
organisations and influence project investment decisions.  
17.  Targeted interventions for youth: Although youth have been identified as a target beneficiary in 
some of the projects there has been little impact made. Youth participation in projects has been limited. 
Designing interventions that target youth is recognised, nationally, as important in terms of generating 
employment  and  ensuring  broader  national  security  by  offering  to  young  people,  opportunities  for 
decent work and sustainable livelihoods, particularly in rural areas. Both women’s empowerment and 
inclusion  of  youth,  are  among  the  fundamental  pillars  of  the  national  goals  of Angola  to  ensure  an 
equitable  and  peaceful  society.  Both  need  to  be  adequately  addressed  and  pursued  in  future 
interventions. 
Building resilience and sustainability 
18.  Community development through Farm Field Schools as a key mode of project implementation 
and scaling: The FFS approach to agricultural extension has been seen to be effective in enhancing 
smallholder  farmers’  capacity  to  generate  and  use  new  knowledge  and  adopt  improved  agricultural 
practices and technology. It is also regarded as a methodology that empowers smallholders. The FFS 
has been incorporated in all IFAD projects and those of other agencies (AfDB, EU, World Bank) and is 
being  implemented  at  scale.  The  FFS  is  also  recognised  as  a  mechanism  to  ensure  institutional 
sustainability  beyond  the  project  life  by  evolving  over  time  into  farmer  associations  or  cooperatives, 
linking  members  and  their  organisations  to  markets  and  empowering  smallholders  to  improve  their 
livelihoods  in  a  sustainable  manner.  The  FFS  has  been  accepted  by  government  as  its  national 
extension strategy and will be used in future project design. 
Importance  of  linking  smallholder  farmers  with  markets.  Long-term  success  requires  not  only 
19. 
improved on-farm productivity but also opportunities for farmers to have access  to, and compete in, 
output markets. In SREP Norte, in particular, the sub-project needs to provide support for marketing 
activities  at  several  levels,  including  assistance  to  FOs  and  entrepreneurs  in  bulking  of  agricultural 
produce  or  purchase  of  inputs,  and  in  small  and  medium  scale  processing.  Such  interventions  can 
stimulate investment diversification and the strengthening of rural enterprises.  
20.  Building resilience of smallholders: The adverse impacts of climate change are already affecting 
rural livelihoods  in Angola,  particularly  agriculture production in the southern regions. The recent El-
nino events and the resulting crop losses and livestock deaths drew attention to the need for enhancing 
resilience to improve the community livelihoods and encourage the sustainable use and management 
of ecosystems.  
21.  Environmental  Management:  The  FFS  is  an  effective  channel  to  improve  the  environmental 
management  in  farming  activities.  This  requires  capacity  building  of  the  trainers  and  the  EDA  staff. 
Stronger collaboration is also required between the MINAMB and the MINAGRI teams to equip various 
technicians with the right skills and tools to provide advisory services and support to smallholders.  
Land  degradation:  Particular  attention  is  required  in  some  locations  where  soil  erosion  is 
22. 
becoming  increasingly  a  cause  of  concern  such  as  cultivation  on  hill  slopes  and  the  expansion  of 
agricultural land. Soil and water conservation measures can be promoted to address the issues of land 
degradation.  
C. Other Considerations 
23.  Two new elements have recently emerged to inform the design of SREP. The first is the interest 
of  the  Government  elected  in August  2017  to  revamp  the  family  farming  sector;  and  secondly,  an 
acknowledgment by the Ministry of Agriculture of the key role that the family farming sector can have in 
sustainably  addressing  the  current  economic  and  financial  crisis  and  meeting  the  national  food 
requirements.  Both  elements  provide  the  rationale  to  support  a  pro-poor  agricultural  and  rural 
development agenda that lies at the core of SREP.  
24.  Some key additional issues were addressed resulting from discussions held with the government 
and SREP Co-financiers (AFD, BADEA,) during the design. These include: (i) the need to invest in the 
construction and rehabilitation of infrastructure such as: feeder roads, bridges, market structures and 
small scale irrigation systems (ii) the need to develop the institutional capacity of project management 
and the technical capacity of government staff and service providers (iii) the need to target interventions 
at  youth,  women,  former combatants,  people  with  disability  and  the  most  vulnerable  individuals  and 
households;  (iv)  support  the  pilot  programme  for  young  unemployed  agricultural  graduates  in  agro-
enterprise  development;  (v)  the  need  to  provide  mechanization  services  for  expanding  land  under 
cultivation  (vi)  the  need  to  move  away  from  giving  inputs  to  cooperatives  and  farmer  associations 
through government subsidies and instead building greater self-reliance through using revolving funds; 
(vi) the need to provide assistance to cooperatives in obtaining legal status and secure access to land. 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Detailed project description
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Detailed Project Description 
1. 
Overview:  The  goal  of  SREP  is  to  contribute  to  improved  food  security  and  nutrition  for 
targeted households. The development objective is to increase agricultural productivity and resilience 
of farm households.  Component 1  will concentrate on strengthening  Institutional capacity  to support 
climate resilient smallholder production. Focus will be placed on strengthening the agricultural extension 
service  support  and  providing  nutrition  and  environmental  services  whilst,  concurrently,  investing  in 
public sector infrastructure – land and water resources, feeder roads and markets. Component 2 will 
focus on direct support to building the capacity of family farms through the organization and training of 
farmer  groups  and  household  level  mentoring  combined  with  community  and  household  level 
investments  to  enhance  agricultural  productivity  and  diversify  livelihoods.  The  Farmer  Field  School 
methodology  will  be  deployed  to  train  farmers  to  adopt  improved  agricultural  technologies  that  will 
sustainably  increase  food  crop  yields,  improve  soil  health,  and  make  way  for  increased  crop 
diversification and commercialisation. The Project will also facilitate farmers in obtaining access to the 
inputs needed to increase crop productivity, and diversify livelihoods. The two components together will 
improve the food security and resilience of smallholder family farmers to better cope with the vagaries 
of climate change.   
2. 
Project Area: Tentatively 35 municipalities have been prioritized in the targeted provinces, with 
final selection to be made during implementation1. SREP covers two discrete agro-ecological areas: 
the  northern  provinces  of  Bengo,  Zaire,  Uige  and  Cuanza  Norte  and  three  southern  provinces, 
Benguela, Namibe, and Cunene which are more susceptible to the vagaries if climate change. SREP 
will replicate the approach followed by SAMAP in the northern provinces to increase productivity and 
market  linkages  in  support  of  family  farmers  and  their  organisations  (FOs  –  producer  groups, 
cooperatives or associations). Project activities in the three southern provinces will build on the recovery 
efforts of ARP and aim at enhancing the resilience of family farmers and their communities to climate 
change.  
3. 
farm households are members of around 2,000 producer groups (cooperatives and associations).  
Target Group: The total coverage of SREP will be 218,000 households of which some 120,000 
4. 
Project sequencing. The Project will be implemented over six years using a gradual approach 
to establish operational modalities, train staff, set up and implement farmer field schools, engage with 
communities and screen/evaluate micro and sub-projects and develop partnerships and coordination 
arrangements. A mid-term review will be undertaken in year 4. 
5. 
Unit under IDA supported by a Coordination Unit providing fiduciary and technical support.  
Management and coordination: The SREP project will be managed by a Project Management 
6. 
component, divided into sub-components as laid out below.  
SREP  comprises  two  technical  components  and  a  cross-cutting  management  coordination 
1 The provinces include Bengo, Uige, Zaire and Cuanza Norte, in the north and Cunene, Namibe, and Benguela 
in the south. 
Goal 
Objective 
Contribute to improved food and nutrition for 
targeted households  
Increase agricultural productivity and 
resilience of farm households 
Components 
Component 1: Institutional Capacity 
Building  
Component 2: Family farming strengthening 
and investment 
Sub-
components 
Activities 
entesive 
1.1 
Strengthening 
capacity for 
improved 
services 
- Agricultural 
extension service 
delivery and 
training   
- Agro-
meteorology 
network 
- Nutrition 
education and 
training 
- Animal health 
services 
1.2  
Investing in public 
rural infrastructure 
for enhanced 
resilience and 
market access 
- Feeder road 
rehabilitation & 
maintenance 
- Market 
infrastructure 
- Water 
infrastructure  
- Small scale 
irrigation 
 - Sustainable 
land 
management  
2.1 
Strengthening 
capacity for 
family farming 
2.2 
Investment 
in family 
farming 
- Community 
organization, 
planning 
&mentoring 
- Training of 
farmers and 
community 
members 
- Agricultural 
diversification 
and improved 
productivity 
- Value 
addition and 
marketing 
- Rural micro 
and small 
scale 
agribusiness 
promotion 
3. Project coordination, monitoring and assessment: 
3.1 SREP Project Coordination 
3.2 Single Coordination Unit/ Portfolio Implementation Facility 
Component 1: Institutional Capacity Building (US$ 85.2 million): 
7.  Component  1  will  focus  on  strengthening  the  institutional  capacity  to  support  climate  resilient 
smallholder  production  by  enhancing  the  adaptive  capacity  of  provincial,  municipal  and  field  level 
extension and support service staff. The component will support a range of activities designed to ensure 
adequate coverage of agricultural extension service (EDA) staff in target municipalities. Concurrently, 
investments  will  be  made  in  public  sector  infrastructure  including  feeder  roads,  markets,  water 
resources and land management.  
Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening capacity for improved services to family farmers:(US$22.9 
mill.) 
8. 
Objective:  To  strengthen  the  capacity  and  skills  of  government  agricultural  extension 
specialists at provincial and municipal level, and national NGOs supporting the development of family 
farming and producer groups.The outcome of Sub-Component 1.1 is to strengthen institutional capacity 
to deliver services to enhance food security, productivity and resilience. 
9. 
Sub-Component  1.1  will  include  five  major  interrelated  activities  intended  to  improve  the 
agriculture  extension  service  delivery  and  strengthen  the  human  resource  capacity  of  advisory  and 
service  providers  in  climate  change,  environmental  management,  nutrition  and  livestock  health 
services. The activities are listed below: 
a)  Agricultural Extension Service Delivery and Capacity Building: A target ratio of three front 
line extension technicians per commune has been set, but there is a dearth of EDA extension 
positions with many positions unfilled. There will be a need for an additional  149 staff to fill 
these positions under a graduated formula for cost sharing of their salaries over the life of the 
project:   
Project Year 
1-2 
3 
4 
5+ 
Project 
Percentage 
100 
60 
50 
- 
Government 
Percentage 
- 
40 
50 
100 
This activity will also support the rehabilitation/construction of extension facilities at local level 
including offices and residential complexes for staff. Some 12 offices will be rehabilitated, 16 
new offices constructed, and a further 32 residential houses constructed and/or rehabilitated. 
The  project  will  also  fund  the  improvement  of  those  offices  and  units  that  are  essential  for 
implementation,  including,  for  instance,  office  and  training  equipment,  and  transport  and 
communication  facilities.  It  will  be  important  to  establish  effective  communication  systems 
(telephone,  internet  and  e-mail  facilities)  in  EDAs  and  the  provincial  project  offices,  linking 
these to each other and to the PPIUs and PIU in Luanda.  
Training EDA staff as potential trainers and advisors is critical to improve the extension worker 
to farmer ratio. Other Government staff at provincial and municipality level and other service 
providers  will  also  be  trained.  Focus  will  be  placed  on  participatory  extension,  community 
development and gender, climate change adaptation, environmental management as well as 
miscellaneous technical subjects. Training topics may include some or all of the following: i) 
community  organisation,  FFS  establishment,  facilitation  and  curriculum  development;  ii) 
community  driven  natural  resource  planning  and  management;  iii)  water  harvesting 
infrastructure  and  techniques,  complementary  irrigation  and  establishment  of  water  users 
associations  (WUAs);  iv)  climate  information  data  collection  and  analysis;  v)  vulnerability 
analysis  and  mapping;  vi)  identification  of  adaptation  measures  for  the  different  agro-
ecological  zones;  and  vii)  basic  environmental  management,  monitoring  and  impact 
assessment. One of the results will be that extension workers will organise farmers into local 
groups,  cooperatives,  associations  and  FFS  groups.  This  implies  training  around  354 
extension  officers  in  the  FFS  methodology  and  curricula  (3  per  commune).  Some  1,330 
provincial and municipal staff will also be trained in the target Municipalities over a four-year 
period.  
b)  Strengthening of the Agro-Meteorological Network: SREP will support strengthening the 
agro-meteorological  network  to  enhance  resilience  through  climate  data  collection  and 
weather forecasting. Data will be collected and applied for the development of downscaled 
climate models and productivity and hydraulic balance models aimed to optimize water use in 
irrigation,  soil  conservation  and  the  prevention  of  soil  erosion.  SREP  will  also  support  the 
timely  dissemination  of  climate  and  weather  information  to  farmers  to  enable  them  to 
incorporate the information in their decision making. Participatory approaches will be adopted 
for the  use  of climate services taking  into  account historic climate data  and trends to build 
capacity of the smallholders and improve farm level planning.  The activity links up with the 
training programme to support family farming communities under sub-component 2.1. It further 
relates to weather forecasting and the preparation of early warning climate bulletins tailored 
to the needs of farmers and backed up by extension advice. Farmers’ need to be trained in 
different action options based on different forecasting and warning messages2.  
c)  The data collection and analysis will require purchasing equipment and materials, which will 
be managed by INAMET in collaboration with the Cabinet of Food Security and IDA including 
communication strategies ensuring timely information for farmers and other stakeholders. The 
2Management decisions include the type of crops and varieties to grow, the timing of planting under dry year 
conditions, how to build up pasture in closed areas in wet years as a buffer for dry years and when to apply fertilizer 
depending on rainfall to get optimal benefits for plants, etc. 
equipment will include agro meteorological stations, analytical units and dissemination units.3 
SREP  will  support  the  update  of  the  agro-ecological  maps  at  the  regional  level  and  also 
vulnerability  mapping  for  prioritized  areas  and  crops.  The  maps  produced  will  be  used  to 
inform IDA strategies and decision making at the local planning level for natural resources and 
environmental  management4.  Technical  assistance 
for  an  environmental 
management expert.  
is  given 
d)  Nutrition education and training: Nutrition education will focus on promoting healthy eating 
through  income  growth  interventions,  own  production  and  awareness  raising  on  food 
diversification through kitchen gardens for ready available vegetables, fruits and animal based 
products (see sub-components 2.1 and 2.2). Nutrition education will also include the element 
on nutrition relevance to climate resilient productivity and alternative livelihoods for resilience. 
A starting point for nutrition education and mainstreaming will be training front line extension 
workers through the FFS methodology, described in 2.1, together with an awareness raising 
programme that will include the use of mass media and IEC materials in communities. SREP 
will  support  coordination  of  the  school  meal  programme  with  other  line  Ministries  through 
technical  assistance.  This  activity  will  target  at  least  2  public  primary  schools  per  target 
municipality in the 7 provinces. Each target school will be linked to the extension services to 
promote  nutrition  education  and  hygiene  practices.  Identification  of  beneficiary  schools  will 
focus  on  the  public  schools  within  the  project  target  areas  and  consideration  of  the  overall 
nutritional  status  of  children.  SREP  will  also  undertake  a  comprehensive  food  survey  - 
Knowledge,  Attitude  and  Practice  (KAP).  The  survey  will  collect  baseline  data  to  guide  the 
implementation of nutrition activities and contribute to a national information system, collecting 
data to monitor the food and nutrition security situation in the target areas. The activity will be 
conducted  by  extension  service  staff  and  other  service  providers  in  collaboration  with  the 
Ministry of Social Action, Family and Promotion of Women  (MASFAMU) and the Ministry of 
Health. The nutrition activities will build on the lessons learned on similar training activities in 
ARP and SAMAP as well as align with the national programmes of MASFAMU. Identified gaps 
and constraints highlighted in the on-going projects will be addressed by SREP.  
e)  Strengthening of Animal Health Services: Technical training will be given to field staff of 
the  Veterinary  Service  Institute  (ISV)  at  provincial  and municipality  level  and  efforts  will  be 
made to build on the work of ARP, in the southern provinces, to develop a cadre of Community 
Animal  Health Workers  (CAHWs).  CAHWS  will  be  identified  through  the  FFS  methodology 
and  amongst  the  cadre  of  Community  Development  Facilitators  (CDFs).  SREP  will  target 
around 50% of women to take on this role to ensure greater access to livestock services by 
women livestock owners who tend to manage poultry and goats. Some 100 CAHWs will be 
selected and trained in animal health for cattle and small livestock. The training will include 
priority diseases, treatment regimes, and vaccination protocols. Qualified veterinary oversight 
will be made available to support the CAHWs through the veterinary institute and local private 
veterinarians.  Refresher  training  will  also  be  provided.  The  project  will  assist  with  course 
design  to  ensure  that  priority  and  high-risk  diseases  are  covered,  including  treatment  and 
vaccination protocols. Solar freezers will be provided – one for each municipality. Each CAHW 
will be granted a vaccination kit and a bicycle.    
Sub-component 1.2:  Investing in public  rural infrastructure for resilience and market  access: 
(US$ 62.3 mill.) 
3Currently IDA has a team (market price, production and studies groupings) that analyses data collected 
statistically in a basic manner for the linear correlations between rainfall and productivity. The analyses are 
integrated into reports but the data is limited and not validated in the field. Potential parameters to include would 
be radiation and evaporation to also measure the hydraulic balance and establish the production correlations. 
Based on the hydraulic balance models, irrigation needs for each specific crop will also be identified taking into 
account the climatic and agro ecological conditions and therefore contributing to a sustainable management of 
water resources, informed calendars for farming activities and support on the selection of inputs. Periodic 
hydraulic balance reports produced taking into account soil parameters will be fully available through a dedicated 
web portal. 
4Other key stakeholders such as the Agricultural Research Institutes will be engaged in updating the maps. 
Which will include hotspots with regards to land degradation, which can be prioritized for soil and water 
conservation measures as well as environmental management. 
Objective: The objective of this subcomponent is to invest in construction of rural infrastructure 
10. 
and  land  development  to  enhance  climate  resilience  and  promote  better  production  and  marketing 
conditions.  Different  types  of  investments  will  be  supported  including:  a)  the  construction  and 
rehabilitation  of  feeder  roads,  b)  construction  of  market  facilities,  c)  water  resources  development 
including small scale irrigation, and d) sustainable land management. The investments will be identified 
taking  into  account  the  needs  identified  in  the  NRM  and  small  business  planning  process  in 
subcomponent 2.1 and the creation of synergies and maximizing benefits of investments made under 
subcomponent 2.2. The expected outcome will be rural infrastructure strengthened to build resilience 
and enhance productivity and market. 
11.  The principal activities to be undertaken will include:  
a)  Feeder  Road  Rehabilitation  and  Maintenance:Investments  will  be  made  to  improve  the 
condition of selected feeder roads  in  both the  northern and southern provinces  and critical 
secondary  roads  through  construction  of  drainage  infrastructure  (culverts).  The  criteria  for 
prioritising road investments will include: 
  Potential to stimulate increased agricultural production;  
  Linkages to bulking/aggregation centres;  
  Linkages to main roads and markets;  
  Number of potential beneficiaries;  
  Provision for maintenance and inclusion in provincial/municipality development plans; 
  Synergies with other road development activities 
Road  rehabilitationwill  include  some  500  km  of  feeder  roads.  Rehabilitated  roads  will  be 
maintained  by  the  project  including  both  routine  and  periodic  activities.  The  development 
process of these assets will include the following steps: (a) studies, design and supervision; 
(b) procurement; (c) construction; (d) liability and handover; and (e) management of assets.  
The project will form and support road gangs on each rehabilitated road and develop Provincial 
road maintenance plans. Following an inventory of the network of rural roads in target areas, 
a  rural  road  improvement  programme  will  be  developed.  The  Project  will  rehabilitate  on 
average  20  km  per  target  municipality  and  will  construct  culverts  in  selected  places. 
Community-based  road  maintenance  plans  will  be  developed  at  provincial  levels  and  road 
maintenance associations strengthened/ formed at community level. Training of trainers (TOT) 
in road maintenance will be provided to the staff of the municipalities who will then train and 
mobilize leaders of the associations. In addition, low-cost hand tools and equipment will be 
provided to the communities to undertake maintenance.  
b)  Market  Infrastructure  and  Platforms:  Market  infrastructure  will  be  provided  mainly  in  the 
form  of  aggregation  and  storages  facilities  (warehouses)  for  agricultural  commodities  at 
commune and municipality level – as a pilot activity. Eligible investments will include: collection 
points, storage and package facilities and field shops.5The platforms will serve as a venue for 
farmers, service providers and the private sector to meet, learn and negotiate arrangements. 
Direct linkages will be strengthened between the cooperatives/associations and private sector 
value chain stakeholders identified through value chain studies. The municipality level platform 
will mirror the commune level in establishing aggregation points or bulk markets but  will have  
additional  functions:  a)  to  facilitate  policy  dialogue  with  local  government  and  other  public 
sector  bodies,  b)  facilitate  communication  between  various  market  stakeholders;  c)  identify 
opportunities  to  improve  market  access  and  linkages;  d)  implement  business  plans  for 
investment to improve market access particularly through investment in aggregation points / 
markets  and  /  or  sub-regional  bulk  markets;  and  e)  participate  in  preliminary  design  of  the 
5 The concept of Field Shops – agro-dealer facilities – is being piloted by MINCO. Three levels of field shop 
investments have been set – municipality, commune and deep bush level – with three different ceilings of 
investments. $200,000 at municipality level, $100,000 and commune level; and $50,000 deep bush level. 
Investments in Field Shops should be regarded as a pilot programme.  
markets  and  selection  of  market  locations.  The  municipal  platforms  will  be  composed  of 
representatives  of  the  Farmer  Field  schools,  cooperatives,  associations,  local  government 
employees and the private sector.67Platform/ cluster hub meetings will be held regularly (at 
least twice per year) initially facilitated by the project team but later jointly by the producers 
and private sector stakeholders. Commercial and non-commercial suppliers (of technical or 
financial services or inputs) as well as government agencies and other supporters would also 
be  active  participants.  Implementation  arrangements  at  municipality  level  will  be  through 
collaboration  with  relevant  Government  Ministries  and  Agencies,  Provincial  and  Municipal 
level entities, local communities and private consultants and contractors.8 A Civil Engineer will 
be recruited to oversee the public works.  
c)  Water Infrastructure: Small scale water harvesting structures will be developed to increase 
water quality and availability for multi-purpose usage. The infrastructure will be linked to the 
creation  of  community  water  users  groups  (subcomponent  2.1)  for  the  operation  and 
maintenance  of  the  infrastructure  and  implementation  of  catchment  management  and 
conservation. This will be important for the sustainability and effectiveness of the infrastructure 
including reduced siltation and as such maintenance costs and increased lifetime. The activity 
will  be  targeted  at  drought  prone  communities  in  the  three  southern  provinces  of  Cunene, 
Namibe, and Benguela. The most common structure found in the area are “Chimpaca” – large 
artificial  reservoirs  -  and  sub-surface  dams,  which  will  guide  this  process.  Strict  selection 
criteria will be applied and will include:   
-  Existence of a secure gravity-fed water source;  
-  The  level  of  organisation  of  users  and  willingness  to  contribute  to  operation  and 
maintenance costs and catchment conservation through WUAs; 
-  Technical feasibility;  
-  Proximity and availability of materials for construction;  
-  Number of potential users;  
-  Cost/benefit ratio.  
d)  Small-scale  Irrigation:There  is  potential  for  irrigation  in  the  more  arid  southern  provinces 
along the riverbanks and valley bottoms. Small scale irrigation will be extended through low-
cost technologies that are easy to operate and maintain. Only gravity systems of less than 35 
ha will be supported up to a total of around 700 ha.  Schemes will be constructed at an average 
cost  of  around  $10,000. WUAs  will  be  set  up  and  supported  to  ensure  sustainability  in  the 
operation  and  management  and  negotiate  and  implement  governance  scheme  to  ensure 
equitable access to water and to avoid possible conflicts. Schemes will be funded based on 
investment proposals incorporating prefeasibility studies, feasibility studies, detailed design, 
and environment management plans. No infrastructure investments will be made before the 
local authorities confirm the beneficiaries’ land  and  water user rights. The site-  or scheme-
specific  environmental  and  social  management  plans  (ESMPs)  (to  be  prepared  after  the 
site/design  details  are  known)  should  consider  the  interests  of  downstream  water  users  as 
well as environmental flow requirements. Criteria for selecting schemes will include:  
6 The municipality level market stakeholder platforms will be modelled on the UNDP supported platforms set up in 
in Huela Province as a pilot. 
7Cluster hubs and multi-stakeholder platforms should be conceived as pilot programmes. 
8Although  feeder  road  construction  and  maintenance  is  the  responsibility  of  the  municipalities,  it  is  a  newly 
decentralised activity and capacity for implementation is low. The detailed planning and implementation of these 
activities will be through strong participation of the farmer organizations and other actors in the value chain. With 
respect to maintenance of feeder roads, it is the responsibility of communities at local level to lead this process. 
Local ownership and O&M responsibility should begin at the community level.  Construction of road infrastructures 
will be undertaken by private contractors through competitive bidding. The Marketing Infrastructure Officer (MIO) 
in  collaboration  with  municipality  staff  will  be  responsible  for  supervising  all  civil  works.  As  improved  road 
infrastructure will directly benefit the communities in the Programme area, the programme will provide technical 
and physical assistance to community road maintenance associations (existing or to be formed) in the area. The 
Programme will sign tripartite MoUs with the leaders of these associations and the target local municipalities with 
the  latter  assuming  responsibility  for  routine  maintenance  of  feeder  roads  in  collaboration  with  the  community. 
SREP  will  also  collaborate  with  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  and  Trade  (MINCO)  and/or  municipality  Local 
Government Councils (LGCs) to facilitate the construction of the market infrastructures in the target municipalities. 
-  Value  chain  analysis  (existing  markets  to  absorb  production  of  the  targeted 
commodities);  
-  Hydrology (existence of sufficient, good quality gravity-fed water);  
-  Agronomy (potential for high production/productivity, existing agronomic practices and 
farming system, etc.);  
-  Topography  (use  of  irrigation  by  gravity,  potential  area  covered  due  to  optimum 
alignment of canals, use of cost-effective technology, etc.); 
-  Land tenure system (existing of a certificate of property); Socio cultural environment 
(existing irrigation practices, good level of adoption of irrigation, potential for farmers’ 
mobilisation, etc.);  
-  Accessibility to the scheme, connection to markets), etc. 
e)   Sustainable Land Management: Interventions to redress land degradation from overgrazing 
will  include:  (a)  rehabilitating  rangelands  and  pastures  and  (b)  undertaking  soil  and  water 
conservation measures. Rangeland development will focus on ecosystem-based rehabilitation 
around the water points where agro-pastoral systems are predominant in Cunene and Namibe 
provinces.  Activities  will  include community  led  improvement of fodder and natural  grasses 
and shrubs and the establishment of grazing exclusion areas. This will be supported by range 
and herd management practices and improvements in livestock health. Attention will be given 
to low-cost soil and water conservation measures and famer-assisted natural regeneration of 
grass, shrubs and trees on communal and cultivated land.  
Funding and implementation arrangements: Grant funding will be provided for productive 
infrastructure  works  that  have  a  high  public  value  and/  or  use  content.  These  sub-projects 
include rehabilitation of roads, construction of small bridges, the establishment or rehabilitation 
and  improvement  of  small-scale  irrigation  and  drainage  works,  (small-scale  earth  dams  to 
harvest  and  store  water,  shallow  wells  and  boreholes  for  (drinking)  water,  dip-tanks  for 
livestock  parasite  control,  rangelands  management,  reforestation  and  erosion  control,  rural 
market facilities, simple livestock slaughter facilities and small-scale storage structures.  
Implementation  arrangements:  International  and  national  consultants  will  be  recruited  to 
provide technical assistance in Water Resources Development (water harvesting and small 
scale  irrigation),  Sustainable  Land  Management  and  Pasture/  Rangelands  Development. 
International consultants will be paired with national counterparts, to build local capacities.   
Component 2: Family Farming Strengthening and Investment(US$ 37.9 million) 
12. 
Component 2 will support activities which are aimed to strengthen smallholder family farming 
through capacity  building and agricultural  based  investments.  Investments in agricultural production, 
productivity, livelihoods diversification and linkages to markets will be enforced by technical, business 
and  marketing  support  of  front-line  service  providers  for  increased  crop  and  livestock  productivity, 
diversity, access to markets and value addition. SREP will strengthen existing farmer associations and 
agro pastoral groups through designing a training/ extension programme around the adaptation of the 
Farmer Field School/Livestock and Pasture Field Schools methodologies to the two project areas – the 
northern provinces with potential for stronger commercial linkages and the southern provinces where 
the emphasis will be placed on climate change adaptation for agro-pastoralists. Food crops including 
cassava, sorghum, millet, maize, beans and fruit and vegetables will be selected as priority crops mainly 
in the north while cattle, goats and sheep will also be the focus of agro-pastoral farmers in the south.  
Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening capacity for family farming:(US$21.7 mill.) 
13. 
Objective:  To  strengthen  the  capacity  and  skills  of  family  farmers  and  their  communities 
through government agricultural extension specialists and national NGOs supporting the development 
of  family  farming.  The  FFS  methodology  will  be  used  as  the  main  instrument  for  reaching  target 
households  within  the  community  and  create  groups  learning  together  through  experimenting  and 
adoption of new practices.. The skills and capacities required at field level will be strengthened to ensure 
that  communities  become  more  resilient  to  climate-related  shocks  and  that  the  necessary  support 
services to communities and households will be readily available. This subcomponent will provide the 
essential capacity building to ensure effective implementation of subcomponent 2.2.  
14. 
family farmers for food and nutrition security, enhanced resilience/ productivity and market access. 
The outcome of Sub-Component 2.1 will be the acquisition of skills and technologies among 
The principal activities to be undertaken will include: 
-  Farmer organization, planning and mentoring   
-  Training of farmers and community members 
a)  Community organization, planning and mentoring: Community organization is the principal 
means  by  which  SREP  will  assist  farmers  to  prepare  and  implement  natural  resource 
management  plans,  business  development  plans  mainly  for  producer  groups  in  the  north  
mobilise the community and organise farmers into self-help and user groups and through the 
latter connect farmers to markets in order to overcome high transaction costs and make the 
transition from a production to a market orientation. By working in groups farmers can access 
extension  and  inputs  more  easily,  improve  production  quality,  increase  quantity,  achieve 
economies of scale in marketing, and increase bargaining power with buyers. Working through 
groups  can  also  reduce  the  costs  associated  with  supplying  inputs,  aggregating  products, 
providing  extension  services,  and  negotiating  contracts.  Whilst  groups  have  many  useful 
functions, care will be taken to ensure that individual financial incentives are maintained and 
that  communal  interests  are  aligned  with  personal  interests.  The  project  will  follow  a  social 
mobilization  process  that  will  develop  self-reliance  among  community  members  through  a 
process  tested  through  ARP.  A  savings-first  approach  will  be  followed  together  with  the 
establishment of revolving cash and in-kind grant schemes. Guidelines on the use of grants 
and loans will be included in the PIM. A cadre of Community Development Facilitators  will be 
selected  from  within  the  target  communities  to  lead  the  social  mobilisation  and  group 
formation/strengthening and mentoring processes. The community facilitators will be used to 
mentor the most vulnerable households (women headed households, youth and the disabled). 
Support  for  social  mobilization  will  come  from  local  NGOs  selected  and  contracted  for  this 
purpose. As capacity amongst some of the local NGOs in social development is low, SREP will 
provide technical assistance to strengthen their skills. The project has budgeted two full time 
positions for nationally recruited Community Development Facilitators  to be supported by an 
International  Social  Development  expert.    In-kind  incentives  have  also  been  allocated  to 
motivate champions in social mentoring in all SREP project areas.  Some 150 community based 
Natural  Resource  Management  Plans  (NRMP)  will  be  prepared  as  part  of  the  community 
development process, particularly in the southern provinces.  Although not accommodated in 
the legal land management systems, NRMPs are expected to be acknowledged by all relevant 
private and public actors as these will participate in the elaboration of the plans. The expected 
output will be at least 150 community NRMPs as framework for sustainable management of 
natural  resources.The  NRMPs  will  allow  communities  to  map  their  available  resources  and 
outline agreed approaches to sustainable management9.  
b)  Training of farmers and community members: The FFS approach has been promoted by 
previous IFAD and World Bank supported projects in Angola (MOSAP I and II, SAMAP etc.) 
with substantial technical assistance from FAO and is  regarded as the principal approach in 
IDA/EDA’s extension strategy. Some of the larger NGOs have experience with FFS, supporting 
projects in the middle and southern region of Angola and have the capacity to replicate and 
scale out the approach in the north. In each cluster of two provinces IDA will be supported by 
a single service provider experienced in FFS. A typical size of a FFS is between 20 and 30 
9A first stage of preparation of the NRM plan is an agro-ecosystem analysis where farmers are expected to better 
understand their ecosystem, and the consequences of poor management practices and opportunities that could 
arise from better management of the system. The approach will be to develop a vision of the future to ensure 
community ownership. Agreement will have to be reached by the various community members, which will require 
the active engagement of community leaders as part of a participatory process. The outputs of the planning 
process will be: a) a community map highlighting the agriculture and NRM features that will influence the types of 
production and NRM management activities implemented by SREP; and b) a prioritised list of both group based 
and individual 
members. Approximately 5,000 schools will be established with 3,500 in the northern provinces 
and 1,500 in the southern provinces. Nutrition mainstreaming will be essential to address the 
high incidence of stunting.10FFS roll-out will take place in a sequenced manner beginning in 
about half of the municipalities initially and subsequently expanding to cover all municipalities 
in the seven provinces. This activity together with community development will be implemented 
through  service  provider  contracts  with  experienced  national  NGOs.  SREP  will  also  provide 
technical assistance support through the recruitment of two national FFS officers supported by 
an international FFS specialist.  
FFS training 
The  FFS  methodology  involves  the  training  of  master  trainers,  elaboration  of  a  training 
curriculum, community mobilization for the establishment of FFSs groups (25-35 members in 
each). A typical FFS is expected to follow a cycle of 30 months over three-years: 12 months in 
year 1, 6 months in year 2 and a further 12 months in year 3.11 The learning will be conducted 
within  the  village  and  on  a  common  plot  of  land.12  The  training  curriculum  will  be  designed 
together with the FFS members to reflect the social and agro-ecological challenges that they 
face. Farmer and Agro-Pastoral Field Schools (FFSs/PFSs) will offer applied training to farmers 
on the adoption of GAPs, including use of quality seed/planting materials of improved varieties, 
integrated soil fertility management (especially for cassava), integrated pest management and 
water-nutrient use efficiency. Climate change adaptation options will also be offered including 
soil and water management, conservation agriculture and planning of the cropping calendar, 
diversifying, intercropping, and sequencing planting times to spread risks. Functional numeracy 
and literacy and business management training will also be offered depending on community 
needs.   
Sub-component 2.2: Investment in family farming:(US$16.3 mill.) 
15.  Objective: To improve agricultural productivity, increase value addition, link farmers to markets 
and increase incomes and livelihood opportunities for family farmers.  Agricultural productivity will be 
enhanced under rain-fed crop and irrigated systems and livelihoods diversified in alignment with the 
NRM plans developed under subcomponent 2.1 and accompanied by the capacity building efforts to 
ensure sustainability of activities (Subcomponents 1.1 and 2.1). Poor dietary diversity will be addressed 
by increasing the availability and consumption of nutritious and diverse-foods and enhancing income to 
ensure healthy eating and improved family diets.  
16.  The outcome of Sub-Component 2.2 will be improved profitability of farm and non-farm income 
generating activities to improve access to food. To prioritize investments, farmers and producer groups 
will be supported in developing small investment proposals (subprojects or micro projects) including a 
simple business plan aligned with the NRM plans (subcomponent 2.1). Activities to be financed include: 
-  Agricultural diversification and improved productivity 
-  Value addition and marketing  
-  Matching grants: rural micro and small-scale-Agri-business promotion 
a)  Agricultural Diversification and Improved Productivity:  SREP will address food insecurity 
and nutrition by enhancing the production and sales of staple food surpluses including maize 
10 “The incidence of stunting ranges between 25% and 45% in the targeted municipalities.  
11 The first cycle will include facilitated sessions in basic crops and participatory diagnostics of constraints and 
needs for increasing productivity. The second cycle will focus on production enhancement and crop 
diversification, and the third cycle will consolidate the achievements of the first two.  The evolutionary process will 
create opportunities for establishing viable and sustainable commercial farmer based organizations (producer 
groups, cooperatives and/or associations) 
12 The number of FFSs to be set up is based on the implementation experience of MOSAP l and ll as well as the 
SAMAP design. As the full cycle of 30 months is capacity intensive it is likely that some schools established later 
in the implementation process will be of shorter duration and frequency of meetings. This has been factored in to 
the economic and financial analysis of SREP.  
and millet,  whilst diversifying the rain fed system and household diets by  including cassava, 
sweet potato and beans. Crop diversification will mainstream nutrition through the introduction 
of improved varieties of nutrient-rich and drought-tolerant food crops such as iron rich beans 
and  orange-fleshed  sweet  potato.  The  diversification  process  will  be  conducted  through  the 
FFSs, on communal plots, as  well as  directly  through offering targeted households low cost 
packages  to  encourage  the  testing  of  improved  technologies,  and  in  particular  cassava. 
Individual  farm  households  and  groups  will  be  eligible  for  small  livestock  investments  as  a 
general  strategy  as  well  as  apiculture  and  aquaculture  in  specific  locations  where  suitable. 
Aquaculture will also include the cultivation of Spirulina (blue-green algae), which will contribute 
to good nutrition. Free-range poultry and goats will provide a safety net for the more vulnerable 
households with limited access to land. In all cases the livestock interventions and support for 
off-farm activities will not exceed a financial ceiling of US$300 per household.  Approximately 
55,000 farm households will be targeted for this activity.  
Eligible investmentswill include: 
  Draft animals and animal traction equipment; Small livestock such as goats, sheep and pigs 
eventually  provided  as  a  pass-on  scheme  (particularly  appropriate  to  assist  female  headed 
households), etc.13; Ponds and equipment for aquaculture; Hives and equipment for apiculture; 
Equipment for conservation agriculture; Seed multiplication, multiplication of vegetative planting 
material (beans, soybean, groundnut, cassava, potatoes and sweet potatoes), tree nurseries 
and  orchards, etc.14; Equipment for vegetable  production (metal poles, small shade houses, 
irrigation, small scale hydroponic systems) Detailed eligibility criteria for matching grants  will 
be developed as part of pre-start-up activities for the project and included in the PIM 
b)    Post-harvest  Management  and  Value  Addition:  Complementing  similar  exercises  under 
SAMAP  and  other  projects,  a  mapping  and  characterization  of  value  chain  actors  and 
opportunities  will  be  undertaken  in  the  four  northern  provinces.  This  will  facilitate  the 
identification of sound investment ideas with potential for inclusion of FOs.  The selection of 
viable  Micro-project  Proposals  will  be  guided  by  the  findings  of  the  value  chain  studies  and 
identified  opportunities  for  FOs  to  forge  partnerships  with  larger  value  chain  actors.  Micro 
project proposals will be prioritized to enable FOs to increase their productivity, reduce post-
harvest losses and respond to increasing market demands for high value products. More basic 
market appraisal studies will be conducted in the southern provinces to link smallholder farmers 
and the more enterprising households to market opportunities. 
The main activities will be working with economic-oriented groups who have identified business 
opportunities and profitability as their priority focus to develop their skills and capacity to move 
their businesses up the market and/or value chain. Activities will include: (a) specialised training 
in  entrepreneurship,  market  identification  and  development,  business  planning,  simple  PHM 
improvement and financial management training; (b) assistance to develop business plans for 
investment in PHM and / or value adding equipment; (c) piloting and demonstrating new PHM 
and V/A technologies. Small PHM investment grants will be offered to fund investment in new 
PHM or value adding technologies that is not commercially available or accessible. Following 
are examples of the types of PHM or value adding activities that farmer groups may wish to 
invest:  
-  Maize - shelling, drying and storage 
-  Beans - cleaning, sorting and grading on size, colour and storage 
-  Vegetables and fruit - preservation and drying equipment,  
-  Cassava / maize mills - hullers and huskers   
-  Cassava - improved post-harvest handling, drying, chipping, waste management  
-  Sorghum – drying and storage.  
13 Small stock investments will also be made to secure household livelihoods.  Individual farm households and 
groups will be eligible for small stock investments that include packages that include poultry and goats as a general 
strategy as well as apiculture in specific locations where suitable. 
14 For cassava and sweet potato it will be necessary to organise lead farmers to multiply improved quality 
planting materials free of pests and diseases through community-based activities. The project will promote 
pathogen-resistant and water tolerant cultivars. 
Approximately 6,000 households will be targeted for this activity.  
c)  Rural Micro and Small-Scale-Agri-Business Promotion: Matching grants will be offered to 
youth,  women,  able  bodied  persons  and  entrepreneurial  small  farmers  to  provide  support 
services to farm households. Service enterprises could include mechanisation, input delivery, 
transportation,  marketing  and  business  advice.  Small  entrepreneurs  will  be  supported  by 
training in financial and functional literacy, marketing and business management offered under 
sub-component 2.1. Selection of activities will be demand driven and drawn from a menu of 
investment options that include: 
  Agricultural  production  equipment,  such  as  tractors  and  animal  traction  equipment 
sprayers, pumps, etc. 
  Agricultural input stocks and equipment 
  Agricultural post-harvest and value adding processing equipment, such as: cassava/maize 
mills, hullers and huskers, oil presses, fruit/vegetable dryers etc. 
  Agricultural marketing equipment, such as transport equipment (ox-cart, trailer), etc. 
  Small  workshops  and  equipment  for  manufacturing  and  repairing  inputs  for  agricultural 
value chains and rural livelihoods (beehives, cradles for produce transport, efficient cook 
stoves, solar panel and machinery repairs) 
  Facilities  for  operating  micro  businesses  providing  FOs  with  accounting,  IT,  market 
intelligence, logistic and business planning services, etc. 
FOs will also be eligible where they have a contractual agreement with one or more members 
to manage the equipment as a microenterprise, providing services to the whole group. Youth 
entrepreneurs  approved  for  financing  will  be  linked  up  with  a  mentoring  programme  that 
matches  them  with  experienced  business  owners,  where  applicable.  Approximately  4,500 
businesses will be supported, mainly in the higher potential northern provinces.  
17. 
Implementation  arrangements:  Sub-components  1.2  and  2.2  will  be  implemented  as 
matching  grants  which  will  be  put  in  place  to  address  partially  the  financial  constraints  of  the  target 
groups to enable them to procure the necessary inputs, equipment and infrastructure. The matching 
grant  targeting,  eligibility,  management,  level,  type  of  investment,  disbursement  and  monitoring 
procedures will be detailed in the Project Implementation Manual which will be issued at the beginning 
of the Project.   
18.  Technical  and  facilitation  assistance  will  be  provided  for:  (i)  training  of  EDA,  NGO  service 
providers  community  and  farm  leaders  as  required;  (ii)  facilitation  of  the  participatory  planning  and 
implementation  processes  for  community-level  and  group-based  micro-projects  and  verification  of 
eligibility  of  communities,  groups  and  their  proposed  investments;  (iii)  technical  assistance  for  the 
screening, assessment and design of proposed investments, such as technical, financial, economic, 
social and environmental feasibility, as well as (iv) preparation of business, operation and maintenance 
plans.  
19. 
Grant Ceiling and Conditions: The initial ceiling for funding Micro-project investments will be 
US$100,000.  Based  on  experience  elsewhere  in  Africa,  it  is  estimated  that  the  average  rural 
community-level  small  investment  project  cost  will  be  about  US$50,000  and  the  average  cost  of 
smallholder group-level SIPs will be about US$25,000.15Proposals for infrastructure sub-projects of a 
pure public good nature, smallholder farmer training and capacity building will be 90% funded by grants 
facility. Larger Micro-projects of up to $100,000 for some of the rural infrastructure investments under 
sub-component 1.2, will be screened for technical, financial, social and environmental feasibility before 
final approval. For assets like storage facilities which are jointly owned and operated by farmers and 
other value chain partners, and where a proper arrangement is in place for joint management, a 20% 
beneficiary contribution will be required. Micro-projects such as livestock, seed multiplication etc. that 
naturally reproduce and can further distribute will be set at a matching grant ration of 90:10 i.e. a 90% 
project contribution and 10% beneficiary contribution (either in cash or in-kind), under the condition that 
15Selection of activities will be demand driven drawn from a menu of options. The crop and livestock based 
interventions and support for income generating activities should not exceed a financial ceiling of US$300 per 
household. Recipient households may decide to come together as a group for ease of implementation. 
the beneficiary  group  agree to a further distribution  mechanism under  which the  whole  group or the 
whole community will eventually benefit. Proposals for small grants of up to $25,000 will be required to 
include a simple business plan which will be prepared in a participatory manner with farmer beneficiaries 
and  which  demonstrates  the  technical  and  financial  feasibility  of  the  proposal.  Average  budget  per 
participating household is expected to be in the range of USD 200-300, but could be higher or lower 
according to circumstances. Some grant financing may be approved for a combination of Micro-project 
that have been grouped together and consolidated for practical reasons. The applied matching grant 
ratios and funding ceilings will be periodically reviewed and recalibrated to take account of the changing 
circumstances and lessons learned during project implementation.  
Component 3: Project Coordination and Management (US$ 21.7 million) 
20. 
Component 3 is a cross cutting component to the technical components described above. The 
lack of institutional capacity is well recognised as a limitation to the effective implementation of projects 
in  Angola.  Institution  strengthening  measures  in  project  management,  finance  and  procurement  are 
crucial to ensure that the Project objectives are achieved. This component includes: (i) SREP day to 
day  management  and  coordination;  and  (ii)  establishment  of  a  Single  Coordination  Unit  (SCU)  to 
support  implementation,  capacity  building  across  the  IFAD  portfolio.  The  overall  coordination  and 
management functions will be performed by a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) under the oversight of 
the SREP Project Steering Committee (PSC). The SCU will provide Technical Assistance to strengthen 
the  capacity  of  the  IFAD  project  portfolio.  A  Portfolio  Implementation  Facility  (PIF)  will  also  be 
established  to  strengthen  the  SCU.    Component  3  can,  subsequently,  be  divided  into  two  sub-
components: a) the SREP Project Implementation Unit; and b) establishment of the Single Coordination 
Unit and Portfolio Implementation Facility (PIF). Detailed implementation arrangements are described 
in Technical Annex 5. 
Sub-component 3.1: SREP Project Implementation Unit: (US$ 15.6 mill.) 
21. 
SREP  will have a project  management team consisting  of a  Project  Manager  and two  team 
leaders  to  manage  field  activities  in  the  northern  and  southern  provinces,  respectively.  Project 
management will also include a Finance Officer, a Procurement Officer, and an M&E officer. The Teams 
will be responsible for the day-to-day management of SREP in the north and south.  
Sub-component 3.2: Single Coordination Unit/ Portfolio Implementation Facility: (US$6.1 mill.) 
The Single Coordination Unit (SCU) will be set up to strengthen the capacity of the management 
22. 
staff  of  the  IFAD-financed  programme  in  implementation  and  fiduciary  matters.  The  SCU  will  be 
responsible  for  coordination  of  the  IFAD  project  portfolio  implemented  through  the  Ministry  of 
Agriculture/IDA. The unit will provide fiduciary management, procurement, planning and monitoring and 
evaluation support. The SCU will be led by the current SAMAP and ARP Coordinator who will oversee 
SREP implementation and will be responsible for strategic management of the programme. The SCU 
will  be  staffed  by  a  team  of  Angolan  professionals  comprising,  a  Senior  Finance  Management 
Controller,  a  Senior  Procurement  Officer,  a  Senior  M&E  Officer  and  an  Administration  Assistant 
supported by the PIF. The latter will be established as an international/ regional technical assistance 
unit  with  the  purpose  of  sourcing  International/  Regional  Technical  Assistance  to  establish  the 
implementation  frameworks  of  the  portfolio  and  set  up  systems  and  provide  on  the  job  training  to 
Angolan Counterparts. A Portfolio Implementation Facility (PIF) will also be established to strengthen 
the  SCU.  The  PIF  will  support  national  counterparts  through  training,  mentoring  and  establishing 
portfolio management systems (in administration and day-to day management, M&E/result reporting, 
Financial Management and Procurement)16. An “internship” programme will be established to support 
the  country  in  establishing  and  reinforcing  its  institutional  capacity  to  attract,  absorb  and  manage 
external  assistance17.  As  the  SCU  will  be  working  with  IFAD’s  ongoing  portfolio,  the  costs  of 
establishment  and  operation  will  be  divided  proportionately  between  SREP  and  SAMAP.  Technical 
assistance will also be provided through the SCU in identified technical subjects – FFS development 
(agronomy), civil engineering, social development, agribusiness development and marketing.  
16 AFD, BADEA and IFAD will to provide financial support to the PIF..  
17 Each year 18 interns (6-finance, 6-project management, 6-procurement) will be competitively hired to form the 
Luanda based internship programme. Each year 9 interns (3 project management, 3 finance, 3 procurement) will 
be selected to attend one year training abroad.  
Attachment 1:  Survey studies of Small-Scale Irrigation Potential in the Southern provinces 
Province   Municipality 
N° of 
FFSs  
N° of 
hhs 
Irrigation 
(ha) 
Cost 
per ha 
Comments 
The river 
Benguela 
Ganda 
20 
500 
20 
20,000 
Cubal 
20 
500 
20 
20,000 
Chongoroi 
40 
1000 
80 
10,000 
Balombo 
20 
500 
20 
20,000 
Ombadja 
40 
1000 
80 
10,000 
Cuvelai 
40 
1000 
80 
20,000 
Cunene 
Cahama 
20 
500 
20 
40,000 
Curoca 
10 
250 
10 
20,000 
Bibala 
40 
1000 
80 
20,000 
Camucuio 
10 
250 
10 
20,000 
Namibe 
Moçâmedes 
50 
1250 
100 
10,000 
Virei 
20 
500 
20 
20,000 
Tômbua 
20 
500 
20 
20.000 
Total 
350 
8,750 
560 
High cost because of the need for 
drilling.  
High cost because of the need for 
drilling.  
Good river flow. No need for drilling. 
Large area of potentially fertile land. 
High cost because of the need for 
drilling.  
Good river flow. No need for drilling. 
Adequate availability of fertile land for 
irrigation.  
High cost because of the need for 
drilling.  
High cost because in some cases will 
need to construct dams  
High cost as need to construct dams 
or Chimpaca to collect water. 
Targeted towards the pastoral areas 
High cost because of the need for 
drilling. Considerable fertile land 
available 
High cost as need to construct dams 
or Chimpaca to collect water. 
Targeted towards the pastoral areas 
Good river flow. Lot of fertile land 
available 
High cost because of the need for 
drilling.  
High cost because of the need for 
drilling.  
Attachment 2:  Activities per target beneficiary group 
Activity cluster 
Activity 1.1.1Climate and nutrition 
sensitive extension service delivery 
Detailed activities  Beneficiary groups 
Office rehabilitation 
Extension staff 
deployment 
Training of 
extension and 
other technical staff 
- IDA staff and other 
professionals  
- EDA front line 
extension staff 
1.1 
Strengthening 
capacity for 
improved 
services 
1.2 Investing in 
public rural 
infrastructure 
Activity 1.1.2 Animal Health Services 
Para-veterinarian 
services 
Activity  1.2.1  Feeder  road  rehabilitation 
and maintenance 
Feeder road 
infrastructure 
Activity 1.2.2 Market infrastructure 
Activity  1.2.3  Sustainable  Land  and 
Water Management  
Activity 2.1.1 Community organization, 
planning and mentoring  
2.1 
Strengthening 
capacity for 
family farming  
Activity 2.1.2: Farmer field school 
establishment and implementation  
Market 
infrastructure 
Water harvesting 
Small scale 
irrigation  
Soil and water 
conservation 
Rangelands 
management  
Awareness raising, 
Training, Planning, 
Mentoring 
Training of FFS 
facilitators 
- Municipality 
veterinarian staff 
- Community level 
workers 
- Frontline extension 
staff 
- Entire community 
- Entire community 
- Community 
- Subsistence farmers 
- Small stable family 
farmers 
- Subsistence farmers,  
- Market oriented 
farmers,  
- Women  
- Youth 
-  EDA capacity 
- Service provider 
capacity 
- FFS facilitators 
- Community facilitators 
- Lead farmers 
FFS Training of 
farmers 
FFS members 
2.2  Investment  in 
family farming 
Activity 2.2.1  Agricultural diversification 
and improved productivity  
Crop production 
packages 
Small livestock 
Activity 2.2.2 Value addition and 
marketing 
Post-harvest  
Activity 2.2. 3Rural micro and small 
scale agribusiness promotion 
Micro-enterprises 
Service providers 
- Subsistence farmers 
- Market oriented 
farmers 
- Subsistence farmers,  
- Market oriented 
farmers,  
- Women  
- Youth 
- Disabled 
- Women 
- Youth 
- Disabled 
- Women 
- Youth 
- Rural entrepreneurs  
- Disabled 
- Ex-combatants 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Institutional approach and implementation arrangements
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Institutional Approach and Implementation Arrangements 
A.  APPROACH 
1. 
SREP will be implemented over a period of six years, concentrating on priority areas within the 
target  municipalities,  where  there  is  high  population  density,  and  higher  incidence  of  vulnerable 
households. In the north implementation will start in two provinces (Uige and Cuanza Norte) and eight 
municipalities  will  receive  intensive  support.  In  PY2  another  five  municipalities  within  these  same 
provinces  will  be  added.  In  PY3,  a  further  two  provinces  (Bengo  and  Zaire)  will  be  added  with 
implementation  in  eight  municipalities.  In  the  south  implementation  will  begin  from  PY1  in  the  three 
provinces simultaneously, but beginning in the same municipalities where ARP is being implemented. 
The interventions in the south are designed to complement the recovery efforts of ARP by strengthening 
the resilience of households and communities. 
2.  Criteria for the selection of municipalities will be included in the PIM and the annual work plans and 
budgets for PY1, PY2 and PY3 will indicate the proposed municipalities and communes to be covered. 
The AWPBs will then be subject to approval by IFAD. Any decision to expand target areas will only be 
justified  by  satisfactory  progress  in  the  initial  target  areas,  as  evidenced  by  annual  implementation 
reviews. 
3.  The  approach  to  project  implementation  is  based  on  recognition  that:  (i)  project  implementation 
capacity  of  IDA  and  NGO  service  providers  is  limited;  (ii)  many  of  the  farmer  organisations  and 
associations already set up are weak and at a fledgling stage of organizational development; and (iii) 
pro-community  policies,  such  as  local  empowerment,  targeting  and  promoting  gender  equity  are 
incipient in Angola’s rural development sector. As such, SREP will focus on strengthening the capacity 
of IDA/ EDA, other government institutions, and local NGO service providers to in turn strengthen the 
capacity  of  family  farmer  groups,  associations  and  cooperatives,  locally.  Implicit  to  the  design  is  to 
develop a “training of trainers’’ programme for FFS implementation together with a longer-term strategy 
of capacitating EDA extension workers and NGO service providers.  
4.  Given  the  capacity  limitations  and  the  need  to  closely  involve  and  empower  communities  and 
farmers  organizations  to  ensure  longer  term  sustainability,  the  approach  will  focus  initially  on  (a) 
capacity building of extension workers and service providers, (b), a planning process that identifies sites 
and appraises infrastructure; and (c) investments in infrastructure and community, group and household 
activities.  
5.  SREP  will  need to rely on  service providers for the  implementation of  activities outside the core 
competencies of IDA and capacity building of these service providers by the project will be essential to 
ensure  effective  and  sustainable  implementation.  The  sequencing  of  implementation  in  the  SREP-
supported provinces is given in the figure below.  
6. 
Initially  efforts will concentrate on capacity  building of service providers (IDA extension staff and 
NGOs) through a concerted training programme that involves a needs assessment and the design and 
organising a series of training programmes in agricultural production, natural resource management, 
climate  change,  environmental  management  and  nutrition. As  new  vacancies  for  extension  workers 
become filled over the course of the first year of implementation additional training programmes will be 
organised.  In  the  northern  provinces,  SREP  will  target,  as  a  priority  for  implementation,  Uige  and 
Caunza  Norte,  where  the  highest  concentration  of  farm  households  can  be  found.  Other  capacity 
building  activities  will  include  planning  for  rural  infrastructure:  site  selection  and  the  preparation  of 
feasibility  studies.  In  the  northern  provinces  investments  in  infrastructure,  FFS  establishment  and 
investment will take place from year 2.  From year 3, SREP will move into the remaining 2 provinces in 
the north – Bengo and Zaire.  
In the southern provinces SREP will build on the community development/ FFS activities of ARP. 
7. 
Investments to support resilience, at household level, will be made immediately following support staff 
organization and capacity building. Rural infrastructure site selection and feasibility study preparation 
will begin immediately and investments could be made in the last six months of year 1. Community and 
household investments will similarly  be made at  that time. For non ARP areas  the process of social 
mobilization,  planning  and  FFS  establishment  will  begin  towards  the  end  of  the  first  year  and 
investments made from year 2. FO consolidation will occur from the end of year 4. A two year period is 
assumed  for  consolidation  following  the  fully  30  months  of  FFS  implementation.  During  the 
consolidation period focus will be placed on linking farmers to markets and building the management 
and financial capacity of FOs.   
Table 1: Sequencing of implementation 
YearsActivitiesLocation   PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6All provincesNorthern provincesCommunity mobilization/ planningUige, Cuanza NorteUige, Cuanza NorteFFS organization/ establishmentUige, Cuanza NorteRural infrastructure investments Uige, Cuanza NorteCommunity/FFS/ HH investmentsUige, Cuanza NorteFFS/ FO consolidationUige, Cuanza NorteCommunity mobilization/ planningBengo/ ZaireBengo/ ZaireFFS organization/ establishmentBengo/ ZaireRural infrastructure investments Bengo/ ZaireCommunity/FFS/ HH investmentsBengo/ ZaireFFS/ FO consolidationBengo/ ZaireSouthern provincesARP areasRural infrastructure investments ARP areasCommunity/FFS/ HH investmentsARP areasFFS/ FO consolidationARP areasCommunity mobilization/ planningAll other areasAll other areasFFS organization/ establishmentAll other areasRural infrastructure investments All other areasCommunity/FFS/ HH investmentsAll other areasFFS/ FO consolidationAll other areasPhasingPhase 1:Phase 2:Phase 3:Capacity buildingInvestments: roll-outConsolidationRural infrastructure: Site selection/ feasibility studies Capacity building of IDA/EDA extension workers/ service providersRural infrastructure: Site selection/ feasibility studies Rural infrastructure: Site selection/ feasibility studies Rural infrastructure: Site selection/  
Table 2: Sequencing of Implementation: Beneficiary Coverage 
B.  KEY IMPLEMENTING INSTITUTIONS 
9.  MINAGRI will be the lead executing agency and will work closely with the other line ministries 
and  partners  whose  mandates  have  a  direct  bearing  on  the  achievement  of  the  Project  goal  and 
development  objectives.  The  Project  delivery  systems  will  be  integrated  into  the  decentralized 
government organisational and operational structures that cascade from the national level to communal 
level. 
10.  National Level – MINAGRI will delegate it responsibility to the Institute for Agrarian Development 
(Instituto de Desenvolvimento Agrário - IDA). As part of its mandate, the institution is responsible for 
supporting smallholder agriculture in the country, promoting production increases and the improvement 
of livelihoods of rural households which fits in well with objectives of SREP. IDA will take the role of the 
main  implementing  partner  on  behalf  of  MINAGRI.  It  will  play  a  key  role  in  both  the  overall  project 
management and  the coordination  of government and non-government  agencies participating  in  the 
Project. 
11.  Provincial Level – At the provincial level, the MINAGRI Provincial Directorates are responsible 
for the agriculture sector support and policy issues relating to their respective provinces, as  well the 
overall coordination of the actions carried out by the agricultural institutions present in the province. The 
involvement  of  the  provincial  directorates  of  agriculture  will  be  important  for  overall  oversight  of 
provincial Project implementation at field level by IDA/contracted service providers. 
12.  Municipal Levels – As the majority of Project activities will take place locally at the Commune 
and Municipal levels, the Estacões de Desenvolvimento Agrário (EDAs) will play a critical role. EDAs 
are the field offices of IDA at municipal level; this is where frontline extension staff is located. They are 
responsible for extension and capacity building of farmers. They are also responsible for collecting data 
for MINAGRI and for implementation of various government-sponsored programmes. The  staffing of 
the IDA’s in the field, is very limited and their administrative and technical capacities are generally weak. 
The  project  will  provide  both  institutional  capacity  building  to  EDAs  (including  office  and  housing 
facilities and equipment where necessary) and targeted technical assistance through service providers 
working closely with EDA staff. 
13.  The  Veterinary  Service  Institute  (ISV)  –  The  Project  has  interventions  in  the  area  of  small 
livestock. Therefore,  ISV  will  work  closely  with  and  provide  advice  to  IDA  and  EDAs  on  all  aspects 
related to the Project’s livestock activities in the areas suitable for livestock raising. It may be called on 
to participate in the Project Coordination Committee. 
14.  The Angola’s Coffee Institute (ICA): ICA will play an advisory role for the implementation of 
the Project in relation to coffee, which can be found in the northern provinces. It will provide advice to 
IDA and EDAs on all aspects of coffee production and may be called on to participate in the Project 
Coordination Committee. 
PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total1. FFS only1.a. FFS only Bengo/Zaire HH383276085200520042005230312701.b. Bengo/ Zaire other extension HH30080020003000400098001.c. FFS only Uize/Cuanza NorteHH5748114127800780063007846469061.d. Uige/ Cuanza Norte other extension HH5001000220040006000137001.e South drier areasHH158749232700270027003362179721.f South wetter areas HH105832821800180018002242119821.g. South other extension HH78612001500200020002600100862. Grants2.1.a. Grants only Bengo/Zaire HH420103636403780380827501543321.b. Grants only Uize/Cuanza HH63015545460567057124124231502.2.a.Grants for south drier areas HH270666234024302447.821227.693812.2 b. Grants for south wetter areas HH01000200020002000070003. Off-farm activitiesHH180444156016201631.88818.46254 3.a Post harvest enterprises 3.b Service provider enterprisesHH1565014001500130012006065Total householdsHH0120022002000180018009000218000Irrigation (south) 
15.  Other  Ministries  –  SREP  will  have  implications  for  some  other  ministries,  in  addition  to  the 
Ministry  of  Agriculture.  The  most  obvious  ones  include:  a)  Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF)  –  This  is  the 
representative  of  the  borrower.  In  addition,  it  is  responsible  for  the  financial  supervision  of  all 
government programs; it is also responsible for supervising the budget process and the allocation of 
project financing for all those projects with external sources of financing; b) Ministry of Social Action, 
Family and Promotion of Women (MASFAMU) will be instrumental to ensure appropriate mechanisms 
for gender and targeting; c) Ministry of Health – the recurring droughts in the south, have resulted in a 
considerable degree of malnutrition. The Ministry will interested in ensuring that nutritional aspects of 
the target beneficiaries are progressively being addressed; and d) Ministry of Environment  – this will 
be a major stakeholder in the SREP implementation; many of the capacity building activities will directly 
involve  the  Ministry;  d)  Other  Ministries  will  include  Ministry  of  Commerce  (marketing);  Ministry  of 
Industry  (processing)  and  Ministry  of  Education  (middle  level  agricultural  schools  and  literacy/ 
numeracy training) 
16.  Technical  Service  Providers  (TSPs)  –  These  will  play  a  critical  role  during  SREP 
implementation. All  Projects  have  been/are  being  implemented  through  different  service  providers. 
These range from UN agencies, such as FAO, to specialised NGOs. In addition, services of consultancy 
firms and/or individual consultants may besought during the course of SREP implementation. The Sub-
projects will finance, specialized TSPs, resident in Angola, with distinct terms of reference (TORs) and 
specific experiences in FFS extension and community development and with capacity to identify and 
train  local  service  providers.  The  TSPs  will  help  to  identify  viable  micro-projects,  prepare  business 
plans, and provide technical oversight of their implementation and, provide technical assistance and 
business management  and  social  mentoring. As  stipulated  in Appendix  8:  Procurement,  the  needed 
services will be procured following the appropriate procedures to ensure the effective achievement of 
the SREP objectives. 
17.  FAO:Following the successful experience of the MOSAP project co-funded by IFAD/World Bank, 
SREP will benefit from the expertise and services  of FAO for the implementation of the Farmer Field 
School methodology, although effort will be made to draw on national staff that have already undergone 
such training.  
18.  NGOs:  there  are  well-established  national  and  international  NGOs  with  long  experience  in 
working with local communities and also in establishing and reinforcing farmers’ groups and developing 
their  capacities.  Their  major  weakness  is  the  lack  of  experience  in  supporting  climate  change, 
sustainable  land  management,  linking  farmers  to  markets  and  developing  partnerships  between 
smallholder farmers and the private sector. SREP includes capacity building activities for the NGOs as 
service providers.  
19.  Consultancy  firms  and  individual  consultants:  There  is  a  wide  range  of  competent 
consultancy  firms  and  independent  consultants  with  working  experience  in  the  implementation  of 
agricultural and related value chain projects in Angola that can provide the services required by the 
Project. They may lack experience in working with rural communities and informal traders. 
In  addition  to  the  entities  mentioned  above,  banks,  agriculture  traders  and  processors, 
20. 
commercial  farm  operations,  agro-dealers  and  other  partners  may  also  be  involved  in  the 
implementation of project activities. 
C.  Project Management Structure 
21. 
SREP  has  been  designed  to  ensure  simplicity  in  project  implementation  by  building  on  the 
implementation  arrangements  designed  for  SAMAP  and  ARP  in  the  central  and  southern  regions, 
respectively.  An  innovative  element  to  these  arrangements  is  the  establishment  of  the  Single 
Coordination Unit (SCU) to coordinate and oversee the IFAD investment portfolio being implemented 
through the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry(MINAGRIF). These considerations are also a response 
to the IFAD CSPE which noted the need to adjust to the limited implementation capacity in Angola and 
build on lessons learned from project implementation in the country.  
The  project  will  be  implemented  by  IDA,  from  the  National  to  Municipal  level,  with  strong 
22. 
coordination and consultation mechanisms with the relevant government stakeholders and authorities 
at different levels.  The institutional framework for execution is as follows: 
23.  SREP will be coordinated through the establishment of a  Project Implementation Unit (PIU), 
staffed by a Project Manager, a Finance Officer, a Procurement Officer, and an M&E officer. The Project 
Manager  will  be  supported  by  two  Team  Leaders,  one  for  the  north  and  another  for  the  south, 
respectively.  The  Team  Leaders  will  be  deployed  in  provincial  offices.  The  Team  Leaders  will  be 
responsible for the day-to-day management of SREP in the north and south.  
22.  Focal  Points  will  be  designated  by  public  sector  entities  (outside  MINAGRI).  They  should  have 
proven technical capacity in their sector (e.g. roads, education) and will be responsible for facilitating 
inter-sector coordination and providing specialized knowledge and input to the team leaders on project 
annual reports, terms of reference, and other aspects.  
23.  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIUs):  Four  Provincial  Project  Implementation 
Units (PPIUs) will be established. In the four northern provinces, two Provincial Units will be set up; one 
in the town of Buanzo Congo covering Bengo and Zaire region; and another in the town of Uige covering 
the Uige and Cuanza Norte region. For the south two more Provincial Units will be set up in Benguela 
and Namibe. The units will be located in EDA offices. Given the distances involved three sub-unit offices 
will  similarly  need  to  be  set  up  in  the  provinces  where  there  is  no  project  representation.  Tentative 
locations include sub-offices in Bengo province (the town of Caxite), Cuanza Norte, (Mdalatondo), and 
in Cunene (the town of Ondjiva). Selection of locations were made considering criteria such as: easy 
access to other target municipalities, presence of IDA/EDA staff and current office conditions. These 
locations,  however,  should  be  regarded  as  tentative  with  a  final  decision  to  be  made  by  IDA  in 
collaboration with the Provincial Governments.  
24.  The PPIUs will be lightly staffed, as most of the investment and technical support duties will be 
implemented by service providers and fiduciary management will mostly be done centrally.  The four 
main  PPIUs  will  include  an  Area  Manager,  an  Assistant  Finance  Officer,  an  Assistant  Procurement 
Officer; an Administrative Assistant, a Secretary and a Driver.  For the Sub-offices the personnel will 
include  an  Area  Manager,  an  Administrative  Assistant  and  driver.  See  Figure  6  below.  The  Area 
Managers will work in close collaboration with the Provincial Directors of IDA and the Heads of EDA 
Offices in the target municipalities and will be expected to assist in strengthening local capacities. There 
will be 2 M&E officers for each of the project areas – north and south - and 3 M&E Assistants (1 in the 
south and 2 more in the north). Decisions regarding their deployment will be made later. 
25.  The responsibilities of the SREP Team Leaders will include technical supervision and coordination, 
overall project planning, quality oversight, communication, reporting of Project activities and progress 
on a regular basis. Fiduciary issues will be managed in conformity with the standards and requirements 
agreed  upon  with  IFAD,  in  accordance  with  the  Financing Agreement  and  other  Project  documents, 
such  as  the  Project  Design/Appraisal  Documents  and  the  PIM.  Support  in  fiduciary  matters  will  be 
provided  by  the  SCU.  The  designated  team  leaders  will  come  under  the  supervision  of  the  SREP 
National Project Manager and will accountable to the Director General of IDA. SREP staff, at all levels, 
will receive capacity-building assistance from the SCU to support project implementation technically, 
operationally and administratively, and especially to strengthen M&E capacity. 
26.  Single Coordination Unit – A Single Coordination Unit (SCU) will be established to ensure ease 
of  coordination  and  oversight,  ensuring  cost  efficiencies  through  shared  functions,  and  developing 
capacity of IFAD project management staff in fiduciary issues for more effective implementation. The 
SCU  will  be  responsible  for  the  overall  coordination  of  the  IFAD  programme  portfolio  implemented 
through MINAGRI, including SAMAP, ARP and SREP1. The SCU will be led by the current SAMAP-and 
1 SAMAP staffing includes a Project Manager, a Financial Management Specialist, a Procurement Specialist, an 
Accountant and an M&E and Knowledge Sharing Specialist. These positions will be absorbed by the Single 
Coordination Unit. The SAMAP Project Manager will take on the role of Single Coordination Unit, Programme 
Manager. ARP is being implemented at provincial level through an office in Lubango, Huela. The project team 
consists of a Project Manager; Accountant; Procurement Assistant; Monitoring and Evaluation Assistant; and 
Project Assistant with SAMAP playing an oversight role. The fiduciary specialist responsibilities will be extended 
to provide support to SREP.  
ARP  Coordinator  who  will  oversee  SREP  implementation  and  will  be  responsible  for  effective 
coordination of day-to-day operations. The unit will be responsible for fiduciary management, planning, 
monitoring  and  evaluation. The  SCU  will  be  staffed  by  a  team  comprising,  a  Financial  Management 
Officer, a Procurement Officer and a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Officer. These positions will be 
financed by SAMAP. Technical support will be provided to strengthen the management and fiduciary 
capacity  of  IFAD’s  programme,  as  recommended  by  IFAD’s  Country  Strategy  and  Programme 
Evaluation (CSPE). Technical assistance in key subject areas will also be available within the SCU to 
support the technical capacity of project staff, service providers and beneficiaries. These will include 
amongst  others,  experts  in  Civil  Engineering,  Environmental  Management,  Farmer  Field  School 
(agronomy), Social Development, Agribusiness and Marketing and Water Resources Development. The 
SCU will host the SREP National Manager, two M&E Officers (for the two subprojects), a Procurement 
Officer and a Finance Officer. As the SCU will be working with IFAD’s ongoing portfolio, the costs of 
establishment and operation will be divided proportionately between SREP and SAMAP. 
27.  Portfolio Implementation Facility (PIF): The PIF will be established to strengthen the SCU by 
sourcing  International/  Regional  Technical  Assistance  to  set  up  implementation  frameworks  and 
systems and provide on the job training to Angolan Counterparts. The PIF will also support national 
counterparts  through  training,  mentoring  and  establishing  portfolio  management  systems  (in 
administration  and  day-to  day  management,  M&E/result  reporting,  Financial  Management  and 
Procurement).2 An “internship” programme will be established to support  Angola in establishing and 
reinforcing  its  institutional  capacity  to  attract,  absorb  and  manage  external  assistance3.  Technical 
assistance will also be provided through the SCU in identified technical subjects – FFS development 
(agronomy), civil engineering, social development, agribusiness development and marketing.  
Figure 6: Project Management Structure 
2 AFD, BADEA and IFAD will to provide financial support to the PIF..  
3 Each year 18 interns (6-finance, 6-project management, 6-procurement) will be competitively hired to form the 
Luanda based internship programme and a further 9 interns (3 project management, 3 finance, 3 procurement) 
will be selected to attend a one year training abroad.  
Figure 7: Project Organizational Framework 
D.  Oversight bodies 
28.  The oversight  bodies at two different levels, national  and provincial, are described below, and 
summarised in Figure 7. 
29.  Project Coordination Committee(PCC)- At the national level, MINAGRI will be supported by a 
Project Coordination Committee(PCC). The PCC  will be chaired by  the Minister of Agriculture or his 
nominee, and composed of membership from institutions with direct relevance to the achievement of 
SREP’s  goal  and  development  objective.  The  PCC  will  be  responsible  for  the  strategic  direction, 
operational  oversight  of  project  activities  and  implementation  progress,  communication,  and  overall 
good governance of the project. It will: a) provide political and strategic guidance and facilitate inter-
sectoral coordination for activities not directly under MINAGRI; b) review and approve the Annual Work 
Plans and  Budget for the  Project Implementation Teams; and, c)  review  annual  project reports  and 
support problem resolution. The Director General of IDA will be the Secretary of the PCC. It will meet 
at least two times per year or more frequently, as and when need arises. 
30. 
Implementation Sub-committee- Implementation Sub-Committees will be set up for each of the 
project areas – north and south. The sub-committees will have executive and technical responsibilities. 
The implementation sub-committees will consist of (at least) the IDA Director General, the SREP Project 
Manager, the respective Team Leader and the Financial Management Officer. Its task will be to: speed-
up decisions and procedures; (ii) approve micro-projects under Sub-components 1.2 and 2.2 that may 
require central level decision making (based on the feasibility studies prepared by the PIT); (iii) propose 
the agenda for the PCC meetings and prepare the support documents; (iv) propose the Annual Work 
Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  to  PCC  for  analysis  and  decision;  and  (v)  submit Annual  Report  of  micro 
projects. The implementation sub-committees will, in addition, include representatives of NGO or civil 
society and a representative of the private sector, when deciding on the approval of micro-projects.  
31.  Provincial Project Coordinating Committee (PPCC)  - At the provincial level, there will be a 
Provincial Project Coordinating Committee (PPCC) in each participating province. The composition and 
tasks  of  the  PPCC  will  reflect  the  composition  and  tasks  of  the  PCC.  The  PPCC  will  include  the 
Provincial  Director  of  Agriculture,  the  Provincial  Director  of  IDA  and  the  Area  Project  Manager,  a 
representative  of  civil  society  or  NGO,  a  representative  of  the  private  sector  and  two  (minimum) 
representatives  of  beneficiaries/producers’  organisations.  The  PPCC  will  also  meet  twice  a  year,  or 
more frequently, if required. The responsibilities of the PPCC will include: a) speeding up decisions and 
procedures; b) review and approval of the beneficiary and micro-project selection processes; c) review 
the  provincial  level AWPB  prepared  by  the  Provincial  Directorates  of Agriculture  and  the  main  area 
service providers; and d) review the provincial level annual Project implementation progress reports. 
The PPCC will also meet at least two times per year or more frequently, as and when need arises. 
32.  Provincial Governance Committees (PGC) – In addition to the PPCCs, PGCs will be established 
in  each  of  the  participating  provinces  to  ensure  good  governance  and  accountability  during  Micro-
project implementation. They will be composed of local authorities and traditional leaders who will be 
supported,  as  and  when  the  need  arises,  by  a  representative  of  the  oversight  agents. The  role  and 
functions of the PGCs will be to oversee implementation from a good governance and accountability 
perspective. With the Micro-projects being demand responsive with the preparation of business plans 
and  micro-project  proposals,  the  process  of  deciding  on  the  approval  of  plans/  proposals  and  the 
selection  of  beneficiaries  could,  potentially,  generate  some  grievances.  The  PGCs  will  establish  a 
grievance  mechanism  which  will  be  used  to  address  any  grievances  that  could  develop  during  the 
course of SREP implementation. The PGCs will keep records of evidences and complaints with minutes 
of  the  discussions,  recommendations  and  decisions  taken.  The  PGCs  will  establish  detailed 
mechanisms for the grievance and complaint process, describing format, language, time for reply and 
alternative resources, including access to Courts of Law as a last resort after exhausting all the viable 
peaceful local alternatives/options. Permanent and open dialogue will also be promoted as this is the 
most suitable way of peacefully addressing any grievances expressed. A team of oversight agents will 
be designated and entitled to spot-check the approval process at the PGC level to ensure fairness and 
transparency and will report to the PCC. The PGC for Uige and Cuanza Norte will include as a PGC 
member a representative of the wildlife authority.  
33.  Micro-project implementation arrangements: Components 1.2 and 2.2 of SREP offer demand-
based support, in the form of matching grants to rural communities and smallholder groups, for small-
scale  agricultural  infrastructure,  production,  processing  and  marketing  sub  and  micro-projects.  The 
project  implementation  arrangements  include  the  following  steps  and  elements:  (i)  Identification: 
Originates at the beneficiary  level, through a facilitated participatory development planning exercise, 
resulting in an identified micro-project proposal. Components 1.1 and2.1 will support the formation and 
capacity building of smallholder groups and associations to identify and prepare subprojects, and will 
strengthen  the  capacity  of  service  providers,  primarily  the  EDA’s,  to  facilitate  participatory  planning 
exercises. The micro-project proposals will be submitted to the local EDA. (ii)  Appraisal: EDA and/or 
selected service providers  will prepare the respective micro-project documentation for submission to 
the  PPIU,  mobilizing  technical  assistance  from  the  PPIU.  All  micro-projects  will  be  screened  for 
feasibility.  With  the  consent  of  the  municipality  administrator,  the  EDA  will  submit  the  sub-project 
document to the PPIU. (iii) Evaluation: All sub-project proposals will be evaluated by the PPIU. This will 
include verification of all eligibility and feasibility criteria. Based on the dimension, and following due 
local procedure, certain micro-projects will be classified as “micro-projects for central level decision”, 
and will be referred to the PIU for further processing and evaluation. (iv)Approval: Depending on the 
project cost and based on the pre-set criteria and the project implementation manual, the micro-projects 
will be approved either by the PISC or the PPISC. (v) Implementation: Depending on the classification 
of the micro-projects, either the PIU or the PPIU will be responsible for the administrative procedures 
(financial  and  procurement)  of  micro-project  implementation.  Whenever  possible  and  justifiable, 
procurement will be done with the full involvement of the beneficiaries. 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Planning, M&E, Learning and KM
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Overview  
1.  A  knowledge  management  system,  comprising  information  management,  monitoring  and 
evaluation (M&E),  communication  and  innovation  and experimentation,  will  be developed for SREP. 
The objectives of the developed system will be to: 
 
 
 
Monitor and guide project implementation in terms of relevance, efficiency and success in 
impacting the lives of the target groups;  
Share knowledge for use in learning, up-scaling and policy development; and 
Evaluate project impact.  
2.  The  system  provides  data,  information  and  feedback  to  improve  the  effectiveness,  efficiency, 
sustainability, relevance and impact of project activities. The project log-frame and intervention logic 
provide a complete set of indicators for monitoring project progress towards the development objectives, 
while  more  detailed  activity  plans  are  in  place  for  monitoring  physical  implementation.  The  project 
development  objective  originates  from  the  IFAD  Country  Strategic  Opportunities  Paper  (2018),  and 
forms part of the overall monitoring of the IFAD country programme in Angola.  
3.  The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will establish an M&E system, satisfactory to IFAD, prior to 
project  implementation.  The  M&E  system  will  be  connected  and  inter-linked  at  all  levels  and  will 
consider the effects / impact of project investments on project beneficiaries and key stakeholders. The 
M&E system will include financial and physical reporting, the Government of Angola (GoA) reporting 
requirements and IFAD’s reporting requirements, including RIMS.  
4.  A key output from monitoring will be development of annual data on people’s progress in becoming 
more resilient, disaggregated  wherever possible by gender and  youth. Monitoring will cover process 
(group  formation,  implementation)  and  progress  (number  of  people  actively  participating,  activities 
being implemented) monitoring. Impact /outcomes will be monitored and assessed as groups complete 
their programmes of activities that will contribute to outputs and outcomes. Municipal and commune  
level  implementers  such  as  local  government  and  farmer  organizations  (cooperatives/  associations) 
and service providers / strategic partners, where used, will undertake most of the project monitoring – 
they will be provided with guidance and training on how this is to be done and held accountable for 
delivering results. Important elements of the monitoring processes include being: 
 
Integrated into local level systems. Planning and monitoring will be led by municipality and 
commune staff, supported by the SCU.  
  Publically  available:  The  data  will  be  publically  available  and  provide  information  to  all 
stakeholders.  
  Participatory: Stakeholders involved in implementation and beneficiaries themselves will play 
an active monitoring activity and performance of implementing partners, as well as modifying 
implementation approaches and activities.  
Knowledge  and  results  based  so  communication  can  inform  policy  development  and 
5. 
efficiency  and  relevance  of  project  implementation  and  ensure  achievement  of  results  though:  1) 
specialised studies at baseline and completion for impact evaluation and 2) establishment of beneficiary 
databases for progress monitoring. 
6. 
Project  results  are  expected  at  three  different  levels  (impact/outcomes/outputs)  which  are 
reflected in the Project Logical Framework (see above). At each level, indicators have been developed 
to be integrated into the Results Monitoring Framework (RMF) taking into account IFAD’s Results and 
Impact Management System (RIMS). The indicators will be operationalized in the form of an M&E Plan 
prior to Project start. 
7. 
The PIU will be responsible for setting up an effective Planning and Monitoring & Evaluation 
(PME) System during the first six months of Project implementation which includes fine-tuning the M&E 
Plan, in consultation with the main Project stakeholders. The PME System will be part of an integrated 
PME/Information, Knowledge Management and Communication System (IKMC) to provide: (a) timely 
and accurate information on implementation progress and constant feedback for decision making and 
addressing  potential  plan  deviations  and  problems  during  implementation;  and  (b)  the  basis  for 
assessing the achievement of Project results. The Logical Framework and M&E Plan may be revised 
at  a  later  stage  if  required.  The  logical  framework  approach  will  be  applied  to  planning  Project 
interventions  at  all  levels  (including  FO  Action  Plans),  actively  involving  the  beneficiaries  in  the 
formulation of objectives and indicators. 
Principles 
8.  SREP will use the guidelines below to collect quality data and analyse data collected in order to 
monitor  project’s  performance  produce  project  reports  that  inform  the  country  policy  makers  and 
development partners on the performance of the project.  
9.  For effective functioning of its monitoring and evaluation system, SREP will carry out the following 
actions: 
  Harmonise its M&E framework with other M&E systems in the project area especially SAMAP 
and ARP projects as well as the capturing of key indicators that contribute to government action 
plans and strategies; 
  Setup operational modalities to capture outputs and outcomes indicators on SLM (sustainable 
Land Management) systems, GAP (Good Agricultural practices), ecosystem status, and follow-
up food security enhancement and increase income as well as progress in gender, youth and 
other vulnerable population; 
  Use of Logical Framework and Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) as planning, monitoring 
and evaluation; 
 
Involve beneficiary communities and implementing partners in data collection and analysis; 
  Develop learning, innovation and knowledge management mechanisms supporting in particular 
policy processes and up-scaling. 
10. 
Information Flow 
The M&E should enable a proper flow of information to and from the primary stakeholders to 
11. 
the PCU and the Single Coordination Unit (SCU), and especially the provision of timely and adequate 
information  for  decision-making  by  Project  Management  and  the  Agriculture  Development  Institute 
(IDA)  of  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  (MINAGRI).  Taking  into  account  that  the  implementation  of  M&E 
system means gathering and managing information, participatory methods will be approached. In this 
regard,  primary  stakeholders,  whom  the  data  pertain,  should  be  involved  from  data  collection  to 
analysis. As such, it is aimed to achieve a sound leaning processes and avoiding to have much data 
lying around, less information, little knowledge and hence very little use of the original data for decision 
making.  
12. 
The six steps in planning data and information management in the M&E system are indicative 
of a more detailed plan which will be developed in the project start-up. However, this report will advance 
cope  with  short  insights  on  these  topics  to  introduce  the  forthcoming  section  focussing  the  formal 
processes while preparing for informal participatory approaches as follows brief description of M&E 
journey of data. 
1)  Data collection – is the starting point of SREP implementation, taking place from project sites. 
Data providers are the primary stakeholders in the framework of FFSs. Field data collectors are 
service providers, including the technicians selected for this purpose amongst the existing local 
capabilities to perform M&E tasks. Those will further hand over the data to other relevant at 
municipal  level  stakeholders  at  EDAs  or  MINAGRI  municipal  division  (Repartição/Direcção 
municipal). 
2)  Data  recording  –  this  step  will  take  place  at  municipal  level,  involving  either  at  EDA  or  at 
MINAGRI Municipal Division, depending on the existing department with capacities to perform 
the tasks. Even though most of the municipalities face limitations in public electricity supply in, 
it  would  be  desirable  that  this  task  should  be  carried  out  with  digital  devices  (smartphones, 
tablets and/or laptops). If this is the case, some training on digital handling would be required 
to scale up the technicians skills in these technologies.  
3)  Data  storing  –  this  task  will  start  at  provincial  level  by  aggregating  data  flowing  from  the 
inherent  municipalities.  Supervised  be  the  Head  of  IDA  Provincial  Department,  the 
spreadsheets and/or templates will be synthesised by technicians selected and afterwards the 
material will be forwarded to PIU.  
4)  Data collation – this is activity is developed by PIU staff. Once the data has been received 
from municipal level and revised at provincial level then it is sent to PIU to be synthesised by 
PIU team, under responsibility of M&E assistant.  
5)  Data analysis – the analysis of data will be carried out by PIU team with participation of project 
manager.  The  applied  methodology  will  be  in  dependence  of  existing  experiences  and 
capacities to manage the data. Data will be analysed and transformed allow interpretation and 
visualisation. Furthermore, the achievements will be shared a wider audience that includes PIU 
staff and project collaborating partners. 
Information feedback and dissemination – the date is translated into information. Following 
the  results  assessments  through  indicators  to  allow  the  onset  of  project  implementation  the 
information  should  be  shared  with  stakeholders  involving  everybody  from  project  primary 
stakeholders to implementing partners and IFAD staff.   
6) 
13. 
In summary, the M&E system includes three steps: a) Planning for quality communication and 
reporting, b) Planning critical reflection processes and events c) Planning for the necessary conditions 
and capacities. The whole project M&E system planning will be addressed in detail during SREP start-
up. This will encompass the assessment of time, budget, level of expertise and core information needs 
to run the proposed M&E system. 
Key indicators 
14.  The Logical Framework is presented in the executive summary of the project design report. It is 
used as a core framework for results-based management of the project. The goal  and development 
objective level of the framework logframe track improved food and nutrition security in rural households 
and increased production and resilience of farm households. 
15.  These indicators will be monitored through the project baseline survey that will capture the core 
indicators  and  a  household  resilience  scorecard  covering  SREP  target  population.  The  goal  of  the 
project  will  be  monitored  by  the  number  of  households  reporting  improved  food  security  and  good 
dietary diversity, this will be disaggregated by gender of household heads. The objective of the project 
will  be  monitored  by  i)  households  that  report  at  least  a  30%  increase  in  productivity.  ii)  No  of  HH 
reporting a >50% increase in resilience score. 
16.  Monitoring  of  household  resilience  is  complex  because  of  the  multiple  factors  impacting  on 
resilience. For the measurement of household resilience a resilience scorecard will be used inspired by 
the DFID KPI4 Methodology.1 This methodology has a pragmatic approach to address the multifactor 
complexity. It only focuses at monitoring the risk and vulnerability aspects the project seeks to address 
or  is  likely  to  influence.  It  does  not  monitor  absolute  resilience  but  changes  in  resilience  of  the 
beneficiaries compared to the baseline. The questions proposed and the draft resilience scorecard are 
presented in annex 4 to this Annex linked to the project supported activities addressing climate risks 
and vulnerabilities.      
17.  For  component  1,  the  outcome  indicators  focus  on  i)  Strengthened  institutional  capacity  to 
deliver services to enhance food security, productivity and resilience; and ii) Rural infrastructure to build 
1 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/328254/BRACED-KPI4-
methodology-June2014.pdf 
resilience and enhance productivity and market access. The indicators are: i) number of family farmers 
reporting regular use of advisory and support services (disaggregated by gender and age); ii) Number 
of  households  reporting  use  of  climate  information  services  (disaggregated  by  gender  and  age);  iii) 
number of households with improved access to water, land and road infrastructure. 
18.  Key  output  indicators  include:  i)  No.  of  government-employed  staff  participating  in  training 
programmes run by the project during the period under review. (disaggregated by gender), ii) No. of 
kilometer  of  rural  roads  constructed  and/  or  rehabilitated,  iii)  No.  of  hectares  under  SLM  (including 
rangelands), iv) No. of households reporting improved access to water resources for productive and 
domestic use (data disaggregated by gender of household heads). 
19.  For Component 2 the outcome indicators are i) Farming families acquire skills and technologies 
for food and nutrition security, enhanced resilience/ productivity and market access; and ii) Improved 
profitability of farm and non-farm income generating activities to improve access to food. 
20.  The key outcome indicators are i) the  number  of HH  applying climate resilient  technologies and 
practices, ii)the number of HH reporting 30% increase in percentage of agriculture output sold in market.  
20. 
Key output indicators include: i) Number of farmers reporting the use of knowledge acquired 
through the FFS training (disaggregated by gender and age); and ii) No of households reporting use of 
production inputs and or technological practices. 
Planning and M&E system 
21. 
Planning of project activities will be an on-going and participatory process coordinated by the 
SCU with support from the provincial and communal offices of the southern and the northern provinces. 
Two sub-regional offices Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPBs) will be the base for planning. This 
consolidated AWPB will be consolidated at national level to report on the project progress. The AWPB, 
together with the Logical Framework’s results-based indicators, will be the basis for monitoring project 
progress. Monitoring will capture all four levels of results (activities, outputs, outcomes and impact at 
development objective and goal level) on a continuous basis.  M&E will be done on particular period 
and  the  findings  from  M&E  will  be  enriched  with  feedback  that  comes  from  on-going  generation  of 
lessons  learned,  best  practices,  beneficiary  and  stakeholder  stories  also  defined  as  learning  and 
knowledge management. 
The AWPB will be the key instrument for implementation and operational control. The AWPB 
22. 
for  the  first  year  will  be  based  on  the  SREP  Project  Design  Report  and  its Attachments  and  will  be 
revised by the project team at start-up. Training will be given to project staff at all levels and the SCU in 
the preparation of AWPBs. The subsequent AWPB will follow the project overall planning and design 
with adjustment made when necessary based on recommendations from joined IFAD-GoA supervision 
missions. These subsequent plans shall include a brief description of the implementation of the project 
in the previous period and the possible challenges and opportunities for the upcoming year. The plan 
must  also  include:  (i)  the  results  obtained  by  component  and  the  proposed  plan  for  the  next  year 
including execution times and specific targets; (ii) the estimated budget by category of expenditure and 
sources of financing, (iii) procurement plan; and (iv) the M&E plan for the year.  
23. 
The AWPB will be the base for implementation and operational control. The AWPB for the first 
year will be based on the SREP Project Design Report and its Attachments and will be revised by the 
project team and PCC (Project coordination committee) at start-up. Training will be given to the PIT, 
PPIU  and  SCU,  on  the  preparation  of AWPBs. The  subsequent AWPB  will  follow  the  project  overall 
planning and design with adjustment made when necessary based on recommendations from joined 
IFAD-GoA supervision missions.  
The  Director  General  of  IDA  will  act  as  the  chairperson  to  the  Programme  coordination 
24. 
committee (PCC). The SCU will act as the secretary of the committee. The PCC will meet twice a year 
to discuss issues concerning the project.  
25. 
A project inception workshop will be held before start-up of project with the SCU team, IDA/EDA 
staff,  PIT,  PPIU,  stakeholders,  relevant  government  counterparts  and  IFAD.  It  is  crucial  to  build 
ownership  of  the  project’s  goals  and  objectives  and  presents  the  modalities  of  implementation  and 
execution, as well as providing inputs to the annual work plan and budget for the first project year. A 
report will be produced after the workshop and shared with participants. 
Start-up activities. The most common reason for project implementation delays, is at project 
26. 
start-up. The SREP design process will provide as much detail as possible, outlining the implementation 
strategy  in  great  detail.  There  should  not  be  a  need  for  specialised  studies  at  start-up,  other  than 
collection of updated baseline information. Rather the focus will be on conducting baselines, setting up 
the systems and agreeing with strategic partners on modalities and outcomes of cooperation.  
27. 
Internally, there will be start-up workshop for project staff and ministry officials directly involved 
in  project  implementation  with  the  participation  of  IFAD  as  presenters,  focused  on  implementation 
arrangements, setting the stage for updating and validating the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
and preparing the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB.  
28.  A public launch will be held in the two SREP regional locations with project staff and a wide range 
of  stakeholders.  Conjointly,  or  immediately  after  the  launch,  the  technical  staff  involved  in  project 
implementation  will  prepare  and  validate  the  AWPB,  for  their  respective  target  areas.  All  staff  will 
participate  in  this,  including  drivers  and  office  attendants,  for  everyone  to  understand  their  role  in 
reaching the development objective of the project.  
29.  This will be followed by an information campaign on identifying location for feeder roads, market 
infrastructure  and  irrigation  schemes  in  the  target  municipalities.  The  launching  process  will  also 
sensitise beneficiaries to the upcoming surveys to be undertaken, and alert possible service providers 
of upcoming calls for proposals. 
30.  Local organisations should be fully consulted and involved in the development of the M&E system 
at local level and in adjusting the logframe in the course of implementation. Additional quantitative and 
qualitative  indicators  could  be  added  to  the  logframe  on  a  participatory  basis  and  particularly  at  the 
output  level.  These  will  complement  the  main  list  of  indicators  currently  presented  in  the  Logical 
Framework 
31. 
The logical framework will be used in establishing the main M&E activities and responsibilities 
among the project’s different stakeholders (IDA, EDA. SP, NGO. MINAGRI, SCU…. etc.); and to prepare 
a quality report based on standard tables of indicators. Also, information on the frequency and method 
of  collection  of  information  as  well  as  datelines  for  submissions  of  reports  will  be  communicated  to 
stakeholders.  
32. 
A baseline study will be carried out within the first year of the project implementation. Another 
survey will be carried out at mid-term to capture the mandatory/core indicators levels as demanded by 
the new IFAD Operational Results Management System (ORMS).  
33. 
Consultants  will  be  hired  to  develop  an  M&E  software  that  will  be  linked  to  the  financial 
management software for easy consolidation. Project staff and executing partners will be trained on the 
use of the software. 
The Single Coordination Unit (SCU) and the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be responsible 
34. 
for  the  development  of  operational  strategies  and  tools  for  Project  implementation:  The  lead  M&E 
Officer  will  be  responsible  for  planning,  monitoring,  reporting,  evaluation  and  assessment,  learning, 
knowledge  management  and  communication,  as  well  as  ensuring  appropriateness  and  efficiency  of 
implementation related to targeting. The lead M&E Officer will also be responsible for conducting special 
studies  and  knowledge  products,  communications  and  knowledge  management  facilitating  the 
implementation  of  the  up-scaling  strategy,  cross-component  learning  and  organisation  of  policy 
seminars and workshops, stakeholder relations and other events. The FFS groups and networks, water 
user  groups  and  other  groups,  and  small  producer  groups  will  play  a  key  role  in  the  participatory 
monitoring of SLM services, GAP and other climate change resilience measures.  
35. 
The lead M&E Officer supported by the Project Implementation Team, PPIU (Provincial Project 
Implementation Unit), PPCC (Province Project Coordination Committee.) will ensure that information is 
collected on a regular basis, providing factual information on changes and results achieved at village 
and landscape levels as well as documenting SLM and GAP benefits. Such testimonies are especially 
relevant for documenting project attribution to higher level impacts. Photo archives will be kept as part 
of qualitative information. To ensure an effective flow of information, the M&E Officer will develop simple 
tools for data collection, data entry, data processing and analysis. Standard forms and formats will be 
made available to ensure consistency in the way data is recorded. Tools are needed to systematically 
document progress at activities, outputs, outcomes, and impact level and will include: 
  Standard formats for submission of financial returns on a monthly basis; 
  Standard forms, based on the AWPB, to record the level of realisation and expenditure for each 
planned activity on a quarterly basis, and standard computer-based formats or templates to enter 
such data in a consistent manner, to facilitate consolidation; 
  Standard forms to record results, in terms of activities completed and specific outputs produced, 
which  will  be  the  basis  for  physical  progress  summary  information,  and  standard  computer-
based formats or templates. 
  Standard  forms  and  computer-based  formats  or  templates  for  data  entering,  in  particular 
registers of assets and contracts…etc. 
36. 
that needs to be addressed and facilitate decision making within the project context.  
By tracking progress, monitoring permits early identification of eventual implementation issues 
Reporting. Functional monitoring will be through monthly coordination meetings at the level of 
37. 
the SCU and also at the level of SREP implementation team at central and provincial level.  Quarterly 
implementation  reviews  joint  meeting  of  SCU,  the  SREP  implementation  team  and  PPIU  to  prepare 
data needed for progress reports. Results will be submitted in quarterly, half-yearly and annual reports 
to PCC, PISC and IFAD.  
38. 
Progress reports present clear picture of the physical and financial achievements as compared 
to targets set in the AWPB, analysis of successful approaches and outputs, failures and constraints, 
and whether progress is being made towards achieving objectives. Progress related to outcomes and 
overall goal cannot be expected until a reasonable period after interventions and delivery of outputs 
has passed, however it is necessary to systematically collect data related to the outcomes and goal 
almost  from  the  beginning.  The  first  year Annual  Progress  Report  will  be  based  on  key  findings  of 
baseline surveys that have been carried-out. From the second year onwards, the project needs to start 
analysing  the  degree  of  achievement  of  results.  The  reports  should  highlight  and  justify  the 
implementation strategy and indicate challenges encountered needed to be addressed as part of the 
adaptive management of the project.  
Evaluation.  Evaluation by the SCU  will ensure that implemented activities are leading to the 
39. 
desired  impact. A  particular  focus  will  be  the  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  the 
project on food and nutrition security and resilience to climate change of rural households.  Generally, 
there is the Mid-term Evaluation and the End of Project  Evaluation. This is  done using independent 
consultants 
40. 
Baseline, mid-term and completion surveys. These surveys are undertaken at start, middle and 
end  of  the  project  implementation  period  and  identify,  the  level  of  achievement  of  outcomes  and 
impacts.  
41. 
A Mid-Term Review (MTR) will be conducted halfway during implementation (beginning of fourth 
year) to assess the performance of the project. Recommendations for revisions to the  activities and 
approach, the Logical framework targets will be made if necessary. In order to have pertinent information 
for the mid-term review, the project will need to conduct at about 3 months prior to the mid-term review 
and evaluation of its key outcome indicators to measure progress towards project impact and outputs.  
42. 
compiled following IFAD principles to provide an overview of the accomplishments of SREP.  
Project  Completion  Report  (PCR). At  the  end  of  the  implementation  period,  a  PCR  will  be 
43. 
A number of ad hoc studies will be undertaken to support the planning and M&E processes 
including  amongst  others:  a)  a  value  chain  mapping/  analysis,  in  the  northern  provinces;  b)  village 
profiling combined with the KAP survey - Knowledge, Attitude, Practice and Planning for nutrition; c) an 
appraisal of farmer cooperatives and associations (in all areas) and an assessment of the performance 
of Farmer Field Schools – in the south.  Additionally, there are number of technical studies that could 
be conducted relating to farming systems analysis, livelihoods analysis and climate smart technologies 
that should be elaborated on during project start-up. Participatory discussions with project stakeholders 
should be conducted to solicit other priority studies to be conducted.   
44. 
Data management and beneficiary database 
45.  Beneficiary database. A project M&E system will be set up comprising a beneficiary database; 
an  inventory  of  internal  and  external  documents  (such  as  progress  report,  specialised  studies  and 
national  policies);  service  provider  (including  district  farmers  associations)  performance  information; 
library of case stories and news clippings; a mapping database and a market information production 
database. Data will be collected at various levels under each component. The main unit of aggregation 
will  be  the  group  level,  supplemented  by  individual  level  tracking  of  1)  a  sample  of  a  minimum  100 
individuals from various groups;  2) mentored  households; 3) any  trainers trained (ToT) as  well as a 
sample of traders and road beneficiaries.  
46. 
Data collection tools. All data collection will be digital through the use of tablets. Standardised 
digital data collection tools and frameworks will be developed by the SCU for each of the components 
of activities, using freeware available for download on the internet. While data collection modalities will 
vary between contracted service providers, they will be expected to provide input in the digital formats 
requested;  priority  will  be  given  to  procurement  processes  to  develop  the  data  collection  and 
management tools. Digital data collection is also a prerequisite for SREP to handle the amounts of data 
expected from beneficiary  database which will be a key aspect of both monitoring and evaluation of 
performance and poverty targeting and movements.  
47. 
Learning and Knowledge management. Knowledge Management (KM) will be a process by 
which value is generated from project intellectual and knowledge-based assets. It will include a detailed 
plan on how information will be obtained and disseminated project reports and reviews, development 
of knowledge products, policy workshops and the use of communication channels.  
48. 
To  share  lessons  learnt  and  promote  up-scaling,  the  two  Implementation  Teams  will  be 
expected to use a range of different approaches, such as FFS, farmer field visits, radio, video, press 
releases  and  articles  for  local  and  international  newspapers  and  the  IFAD  website.  The  project  will 
benefit from and contribute to the GEF Food Security Programme knowledge network. With the support 
from  IFAD,  other  relevant  KM  expertise  could  be  mobilized  to  support  the  project  in  developing 
knowledge product. Tools, such as case studies and stakeholder interviews, will complement the M&E 
tools  described  above  to  deepen  the  understanding  of  factors  contributing  to  adoption  of  improved 
agricultural  and  sustainable  land  management  practices  and  success  or  failure  to  show  impacts  on 
ecosystems services and food security. One of the main purposes of knowledge creation and sharing 
will be to support policy making by building a comprehensive body of evidence, lessons learned, and 
good practices. The M&E tools  will  provide  a cost-effective  way  of building strong cases  and inform 
policy makers for further up-scaling. 
49. 
Communication  strategy:  Stakeholder  and  service  provider/implementer  coordination  and 
information  sharing  will  be  paramount  in  terms  of  activity  coordination,  knowledge  sharing  and 
participatory processes. The service provider database will be key tools for development of a targeted 
communication strategy, during the first years of implementation. 
50. 
Capacity Building: As noted before, M&E capacity in Angola is limited and therefore capacity 
building will be essential. Efforts will be made through existing forums such as the East and Southern 
Africa Division Regional Implementation Workshops or undertaking a specific M&E training workshop 
for  IFAD  funded  projects  in Angola. The  M&E  Officer from  the  SCU,  the  SREP  M&E  officer  and  the 
assistants  that  will  be  engaged  by  SREP  Norte  and  SREP  Sulat  provincial  levels  will  benefit  from 
country specific training.  
52. 
M&E Staffing: M&E activities will be led by a lead Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) / Learning 
Officer based in the SCU but responsible for SREP. The lead officer will support the SREP management 
team will  work closely  with the technical staff at  all levels. The M&E officer will  similarly support the 
Project Manager and the Team Leaders in national level coordination and policy dialogue. The two M&E 
officers will be supported by 2 more M&E officers for each of the regions and 3 M&E Assistants (1 in 
the southern provinces and 2 in the north). The M&E officers and assistants will support the technical 
departments  to  take  responsibility  for  data  collection,  database  development  and  maintenance.  The 
primarily role of the officers will be to support the work of the technical staff, as well as work closely with 
implementing partners.  
Annex 1: Reporting 
  Monthly  reports  will  be  simple  flash-reports  indicating  in  bullet  points  areas  of  concern  to 
enable adjustment of implementation. To be used by SCU management. 
  Quarterly reports will be more detailed and will be the basis for self-assessment workshops 
and reporting on indicators. Budgetary reporting and progress in relation to the AWPB should 
be included. In addition, stakeholders should be encouraged to provide any observations on 
strengths and weaknesses of implementation.  
  Semi-annual and annual reports should follow the format of the quarterly report, but include 
an  executive  summary  of  no  more  than  2  pages,  indicating  key  progress  and  actions  to  be 
taken.  Tables  including  expenditures,  compared  to  the  AWPB,  and  reporting  on  indicators 
should be included (log-frame indicators as well as others, as identified in the monitoring plan). 
Targeting  and  inclusion  of  the  rural  poor  in  project  implementation  are  crucial  elements  for 
reporting. The reports should include pictures and field reports. The reports will be submitted 
to IFAD and government.   
  Progress  reports  to  IFAD  supervision  and  implementation  support  missions  should 
include, as a minimum, i) the quantitative and qualitative progress achieved in implementing 
the project and achieving goals, ii) problems encountered during the period of reporting iii ) the 
steps taken or proposed to remedy these problems, and iv) the proposed program of activities 
and expected progress during the reporting period. To be submitted to IFAD.  
Table 1: Proposed timetable for reporting 
Steps 
Monthly 
Delivery of report to SCU 
Consolidation of reports from partner service providers  
Production of report and submission to management 
Quarterly 
Delivery of report to SCU 
Consolidation of reports from partners 
Production of report and submission to management 
Semi-annually  
Delivery of report to SCU 
Consolidation of reports from partners 
Production of report and submission to management 
Annual  
Delivery of report to SCU 
Consolidation of reports from partners 
Production of report and submission to management 
Calendar 
Responsible 
25th every month 
5th of next month 
10th of next month 
Implementing partners 
Technical staff 
M&E Officer 
5th of next month 
10th of next month 
15th of next month 
Implementing partners 
Technical staff 
M&E Officer 
31 January 
15 February 
15 March 
10 July 
15 July 
30 July  
Implementing partners 
Technical staff 
M&E Officer 
Implementing partners 
Technical staff 
M&E Officer and Financial 
Controller 
Project Manager 
Presentation of report to IFAD and government 
1 August 
Annex 2: Individual baseline assessment questions 
As indicated in the logical framework a simple baseline assessment index will be developed 
1. 
to assess, in particular, usage and relevance of project services. The questionnaire should be no 
more than 20 questions, and for the basis of a beneficiary database. A rating from 0-5 can be given 
by the beneficiaries. A suggested list of questions can be seen below. For groups, capacity 
assessments etc. are highlighted under the various objectives, but should also form part of the 
database.  
Questions: 
1)  Has there been an extreme weather event on your farm?  
2)  What did you do when it happened?  
3)  What business/marketing skills do you have, and how do you use them? 
4)  Do you have any access to weather related information?  
5)  Or market prices?  
Other information to be collected (through the above mentioned index or through baseline 
2. 
studies etc.) include the below. Preferably the data should be collected for beneficiary households, for 
purposes of project monitoring, and at project implementation level for impact monitoring. For 
assessment of roads impact, random selection along roads is suggested.  
-  Participation in community activities 
-  Access to land (and ownership of it) 
-  Access to labour 
-  Food security status of hh 
-  Knowledge of methods to increase production 
-  Degree of commercialisation (quantity (%) sold to market and assessment of mind-set) 
-  Gender, age, marital and disability status 
-  Degree of on-farm mechanisation 
-  Any energy and water saving technology at household level 
-  Geographical location of household 
-  Number of dependants of household 
Some information should also be captured on people trained as training of trainers, 
3. 
community facilitators etc.  
Annex 3: Group baseline assessment questions 
1. 
The project database will capture all information from the technical components of group 
support, including rapid appraisals, capacity assessments etc. Specifically, the below will be captured.  
-  Existing or new group (existing can contain: FFS, revolving fund groups, youth groups, etc.) 
-  Type of training received:  
o  FFS: climate change, junior, starting, or advanced 
o  Social  capital:  leadership,  governance  and  management,  group  dynamics,  vision 
setting  and  sustainability,  inclusive  and  gender  mainstreaming  (GALS),  work  plan 
development 
o  Business Development Skills: Entrepreneurship, business mentoring, BDS 
Annex 4: Resilience monitoring scorecard 
Below is a draft resilience scorecard for beneficiary families, to be finalized at start up (higher total 
score means more resilience) 
Indicator 
1) Can you explain how climate variability and change have affected your production activities the 
last 10 years and how they will be affected in the future? (If the respondent gives at least 2 correct 
impacts from the past or the future in the agro-ecological zone where the family produce, the answer 
is ‘yes’)  
2) Can you explain what options of adaptation practices and changes in your production system you 
or your village have and/or may implement to address these risks? (If the respondent mentions two 
good options the answer is ‘yes’) 
3) In the last 3 years have you used weather forecast information to make decisions in the planning 
and implementation of your production activities?   
4) Do you have a secured common or individual (given to a member living in your household) title to 
the land you are using for crop farming and livestock grazing? 
5) Do you have sufficient access to water resources (stored in soils or via irrigation) for at least ¼ of 
your land used for crop production to cover the needs of the production during the dry season? 
6a) Only for crop farmers beneficiaries 
- Have you introduced practice to improve fertility and water storage capacity of your soils? (If the 
answer is ‘no’ put ‘0’ as score and jump to question 7, if the answer is ‘yes’ ask the following 
question and score based on the answer: 
- Have you seen or do you expect to see any improvement in the yields of your crops by using these 
practices?    
6b) Only for pastoralists or agro-pastoralist  beneficiaries 
Have you participated in any joint activities for improved rangeland management with all users of this 
rangeland? If the answer is ‘no’ put ‘0’ as score and jump to question 7, if the answer is ‘yes’ ask the 
following question and score based on the answer: 
- Have you seen or do you expect to see improvements for your livestock because of this joint and 
improved management of the rangeland and do you think the group will be able to maintain this joint 
management? 
7) Do you or a member of your family participate in a saving and credit scheme/arrangement through 
a farmer organisation (producer group, cooperative or association), a stand-alone saving and credit 
group or own saving account? 
8) How many different products and non-agricultural activities gives an important income for your 
family? (if the answer is more than 3 products and activities the score is two points, if the answer is 
two products and activities the score should be 1 point if the answer is one or none the score should 
be 0 points)   
9a) Only for SREP Norte beneficiaries 
Do you or a member of your family participate in a farmers organisation (producer group, association 
or cooperative) that has a financed business plan that has increased the income of the household? 
9b) Only for SREP Sur beneficiaries 
Have you or a member of your family participated in the development of a Natural Resources 
Management Plan (NRMP) and in an interest group supporting the implementation of the Plan 
(catchment and irrigation management, rangeland management, etc.) and has this brought 
increased food security and income to your household?   
Yes 
1 
No 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
2 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total maximum project attributable climate resilience score 
10* 
*If an interviewee is agro-pastoralist he/she might score from both question 6a and 6b and the maximum possible score 
would then be 11. This should be taken into account in the analysis of the resilience results. 
The M&E Officer in collaboration with other PIU staff will improve and adjust the scorecard and validate 
it  with  participation  of  beneficiary  Villages.  The  proposed  questions  are  formulated  directed  to 
households who are receiving project services, which is adequate for the rolling monitoring of the results 
of the project. But for the baseline study they should be revised to fit a baseline survey situation where 
both future potential beneficiary households and control group households are surveyed. In other words, 
it is important to consider what should be the resilience scorecard for the baseline, midterm and final 
survey and what would be the resilience scorecard to monitor the progress in household resilience of 
beneficiary families as the project is rolled out.  
The  scores  assigned  to  each  questions  in  the  draft  scorecard  proposed  above  are  simply  1  and  0 
(except for question 8). It could be considered if all questions should have equal weight. Instead of only 
using binary ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answers scores it could also be considered to use: 
a)  Categorical scores to capture qualitative answers transformed into quantitative perception of 
resilience scores. For example, the question “How well would you and your family cope with a 
drought  like  the  one  that  happened  in  2015  if  it  happened  within  the  current/next  cropping 
season – how would you be affected?” may be scored as follows:  ‘would not be affected’=3, 
‘would be moderately affected’=2, and ‘would be seriously affected’=0.   
b)  Continuous variables using a range to convert into a resilience score for  example household 
income, yield/ha, time for recovering after a shock. Answers to for example the last question on 
time  to  recover  after  a  shock  are  divided  into  ranges  assigned  a  score:  1  month=3;  2-3 
months=2; 4-6 months=1; and  >6 months=0. 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Financial management and disbursement arrangements
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
1.  Overall implementation arrangements.  The Leading Implementation  Agency for SREP  will be  the 
Institute for Agricultural Development (IDA). The SREP Project Management Unit will be embedded in the 
Single Coordination Unit (SCU) that shall be established by IDA in Luanda to coordinate the implementation 
of all IFAD projects implemented through the Ministry of Agriculture: SADCP-C&H, ARP and now SREP.  
The  SCU  will  also  be  responsible  for  the  overall  fiduciary  management  of  the  IFAD  financed  projects 
implemented through the Ministry of Agriculture in close collaboration with the fiduciary team of the World 
Bank project SADCP-WB, which is also implemented by IDA and has garnered several years of experience 
in financial management procedures of IFAD and WB financed projects. The overall structure of the SCU 
shall  include  a  “core  team”  of  experienced  specialists  made  up  of  a  SCU  Coordinator,  a  Financial 
Controller,,  a  Senior  Procurement  Specialist,  a  Senior  Planning,  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Specialist. 
Furthermore, the SCU shall be established and initially financed by the IFAD project SADCP-C&H, which 
will guarantee that upon the start of implementation of SREP the necessary organizational structure shall 
already be in place. SCU organogram outlined in Annex 1. 
2.  Financial Management Staffing. SREP shall create a small financial management team embedded 
in  the  SCU  composed  of  a  Financial  Management  Officer  (FMO),  a  Finance  Specialist  (FS)  and  an 
Accountant, responsible for the day-to-day accounting and financial management arrangements of  SREP. 
The FMO will report to the Financial Controller of the SCU and will work in close coordination with the SREP 
Component Managers. Four additional accountants shall be hired for the four PPIUs. These accountants 
shall respond to the PPIU Area Manager and the FMO at SCU.  The sub-offices to be established by IDA 
at  provincial  level  will  only  handle  small  transactions  to  be  managed  by  the  sub-office  Administrative 
Assistant. The selection of the FMO and the FS will be carried out by IDA, in accordance with Government 
practices for appointment of staff and with IFAD’s No Objection. The selection of the SREP Accountant at 
SCU  and  the  4  Accountants  of  the  PPIUs  will  be  carried  out  by  IDA,  in  accordance  with  Government 
practices for appointment of staff. 
3.  The selection criteria will be based on professional qualification with considerable relevance given to a 
consolidated  experience  in  financial  management  of  investment  projects  of  International  Financial 
Institutions. Knowledge of accounting software should also be taken into account in selecting the candidate. 
The selection of the project accountants will be based on a competitive process open to staff of the Ministry 
of Agriculture as well as external candidates.  
4.  As  part  of  the  overall  set-up  of  the  SCU,  IDA  shall  hire  an  accounting  and/or  auditing  firm  with 
international reputation,  and experienced in the project financial management arrangements of IFIs and 
other  bilateral  institutions,  to  provide  on-the-job  training  to  project  financial  management  staff.  It  is 
envisioned that this support encompasses the first 2 years of project implementation.   
5.  In addition, a Financial Expert will be hired as International Technical Assistance (member of the Portfolio 
Implementation Facility-PIF team) to provide training on the job and mentoring to SCU finance team.  
6. 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB). The annual project budget will be prepared on the basis 
of  guidelines  and  regulations  reflecting  government  policy  and  in  coordination  with  the  preparation  of 
Project’s  AWPB.  The  procedures  for  preparing  the  annual  budget  and  project  financing  needs  will  be 
documented in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The budget will cover all project activities and will 
be prepared no later than two months prior to the end of each fiscal year. This proposal will be endorsed 
by IDA, and approved by the Programme Coordination Committee (PCC) and submitted to IFAD prior to 
implementation. The AWPB will describe all the activities to be  implemented, description of expenditures 
by  component,  category,  funding  sources  and  timelines  for  implementation.  It  will  also  contain  a 
procurement plan for the relevant implementation period. Timely preparation and approval of AWPB will be 
key  to  guarantee  budgetary  control.  The  budget  information  should  be  entered  and  available  in  the 
accounting system to allow for the timely recording of commitments, payments. Finally, IDA will send to 
IFAD the first AWPB for no-objection as a condition of first disbursement as per IFAD’s General Conditions 
for Agricultural Financing. 
Accounting  Policies  and  Procedures.  The  Project  will  comply  with  the  International  Public 
7. 
Accounting Standards (IPSAS). The Financial Statements will be prepared in accordance with the IPSAS 
“cash basis” method of accounting. A Financial Management Procedures Manual (FMPM) will be adopted 
by the SCU and shall be incorporated as an annex of the Project Implementation Manual. The FMPM will 
be prepared by the SCU Finance Controller and FMO and will be based on internationally recognised ‘best 
practices’.  The  FMPM  will  contain  the  accounting  policies  and  procedures  including  a  tailored  chart  of 
accounts, method of determination  of the exchange rates and the financial management arrangements, 
evaluation methodologies for beneficiaries’ and government in kind contributions. The FMPM should also 
lay  down  the  precise  internal  control  arrangements  of  the  project.  SREP  will  procure  and  install  the 
accounting  software  PRIMAVERA,  which  is  widely  used  by  the  IFAD  financed  projects  in  country. 
PRIMAVERA  shall  be  installed  and  used  for  day-to-day  accounting  entries  at  the  PIU  and  PPIU. 
Customization of the software will include the installation of the budget module.  
8. 
The sub-offices to be established  by  IDA  will only handle small transactions to  be managed by a 
petty cash system in Excel. A similar system is already in use in the World Bank financed project SADCP-
WB, and shall be adopted by SREP. The system will be managed by the sub-office Administrative Assistant, 
and the PPIU accountant within the same province shall regularly travel to the sub-office to reconcile the 
petty cash system, and record all transactions on PRIMAVERA at the PPIU level.  
9. 
Due to the scarcity of highly trained accountants, it is envisioned that at the start of implementation 
the SCU Financial Controller and FMO provide significant capacity building to the SREP finance team on 
accounting policies and procedures. Furthermore, regular workshops on the use of accounting software 
shall  be  organized  by  the  SCU  to  bring  all  accounting  staff  to  a  common  level  of  minimum  knowledge. 
Finally, the acquisition and installation of the software shall be a pre-condition for first disbursement. 
10.  Financial  Reports.  The  project’s  accounting  system  will  generate  the  necessary  financial 
information for the Project financial progress reports as well as the year-end Financial Statements that will 
identify sources of financing, expenses by component and category against the project’s AWPB and the 
cumulative  expenditures  to  date.  Available  resources  will  be  applied  exclusively  for  the  achievement  of 
project objectives supported by complete supporting documentation and presented to IFAD in hard copy 
until  the  IFAD  Client  Portal  has  become  operational.  The  format  and  content  of  these  reports  will  be 
presented in the Letter to the Borrower and elaborated in the FMPM. The withdrawal application data should 
be an output from the accounting software. 
11.  Disbursements Arrangements. The disbursement methods available to IDA for the withdrawal of 
financing proceeds from the loan account shall be: advances, direct payments and reimbursement. The 
ceiling of the Designated Account, the limits of contracts subject to prior review and detail of supporting 
documentation required to accompany the application for disbursement will be defined in the Letter to the 
Borrower. Due to severe difficulties in the processing of payments to accounts abroad, and to the difficulty 
in the availability of USD resources for bank-to-bank transfers within Angola, pending the opening of an off-
shore  bank  account,  SREP  shall  need  to  use  more  frequently  the  direct  payment  for  contractors  and 
suppliers abroad, and within Angola. As such,  the threshold for direct payments will be set at  amount of 
USD 20,000. IDA shall liaise with Ministry of Finance and Bank of Angola on the opportunity of opening an 
offshore  bank  account  for  the  processing  of  USD  payments  to  accounts  abroad.  Once  this  account  is 
opened, direct payment threshold will be revised. 
12.  Flow of Funds IFAD. IDA shall open a bank account in USD in Luanda to receive the proceeds of 
the financing (Designated Account). Mandatory joint authorized signatories of the account will be the SREP 
Project Director, the FMO or Financial Controller of the SCU and an authorized representative at MINFIN. 
Two operational accounts, one in AOA and one in USD, will be opened in a commercial bank in Luanda. 
This second USD account is needed in order to limit the number of operations in the Designated Account 
in each fiscal year. Authorized signatories on these accounts will include the Project Director and the FMO 
or  Financial  Controller  SCU.  The  local  USD  account  shall  be  closed  when  the  USD  off-shore  account 
becomes  operational. Another  bank  account  in AOA  shall  be  opened  to  receive  Government  of Angola 
counterpart funds. Four bank accounts in AOA (one per province) shall be open to manage expenditures 
at local level. The Area Coordinator will have signatory powers with the local accountant managing all the 
disbursement, accounting and reporting requirements. Detailed procedures shall be outlined in the FMPM. 
13.  As it is envisioned that SREP will create 4 Provincial Programme Implementation Units (PPIU), the 
project will open  provincial operational accounts  in the provinces  of Zaire, Uige, Benguela  and  Namibe. 
These accounts will be used only for small purchases to support the PPIU, as most of the payments will be 
centralized in Luanda. Mandatory signatories of these accounts shall include the PPIU Coordinator.  
14.  Co-financier financial arrangements: While each financer will have its own Financing Agreement 
(FA) with Angola with regards to supervision and implementation support, it was agreed that IFAD would 
lead and act as administrator with regards to the AFD loan. For this service, IFAD will be paid an annual 
fee.  Similar  arrangements  have  been  entered  between  AFD  and  WB  in  the  implementation  of  the 
Agricultural Commercialization Project (ACP). 
15.  Co-financing  agreements  between  IFAD,  AFD,  and  BADEA  will  be  prepared  setting  out  the 
implementation  modalities  in  relation  to    procurement,  disbursement,  reviews  and  provision  of  prior  “no 
objection”,  reviews  of  withdrawal  applications  (WAs),  financial  management  and  due  diligence  and 
reporting. BADEA will administer and manage its own co-financing.  
IFAD will be entrusted with the day to day oversight of the project implementation while ensuring that 
16. 
AFD and BADEA are fully briefed and consulted prior to taking any major implementation decision.  
AFD Flow of funds: The AFD flow of funds is described in Figure 9 below.  AFD will follow IFAD’s 
17. 
disbursement review and verification process, prior to executing payment.IFAD will undertake prior review 
of  AFD  WAs,  and  AFD  will  undertake  final  approval  prior  to  disbursement  of  funds.  Processes  and 
procedures  for  AFD  disbursement  will  be  included  in  the  PIM.  The  option  of  holding  an  offshore  dollar 
account for the disbursement  of payments  in foreign currency  will be explored. Until a solution  is found 
SREP  will  make  direct  payment  with  a  low  threshold  of  US$  20,000.  The  fund  flow  procedure  will  be 
described in the PIM. 
18.  Government contribution. In addition to the counterpart funds deposited in an account held by IDA 
for the payment of taxes by the project, Government will also contribute in the form of office space for the 
project in Luanda, as part of the establishment of the SCU. The contribution will be assessed by the project 
based on the prevailing market rate for a comparable office area in Luanda. The rate may be evaluated by 
independent real estate agents operating in the city, and should be reviewed annually. As it is envisioned 
that  Government  will  also  contribute  in  the  form  of  logistics  and  personnel,  this  contribution  shall  be 
evaluated pro-rata. Furthermore, and in order to better reflect Government’s contribution to the project in 
the project yearly financial statements, the project PIM shall detail all measures to account for Government’s 
in-kind  contribution,  based  on  IFAD’s  in-kind  domestic  co-financing  technical  note.  The  amount  so 
quantified shall be disclosed in the Notes to the Financial Statements rather than in the main body. 
19.  Financial records. SREP shall keep accurate records of all financial and procurement transactions. 
All  original  documents  related  to  the  project  transactions  should  be  safeguarded,  and  the  project  will 
continuously  sensitize  IDA  on  the  need  to  safeguard  all  supporting  documentation  related  to  project 
activities  for  a  period  of  10  years  following  project  closure.  To  mitigate  the  risk  of  loss  of  financial  and 
procurement documentation, SREP should employ the use of electronic archiving already from inception. 
The  project  team  should  procure  the  services  of  a  competent  archiving  company  for  the  digitization  of 
supporting documentation. This process should be done with a 12 month frequency at the beginning of the 
project to be scaled up to a quarterly frequency by the last 24 months of project implementation to guarantee 
that all project records are correctly digitally archived.  
20.  Assessment,  risk  mitigation  and  internal  controls.  The  Public  Expenditure  and  Financial 
Accountability (PEFA) assessment for Angola was carried out in 2016, and as at May 2018 is still due for 
publication.  Angola  ranks  167  out  of  180  countries  in  the  2017  Transparency  International  Corruptions 
Perception  risk1,  a  3  point  decrease  in  the  scale  from  2016  rating,  signaling  a  worsening  of  perceived 
1 https://www.transparency.org/news/feature/corruption_perceptions_index_2017#table 
corruption  risk.  The  African  Development  Bank  carried  out  an  assessment  of  the  public  financial 
management  systems  of  Angola  during  the  elaboration  of  its  Country  Strategy  Paper  2017-20212  and 
concluded that the country has taken important steps to improve the fiscal framework and public financial 
management systems. However, the report notes some important areas of concern in budget execution 
and internal controls, as well as on significant variances between actuals and budgets, which may signal 
some issues in the absorption capacity to implement public investment projects. The overall risk of public 
financial management systems is ranked as substantial. As such, and based on this analysis the inherent 
financial management risk of the SREP is classified as high. 
21.  The  creation  of  a  new  layer  of  project  management  (including  fiduciary  management)  poses  an 
additional risk, as the SCU will still need to develop its internal capacity, procedures and guidelines. To 
mitigate  the  internal  control  risk  the  following  measures  will  be  employed  by  IDA:  1)  preparation  of  the 
FMPM upon approval of design report by Government; 2) purchase an accounting system and 3) hiring an 
internal auditor within six months after entry into Force. 
22. 
Internal controls will be insured through effective segregation of functions, monthly reconciliation of 
accounts,  and  different  levels  of  approvals  required  depending  on  amounts  of  expenses.  Physical 
management of cash is  discouraged,  with the use of bank transfers and check books employed for the 
majority  of  expenditures.  The  PIU  will  detail  the  internal  control  arrangements,  flow  of  funds,  and  roles, 
responsibilities and procedures in the FMPM. The FMPM should specially detail the minimum acceptable 
supporting  documentation,  and  project  approvals  needed  to  process  a  payment,  and  the  supporting 
documentation that must be presented for justification of expenditures such as travel, per-diem and fuel. It 
should also stipulate that advances are not to be treated as expenses until justified. 
Key Financial Management 
element 
Risk level 
Mitigation measure 
Staffing:  scarcity  of  highly  qualified 
Financial 
Management 
Specialists/accountants in-country 
High 
Budgeting:  potential  high  variances 
between budget and actuals 
High 
Budgeting:  existence  of  a  thriving 
parallel  market  for  foreign  currency 
with higher exchange rates than the 
official exchange rate 
difficulties 
Disbursement: 
in 
processing  payments  to  accounts 
local 
outside 
commercial 
Near 
impossibility  of  bank  transfers  in 
USD between different banks 
Angola 
banks. 
from 
Internal control environment: as part 
of  the  newly  established  SCU,  the 
SREP FM unit could face difficulties 
in  establishing  an  effective  internal 
control environment 
High 
High 
High 
 SREP (as part of SCU) to hire a qualified and experienced 
finance  team  for  the  SCU  positions.  SREP  to  request 
support  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance  to  guarantee  widest 
coverage of vacancy announcement and to receive a pool 
of  potentially  qualified  professionals  with 
financial 
management background. Furthermore, and as part of the 
support granted by the SCU, project financial management 
staff shall receive on-the-job  training from a qualified and 
experienced accounting and auditing firm. 
SREP to prepare realistic AWPBs based on the experience 
of  the  ongoing  projects  SADCP-WB  and  SADCP-C&H. 
SREP team to acquire the PRIMAVERA budget module for 
continuous monitoring. 
Funds transfers to operational account in AOA will need to 
be planned in advance to cover commitments due within a 
relatively short period of time to mitigate the risk of currency 
depreciation.  
IFAD  to  lower  the  threshold  for  direct  payment  to  USD 
20,000  
IDA to quickly establish operational manuals for the SCU, 
which shall be incorporated into the SREP PIM. Staffing of 
the  SCU  should  also  proceed  the  staffing  of  SREP  to 
guarantee proper segregation of duties. 
2 https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Project-and-Operations/Angola_-
__Country_Strategy_Paper_2017-2021.pdf 
23. 
Internal Audit. The SCU will contract the services of an internal audit company through competitive 
bidding. This internal audit will then provide their services to all ongoing IFAD projects implemented through 
IDA.  The  internal  auditor  should  be  hired  soon  as  possible  following  project  effectiveness.  The  internal 
auditor should have relevant work experience with projects funded by International Financial Institutions. 
As the level of perceived risk of the project is high, the project should be internally audited at least twice 
per  project  year.  The  internal  auditor  should  report  to  the  Project  Steering  Committee  and  the  contract 
administration should be facilitated by the Project Coordinator. 
24.  External  Audit.  Project  financial  statements  will  be  audited  by  independent,  private  audit  firms, 
satisfactory  to  IFAD,  in  accordance  with  International  Standards  of  Auditing  (ISA).  The  selection  of  the 
auditor should be on an open competitive process, and an important selection criteria should be experience 
in auditing projects of IFIs operating in Angola. The auditor’s report will be submitted to IFAD no later than 
six months after the closing of the borrower’s fiscal year. The external audit will be conducted in accordance 
with Terms of Reference (ToR) acceptable to IFAD. Draft ToR can be found in Attachment 2. Auditors will 
be required to issue an opinion on project financial statements and the audited financial statements will be 
publicly disclosed as per IFAD’s Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed projects. 
Figure 8: Flow of funds IFAD 
IFAD 
Project Loan Account 
Government of 
Angola 
 Off-shore  
Account– 
IFAD (USD) 
Designated Account 
(USD) [Luanda] 
Operational 
Account – 
IFAD (USD) 
[Luanda] 
Operational 
Account – 
IFAD (AOA) 
[Luanda] 
Operational 
Account  - 
GOA (AOA) 
[Luanda] 
Provincial Accounts (AOA) 
[ZAIRE, UIGE, NAMIBE, 
BENGUELA, BENGO, CUANZA 
NORTE, CUNENE] 
Suppliers of Goods and Services 
Figure 9. Flow of Funds AFD 
Attachment 1: draft audit TORs 
Guidelines for the Preparation of the Terms of Reference for the PROJECT AUDITOR 
DRAFT TORS: EXTERNAL AUDITOR 
1.  Background  
  The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is aiding the borrower/recipient in the 
form of loan(s) [and/or grant(s)].  
  A financing [and /or grant] agreement or agreements has/have been signed between IFAD and the 
borrower/[recipient]; refer to appendix 1. 
 
[Insert for private auditor]: IFAD requires the borrower/recipient to appoint an independent auditor 
to audit the accounts related to the project, in accordance with the IFAD Handbook on Financial 
Reporting and Auditing.  
  The reporting entity is the Institute for Agricultural Development (IDA). 
  The entity prepares its financial statements in accordance with [applicable accounting standard]. 
The auditor conducts its audit in terms of [applicable auditing standard].  
 
[Insert any other information that may be relevant to the auditor].  
2.  Objective  
The objective of this audit is to enable the auditor to express an opinion on whether the financial statements 
(including additional disclosures as outlined in section 5) present fairly, in all material respects, the financial 
position of the reporting entity as at [insert year-end date], and/or the results of its operations and its cash 
flows for the years then ended, in conformity with the [applicable accounting standards].  
3.  Responsibilities of the borrower/[recipient]  
i. 
General 
a.  Provide  financial  statements  for  the  activities  financed  by  the  loan/[grant]  that  are 
reconcilable to its records and accounts.  
b.  Provide  the  auditor  with  access  to  all  legal  documents  and  correspondence  with 
consultants, contractors and other persons or firms engaged by the project, and any other 
information associated with the project and deemed necessary by the auditor.  
c.  Ensure that the accounting policies are consistently applied and disclosed.  
d.  Ensure that appropriate internal controls are implemented to prevent misstatements and 
susceptibility to fraud. Ensure compliance with all relevant laws and regulations that pertain 
to the entity, as well as with the financing agreement between the borrower/[recipient] and 
IFAD.  
e.  Provide the financial statements to the auditor within a reasonable time and be available 
for any queries that the auditor may have. 
ii. 
Financial statements  
The borrower/[recipient] shall:  
a.  Prepare financial statements covering the reporting period [date] to [date], in accordance 
with [IPSAS/IPSAS “Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of Accounting” standards]. 
In addition, the following specific disclosures will be included in the financial statements:  
i.  Withdrawal application statement– appendix 1 to the IFAD Handbook on Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects;  
ii.  Sources  and  uses  of  funds  statement  –  appendix  2  to  the  IFAD  Handbook  on 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects; 
iii.  Designated  Account  statement  and  reconciliation  –  appendix  3  to  the  IFAD 
Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects;  
4.  Responsibilities of the auditor  
i.  Auditing standards  
a.  The auditor is responsible for the formulation of an opinion on the financial statements in 
accordance with [ISA/ISSAI/national auditing standards];  
ii.  General principles  
By agreeing to these terms, the auditor confirms that:  
a.  The  firm  is  independent  from  the  project,  its  staff  and  activities,  in  accordance  with 
international best practices.  
b.  The firm is not providing consultancy services to the project or preparing its project financial 
statements (nor has it done so in the previous two years).  
c.  The auditor is suitably qualified and a member of a professional  body  affiliated  with  the 
International Federation of Accountants.  
d. 
[The office of [public  auditor] is  a member of the International Organization  of Supreme 
Audit Institutions (INTOSAI).]  
e.  The auditor is able to conduct the audit in line with auditing standards acceptable to IFAD, 
pursuant to paragraph 4.1.  
f.  The firm can assign an audit team to the audit that has the necessary competence and 
skills.  
g.  The firm has a proven track record in conducting audits of a similar nature and complexity.  
iii.  Management letter  
The management letter is  an  integral part of the  audit package that documents  accounting and  internal 
control issues identified by the auditors. The management letter should:  
a.  Outline the auditor’s recommendations to improve identified accounting and internal control 
issues;  
b. 
Include  the  responses  of  project  management  to  the  identified  control  issues,  and  its 
proposal to address the issues identified within a specific time period.  
c.  Where applicable, follow up on the issues identified  in the previous  year's management 
letter.  
iv.  Reporting 
The Auditor is required to deliver an audit package that includes:  
a.  The audited financial statements, including additional disclosures as outlined in paragraph 
3.2;  
b.  An audit opinion on the financial statements, within the scope as outlined in paragraph 5;  
c. 
[A report on factual findings, within the scope  of agreed-upon procedures as outlined in 
paragraph 6.] Any ineligible expenditure identified should be clearly mentioned.  
d.  A management letter, including the information outlined in paragraph 4.3; 
The audit report should provide sufficient detail as to the nature and extent of the procedures performed by 
the auditor. The auditor is required to provide the audit package by no later than [insert date]. Reports are 
to be delivered in English.  
5.  Scope of the financial audit  
In performing the audit, at a minimum the auditor shall:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Obtain an understanding of the internal controls related to the financial reporting 
process, to identify and assess any weakness in internal control that might result 
in misstatements, whether due to fraud or to error;  
Design and conduct audit procedures in response to any weaknesses identified in 
the  internal  controls  relating  to  the  financial  reporting  process,  to  obtain  audit 
evidence that the financial statements are fairly presented and free from material 
misstatements, in accordance with the applicable accounting framework;  
Verify whether expenditure that was incurred in the name of the project is in line 
with  the  terms  of  the financing  agreement(s)  (appendix  xx)  and  incurred  for  the 
purposes intended in this agreement. Both IFAD and third party funding should be 
taken into consideration;  
Verify that the inventory and fixed assets held by the entity exist, are complete, are 
properly accounted and are used for the project purposes;  
Note  any  weaknesses  in  the  internal  control  environment  and  in  the  financial 
reporting process, and communicate those in the management letter.  
[List others].  
6.  Scope of the agreed-upon procedures  
The  auditor  is  required  to  perform  the  following  specific  procedures  and  report  on  factual  findings  as 
required in paragraph 4.4.  
i. 
Withdrawal application statement  
The  auditor  is  requested  to  obtain  the  individual  withdrawal  applications  (WAs)  submitted  to  IFAD,  as 
summarized in the withdrawal application statement, and develop test procedures to:  
a. 
using the historical exchange rate of transfers to the operating account;  
Determine whether the Designated Account currency equivalent was determined 
b. 
mechanism in line with the stipulated SOE threshold;   
Determine  whether  goods  and  services  have  been  purchased  through  the  SOE 
c. 
Determine  whether  the  expenditures  claimed  through  SOE  procedures  were 
properly and appropriately authorized, classified and supported by audit documentation;  
d. 
e. 
Identify any ineligible expenditure;  
[List additional procedures, if applicable].   
ii. 
Designated account statement and reconciliation  
The auditor is requested to review the activities of the designated account(s) associated with the project, 
including the initial advance, replenishments, interest that may accrue on the outstanding balances, and 
the year-end balances. The auditor is requested develop test procedures to: 
a.  Check the accuracy of the Designated Account reconciliation(s);  
b.  Confirm that the Designated Account(s) have been maintained in accordance with the 
provisions of the financing agreement;  
c. 
[List additional procedures if applicable].  
iii. 
Certified Statement of Expenditure [applicable to grants]  
The auditor is requested to obtain the certified Statement of Expenditure as submitted to IFAD, and develop 
test procedures to:  
a.  Determine if expenditures incurred are related to the project description in according 
with the grant agreement;  
b.  Determine  whether  goods  and  services  have  been  purchased  through  the  SOE 
mechanism in line with the stipulated SOE threshold; 
c.  Determine whether the expenditures claimed through SOE procedures were properly 
and appropriately authorized, classified and supported by audit documentation;  
d. 
Identify any ineligible expenditure;  
e. 
[List additional procedures if applicable].  
iv. 
Expenditure transaction list [Applicable to grants]  
The  auditor  is  requested  to  obtain  the  expenditure  transaction  list  submitted  to  IFAD  and  develop  test 
procedures to:  
a.  Determine if the expenditure incurred is related to the project description in accordance 
with the grant agreement;  
b. 
[List additional procedures if applicable].  
7.  Public disclosure  
IFAD promotes public disclosure of project financial information to enhance the level of transparency and 
accountability. IFAD  will disclose project audit reports, as appropriate,  in  line  with the Fund’s disclosure 
policy. Management Letters issued by auditors are not subject to public disclosure by IFAD. In agreeing to 
the terms of reference, the auditor explicitly acknowledges IFAD’s right to publicly disclose audit reports 
(audited financial statements and audit opinion) and will issue reports without a limitation of use clause.  
To facilitate the public disclosure process, the auditor is requested to submit two separate files as follows:  
i. 
ii. 
Audited financial statements and audit opinion; and  
Management Letter.  
________________________________  
Signed by:  
Authorized representative of the auditor  
Date: 
8.  Appendices 
Appendix 1: Financing/grant agreement(s)  
Appendix 2: Letter to the Borrower  
Appendix 3: IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects  
.
Attachment 2: draft TORs for Financial Management Officer 
Background and General Information 
The total costs of the Project are estimated in about USD 150million, to be financed by an IFAD loan 
(... million USD) and the Government of Angola (… million USD). The total recurrent costs are estimated 
to be about USD ... million USD. The detailed costs for each of these items are presented in Appendix 
... (Project Costs and Financing). 
Implementation Arrangements  
As described in detail in Appendix … of the Project Design Report. 
Background Qualifications and Experience of the Financial Manager  
High  degree  in  economics  or  finance  administration;  at  least  5  years  in  financial  management  and 
accounting in internationally financed programmes; good skills in using computer financial management 
and  accountancy  software;  fluency  in  spoken  and  written  Portuguese  and  English;  experience  in 
implementing IFAD or World bank funded projects will be an advantage. 
Scope of Technical Services 
Under the direct supervision of the Project Manager, the Financial Manager will be responsible for the 
financial management and administration in relation to project implementation. Specific responsibilities 
include but are not limited to: 
 
Implementing the Project Financial system and tools;  
  Conducting the financial management, accounting of the project; 
  Managing project funds. 
  Preparing and monitor annual budgets in the framework of the annual planning process; 
  Ensuring  all  project  accounts,  disbursement  and  replenishment  procedures  are  managed  with 
respect to disbursement and replenishment in accordance  with the procedures stipulated by the 
Financing Agreement; 
  Preparing regular financial progress reports as required by the government and IFAD; 
  Preparing  regular  withdrawal  applications  for  the  replenishment  of  the  project’s  Designated 
Account.  
  Preparing of annual and final Project Financial reports for external auditing and provide all required 
assistance to Project external auditors. 
  Assisting the Project Manager in elaborating the Project Completion Reports, by providing update 
detailed project financial statements; 
 
Implement an electronic archive of financial documentation. 
  Assisting  the  Project  Manager  in  conducting  Project  Completion  and  Loan  Closing  activities  in 
compliance with Loan conditions. 
Attachment 3:  Guidelines for Disbursement of Funds 
The guidelines below give a high-level overview of BADEA’s disbursement of funds procedures. Full 
details can be accessed in the link below: 
https://badea.org/Portal/Document_Repository/151/1_gpl.pdf 
1.1.  Purpose 
1.1.1.  For the borrower: proceeds are delivered as quickly as possible, in order to avoid delays 
in project execution. 
1.1.2.  For the lender: to ensure that loans are used exclusively for the purpose for which they 
were made available. 
1.2.  Principles 
1.2.1.  Conformity with procurement guidelines. 
1.2.2.  Compliance with terms of contract. 
1.2.3.  Conformity with specified goods and services. 
1.3.  Conditions and Preliminary Procedures 
1.3.1.  The loan agreement must be signed. 
1.3.2.  All conditions pertaining to the effectiveness of the agreement are to be completed before 
disbursements are made. 
1.3.3.  The loan closing date must be valid before any disbursement can be made. If it expires 
before all the proceeds are disbursed the Borrower (Ministry of Finance) should apply for 
an extension. 
1.3.4.  That the persons who will sign disbursement applications have been properly authorized 
and  BADEA  is  supplied  with  authenticated  signatures,  by  using  (Form  1),  the 
authorization should be signed by the borrower’s representatives designated in section 
VII-1 of the General loan agreement. 
1.4.  Methods of Disbursement 
1.4.1.  Reimbursement to the Borrower. 
1.4.1.1. 
The supplier / contractor charges the borrower. 
1.4.1.2. 
The borrower pays the supplier / contractor. 
1.4.1.3. 
The borrower applies for BADEA reimbursement. 
1.4.1.4. 
BADEA reimburses the borrower. 
1.4.1.5. 
Documents required by BADEA for completion of reimbursement file: 
a)  Two copies of an Application for Reimbursement (Form 3) signed by an 
authorized signatory of the borrower. 
b)  Two copies for the summary statement (Form 5 for supplier) or (Form 6 for 
contractor). 
c)  Evidence of payment i.e. (formal receipt from the supplier, bank transfer or 
any evidence of payment satisfactory to BADEA). 
d)  The  supplier’s  or  contractor’s  invoices,  which  must  be  certified  by  the 
consultant when appropriate. 
1.4.2.  Direct payment to the contractor or consultant or suppliers. 
1.4.2.1. 
The supplier or contractor will charge the borrower for the goods and services 
supplied 
1.4.2.2. 
The borrower will pass on to BADEA the charges made by the supplier or the 
contractor  with  the  “Application  for  Direct  payment”  (Form  4),  signed  by  an 
authorized signatory of the borrower. 
1.4.2.3. 
BADEA  pays  the  supplier  or  the  contractor  directly  upon  receiving  the 
disbursement application from the borrower. 
1.4.2.4. 
Documents required by BADEA for completion of Direct payment file: 
a)  Two  copies  of  an  Application  for  Direct  payment  (Form  4) signed  by  an 
authorized signatory of the borrower. 
b)  Two copies for the summary statement (Form 5 for supplier or Form 6 for 
contractor). 
c)  The  supplier’s  or  contractor’s  invoices,  which  must  be  certified  by  the 
consultant. 
1.4.3.  Payment under Letter of Credit (Guarantee). 
1.4.3.1. 
The supplier will request the borrower to open L/C. 
1.4.3.2. 
The commercial Bank will open L/C on behalf of borrower. 
1.4.3.3. 
The Bank will request BADEA for the guarantee payments under the L/C. 
1.4.3.4. 
The Borrower will apply for “Qualified repayment guarantee” from BADEA by 
using (Form 9 and Form 11). 
1.4.3.5. 
BADEA  will  send  to  the  Bank  two  copies  of  the  letter  of  “The  Qualified 
Repayment Guarantee” (Form 12), attached with the proposed L/C. 
1.4.4. Payment under Letter of Credit (Repayment) 
1.4.4.1. 
The bank will be required to sign the appropriate section of Form 12 and send 
the original back to BADEA together with a list of authorized signatories of the 
bank. 
1.4.4.2. 
The commercial bank will make the payments to the supplier under the L/C. 
1.4.4.3. 
The bank requests BADEA for repayments of the L/C using Form 14. 
1.4.4.4. 
BADEA effects payment directly to the Bank. 
1.4.5. Payment under Letter of Credit (Amendment of the L/C) 
1.4.5.1. 
The  bank  should  send  two  copies  of  the  proposed  amendments  to  the 
borrower. 
1.4.5.2. 
The borrower will send a request to BADEA for a Letter of Credit Amendment 
by using Form 15, with two copies of the amended L/C attached. 
1.4.5.3. 
BADEA will endorse one copy of the amendments and return it directly to the 
bank and inform the borrower. 
1.5.  Notification of Payment 
1.5.1.  Upon effecting of payment under any of the three methods, and receipt of confirmation of 
debit notice from BADEA’s Bank, the Borrower will be notified by sending a Debit Advice 
by the mail and a detailed fax concerning the transaction to the Borrower. 
1.6.  Currency 
1.6.1.  BADEA commitment is in US Dollars. However, payments can be made in US Dollars or 
in any other currency, upon request. 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Procurement
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Procurement 
1. 
Procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  financed  by  the  IFAD  loan  and  other  co-financiers’ 
loan/grant  will  be  undertaken  in  accordance  with  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and  IFAD  “Policy  on 
preventing fraud and corruption in activities and operations”. All procurement will be executed only against 
approved Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) which align with the procurement plans, specifying items 
to be procured under each component, agency responsible for such procurement, procurement method to 
be  used  (as  defined  in  IFAD  Procurement  Handbook  and  Guidelines)  sequencing/timing  and  total  cost 
involved. All larger procurement are expected to be NCB contracts, except international competitive bidding 
(ICB) for contracts above an agreed threshold. All procurement financed by IFAD will be exempt from duties 
and  taxes.  IFAD  prior  review  thresholds  will  be  established  at  US$75,000  for  goods  and  works  and 
US$50,000 for consultancy services. These will be described in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
with  additional  requirements  of  IFAD's  Prior-Review  procedures  specified  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower 
(LTB).  
2. 
Procurement  planning  will  be  very  crucial  and  will  follow  the  appropriate  templates  in  the  IFAD 
Procurement Handbook and Guidelines as already adapted for other on-going IFAD-supported projects in 
the country. However, as provided in IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines, SREP will use World Bank's 
Guidelines and standard bidding documents for ICB. The project will ensure that timelines included in the 
approved procurement plan are closely monitored during implementation to minimize delays. 
A procurement assessment has been undertaken based on the current operation of IFAD funded 
3. 
projects.  The  design  draws  lessons  from  the  on-going  projects  in  the  country.  Robust  implementation 
arrangements will be put in place to ensure effective project execution. The project will be embedded in the 
Ministry of Agriculture & Forestry structure. 
4. 
The African Development Bank carried out an assessment of the country’s procurement systems 
of Angola during the elaboration of its Country Strategy Paper 2017-20211 and concluded that the country 
has  taken  important  steps  to  improve  the  fiscal  framework  and  the  country’s  procurement  systems. 
However,  some  weaknesses  were  identified  in  the  internal  and  external  controls,  as  follows:  (i)  Serviço 
Nacional  da  Contratação  Pública  (SNCP)/National  Public  Procurement  Service  (NPPS)  is  involved  in 
transactions, (ii) the Public Financial Management internal control entity (General Inspectorate of Finance 
– IGF) lacks capacity in procurement and its reviews are usually ex-post and not systematic, and (iii) there 
is no dedicated and independent procurement entity in charge of quality review of procurement processing. 
Regarding the complaints mechanism, there is no independent administrative body for review of complaints, 
which may impact the confidence of the private sector in the system. The procurement law calls for ethical 
behaviour  for  public  servants  intervening  in  procurement  procedures  and  for  the  bidders,  including 
sanctions for non-compliance. 
5. 
A Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation (CSPE) was undertaken by IFAD’s Independent 
Office of Evaluation (OIE) in November 2017. IOE has shared the CSPE draft report with the Programme 
Management Department (PMD) and the Government of the Republic of Angola. The report is informative, 
providing in-depth lessons learnt in implementing projects and conducting policy dialogue in country. Many 
lessons have been detailed from the engagement and projects, which are being considered during design 
of new investments and project implementation. The CSPE gave an overall rating of moderately satisfactory 
to the project portfolio achievement. As it relates to procurement, the CSPE highlighted that AFAP, another 
IFAD-funded  project  in  Angola,  faced  severe  procurement-related  issues,  which  were  addressed  by  a 
1 https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Project-and-Operations/Angola_-
Country_Strategy_Paper_2017-2021.pdf 
supervision mission carried out in November 2017. The CSPE goes on to specify that, although initially only 
few  international  procurement  activities  had  been  planned,  the  high  cost  and  non-availability  of  several 
goods  and  services  on  the  domestic  market  required  more  international  procurement  actions,  also  for 
relatively small amounts. However, the 2016/2017 economic and financial crisis in the country triggered 
severe restrictions in the availability of foreign currency. As a consequence, the evaluation noted that AFAP 
management has been facing difficulties in the transfer of funds to accounts outside of Angola to pay for 
internationally  procured  goods  and  services.  This  complex  situation  could  seriously  impact  the 
effectiveness and efficiency of procurement activities under SREP and it is therefore recommended for the 
Project  to  open  a  second  designated  account  in  US  dollars  in  an  offshore  bank  to  make  payments  to 
international consultants and suppliers. 
6. 
The specific principles governing project procurement will be as follows: 
a. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the Financing Agreement, the Letter to the 
Borrower  and  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  and  any  subsequent  changes  reflected  in 
IFAD‘s mission reports (e.g. supervision reports, mid-term reviews, etc.); All procurement shall be 
carried  out  in  accordance  with  IFAD's  Procurement  Handbook  and  Project  Procurement 
Guidelines. The overall procurement responsibility will rest with the MINAGRI/IDA.  
b. Procurement  shall  be  conducted  within  the  project  implementation  period  (from  the  date  of 
effectiveness to the date of completion). Procurement cannot be undertaken between the date of 
completion and the closing date; 
c. Procurement must not exceed the availability of funds duly allocated by the financial agreement; 
d. Procurement Plan must be consistent with the approved Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWBP); 
and 
e. The principle of value for money must be sought: Best value does not necessarily mean the lowest 
initial price option, but rather represents the best return on investments, taking into consideration 
the unique and specific circumstances of each procurement activity; the balance of time, cost and 
quality  required;  and  the  successful  overall  outcome  of  the  contract  in  meeting  its  original 
objectives. 
7. 
The following project activities are subject  to IFAD's procurement procedures: 
a.  Goods.  This  activity  will  include  procurement  of  vehicles  and  motorcycles,  agricultural 
implements, IT equipment, material and furniture & fixture. Goods will also include any activities 
included in the selected subproject proposals. 
b.  Works.  This  activity  will  include  rehabilitation  of  irrigation  systems,  rehabilitation  of  roads, 
construction of bridges/drifts, repair/renovation of technical staff housing and office complexes, 
repair/rehabilitation of warehouses and market infrastructure, and rehabilitation and/or renovation 
of  critical  agricultural  extension  facilities  at  local  level.  Specific  activities  for  irrigation  are  (i) 
upgrading  of  the  area  around  the  intake  and  the  main  canal;  (ii)  rehabilitation  of  collecting 
structures  for  the  accumulation  of  water  to  be  distributed  and/or  rehabilitation  of  damaged 
embankments; (iii) installation of control structures like water gates; (iv) upgrading (digging) of the 
main canals and, where necessary, lining critical stretches of the distribution system; and (v) use 
of local plants/grass to control canal erosion. Works will also include any activities included in the 
selected subproject proposals. 
c.  Consultancies. This activity will include (i) recruitment of service providers for capacity building 
of community associations, agricultural statistics, market information systems, agricultural policy 
analysis,  irrigation-related  services,  and  agricultural  research  that  will  include  improving  soil 
diagnostics  services;  multiplication  of  seeds  and  planting  materials;  strengthening  national 
research  and  extension  systems;  and  scaling  up  testing  and  demonstration  of  improved 
technologies at the international and regional levels. 
8. 
Particular methods of procurement for Goods, Works and Non-consulting Services 
9. 
General.  Procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  financed  by  IFAD  shall  be  carried  out  in 
accordance with the provisions of the Borrower's procurement regulations, to the extent such are consistent 
with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines. Each Procurement Plan shall identify procedures which must be 
implemented by the Borrower in order to ensure consistency with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines. 
Concerning  Angolan procurement regulations, Law  No. 20/10 ("Lei dos ContratosPúblicos") has 
10. 
recently been amended by Law No. 9/16. An assessment of the changes introduced by Law No. 9/16 will 
be  carried  out  in  order  to  verify  compliance  with  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines.  Any  deviations  will  be 
included in the Financing Agreement and in the Letter to the Borrower. 
11. 
IFAD  Review  of  Procurement  Decisions:  IFAD  will  undertake  to  review  the  provisions  for  the 
procurement  of  good,  works  and  services  to  ensure  that  the  procurement  processes  are  carried  out  in 
conformity with the Guidelines and Procedures. The following procurement decisions shall be subject to 
prior review by the Fund for the award of any contract for goods, works, consultancy and services under 
SREP: 
i. Procurement of goods, materials and works  
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Prequalification documents and shortlist when prequalification is undertaken; 
Bid documents for goods, materials and works; 
Evaluation report and recommendation for award; and 
Contract and amendments. 
ii. Procurement of consultancy services  
a.  Expressions of interest;  
b.  Request for proposal; 
c.  Technical evaluation report; 
d.  Combined (technical and financial) evaluation report and the recommendation for award; and 
e.  Contract and amendments. 
Prior Review Thresholds: Procurement decisions will be subject to prior review as stated in 
12. 
Table 1. The procurement plan shall set forth those contracts that shall be subject to prior review by the 
IFAD. All other contracts shall be subject to post review by  IFAD. IFAD may, at its own discretion, require 
that a sample of contracts below the threshold be subject to prior review, at any time or when the 
procurement plan is updated. 
Table 8: Threshold for Procurement of Goods, Works and Services 
Thresholds for 
Procurement and 
Review Methods 
Expenditure 
Category 
Works 
Goods 
Consulting 
Services – Firms 
Consulting 
Services - 
Individuals (IC) 
Contract Value 
Threshold (US$) 
Procurement / 
Selection Method 
Contracts Subject  
to Prior Review 
≥ 500,000 
≥ 75,000 < 500,000 
ICB 
NCB 
<75,000 
All values 
≥ 200,000 
Shopping 
Direct Contracting 
ICB 
≥ 75,000 < 200,000 
NCB 
<75,000 
All values 
≥ 200,000 
<100,000 
All values 
Shopping 
Direct Contracting 
QCBS/QBS 
CQS/Other (QCBS/QBS/ 
FBS/LCS) 
SSS 
≥ 50,000 
IC- International - QCBS 
< 50,000 
IC –National - QCBS 
All values 
IC – SSS 
Prior Review  
Prior Review 
(Post review) 
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
(Post review) 
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
Prior Review  
ICB.  
QCBS.  
FBS. 
SSS. 
IC. 
International Competitive Bidding 
Quality and Cost Based Selection 
Fixed Budget Selection 
Single Source Selection 
Individual Consultant  
NCB.  
CQS.  
LCS. 
QBS 
DC. 
National Competitive Bidding 
Selection Based on Consultants’ Qualification  
Least Cost Selection 
Quality Based Selection 
Direct Contracting 
13.  Co-financing  Procurement  Arrangements:  AFD  will  follow  IFAD  procurement  procedures.    The 
review of withdrawal applications will be initially conducted by IFAD with disbursement conducted by AFD 
directly. AFD will entrust procurement oversight and “no objections” to IFAD as will be detailed in the “Co-
financing Agreement”. BADEA will use their own procurement and disbursement procedures as described 
in Attachments 1 and 2. BADEA will ensure that the SREP PIU will be fully trained in the BADEA procedures 
which will be included in the SREP PIM.  
1.  PROCUREMENT PLAN 
As soon as possible after project commencement, the Project Coordinator shall submit to IFAD the draft 
18-months  annual  work  plan  and  budget  and  procurement  plan  for  review  and  No  Objection.  The 
procurement  plan  shall  be  prepared  annually  and  submitted  to  IFAD  for  review  and  expression  of  No 
Objection 60 days before the beginning of each subsequent project year. When preparing the procurement 
plan, an accurate and realistic planning and prioritization of needs is an essential prerequisite to effective 
procurement and a key tool for monitoring project implementation. The procurement plan will be updated 
annually or as required to reflect the actual project implementation needs and improvements in institutional 
capacity.  Items  procured  outside  the  procurement  plan  and  the  related  AWPB  will  be  declared  mis-
procurement and the related expenditure will be ineligible. 
All procurements should be undertaken only during the project implementation period.  The procurement 
plan for each year will be consistent with the project’s AWPB and its target date of implementation including 
list of procurement of works, goods, and services to be procured under the project yearly with estimated 
cost and method of procurement detailed in appropriate formats for each budget year.  The procurement 
plan details include: 
a)  A  brief  description  of  each  procurement  activity  to  be  undertaken  during  that  project 
implementation period;  
b)  The estimated value of each activity in US$ equivalent to Angolan Kwanza;  
c)  The method of procurement to be adopted for each activity;  
d)  Works procurement packages with methods and time schedule 
e)  Goods procurement packages with methods and time schedule  
f)  Consultancy assignments with selection methods and time schedule 
g)  The method of review of each activity (Post or Prior); and 
h)  Timelines showing milestones when the key stages of the procurement cycle will be achieved. 
I.  General description 
a.  Project Name: Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project (SREP) 
b.  Country: Angola  
c.  Borrower: Republic of Angola 
d.  Loan No. TBD 
e.  Project Implementing Agency: MINAGRI/IDA.  
f. 
g. 
h.  Date of General Procurement Notice: TBD 
i.  Period Covered by this Procurement Plan: TBD 
Implementing Partners: MINAGRI/IDA 
IFAD’s Approval Date of the Procurement Plan: TBD 
2.  PROCUREMENT UNIT 
SREP procurement activities shall be coordinated by a Procurement Specialist (PS) who  will be working 
under  the  direct  supervision  of  the  Project  Coordinator  in  the  Single  Coordination  Unit  (SCU)  based  in 
Luanda and  will be responsible for undertaking procurement activities  within the defined thresholds and 
prepare procurement documents for processes. The PS will help in running the unit’s responsibilities. The 
PS should have the relevant qualification, experience and  sound knowledge and understanding of IFAD 
Procurement Handbook and Guidelines and knowledge of other donors’ procurement procedures applying 
to internationally financed projects. The PS will facilitate procurement for the SREP with following guidelines 
to be specified in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM), including procurement procedures for goods, 
works  and  services,  internal  control,  reconciliation  and  dispute  resolution,  risk  management;  post 
procurement, audit and monitoring, etc. 
3.  ASSESSMENT OF THE FIDUCIARY RISK IN PROCUREMENT  
The risk mitigation measures for the project include enhancement of the SREP’s procurement capacity by: 
(a)  hiring  experienced  Procurement  Specialist  at  the  PIU/SCU,  whose  main  duty  will  be  to  hire  service 
providers/consultants and provide support to the procurement team; (b) conduct procurement trainings for 
the  personnel  at  federal  and  provincial  levels  and  (c)  preparation  of  the  procurement  implementation 
manual. Overall, procurement risk is high. The table below summarizes the main risk factors as well as the 
mitigation measures proposed: 
Risks 
 Procurement 
risk 
Possible 
Consequences 
 Delays in procurement 
 Inadequate and 
incomplete Terms of 
References (ToRs), 
Mitigation Measures 
  Hire qualified and proficient Procurement 
Specialists/Experts 
Risks 
Possible 
Consequences 
Mitigation Measures 
technical specifications 
and Bill of Quantities 
(BoQ) 
  Staff involved in the implementation of procurement 
activities should be provided procurement clinics on 
a regular basis; 
 Procurement 
 Inadequate 
  Train procurement staff in the preparation and 
Planning 
  Delay in 
Project start-
up 
  Contract 
Management 
procurement planning 
and monitoring and 
follow-up of 
procurement activities 
  Possibly lengthy 
recruitment and 
implementation and 
disbursement delays 
  Lack of experience in 
contract monitoring 
and administration 
 Capacity 
Building 
 Weak capacity in 
procurement  
updating and monitoring of procurement plans at all 
levels 
  Follow up of procurement activities at all levels 
  Timely recruitment of SCU/PIU/PPIUs staff  
  Assistance from IFAD and other on-going projects in 
implementing start-up activities 
  Provide training to staff in contract monitoring and 
management 
  Continuous capacity building and strict follow-up and 
supervision 
  Prepare and implement a comprehensive capacity 
building plan 
  Continues capacity building of IDA and SREP 
Draft: Terms of Reference for Procurement Specialist 
Purpose 
The procurement reports directly to the Project Coordinator and is responsible for managing procurement 
processes  and  contract  administration  aspects.  As  head  of  the  procurement  unit,  the  incumbent  will  be 
tasked to ensure compliance with National Procurement Law and its regulations and ensure due diligence 
to comply with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and handbook. 
Background and General Information 
The total costs of the Project are estimated in about USD ... million, to be financed by an IFAD loan (….. 
million USD) and the Government of Angola (… million USD). The total recurrent costs are estimated to be 
about USD ... million USD. The detailed costs for each of these items are presented in Appendix ... (Project 
Costs and Financing). 
Implementation Arrangements  
As described in detail in Appendix … of the Project Design Report. 
Procurement Specialist’s Scope of Work 
i. 
Installation of appropriate procurement systems and procedures for effective planning and monitoring 
of procurements under the project; 
ii.  Oversee preparation and consolidation of inputs to the annual procurement plan; 
iii.  Ensure all prior review requirements such as obtaining of the No Objections from IFAD are complied 
with in a timely manner; 
iv.  Ensure that all the due tendering processes are adhered to: sufficient publications, strict adherence to 
deadlines, transparency in communications with bidders, publication of bid results, etc.; 
v.  Establish a simplified procurement tracking system for monitoring of the project procurement activities 
and train staff to track procurement, to analyze recurrent weakness and strengths and to develop and 
implement mitigation measures; 
vi.  Provide  direct  support  and  hands-on  technical  assistance  to  the  procurement  management  staff  at 
PPIUs in order to enhance efficiency and effectiveness of handling procurement; 
vii.  Train  staff  to  prepare  and  update  the  Project’s  Annual  Procurement  Plan  (including  procurement 
method, types/kinds, quantity, value, delivery requirements, sources, etc.); 
viii.  Coordinate the preparation of Bidding Documents and RFPs and issue the documents to the respective 
bidders and consultants; 
ix.  Assist establishing a performance monitoring database for all suppliers and consultants, and ensure 
timely updates of the system; 
x.  Assist in handling project procurement related complaints, including logging and recording, notifying 
the  IFAD,  and  preparing  response  to  the  complaints,  including  in  the  preparation  of  qualitative 
justifications for settlement of disputes with consultants and suppliers; 
xi.  Ensure acceptable record keeping in procurement with at least a complete procurement file for each 
procurement from start to contract finalization. Maintain all procurement records in a form appropriate 
for regular auditing and spot checks by supervision missions; 
xii.  Prepare bi-annually progress reports with implementation of the procurement plan, and regularly 
inform the PC of problems and make proposals to overcome bottlenecks; and 
xiii.  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the PC. 
Required Qualifications 
  Academic  degree  with  a  major  in  a  relevant  discipline  (e.g.  Law,  Procurement,  Economics, 
Engineering,  Natural  Sciences,  Finance,  Business,  Commerce,  Public  Administration  or  related 
disciples and documented previous experience in similar assignments;  
  Minimum 5 years' experience in procurement and at least 3 years in a comparable donor-funded 
project environment; 
  Significant  experience  in  providing  technical  assistance  in  procurement  management  or 
experience of managing procurement systems preferably based on the Donor guidelines  
  Seasoned knowledge of all major facets of IFAD/WB/AfDB operations and procurement policies  
  Knowledge  of  developing  country  conditions  generally  and  of procurement-related  legislation, 
systems and practices; 
  Strong  communication  skills  and  persuasiveness  in  presenting,  negotiating  and  resolving  highly 
complex issues, both orally and in writing in Portuguese and with an excellent knowledge of English 
as a working language; 
  Ability to work independently, pay careful attention to detail and manage multiple tasks in a fast-
paced environment; 
Attachment 1:  BADEA: Guidelines for Procurement of Goods and Contracting for Execution of 
Works 
The guidelines below give a high-level overview of BADEA’s procurement procedures. Full details can be 
accessed in the link below: 
https://badea.org/Portal/Document_Repository/25/1_GUIDELINES_FOR_THE_PROCUREMENT2001.pd
f 
1.1.  Responsibility for the Procurement of Goods and Contracting for the Execution of Works 
1.1.1.  The ultimate responsibility for the procurement of goods for the execution of works rests 
with the Borrower or agency appointed by him, in agreement with BADEA. 
1.1.2.  The rights of the Borrower vis-à-vis the bidders are governed by the tender documents and 
contracts to be signed. 
1.1.3.  These guidelines only define the relationship between BADEA and the Borrower. 
1.2.  BADEA's Mode of Procurement 
1.2.1.  Any loan granted by BADEA to finance a particular project shall be subject to public bid 
procedures in African and Arab countries for the procurement of goods and services 
produced in those countries. 
1.3.  Types and Sizes of Contracts 
1.3.1.  Contracts may be based on unit prices for work performed or materials supplied, or lump-
sum price /or combination of both methods for different parts of the contract. 
1.3.2.  The size and scope of the various contracts depend on the size and nature of the project. 
1.4.  Advertising and Prequalification 
1.4.1.  The invitation to bid must be advertised in at least one newspaper of wide circulation in the 
Borrower’s country and in one or more of the well-known specialized magazines, 
newspapers and trade publications of wide international circulation. 
1.4.2.  Advertising must take place a sufficient time before the date fixed for opening the tenders in 
order to allow bidders adequate time for obtaining the tender documents and preparing their 
bids. 
1.4.3.  The text of the advertisement must be submitted to BADEA for approval. 
1.4.4.  Prequalification process is used in the case of tenders for large or complex projects, and 
takes into consideration (1) the experience and performance of each company or firm in 
similar works, (2) its capabilities in terms of personnel and equipment or plant, (3) the 
magnitude of works under execution and progress of works, and (4) its financial status and 
performance during the past three years. 
1.5.  Submitting the Tender Documents to BADEA 
1.5.1.  Tender documents and any further modifications thereof, should be submitted to BADEA for 
approval. 
1.5.2.  Bids Security 
1.5.2.1.  Bidders must be required to submit bid-security 
1.5.2.2.  The amount of the Bid security may be (1) a percentage of the value of the offer 
or (2)a specified amount based on a percentage of the estimated cost of the 
contract. 
1.5.2.3.  The bid security shall be returned to the unsuccessful bidders. 
1.5.2.4.  Failure of the successful bidder to sign the contract will result in the forfeiture of 
the bid security and the elimination of this bidder from participating in any bid 
involving BADEA. 
1.5.3.  Tender Documents 
1.5.3.1.  The Tender documents and specifications shall precisely and clearly set forth the 
work required to be realized. 
1.5.3.2.  Any new information, or explanations, or corrections, or amendments, to the 
specifications should be conveyed to bidders. 
1.6.  Pricing of Bids 
1.6.1.  The tender documents should clearly state the currency or currencies allowed to be used in 
pricing the offers and which will be adopted for settlement of payments under the contract. 
1.6.2.  Price Adjustment 
1.6.2.1.  The tender documents must explicitly state where the prices to be quoted should 
be fixed or  are subject to  escalation  through the application of price adjustment 
formula. Not applicable if implementation time does not exceed one year. 
1.6.2.2.  BADEA accepts reasonable adjustments in the contract prices totaling not more 
than 20% of the basic contract price. 
1.6.3.  Advance and Progress Payments 
1.6.3.1.  Should not exceed 20% of the total contract price in the case of supply contracts 
for civil  works. But in the case of civil  engineering  works, the advance payment 
should  not  be  more  that  10%  of  the  contract  price,  unless  there  are  special 
justifications associated with the project which justify a higher percentage not to 
exceed 20%. 
1.6.3.2.  The advance payment should be covered by  a  Bank  Guarantee  and the tender 
documents should include a specimen of the text of the Bank Guarantee.  
1.6.3.3.  The  tender  documents  should  clearly  specify  any  other  amounts  to  be  paid  in 
advance, such as: 
a)  Materials delivered to the site for incorporation into the civil works and such 
percentage  which  should  not  be  in  excess  of  80%  of  the  value  of  such 
materials. 
b)  A maximum of 70% may also be paid against the value of work completed 
during the manufacture of major equipment. 
1.6.4. Performance Guarantees - Retention Money 
1.6.4.1.  An acceptable guarantee to ensure that the works will be executed up to its 
completion should be submitted. This guarantee should not be less than 10% of 
the estimated cost of the contract. 
1.6.4.2.  The amount of the guarantee will vary with the type and magnitude of the work, 
but in whatever case it should extend beyond the completion of the contract by a 
sufficient period to cover a reasonable warranty period. 
1.6.4.3. 
In  the  case  of  the  civil  works,  that  not  less  than  5%  will  be  deducted  from  the 
amounts due to the contractor for the work executed, as an additional assurance 
for the proper execution of the contract. The tender documents should specify this 
percentage and the terms and conditions for its refund. 
1.7. 
Insurance 
1.7.1.  The tender documents should precisely specify the types of the insurance to be provided by 
the successful bidder. 
1.8.  Liquidated Damages 
1.8.1.  The tender document should state the compensation to be paid for the delay in delivery or 
execution of the work, which shall not exceed 10% of the estimated contract price. 
1.8.2.  The tender documents may specify the amounts to be paid to the contractor for completing 
the work earlier than the time specified in the contract if such earlier completion will result in 
benefits to the Borrower. 
1.9.  Language of the Contract 
1.9.1.  The tender documents should be written in one of the languages widely used in 
international transactions. 
1.10.  Applicable Law - Settlement of Disputes 
1.10.1. The conditions of contract should specify the applicable law and shall include provisions for 
the settlement of disputes. 
1.11.  Period between the Invitation and Submission of Bids 
1.11.1. The time allowed for the preparation of bid depends, to a large extent, on the magnitude of 
the contract and its degree of complexity. 
1.12.  Bid Opening Procedures 
1.12.1. Any bids received after the deadline shall be returned unopened. 
1.12.2. All bids shall be opened in public at the stipulated time and place. 
1.12.3. No bidder shall be allowed to alter his bid after bids are opened. 
1.12.4. Clarifications shall not be accepted except in the case that they do not change the 
substance of the bid. 
1.12.5. After opening the bids, it shall be ascertained that they: 
a)  Are substantially responsive to the bidding documents. 
b)  Are accompanied by the required securities. 
c)  Have been properly signed. 
d)  Are generally in order. 
1.12.6.  The responsive bids shall be technically analyzed, and all actions be recorded and 
substantiated in the tender’s analysis report.  
1.13.  Post-qualification of Bidders 
1.13.1.  In the absence of formal prequalification, the Borrower shall make sure that the bidder whose 
evaluated  bid  is  the  lowest  in  price  has  the  adequate  technical  capabilities  and  financial 
resources necessary for the effective execution of the contract. 
1.14.  Evaluation and Comparison of Bids 
1.14.1.  The Bids’ evaluation process shall be consistent with the terms and conditions set forth in the 
tender documents. 
1.14.2.  The Technical criteria factors shall, as far as possible to be translated into monetary terms in 
accordance with the criteria set forth in the tender document.  
1.14.3.  For the purpose of comparison of qualified bids, the currency or currencies in which they are 
priced shall be converted to the single currency specified in the tender documents. 
1.14.4.  Margin of preference to local manufacturers and contractors from the Borrower’s country or 
from BADEA’s member country can be awarded 
1.14.5.  In case of goods, such preference shall not exceed 15% of the price of the lowest evaluated 
offer (After the exclusion of custom duties, taxes and other charges). 
1.14.6.  In the case of civil works, the margin of the preference shall not exceed 10% of the value of 
the lowest evaluated bid,  
1.14.7.  It should be owned by citizens of the Borrower’s country or of BADEA member countries with 
a percentage of not less than 50% in addition to the condition to use local labor and materials 
in the execution of the works to the greatest extent possible and in certain cases. 
1.15.  Rejection of all Bids 
1.15.1.  Rejection  of  all  bids  may  occur  when:  (1)  the  bids  are  not  responsive  to  the  intent  of  the 
tender document, (2) lack of enough competition because there are less than three bids. 
1.16.  Award of Contract 
1.16.1.  The contract will be awarded to the bidder whose bid has been determined to be the lowest 
evaluated bid and who has the required technical capacity and financial ability. 
1.17.  Other Methods of Procurement 
a)  Local competitive bidding. 
b)  Execution of civil works by the Borrower through force account. 
c)  Local or International shopping. 
d)  Extension of an ongoing contract. 
e)  procurement from the original supplier. 
f)  Direct purchase. 
g)  Equipment which is patented and can only be obtained from one manufacturer. 
h)  Procurement from specialized supplier to ensure that the contractor, responsible for the 
process design will guarantee the product on the process. 
i)  Loan proceeds are re-lent to beneficiaries, such as tradesmen or farmers or small 
enterprises, or to participate in financing subsidiary projects in which the beneficiary 
undertakes the procurement in accordance with established procedures, on conditions 
that these are acceptable to BADEA. 
j)  Financing for an important programme, the procurement may be in different ways. 
1.18.  Language of Communication with BADEA 
1.18.1.  Procedures should be in one of the three working languages used by BADEA. 
1.19.  Photocopies of Documents 
1.19.1.  In case photocopies of the documents are submitted to BADEA, they should be clear and 
readable, otherwise they may not be accepted and should be replaced. 
Attachment 2: BADEA: Guidelines for Use of Consultants 
The guidelines below give a high-level overview of BADEA’s use of consultants procedures. Full 
details can be accessed in the link below: 
https://badea.org/Portal/Document_Repository/26/1_GUIDELINES_THE_USE_OF_CONSULTANTS_199
5.pdf 
1.20.  Selection of consultants 
1.20.1.  Selection should be based on a consultant’s expertise and skills and should not be based on 
the price by itself. 
1.21.  Scope and nature of the Consultancy Services 
1.21.1.  Advisory or Counselling services. 
1.21.2.  Pre-investment studies. 
1.21.3.  Engineering and design study. 
1.21.4.  Supervision services. 
1.21.5.  Project management. 
1.22.  Types of Consulting Firms 
1.22.1.  Independent  Consulting  Firms  (partnership;  private  companies  or  corporations  operating 
internationally. 
1.22.2.  Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Government organizations set up for the purpose. 
1.22.3.  Universities/Research Institutes. 
1.22.4.  Consulting Firms forming part of, or otherwise affiliated to, or associated with, or owned by, 
contractors or manufacturers, or Consulting Firms combining the functions of consultants with 
those of contractors/manufacturers. 
1.23.  Transfer of Technology 
1.23.1.  BADEA encourages the participation of domestic consultants in a project for which they are 
qualified  and  assessed  as  qualified  and  capable  of  performing  the  services,  provided  that 
such participation does not result in compromising the quality of the services. 
1.23.2.  In the case of a joint venture for consulting services, the leadership of the joint venture and 
the ultimate responsibility for the services should be stipulated in the formal document setting 
out such venture. 
1.24.  Definition of Domestic Firms 
1.24.1.  A domestic Firm is defined as a firm which fulfills the following conditions: 
It is registered in the country where the assignment is to be carried out. 
a) 
b)  More than 50% of equity is held by nationals or institutions of that Country. 
c) 
d)  More than half of its managerial staff and more than half of its total professional staff 
Its Chief Executive Officer is a national of the country. 
are from that country. 
1.25.  Forms of Association between Consulting Firms 
1.25.1.  Association with one shortlisted firm provided that the client and BADEA are advised within 
14 days of receipt of RFP. 
1.25.2.  With non-shortlisted firms if the latter are given specific responsibilities of the assignment. 
1.26.  Selection Process 
1.26.1.  Preparation of the Terms of Reference (TOR). 
1.26.2.  Preparation of the cost estimate (budget). 
1.26.3.  Drawing up a short-list of qualified consultants. 
1.26.4.  Agreement on a selection Procedures and criteria between the borrow and the Fund. 
1.26.5.  Issuing a Request for Proposal (RFP) to the short-listed consultants. 
1.26.6.  Evaluation  of  the  proposals  and  selection  of  the  best  offer  followed,  as  necessary,  by 
negotiations with the chosen consultants. 
1.27.  Technical Evaluation qualitative analysis is based on: 
1.27.1.  The  Consultant’s  professional  qualifications,  its  general  experience  and  standing.  These 
should be examined in greater depth than was the case at the pre-qualification stage.  
1.27.2.  The consultant’s experience and expertise in the field of the assignment as well as in a similar 
geographical area to that of the project. 
1.27.3.  The thoroughness of the consultant’s approach, of its comments on the “TOR” and  of the 
work plan as set out in the technical proposal. These are prime indicators as to a consultant’s 
understanding of the assignment and its implications as well as the consultant’s creativity, 
which may be the attribute or quality most needed for the accomplishment of the task.  
1.27.4.  The expertise of the key personnel proposed for the assignment and whether the majority of 
such personnel are drawn from the permanent staff of the consultant. 
1.27.5.  The  preferential  consideration  given  to  domestic  consultants  and/or  consultants  from  the 
BADEA’s member countries. 
1.28.  The Financial Proposal 
1.28.1.  The Financial proposals must be arranged in ascending order of the prices, with the lowest 
securing  100  points  while  other  proposals  are  given  proportional  points  in  the  ratio  of  the 
lowest price to the respective price of the particular proposal. 
1.28.2.  After a list has been established on the basis of Technical Evaluation, envelopes containing 
g financial proposals of the top-ranking consultants are then opened. 
1.28.3.  The  overall  ranking  is  determined  by  weighted  points  on  the  basis  of  pre-agreed  weights 
allocated to the quality and price elements. 
1.29.  Remuneration for the Consulting service 
1.29.1.  Lump sum Agreements. 
1.29.2.  Personal time Rate plus reimbursable cost (man-month based agreement). 
Remuneration based on the cost of the installed equipment and constructed works plus reimbursable 
direct costs. 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Farming systems in northern provinces
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Farming Systems in the Northern Provinces  
1. 
A comprehensive description of the farming systems of the drought affected areas in the south 
of  Angola  was  given  in  Appendix  13  of  the  Angola  Recovery  Project  (ARP).  This  Annex  will 
consequently focus on the northern provinces of Angola. 
Agro-ecological situation  
Topography,  vegetation  and  soils:  Large  parts  of  SREP  are  located  on  the  high  altitude 
2. 
plateau,  along  the  northern  border  of  Angola  with  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  (DRC).  In  the 
northern sub-zone, topography ranges from undulating to steep hills. Altitudes range from 1300 to 1500 
masl. As altitude and rainfall vary throughout the region, vegetation shifts from rain forest in the higher 
northern zones to savannah grasslands at the lower altitude and rainfall zones. The soils are diverse 
ranging from a mixture of sandy and clay. The majority of the  soils are ferralitic of naturally low and 
moderate fertility. In the southern areas altitudes are lower ranging from 1000 to 1200 masl, and the 
topography  is  undulating  and  steep  in  places.  The  soils  are  similar  to  those  found  further  north. 
Vegetation is broad leaf and hard wood forest. 
3. 
Climate: The climate of the northern highland region is classified as sub-humid. Annual rainfall 
varies from 1,000 mm in the southern part of the project area up to 1500 mm in the highest hills of Uige. 
Rains normally commence in October and last until April with a dry season extending from May/ June 
to August. The rains are interrupted by a short dry season of normally 3 weeks in December to January. 
Mean temperatures range from a minimum of 20° to a maximum of 32° Celsius. Minimum temperatures 
average 20 to 220C during the dry season. Low temperatures in the higher altitudes restrict plant growth. 
Relative humidity during the rainy season can reach 85-90%. 
Land and water resources: There is an abundance of cultivable land in the project area but 
4. 
available land can be scarce close to  the provincial capitals and in peri-urban areas. In some of the 
isolated steep locations close to villages, areas of soil erosion can be found. Most soils are of relatively 
low fertility and as crop production per unit of land improves, problems of soil fertility will assume greater 
importance. As the traditional farming system is based on rain fed crops, and some water stress occurs 
in  the dry season,  water availability  is  not a major constraint.  Supplementary  irrigation, over  the dry 
period has considerable potential. 
Agro-ecological  areas:  The  four  provinces  of  the  north  cover  three  main  agro-ecological 
5. 
areas. a) The coastal area of Bengo which comprises an almost continuous platform along the coast at 
an altitude of 150 to 250 masl. b) A subplateau strip, an intermediate surface transitioning to the interior 
of the plateau, at an altitude of around 400-600 m and island hills and mountain ranges that can reach 
up to 1,000 masl.; and c) Peneplain Zaire, that consist of are sandy slopes that fall steeply from an 
altitude of 1,200 masl along its border, up to 500 masl, inland.    
The Farming System 
Overview: The population density of the northern provinces is approximately 10-20 people per 
6. 
square kilometer (National Population Census-2000). The farming system is a cassava based mixed 
food cropping system which is typically practiced by all smallholder farmers in the provinces.  Rainfed 
agriculture is carried out with unique intercropping practices for cassava, banana and coffee cultivation, 
which increase the banana and coffee yields. Coffee production has been re-introduced over the last 
decade  with  GoA  providing  financial  incentives.  Other  crops  include  maize,  beans  and  vegetables. 
Livestock holdings include cattle, goats and poultry which are kept for consumption.  
Shifting cultivation is practiced with plots normally cropped for 2 to 3 seasons. In areas where 
7. 
there is higher than normal population pressure, fallow periods have been shortening with a subsequent 
decline in soil fertility. Since land is available, fallow periods of 8 to 10 years were commonly found in 
the past. This rotation has been changing quite markedly over the years and shorter fallow periods can 
be  found  close  to  villages  and  urban  centers.  Land  clearing  starts  in  the  dry  season  (August  to 
September) when vegetation is cut and burnt. Land preparation begins before the rains start and ridges 
are formed. With the onset of the rains start cassava, sweet potatoes, maize, groundnuts and beans 
are planted. In the second rainy season a second crop of cassava and beans is planted.  
The farm household’s primary objective  is food security as reflected by the cropping pattern 
8. 
and diversity of crops grown. The most important factor determining the area of land cultivated by a 
family is  its size  and the availability  of family  labour to  work the farm plots. Families average 5 to 6 
members with 2 to 2.5 adult labour units per family. The area cultivated by an average sized family 
varies between 1.5 hectares closer to the sea and 2.7 hectares in the mainland. Typically crops are 
planted in two seasons following rains, usually in different locations. Each adult family member has his 
or her own plot and is normally helped by other family members when labour intensive operations are 
needed.  
9. 
The project area contributes to more than 60% of the national production of roots and tubers 
with cassava the main food crop. In addition to cassava production, the region also produces peanuts, 
beans,  bananas,  maize  and  sweet  potatoes,  all  of  which  are  part  of  the  local  food  diet.  Surplus 
production of food crops above household needs are sold locally. Other crops include potatoes, coffee, 
bananas, palm oil, yams, fruits and vegetables, which are commercially sold. The productive potential 
of the region is significant, if one takes advantage not only of the soil-climatic characteristics but also of 
the knowledge and experience of the local rural population. Smallholder farmers had experience, during 
the colonial period, in mechanical traction with produce marketed in local towns as well further afield in 
Luanda. 
10. 
Despite this potential, there are some constraints to agricultural development. Challenges of 
access to water, energy, markets (transport and roads) and finance prevail in the rural areas. These 
limitations result in variable levels of productivity and low income. These challenges are compounded 
by  limited  access  to  drinking  water  and  agricultural  services  (mechanization,  extension,  input 
availability) that respectively impact on health and agricultural productivity. There are also low levels of 
literacy amongst the rural population that restrict their access to new technologies and the adoption of 
more  profitable  activities.  These  restrictions  also  have  a  stronger  impact  on  women,  who  are  the 
majority of the effective workforce in the rural areas.   
11. 
Seasonal calendar: As mentioned before, the rainy season lasts from October until the end of 
April/May  followed  by  the  dry  season,  from  May  to  September.  The  lean  period  is  from  January  to 
February. Land preparation takes place from June to September, followed by planting and sowing in 
October  and  November  and  weeding  from  December  to  January.  Planting  and  weeding  operations 
provide employment opportunities for the poor. The main cereal harvest takes place in June. Activities 
related  to  cassava  production  take  place  throughout  the  year.  Other  important  seasonal  activities 
include lambing, kidding, calving and milking from October until April the following year.  
12. 
Crop cultivation techniques: Most cultivation is conducted by hand, limiting the areas under 
cultivation.  On  average  between  0.8  to  1.2  hectares  are  cultivated  in  some  areas.  Increasingly  the 
‘better off’ smallholder farmers employ labour and hire tractors and can cultivate larger areas.  
13. 
Cassava: Cassava is by far the most important crop grown in the project area in terms of area 
sown and production. The crop is responsible for about 65% of all national production in the family farm 
sub-sector (2012/13). The provinces of Uíge and Cuanza Norte, represent35% and 12%, respectively 
of the region's production. The highest levels of productivity are reached in Zaire, Uíge, and Cuanza 
Norte.  Cassava  is  grown  for  food  and  as  a  cash  crop  with  sales  of  fresh  roots  and/  or  processed 
products (dried cassava chips or flour). There is a diverse mix of varieties in the project area with 70% 
bitter  and  30%  sweet.  Local  varieties  take  15  to  18  months  to  mature,  but  harvests  are  sometimes 
delayed  for  as  long  as  24  months.  Field  visits  revealed  healthy  stands,  although  mosaic  virus  and 
mealybug infestation is reported to occur in the area. Cassava yields are moderate with the majority of 
cassava plots producing less than 8 tons per hectare. In some cases with  improved, short duration, 
varieties yields can reach 12 tons.1 The main factor affecting low productivity is poor planting material, 
although  cultural  practices  and  low  soil  fertility  also  contribute.  Appropriate  planting  materials  are 
1Short duration varieties are being supplied by IITA and come over the border from DRC.  The names of these 
varieties are Keet, Voisi, Tiam, Zezela. 
particularly in short supply. Low planting densities and inadequate weeding are among the factors that 
could be improved by on-farm trials and extension support. Acidity problems are generally found in most 
locations. Although cassava can be planted throughout the year, farmers prefer to plant cassava in the 
second season since less weeding is required. Roots are harvested throughout the year but mostly in 
the dry season since drying of the crop is easier at that time. Farmers report that cassava flour quality 
deteriorates if the drying operation is prolonged because of rains.  
14. 
Maize: Maize is normally planted during the first season, after mid-October and is intercropped 
with cassava, beans and groundnuts. Local varieties are of the 120 days duration. At present only local 
varieties are mainly grown, although some improved varieties have been imported from Zambia. Local 
varieties  are  generally  drought  resistant  and  low  yielding.  Yields  average  around  1.2  tons/ha.  Poor 
planting material, low soil fertility, sowing times and inadequate cultural practices are the main factors 
constraining  maize  productivity.  Poor  harvest  losses  of  maize  are  commonly  high  since  harvesting 
normally coincides with the first rains resulting in high grain moisture content. Although simple storage 
facilities exist in the project area, there is a clear need to improve maize grain storage. Most maize is 
commercialized as grain.  
important  part  of 
the  national  production  of 
15. 
Sweet potatoes. Sweet potatoes are grown as both a food crop and cash crop. Normally about 
50%  of  the  crop  is  utilized  for  family  consumption  and  the  remainder  traded  for  cash  or  for  basic 
consumer goods. Although cassava is the preferred root crop, sweet potatoes have been a part of the 
food crop farming system for some time. With the disruption created by the war, a scarcity of cassava 
planting material stimulated an expansion of sweet potato in the project area. Sweet potato production 
the  crop  (Season  2012/13: 
represents  an 
56%).Approximately 66% of the total production is produced on family farms. Low yielding varieties are 
normally grown although a number of new improved varieties have been recently introduced. Production 
ranges from 4-5 t/ha. The local varieties are of 70 to 90 days duration and the higher yielding varieties 
are of shorter duration. It is reported that the improved varieties have been well accepted by farmers. 
The area planted with sweet potatoes is generally small, 0.25-0.30 hectares split between the first and 
second seasons for food security reasons. Sweet potatoes are intercropped with cassava and beans. 
Although sweet potato is a simple crop, not very demanding in terms of resources, and adaptable to 
varied agricultural conditions (especially to drought and poor soils) and has a short cycle, it suffers from 
several challenges: (i) lack of seed availability at the beginning of the rainy season; (ii) lack of adapted 
varieties;  and  (iii)  rudimentary  production,  storage  and  storage  techniques  and,  consequently,  high 
losses after harvesting. The crop does have considerable potential particularly for its commercialization. 
The  production  of  flour  is  already  common  practice,  but  other  transformations  and  uses  could  be 
developed, for example the production of cooked pieces or tubers as an ingredient in the manufacture 
of cakes, breads and beverages.  
16. 
Pulses – beans and cowpea. Beans are of special importance to household food security and 
is an important protein supplement to the diet of the local population. In addition, the crop contributes 
to the improvement of soil fertility and can be intercropped with various crops including maize. Most of 
the beans are produced in Uige province. Beans isa basic ingredient of the diet of the rural population 
and its consumption is also high in urban areas. There are three main species of beans: lablab, butter 
bean and macunde. Lablab is largely found in the low coastal zone and butter beans in the sub-plateau 
and plateau zones of the region. Lablab is grown mainly in the coastal strip in the provinces of Zaire 
and Bengo. These crops offer good potential for immediate growth, having a central role in food security 
in the region and high potential to contribute to agricultural development. Yields are moderate averaging 
between 4-500 kg/ha. The crop can be grown over the two seasons. Cowpea has become popular in 
some  zones  of  the  project  area,  reportedly  because  of  its  higher  potential  yield  reaching  up  to  700 
kg/ha.  Cowpea  is  also  widely  found  given  its  high  yielding  potential,  resistance  to  disease  and  high 
protein content.  
Groundnuts.  The  northern  provinces  produce  over  50%  of  national  production2.  Groundnuts 
17. 
are a major source of cooking oil and are  grown  as  a source of food and as a  cash crop. The crop 
adapts well to the tropical/ subtropical climate of the area and has limited water requirements. However, 
given the water storage capacity of the soils, satisfactory yields are usually reached when rainfall levels 
exceed 600 mm, and are well distributed. The growing season, is, consequently, the rainy season from 
January to May when temperatures are high (around 28o C) which favoursa high oil content. Up to 60-
2 Of which Uíge province has 24% of the production in the region, Bengo, 18% and Lunda Norte, 15%. 
70 % of the crop is commonly sold in markets.  Local varieties are generally planted, although some 
new planting material has been reportedly introduced from India. Groundnuts are mostly planted in the 
first season together with cassava and over a growing period of 90 to 120 days. Yields of 600 kg/ ha 
have been commonly found.  
Vegetables. Cauliflower, tomato, and onions are grown in some locations during the dry season 
18. 
as a source of food or for cash. However, irrigation is essential. Vegetable gardens are cultivated along 
rivers streams or in proximity to springs. Commonly simple gravity irrigation systems are used. Very 
few local varieties are available and vegetable production is constrained by a shortage of seeds.  
19. 
Banana. Banana is an important crop in all of the northern provinces.However, it does not have 
the same importance in terms of volume of production as in the Central Provinces of Angola  - which 
account for three quarters of the national production. Banana, amongst family farms, is mainly grown 
in Uíge (32%); Bengo (23%) and Zaire (21%). The optimal temperature for banana oscillate between 
25oC and 30oC, at an altitude of less than 500-600 masl. The crop is very demanding in water, requiring 
an average rainfall of between 1,500 mm to 2,000 mm, well distributed throughout the year. The ideal 
soils  are the alluviums of the  lowlands or hillside slopes, usually  enriched  by  appreciable content  in 
mineral reserves. Banana trees are widespread around the homestead of the smallholders but also in 
communal plots. In parts of Bengo along the coastal and sub-coastal strip, bananas need to be irrigated. 
In the sub-plateau interior area, bananas are grown under rain fed conditions.  
Coffee. In the past, coffee provided the main source of farm income in Uige and Cuanza Norte.     
20. 
Extensive plantations of Robusta coffee can be found over the  hills of Uige under shade from large 
native  trees  creating  a  favourable  micro  climate.  The  crop  is  rapidly  becoming  the  main  source  of 
agricultural income.  
Livestock:  Livestock  in  the  past  constituted  an  important  part  of  the  farming  system  in  the 
21. 
northern provinces.  Most cattle, however, have disappeared as a result of the war, although in Uige 
many livestock do remain as the fighting there was less severe. Small stock in particular poultry and 
small ruminants are still widely found and pig production is expanding gradually.  
Cattle breeding; Cattle breeding can be divided between family farms and commercial farms. 
22. 
Cattle  breeding on family farms can have large importance  both economically  and socially,  in some 
areas although cattle numbers are low. According to data provided by MINAGRI, the project provinces 
account  for  only  1%  of  the  country's  bovine  population,  albeit  contributing  to  around  11%  of  meat 
production in the country (includes Malanje province). The most common breeds are native imported 
from Brazil and Namibia and crossed locally. 
23. 
Goats: Goats play an important role in the family economy, and in are commonly looked after 
by women. Goats are kept as a wealth reserve and are sold when households incur cash demands. 
The number of goats in the north represent around 17% of the national population and accounting for 
14%  of  the  country’s  goat  meat.  They  are  traded  and  transported  live  to  other  provinces,  either  for 
breeding or for slaughter. In the smallholder sector, the species can be found in the provinces of Bengo, 
Cuanza Norte, Uíge, and Zaire.3 
24. 
Sheep: Some 22 percent of the sheep population of Angola can be found in the northern region, 
with the majority in Cuanza Norte and Uíge. The sheep belong to the West African dwarf sheep group, 
trypanotolerant and have been adapted to the region.  
25. 
Pig: The northern provinces have less than 10% of Angola's pig herd (2011 data), with Uíge 
the province with the largest number of pigs, followed by Zaire and Cuanza Norte. Some 12 percent of 
the national pork production emanates from the seven northern provinces. One of the major constraints 
to  the  development  of  pig  farming  is  the  recurrent  occurrence  of  African  Swine  Fever.  Pig  farms  in 
Bengo, Cuanza Norte, Uíge, and Zaire provinces. The pigs belong to a group of native pigs adapted to 
the region. With improved animal health there is considerable potential for pig farming to expand rapidly.  
3The exploited breeds are those native to the West African dwarf goat group, trypanotolerant and adapted to the 
conditions of the regions  
Poultry:  Birds  are  native  to  the  area  and  have  a  social  and  economic  function.  The  most 
26. 
commonly found poultry are chicken, duck and guinea fowl. In 2012, the poultry stock of the 7 northern 
provinces represented some 10% of the total poultry stock for the country (MINAGRI), but accounting 
for approximately 25% of meat production at national level. Commercial poultry is expanding rapidly 
and is having a significant importance as an income generating efarm enterprise for family farms. 
27. 
Labour availability and use: As demonstrated above, agriculture is the main economic activity 
in the project area and the majority of the population are engaged in food production to meet their food 
requirements with surpluses sold to satisfy their other food and basic living needs, Both men and women 
are employed in food production but women make up the majority of the labour force. Only close family 
labour is used in the production of food, even though extended family members often help each other 
during peak labour demand periods i.e. land preparation and harvesting. Women are generally assisted 
by  men  in  land  clearing  and  in  the  heavy  work  of  preparing  ridges  before  planting.  Besides  food 
production, caring for their children and preparing food, women also collect water, firewood and spend 
considerable  time  processing  cassava  and  maize.  All  operations  are  performed  manually.  Labour 
saving  technologies  are  not  widely  used  on  any  significant  scale  notwithstanding  the  limited  labour 
availability (particularly female labour availability) to develop the food supply.  
Main income sources and markets 
28. 
The primary determinants of wealth are size of land cultivated and the types of crops grown. 
Other factors include access to productive assets and to paid employment. Cash income among the 
poorest  households  is  largely  derived  from  the  sale  of  cassava,  natural  products  (charcoal  and 
firewood),  labor,  hand  crafts  and  fish.  Other  sources  of  income  include  employment  in  the  timber 
industry and agricultural labour.  
Amongst the better off households income is generated from both sales of food crops (largely 
29. 
cassava) and higher value crops such as banana and coffee. The better-off group also relies on sales 
of  fish,  timber  and  skilled  labour  in  the  commercial  timber  industry.  The  main  markets  are  Malanje, 
Ndalatando, Uige and Cabinda. Marketing of local products, including labor mainly takes place within 
the  region  but  trade  with  Luanda,  the  coastal  markets  of  Catumbo,  Barra-do-  Dande,  Cacuaco  and 
Cabinda, as well as with the Democratic Republic of Congo, has risen markedly. The main constraint 
to market access is seasonal flooding.  
Food storage and processing 
30. 
Some traditional food storage techniques can be found in the project area at household level, 
the majority of food production is not stored under suitable conditions and this has resulted in substantial 
post-harvest food storage losses. Post-harvest losses due to widespread insect and rodent damage in 
the poor storage systems used currently were found during the field visits. Crops are dried on roads 
and on the open ground where considerable crop losses occur.  
31. 
Cassava processing represents one of the most time consuming activities for women. Since 
cassava  is  the  main  crop  grown,  large  quantities  could  be  processed  by  smallholder  families.  The 
expanded  production  of  cassava  over  the  years  has  led  to  processing  bottlenecks  amongst 
smallholders. 
Land tenure and ownership 
32. 
In Angola all land belongs to the State that determines its final use and destination. In order to 
preserve the rights of the rural communities, the 2004 Land Law takes into account the customary land 
use  system  that  prevail  in  the  different  provinces  and  cultures  of  the  country.  This  was  expected  to 
provide  security  of  tenure  also  in  the  case  of  permanent  investments  in  the  land,  e.g.  small-scale 
irrigation, used by community-based groups and associations. The law foresees that land for private 
agricultural investment  would be regulated through perpetual  land use rights transfers of ownership, 
sold by auction from the State to private actors. At the same time, the Land Law subjected those with 
informal rights to eviction if they fail to apply for a concession in a timely fashion. In most of the project 
area, however,there is no straightforward competition for scarce land, due to the still very low population 
density. However, in areas close to forest land, some competition is being realized.  
Farmer organizations: associations and cooperatives: Some 1,800 Associations and 300 
33. 
Cooperatives can be found in the project target provinces. The vast majority of these organizations, are 
not legalized. The combined cooperative and association membership is over 230,000 persons of which 
57% are women. These organizations are of major importance and should be seen as the entry point 
for community development in the project areas.  
Table 26: No. of Associations and Cooperatives 
No. Associations 
Legal Status 
No. Members 
Zaire 
Uíge 
Bengo 
Cuanza Norte 
Total 
Source: IDA, 2016 
181 
1 024 
187 
485 
1877 
Legal 
Not Legal 
H 
2 
0 
0 
1 
3 
179 
1 024 
187 
484 
1874 
1 805 
53 837 
4 403 
28 058 
88,103 
W 
1 738 
Total 
3 543 
71 406 
125 243 
5 266 
9 669 
40 179 
118,589 
68 237 
206,692 
No. Cooperatives 
Legal Status 
No. Members 
Zaire 
Uíge 
Bengo 
Cuanza Norte 
Total 
Source: IDA, 2016 
85 
10 
108 
100 
303 
Legal 
Not Legal 
6 
8 
22 
2 
38 
79 
2 
86 
98 
265 
H 
1 170 
2 908 
3 290 
4 752 
12,120 
W 
1 235 
1 433 
3 232 
7 269 
13169 
Total 
2 405 
4 341 
6 522 
12 021 
25289 
Climate change risks: Agriculture in the humid northern provinces is also vulnerable to climate 
34. 
change with increased temperatures, lower rainfall and a shorter growing season. The effect is lower 
crop yields and waterlogging during periods of prolonged rainfall. A climate risk analysis undertaken by 
the Africa Climate and Development Initiative illustrates the effects of climate change such as reduction 
in the length of growing seasons. 
35. 
provinces are summarised below. SREP will aim to build the resilience to these stresses.  
Some  climate  change  risks  and  potential  impacts  on  the  livelihoods  sources  in  the  targeted 
Livelihood 
system 
Crop 
production 
Livestock 
production 
Climate variable 
Potential impacts 
Rising temperatures 
Increased rainfall 
variability  
Increased rainfall 
intensity 
Increased  variability 
in rainfall patterns:  
Rising temperature 
Increased intensity of 
rainfall  
Increased incidence of pests and diseases, low crop yield; 
changing  cropping  calendar/dates,  late  harvest,  crop 
failure,  gully  &  sheet  erosion,  loss  of  farmland  and  soil 
fertility,  water  logging  leading  to  the  loss  of  deep  rooted 
crops; increased sedimentation; siltation of water bodies 
Lack  of  water  availability  for  livestock;  reduced  forage 
availability;  poor  livestock  health  linked  with  heat  stress 
which  reduces  the  market  value  of  affected  livestock, 
reduction in livestock productivity; loss of livestock; loss of 
pasture land and; increased incidence of diseases 
36.  The  main  hazards  are  excessive  rainfall,  flooding,  strong  winds  and  storms,  human-wild  life 
conflict, crop pests and diseases, such as cassava mosaic and low prices of crops especially of coffee. 
However, cassava production is seen as an insurance against food insecurity, during years of general 
crop failure. The main coping strategies include increased collection of wild foods, increased sale of 
local  crafts  and  reliance  on  external  cash  remittances,  sales  of  livestock  and  reliance  on  self-
employment such as trade.  
Table 27: Climate risk analyses on main crops in SREP - NORTE 
Crop 
Suitability 
Climate risks 
Opportunities  
Cassava 
Extensive areas 
of suitability 
Coffee 
robusta and 
arabica 
Extensive areas 
of marginal to 
moderate 
suitability in the 
interior highlands. 
Widespread staple 
crop, 
generally 
considered to be 
climate-resilient 
relative to 
other rain fed 
staples. 
Comparatively less 
vulnerable to 
unpredictable 
rainfall. 
Can be harvested 
at any 
time to meet short-
term 
food security needs 
Already widely 
grown, 
considerable 
potential for 
expansion. 
Moderate increased 
temperature may reduce 
productivity due to plant 
stress. 
Inundation after heavy 
rainfall may increase 
susceptibility to soil 
pathogens. 
Increased temperature 
may 
increase spoilage of 
tubers and flour. 
Moderate 
Vulnerable to increased 
heat stress and drought. 
Suitable area may be 
reduced due to 
increased temperature 
at low altitudes 
Adaptation 
options 
Promotion of 
pathogen-
resistant and 
water-tolerant 
cultivars. 
Promotion of 
improved post-
harvest storage 
and processing. 
Prioritise 
engagement with 
private sector to 
support research 
& development, 
strengthening of 
value 
chain. 
Promotion of 
multiple varieties 
of robusta and 
arabica in the 
same production 
areas to reduce 
exposure 
Sweet potato  High to excellent 
Banana 
in the interior, 
unsuitable in the 
arid lowlands 
and coastal 
region. 
Extensive areas 
of marginal to 
moderate 
suitability for 
Cavendish table 
banana, marginal 
Low to moderate 
Considered to be 
climate-resilient, 
however suitable range 
may be reduced by 
temperature increases 
and drought in the s 
Low to moderate 
Considered to be 
climate-resilient, 
however suitable range 
may be reduced by 
temperature increases 
Promote as a climate-resilient, easily 
grown perennial crop 
(particularly as an alternative or 
complement to cassava). 
Promotion of improved post-harvest 
storage and processing. 
Considerable area 
with 
suitable potential 
which is 
currently 
underexploited 
Promotion of 
pathogen-
resistant and 
water-tolerant 
cultivars. 
Promotion of 
irrigation for 
Crop 
Suitability 
Climate risks 
Opportunities  
suitability for 
cooking 
plantain, marginal 
suitability for 
hybrid cooking 
plantain 
and drought in low-lying 
areas. 
Inundation after heavy 
rainfall, increase 
temperature, may 
increase susceptibility to 
soil pathogens. 
Moderate to high 
N/A 
Vulnerable to variability 
in onset and duration of 
rainy season, drought in 
low-lying areas. 
Adaptation 
options 
plantation-scale 
producers. 
Prioritise 
engagement with 
private sector to 
support research 
& development, 
strengthening of 
value 
chain. 
Promotion of 
improved drought-
tolerant varieties. 
Increase access 
to weather 
forecasts and 
early warnings. 
Promotion of 
sorghum, millet as 
climate-resilient 
maize. 
Large potential area of high suitability, 
noted as climate-resilient 
alternative to maize. 
Low to moderate 
Considered to be 
climate-resilient, 
however  suitable  range  
may  be reduced by 
temperature increases 
and drought in the south 
Maize 
Millet and 
Sorghum 
Extensive areas 
of high to 
excellent 
suitability for all 
varieties of maize 
in interior 
midlands and 
uplands. 
Unsuitable in the 
arid lowlands and 
coastal region. 
Planting season is 
limited to October 
–November. 
Extensive areas 
of good to high 
suitability in 
interior midlands 
and uplands. 
Marginally 
suitable in the arid 
lowlands and 
coastal region 
during the late 
rainy season  
(December –
January). 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Agricultural support infrastructure
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Agricultural support infrastructures 
A. 
Introduction 
The  project  will  develop  a  series  of  infrastructure  to  support  the  main  components,  including: 
1. 
Small  scale  irrigation  schemes  and  small  scale  water  harvesting  facilities,  market  facilities  and  road 
infrastructure. In addition to these, under institutional support to the Ministry of Agriculture, offices and 
residential houses of extension staffs will be rehabilitated and constructed. The following gives a more 
in-depth description of the development process of each type of infrastructure targeted. 
B.  Houses/buildings 
2. 
In order to improve working conditions of extension staffs in the targeted area, the project will 
improve the physical conditions of offices and houses at municipal levels (Table 1). This will be done 
through the following: i) rehabilitation of 16 offices (11 in the north and 5 in the south) and construction 
of 16 new ones (8 in each area of the project) and; ii) rehabilitation of 11 residential houses for extension 
staffs (7 in the north and 4 in the south) and construction of 21 new ones (12 in the north and 9 in the 
south). Each of these will be provided at the level of the municipality. The following gives details on 
overall development process: 
3. 
Design and supervision of works. BoQs of offices and residential houses are already available, 
including drawings and technical specifications that were used by MOSAP I and are planned to be used 
for MOSAP II (Figure 1). This can be referred as prototypes to be updated, taking into account some 
improvements to incorporate in order to meet with some operational needs (increased number of staffs) 
of SREP. The use of such prototype will contribute to: i) reduce the overall construction cost (no need 
to spend for design) and; ii) reduce the time required for the construction process. These improvements 
will include the following among others:  
(a) 
For offices: i) use the space initially provided for the laboratory as an office for the third 
extension staff; ii) provide a permanent source of water (borehole with simple water lifting system) in 
case of absence of water system in the area; iii) provide a permanent fence to secure the place; 
For  residential  house:  i)  increase  the  space  of  the  bedroom  next  to  the  dining  room  by 
(b) 
aligning the wall to the one of the smaller bedroom and make it self-contained (by providing a toilet); ii) 
provide a small storing room in the kitchen by increasing the space and; iii) include a door at the kitchen 
that takes to the dining room; iv) provide a permanent source of water (borehole with simple water lifting 
system) in case of absence of water system in the area; v) provide a permanent fence to secure the 
building. 
4. 
For new constructions, the project Engineer will be responsible for updating the existing drawings, 
according to the guidance provided above. For existing building, he will make a thorough assessment 
of the physical state of each building office and develop BoQ accordingly for further rehabilitation works.  
5. 
Supervision will be carried out by the project Engineer, in collaboration with Resident Engineers 
of each Province where a building is located, through regular missions and field visits. An overall result-
based MoU signed between the project and each province will provide more details on this partnership, 
including roles and responsibilities of each Provincial Engineer. 
recruited 
following  a  competitive  approach, 
Construction/rehabilitation  works.  Developed  BoQs  of  each  building  will  be  advertised  and 
6. 
contractors  will  be 
the 
construction/rehabilitation works. Based on possible lessons learnt from other project (assessment to 
be done by the SCU prior to activity launch), lots will be arranged to ease and fast-track the progress 
of  works.  Prior  to  awarding  contracts,  a  quick  capacity  assessment  of  each  contractor  (equipment, 
human resources, financial, etc.) will be carried out by the project. Each contractor should be allocated 
a limited number of sites to reduce any risk of unaccomplished works. Drawing from the experience of 
MOSAP  I,  the  average  unit  cost  of  construction  of  these  buildings  is  USD  300,000  and  200,000 
respectively  for  a  residential  house  and  office.  Rehabilitation  costs  have  been  estimated  to  1/3  of 
construction ones. 
to  perform  with 
Hand over. After completion of works, each premise will be under liability period of not more than 
7. 
one year, during which all snags highlighted during reception will be addressed. After the liability period, 
all facilities will officially (with written proof) be handed over to the respective authorities for further use 
and management. 
a.  Road infrastructure development 
8. 
Road  infrastructure  will  be  developed  through  various  activities  including  rehabilitation  and 
maintenance. It is expected all rehabilitated roads will be maintained by the project. Maintenance will 
involve  both routine and periodic activities. In order to sustain road  works, the project will: form and 
support road gangs on each rehabilitated road and develop Provincial road maintenance plans. 
Road rehabilitation 
9. 
Climate  resilient  road  infrastructure  will  be  developed  in  all  targeted  provinces,  to  ensure 
connectivity is provided between production areas/sites and markets. The project will rehabilitate (full 
rehabilitation) around 800 km of Feeder (tertiary) roads: 400 km in the north and 110 km in the south. 
Drainage structures (exclusively culverts) will be provided on selected secondary roads to ensure that 
farm products taken to markets are effectively conveyed on time and in good quality. Road development 
activities  will  start  from  the  first  year  of  the  Project  lifecycle  to  expect  early  results  and  increased 
impacts. Synergies and collaboration with other stakeholders involved in this sector will be capitalised. 
10. 
Identification, selection and prioritisation. The development of Feeder roads will be demand-
driven,  in  line  with  the  needs/requirements  of  main  project  activities/components.  The  identification, 
selection and prioritisation of roads will be participatory throughout its process, involving communities, 
local  government  and  the  road  authority.  For  identification  of  Feeder  roads,  the  needs  of  targeted 
farmers and FBOs as well as priorities from Local Government (Provincial Development Plan), will be 
considered  (eligibility  criteria  will  be  developed  and  applied  at  levels  of  Communes,  municipalities, 
Provinces and SCU). Roads selection process of all identified roads will be submitted to a multi-criteria 
ranking  and  evaluation  process  including  technical,  socio  economic  and  environmental  aspects.  All 
selected roads will be prioritised for further rehabilitation. 
11.  Survey and design. Private consultants will be recruited on a competitive basis to survey and 
develop  designs  of  selected  roads  prior  to  their  rehabilitation.  The  country  is  under  the  “SATCC 
Standard  Specifications  for  Road  and  Bridge  Works”  for  the  development  of  all  types  of  roads, 
including  Feeder  (Tertiary)  Roads.  Given  that  they  refer  to  low  traffic  ones,  the  recommended 
specifications are: 4.5 m wide and 15 cm thickness of the gravel layer. 
4.5 m 
0.15 m 
12.  The  overall  survey  process  of  selected  roads  will  be  participatory  and  inclusive,  to  ensure 
sustainable designs are provided. Surveys  will include among  others hydrological and topographical 
investigations to incorporate, and will consider unexpected hazards resulting from overflowing in the 
designs.  This  will  result  in  engineering  design,  dimensioning  and  locations  (road  profile  and  line 
diagram) of structures (including drainage system) and other measures in view of customised standards 
and will contribute to safe road infrastructures. During design, various technological measures will also 
be envisaged, contributing to reduce the consequence of erosion and other effects of water on road 
infrastructure,  particularly  due  to  extreme  climatic  events  as  a  consequence  of  climate  change.  All 
measures to ensure safe roads developed (including roads/traffic signs) will also be envisaged. A socio-
environmental  management  plan  (SEMP)  and  checklist  will  be  developed  following  proper 
Environmental Impact Assessment. The plan will guide and ensure construction/rehabilitation works are 
sustainable. For each road, a full Request for Proposal Documents (RFD) will be developed, ready to 
be used for further procurement of works. This will include BoQ (incorporating line diagrams), drawings, 
scope of works, etc. 
13.  Procurement.  Lots  should  be  arranged  to  ensure  easiness  of  works,  including  altogether 
earthworks and structures on the same road. The SCU will be responsible for procurement and manage 
all contracts. It is expected that the planning of procurement process will favour effective start of works 
from the beginning of dry seasons. To expect high performance in the delivery  of contractors, some 
selection  criteria  to  be  considered  will  include:  (i)  ownership  of  minimum  required  equipment;  (ii); 
minimum  years  of  experience  (five  in  similar  agro-ecological  area  and  ten  in  road  construction);  (iii) 
qualified and available staffs. Contract duration will be of not more than nine months coinciding with dry 
season. 
14.  Rehabilitation works. They will be carried out (on all surveyed and demined roads) by qualified 
contractors hired on a competitive basis. Works will be done following the equipment-based approach. 
All roads will be fully rehabilitated along their entire stretch. All targeted works will be guided by technical 
specifications provided by the survey and design. Both earthworks  (body of the road)  and structures 
(drainage  structures  and  bridges)  will  be  concerned.  Before  start  of  works,  an  updated  timeline  of 
activities will be developed as a monitoring tool to monitor work progress. According to the road authority 
of the Ministry of Construction and Public Works, the unit cost for rehabilitating Feeder roads is around 
USD 40,000 per km (on an average of 2 to 3 pipe culverts per km). During rehabilitation/construction 
activities, relevant indicators and data (dealing with participation and contribution of beneficiaries) will 
be collected by the Project staffs for further monitor and evaluation purposes, using a series of tools 
developed prior to start of works. 
15.  Road mapping. All roads will be mapped in a very comprehensive way, including not only socio-
economic information (population, social centres, etc.) but also characteristics of all structures along 
the  roads  (location,  dimensions,  cost,  etc.).  This  will  be  produced  at  the  level  of  each  District  and 
County. 
16.  Supervision and follow up. The consultant/firm that designed the roads will be responsible for 
supervising targeted works. It will be expected that one supervisor will be stationed on each roads/site 
(not more than two closed roads) to ensure works progress is in line with technical specifications of the 
BoQ and meets with the initial timeline developed for monitoring purposes. This will also ease the timely 
decision making process of any possible improvement/change during works. Both Project and Province 
Resident Engineers will undertake regular (depending on the sequence of work progress) field visits 
and take part to site meetings for assessing work progress against the timeline and BoQ. Authorities of 
the national road institute (MCPW) will also be involved during filed visits. Each follow up mission will 
be clearly documented, highlighting recommendations made to improve works. A result-based MoU will 
be signed  with the  Provincial office to cover the supervision activity and prepare  for hand over. The 
involvement  of  local  government  will  be  compulsory  at  each  level,  from  the  initial  stage  of  roads 
development. This  will contribute to  increase their  level/sense of ownership  as  well as synergies (in 
actions) with other stakeholders.  
17.  Defect liability and hand-over. A maximum of one-year defect liability period will be given to 
the contractor, during which all abnormalities and snags will be addressed. After this period, all roads 
will be officially (by written) handed over to the respective local governments for further management. 
Municipalities have the entire responsibility over all Feeder roads in the country. 
18. 
Impact assessment. It is expected that investments put into the rehabilitation of targeted roads 
will  end  up  in  positive  impacts  in  the  lives  and  environment  of  beneficiaries.  As  the  most  important 
investment  activities  of  the  Project,  it  will  be  useful  to  gather  and  catch  most  aspects  linked  to  the 
rehabilitation/construction of these roads. Socio economic information resulting from the involvement of 
communities (as unskilled labour or selling of aggregates) will be collected for the sake of further impact 
analysis of these activities. 
Road maintenance 
19.  Routine  and  periodic  maintenance  works.  All  rehabilitated  roads  will  be  maintained  by  the 
project. Maintenance will include both routine (every year using labour-based approach involving road 
gangs)  and  periodic  activities  (three  years  after  the  rehabilitation/construction,  following  equipment-
based approach). A total of 1,350 km will be routinely maintained (800 km in the north and 200 km in 
the South) and 350 km will be periodically maintained (200 km in the north and 150 km in the South). 
All road maintenance works should be carried out during a period between the end of the rainy season 
and  the  beginning  of  dry  season  (usually  the  start  of  the  commercialisation  campaign).  Periodic 
maintenance activities should be carried out following the procurement process described above. All 
BoQs will be developed by the Project Engineer in collaboration with the Provincial Resident Engineer. 
A private company will be hired on a competitive basis to carry out maintenance works according to the 
specifications  provided.  Monitoring  tools  will  include  BoQ  and  chronogram  activities.  Unit  costs  for 
periodic  and  routine  maintenance  are  around  USD  20,000  and  4,000  per  km.  This  is  an  estimation 
agreed with the road authority as very little information exists on this area. 
20.  Road gangs. Community mobilisation/engagement for road maintenance is not too common in 
the country and there is not enough information made available on the issue. It is expected that, for 
routine maintenance works, villagers along roads will be mobilised, organised and capacitated to carry 
out regular routine works. Prior to this, an assessment will be carried out to evaluate all prerequisite 
and conditions (sociocultural, economic, demographic, etc.) for a successful application of this approach 
in all targeted areas. When possible (existing evidence), one Road Management Committee (RMC) will 
be formed, capacitated/trained (social and technical skills) and supported (distribution of light equipment 
to carry out maintenance) on each road, prior to rehabilitation/construction works. They intend to be an 
indispensable  interface  to  the  sustainability  of  road  development  process.  It  is  expected  that,  by 
involving them at a very early stage of the rehabilitation process, they will be helpful and capitalised 
during routine maintenance activities for which they will play a leading role in mobilising the road gangs 
members.  
21.  Development  of  Provincial  Feeder  road  management  plans.  The  Project  will  support 
provincial  governments  in  developing  Feeder  Road  Management  Plans  (FRMP)  as  a  key  tool  for 
decision making in the overall management of mobility and accessibility in the County. These plans will 
include (and not limited to) prioritised actions to sustainably improve integrated access in the County, 
taking into account all existing modes of transport. It is expected that the developed FRMP will serve 
as  a  master  plan  and  a  guide  to  any  further  activity  to  improve  access  in  the  Counties.  A  private 
consultant will be hired on a competitive base to carry out this assignment. 
a.  Market facilities 
22.  They  will  be provided by the project mainly as storages facilities (warehouses) for agricultural 
commodities. The development process of these assets will include the following steps: 
23.  Studies, design and supervision. Prior to the development of these facilities, an assessment 
of the market organisation and settlement pattern will be carried out, to identify the type of facilities to 
construct  and  the  location  of  each.  Based  on  the  storage  capacity  indicated  by  the  various  studies, 
BoQs  will  be  developed,  including  drawings  and  other  technical  details.  It  is  expected  that  targeted 
facilities should be used to store more than one commodity of the same nature (dried, fresh, etc.) for 
more efficiency of the assets. They should be of various sizes (small and medium), depending on the 
storage capacity (and the value chain and market analysis assessment done in advance) and should 
include different areas/compartments dedicated for storing: agricultural commodities, inputs (pesticides, 
fertilisers,  etc.),  equipment  and  office.  The  layout  out  process  of  the  warehouses  should  take  into 
consideration key factors (air circulation, light orientation, circulation inside the warehouses, protection 
against  rats,  etc.)  determining  the  storage  conditions  and  the  quality  of  the  stored  commodities.  A 
private consultancy firm will be recruited on a competitive basis to: i) carry out the market study (leading 
to  the  types,  the  number  and  dimensions  of  the  storages);  ii)  develop  the  BoQs  to  be  used  for  the 
construction. A single BoQ will be developed for each type of warehouse identified and will be used as 
a prototype to be constructed in all sites. This approach will be cost effective and time saving for the 
project. 
24.  Prior  to  the  construction  of  each  storage  facility,  the  following  will  be  assessed:  i)  an  existing 
critical  mass  (a  group  of  beneficiaries  that  are  able  to  handle  the  use  and  management  of  the 
constructed  facility);  ii)  availability  of  land  (good  accessibility,  technically  suitable  for  construction, 
enough space to accommodate with the structure, etc.) as a guaranteed; iii) existence of good quality 
construction material; iv) links with other project activities (for synergies) in the area. Land to build the 
asset will donated by the beneficiaries as their contribution, through a written commitment.  
25.  Supervision of construction works will be ensured by the private consultancy firm that developed 
the  BoQs,  jointly  with  the  Project  Engineer  and  the  Provincial  Resident  Engineer.  This  will  be  done 
through regular field visits sanctioned by documentation on the overall progress of works.  
26.  Procurement.  Lots  should  be  arranged  to  ensure  easiness  of  works,  including  altogether 
earthworks  and  structures  on  the  same  road.  The  SCU  will  be  responsible  for  procurement  and 
management  of  all  contracts.  It  is  expected  that  the  planning  of  procurement  process  will  favour 
effective  start  of  works  during  indicated  period..  To  expect  high  performance  in  the  delivery  of 
contractors, some selection criteria to  be considered  will include: (i)  ownership  of minimum required 
equipment;  (ii);  minimum  years  of  experience  (five  in  similar  agro-ecological  area  and  ten  in  road 
construction); (iii) qualified and available staffs. Contract duration will be of six months coinciding with 
dry season.  
27.  Construction  works.  The  facilities  will  be  constructed  by  private  contractors  hired  on  a 
competitive  basis,  following  to  the  technical  specifications  provided  by  the  BoQs.  The  selected 
contractors  will  be  of  best  performance  with  evidence  of  owned  capacities  (equipment,  personnel, 
financial) to ensure they reach the construction objectives on time. It is expected that construction works 
will  be  a  source  of  creation  for  local  employment  and  will  genuinely  generate  revenue  to  the 
beneficiaries, as well as building their capacities. Another aspect of the participation of local people is 
foreseen through collection of local materials (aggregate, water, etc.) sold to contractors (whenever it 
will  be  possible).  During  construction  activities,  relevant  indicators  and  data  will  be  collected  by  the 
Project staffs for further monitor and evaluation purposes, using a series of tools developed prior to start 
of works. 
28.  Liability  period  and  hand  over.  After  construction,  each  infrastructure  will  be  under  liability 
period  of  a  year,  during  which  all  snags  identified  during  reception  will  be  addressed.  After  liability 
period, each asset built will handed over to the Beneficiaries/Municipality.  
29.  Management  of  the  assets.  For  the  sake  of  sustainability,  the  project  will  ensure  that 
beneficiaries are organised and capacitated in order to manage the new assets. For each storage facility 
built, beneficiaries will be trained and equipped on  simple management rules (maintenance, running 
costs, functioning, commodity management, etc.) to ensure it will last longer. Given that very little in the 
country  is  known  about  community/group  management  of  infrastructure,  an  assessment  of  potential 
successful stories existing in the various targeted communities will be done.  
a.  Water infrastructure 
30.  The  project  will  develop  schemes  for small  scale  irrigation  (SSI)  as  well  as  small  scale  water 
harvesting  infrastructure  (to  collect  and  make  available  for  multipurpose  water).  All  targeted  SSI 
schemes  will  be  rehabilitated,  no  new  construction  will  be  done.  However,  small  scale  water 
harvesting/collection infrastructure will be constructed. These activities will be carried out exclusively in 
the Southern part of  the country,  where climate and  environmental conditions are more severe. It  is 
foreseen that, for all activities targeted regarding water infrastructure development, only water gravity 
system  will  be  concerned.  The  following  steps  describe  the  development  process  of  the  targeted 
activities: 
31. 
Identification  and  selection.According  to  the  Rural  Infrastructure  Department  (in  charge  of 
irrigation development) of the Ministry of Agriculture, SSI schemes refer to areas of not more than 35 
Ha. A range of small scale water harvesting infrastructure exist in the country among which “Chimpaca” 
is the most common found. The project will focus on those. Schemes and water harvest infrastructures 
to be developed will be screened using a list of criteria set up to ensure that investments will contribute 
of  Project  goals.  For  increased  ownership,  the  selection  process  (including  identification)  of  these 
infrastructures will be participatory and inclusive. It will start from the very little administrative/traditional 
units of the country upwards to provinces, and will involve technical (natural resource management and 
environment,  water  resource,  agriculture,  livestock,  etc.)  and  administrative  (representatives, 
traditional, etc.) authorities at different levels. Adequate consultative mechanisms will be used during 
the process. At the end of the process, a list of SSI schemes and water harvest infrastructures will be 
provided to the Project for further development. Such participatory approach will contribute to increase 
ownership at the level of the beneficiaries, hence leading to sustained investments. 
32.  Criteria  to  consider  for  eligibility  will  include  the  following  areas  among  others:  i)  value  chain 
analysis  (existing  markets  to  absorb  production  of  at  least  one  targeted  commodities);  ii)  hydrology 
(existence  of  sufficient,  good  quality  water  and  gravity  system);  iii)  agronomy  (cultivated  farms  with 
potential for high production/productivity, existing agronomical practices and farming system, etc.); iv) 
topography (use of irrigation by gravity, potential area covered due to optimum alignment of canals, use 
of  cost  effective  and  efficient  technology,  etc.);  v)  land  tenure  system  (existing  of  a  certificate  of 
property); vi) socio cultural environment (existing irrigation practices, good level of adoption of irrigation, 
potential for farmers’ mobilisation, etc.); vii) physical access to the scheme (connexion to the markets), 
etc.  Only  schemes  meeting  the  majority  of  these  requirements  will  be  eligible  and  considered  for 
selection.  Eligible  sites  will  go  through  a  selections  process  (more  refined  screening)  to  happen  at 
municipal level. This will be done following prioritisation/elimination approach using ranked criteria. Most 
important criteria for selection of final schemes (those with high score) will include those related to the 
overall Project objectives as comparative advantages. 
33.  Design and supervision. This will be done by a private consultancy firm hired on a competitive 
basis. For the sake of sustainability, the project will adopt a holistic approach to develop the selected 
schemes, targeting and assessing all combined areas that are critical for their viability, on an individual 
(isolated)  basis  and  jointly  (interactions  of  areas).  Only  selected  sites/schemes  (SSI  and  water 
harvesting) will be concerned with this next stage of the process. Feasibility studies will be done using 
multidisciplinary approach, bringing together various experts on: value chain and markets, agronomy, 
hydrology,  socio  economy,  topography,  geology  (soil  structure  and  quality),  legal,  financial  analysis, 
accessibility, watershed management, etc. Special attention will be given to the development of a Socio-
Environmental Management Plan that will be produced following relevant studies on each site (it is a 
national recommendation for SSI development). The aim is to assess existing potentials, lacks and risks 
(including environmental ones), and make recommendations on how to mitigate/capitalise them for well-
functioning and operating schemes. These studies will be done during appropriate period (considering 
existing seasonality) for better accuracy and relevance of data collected and their optimum analysis. 
intake, 
irrigation  and  drainage  network, 
34.  Based  on  recommendations  made  by  feasibility  studies,  all  identified  measures  related  to 
watershed management will be subject to in-depth designs. Detail designs will still be done at scheme 
level, to ensure viability and sustainability. The design will mainly focus on irrigation facilities/structures 
(head-water 
tail-water  ditch,  collectors,  etc.)  and 
interventions/measures related to watershed management in overall. Auxiliary infrastructures (service 
facilities like access roads and markets sheds) will not be concerned. The designed layout will allow: i) 
efficient  use  of  water  (use  of  lined  canals);  ii)  efficient  source  of  water  (gravity  exclusively);  iii)  best 
option for canal alignment to allow maximum irrigated area possible; iv) low investment cost possible; 
v) simple and ease (for maintenance) irrigation system, etc. The detailed design will also provide all 
possible  technical  and  technological  options,  and  will  give  guidance  for  selecting  the  best  (good 
distribution  of  good  quality  water)  and  optimum  (investment  cost)  option  to  be  implemented,  while 
providing  rationale  for  the  option  chosen.  Dimensioning  (head-water  intake,  canals,  etc.)  and 
characterisation will also be part of the design exercise, including all related drawings of the system to 
be adopted. Good quality BoQs will result from this step of the process. 
35.  Supervision of works is the main responsibility of the firm that designed all water infrastructures. 
It is expected that, one supervisor will be assigned to monitor and follow up not more than two sites 
located closely. However, project and Provincial Residential Engineers will be involved in supervising 
all  rehabilitation  (SSI)  and  construction  (water  harvest)  works.  This  will  be  done  through  regular 
missions  and  field  visits  (with  site  meetings),  to  monitor  the  progress  made  against  the  technical 
specifications  of  BoQs  and  the  timeline  provided  accordingly.  All  supervision  activities  will  be 
documented. The supervision team will have the opportunity to provide instructions (organisation, plans, 
objectives) if necessary, to the construction process, as well as new orientations in order to improve the 
construction works. 
36.  Procurement. This should be aligned to national standards.  Lots  will be grouped  in a  way to 
favour  a  quick  and  efficient  progress  of  works.  Well-performed  contractors  will  be  hired  after 
assessment  of  their  overall  capacity  (equipment,  staffs,  finances,  etc.)  to  ensure  on-time  delivery  of 
quality works. All contracts will be managed at the level of the SCU. It is expected that the planning of 
procurement process should be made in a way to favour effective start of works from the beginning of 
dry seasons. Contract duration will not be for more than six month duration. 
37.  Rehabilitation  and  construction  works.  All  selected  schemes/sites  will  be  rehabilitated 
(irrigated schemes)  or constructed  (water harvesting  infrastructure)  following  technical specifications 
and guidelines provided by the BoQs. Irrigated schemes will exclusively be rehabilitated, no schemes 
will be newly constructed. An overall activity chronogram will be developed for each site, as a tool to 
guide and monitor the progress of works. The process will be highly flexible (but not to allow any delay) 
to adapt/adjust and align with any existing influencing situation or matter. Performed private contractors 
will be hired on a competitive basis to carry out targeted works. Very little information is available on 
existing irrigation development works and costing. However, based on experience from “PROJECTO 
DE RESILÊNCIA” in the country, the unit cost for rehabilitating a SSI scheme is between USD 10 000 
per Ha (for those using gravity system) and USD 20 000 per Ha (for those requiring provision of a well 
or boreholes). Given that the project will focus on gravity water schemes exclusively, the unit cost of 
rehabilitation recommended is USD 10,000 per Ha. However, given that water collection infrastructures 
are of very wide spectrum, a lumpsum amount will be allocated to cover the overall targeted activities. 
During construction and rehabilitation works, relevant indicators and data (contribution and participation 
of beneficiaries) will be collected by project staffs for further monitor and evaluation purposes, using a 
series of tools developed prior to start of works. 
38.  Liability period and hand over. After construction and rehabilitation works are completed, each 
site will be under liability period of a year during which all snags pointed out during reception will be 
addressed properly to ensure water is well flowing from one end to another of the scheme. This will be 
the case with water collection infrastructures. Once the liability period is over, each scheme and water 
infrastructure  will  be  handed  over  to  the  respective  community/beneficiaries  as  a  transfer  of  all 
responsibilities of with management and accountability towards the scheme. 
39.  Operation,  maintenance  and  sustainability.  Sustained  water  infrastructures  cannot  be 
obtained without taking into account the activities related to O&M, which are under the responsibility of 
well-performed  Water  User  Associations  (WUAs).  Very  little  information  on  the  existence  and 
functioning  of WUAs  exist  in  the  country.  The  development  of  those  is  also  a  priority  of  other  sister 
projects like MOSAP. SREP will work closely with those toward a harmonised approach to support the 
development  of  strong  WUAs  in  the  targeted  areas  and  in  the  country.  Prior  to  this,  relevant 
assessments  will  be  carried  out,  as  a  leading  activity  regarding  the  process  of  making  sustainable 
progress  on  this.  Each  scheme  and  water  infrastructure  point  will  be  organised  taking  into  account 
specific issues related to current functioning and deal with very key issues of water management in an 
irrigated scheme (water use and distribution, fees collection, conflict resolution, etc.). Support to WUAs 
will  include  organisation  (grouping  beneficiaries  if  they  are  not),  legalisation  (getting  a  legal  status), 
training  (on  various  aspects  of  group  management  including  administrative  and  technical).  WUAs 
should  ensure  that  each  scheme  is  kept  at  a  very  good  physical  condition  by  providing  adequate 
maintenance. Maintenance includes both routine and periodic. Routine maintenance, carried out each 
season,  will be done  to allow good  water distribution (quality and quantity) over  the command area. 
This  will  include:  desilting,  herbs  removal,  fixing  cracks,  etc.  on  the  canals.  However,  periodic 
maintenance works, which include heavier works, can be carried out every  at least three years. The 
volume and quantity of these works may require support (technical and financial) from other partners 
for their implementation. 
a.  Partnership and synergies 
40.  The project will partner with different entities as far as infrastructure development is concerned. 
This will be done through result-based MoUs signed with the following, among others, depending on 
the type of infrastructure targeted: Provincial and Municipal authorities (for all infrastructures), National 
Commission for Demining and the road authorities (for roads). It is expected that synergies on various 
areas will be searched with various other stakeholders for improved results and increased efficiency.  
a.  Project coordination 
41.  A well experimented Engineer will be recruited on a competitive base, as technical staff of the 
Single  Coordination  Unit  (SCU).  Among  other  responsibilities,  he  will:  i)  oversee  the  development 
process of all project’ infrastructures; ii) liaise and ensure permanent follow up with all partners involved 
in infrastructure activities; and iii) quality assurance throughout all stages of the development process 
of infrastructure activities. 
Annexes 
Figure 1: Drawings for offices and residential houses of extension staffs 
Table 1: Distribution/locations of premises to be built/rehabilitated in the project area 
Provinces 
Municipalities 
Offices 
Residential houses 
Rehabilitation  Construction  Construction  Rehabilitation 
Dande 
Dembos 
Nambuangongo 
PangoAliquèm 
Ambaca 
Cazengo 
Lucala 
Samba Cajú 
Cambambe 
Alto Cauale 
Bungo 
Damba 
Dange-Quitexe 
Maquela do Zumbo 
Negage 
S. Pombo 
Mb Congo 
Kuimba 
Tômboco 
Noqui 
Ganda 
Cubal 
Chongoroi 
Balombo 
Ombadja 
Cuvelai 
Cahama 
Curoca 
Bibala 
Camucuio 
Moçâmedes 
Virei 
Tômbua 
Bengo 
Cuanza 
Norte 
Uige 
Zaire 
Total North 
Benguela 
Cunene 
Namibe 
Total South 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
11 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
9 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
7 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Angola
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Project life file
Mission Dates:
9-30 April 2018
Document Date:
10/07/2020
Project No.
2000002071
Report No.
5135-AO
Loan ID
2000003166
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Angola 
Smallholder Resilience Enhancement Project 
Project design report 
Contents of the Project Life File 
A. PRIOR DOCUMENTS 
  Country Strategic Note; 
  SREP Concept Note; 
  SREP OSC Issues Paper 
  SREP OSC minutes 
  SREP CPMT minutes 
  Design mission TORs for SREP 
  Agricultural Recovery Project (ARP) PDR; 
  Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialisation Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila 
Provinces (SADCP-C&H) PDR; 
IFAD Guidelines for Disaster Early Recovery; 
 
  Angola Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation (CSPE) 
B. SREP PDR Annexes 
Logframe 
Theory of Change 
Project Cost and Financing: Detailed Cost Tables 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
IFAD Policies and SECAP Review Note 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Organigram for the Single Coordination Unit 
Country Context 
Poverty, Gender and Targeting 
Country Performance and Lessons Learned 
Detailed Project Description 
Institutional Approach and Implementation Arrangements 
Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation, Learning and Knowledge Management 
Financial Management and Disbursement Arrangements 
Procurement 
Farming Systems in the Northern Provinces 
Agricultural Support Infrastructure 
Contents of the Project Life File 
C. Additional Reports 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Task Force (in-Country) 
  To be established at negotiations 
CPMT Members (in-house) 
Rikke Olivera (Lead Advisor); Abla Benhammouche (Country Director); Paxina Chileshe (ECD); Robert 
Creswell (FMD); Karen Gumbo (FMD/Intern); Richard Abila (PTA); Stephen Twomlow (ECD); Marian 
Odenigbo  (OPE);  Bernadette  Mukonyora  (ESA);  Joash  Moitui  (ESA  Intern);  Francesca  Tarabella 
(Programme Assistant); Robert Delve (PTA).   
Design Team 
The project first design Mission composition: Abla Benhammouche; Ms. Rikke Olivera; Mr. David 
Kahan; Ms. Paxina Chileshe; Ms. Marian Odenigbo; Mr. Jonathan Agwe; Mr. Davis Atugonza; Mr. 
Alaudio Chingotuane; Mr. Antonio Abreu; Ms. Maureen Bessem 
Final Design Mission Composition:  
Abla Benhammouche; Mr. David Kahan; Mr. Davis Atugonza; Mr. Antonio Abreu; Mr. Guy Kemtsop 
Mr. Custodio Mucavele.  
Project development timeline for SREP 
  Submit to IDA and Pre-QE CPMT to review SREP design document (PDR) by 05/2018 
  Review of draft SREP PDR by IDA and CPMT by 05/2018 
  Send to IFAD QE Secretariat by 05/2018 
  QE Meetings by 06/2018 
  Final design mission  by 07/2018 
 
  SREP  Negotiations by 02/2019  
  Submission of SREP to IFAD Executive Board by 04/2019 
  SREP Financing Agreement Signing and Implementation Start by 05/2019 
IFAD Senior Management QA by 09/2018 
