REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Project Design Report and appendices
31-Jul 2017
Document Date:
Project No.
East and Southern Africa Division
Programme Management Department
2000001767
iii
iii
iv
v
vi
xi
1
1
3
6
6
8
8
14
15
15
17
18
19
21
21
23
23
25
25
27
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Contents
Currency equivalents
Weights and measures
Abbreviations and Acronyms
Map of the ARP Area
Executive Summary
Agricultural Recovery Project: Logical Framework
I.
Situation Background and Rationale
A.
B.
Situation Background
Rationale
II.
Agricultural Recovery Project Description
A.
B.
C.
D.
Project Area and Target Group
Development Objective and Impact Indicators
Outcomes/Components
Lessons Learned and Adherence to IFAD Policies
III. ARP Implementation
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Approach
Organizational Framework
Planning, M&E, Learning and Knowledge Management
Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
Supervision
Risk Identification and Mitigation
IV. ARP Costs, Financing, Benefits and Sustainability
A.
B.
C.
D.
ARP Costs
ARP Financing
Summary Benefits and Economic Analysis
Sustainability
List of Tables
Table 1: Farmer Field Schools by Municipality and Province
Table 2: Risk Identification and Mitigation
Table 3: Summary of Project Costs by Component (including contingencies)
Table 4: Inflation Rates
Table 5: Project Costs by Expenditure Categories
Table 6: Project Financing Plan
Table 7: Results of Sensitivity Analysis
Table 8: Risk Analysis
i
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Appendices
Appendix 1:
Country and Rural Context Background
Appendix 2:
Poverty, Targeting and Gender
Appendix 3:
Country Performance and Lessons Learned
Appendix 4:
Detailed Project Description
Appendix 5:
Institutional Aspects and Implementation Arrangements
Appendix 6:
Planning, M&E and Learning and Knowledge Management
Appendix 7:
Financial Management and Disbursement Arrangements
Appendix 8:
Procurement
Appendix 9:
ARP Costs and Financing
Appendix 10:
Economic and Financial Analysis
Appendix 11:
Draft Project Implementation Manual
28
32
40
42
53
56
58
79
86
104
118
Appendix 12:
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures Review Note 120
Appendix 13:
Farming Systems in the Project Area
Appendix 14:
Drought Vulnerability Analysis
Appendix 15:
Contents of the Project Life File
126
133
140
ii
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Currency equivalents
Currency Unit
US$1.0
Weights and measures
1 kilogram
1 kg
1 kilometre (km)
1 metre
1 square metre
1 acre
1 hectare
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
Angolan Kwanza (AOA)
172
1000 g
2.204 lb.
0.62 mile
1.09 yards
10.76 square feet
0.405 hectare
2.47 acres
iii
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AFAP
AfDB
AOA
ARP
AWPB
EDA
EIRR
ESMF
ESMP
FAO
FFS
GAP
GDP
GNI
GoA
HDI
HDR
IDA
IFAD
Angola Fisheries and Aquaculture Project
African Development Bank
Angolan Kwanza
Agricultural Recovery Project
Annual Work Plan and Budget
Estacões de Desenvolvimento Agrário (IDA office at municipal level)
Economic Internal Rate of Return
Environmental and Social Management Framework
Environmental and Social Management Plan
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Farmer Field School
Good Agricultural Practice
Gross Domestic Product
Gross National Income
Government of Angola
Human Development Index
Human Development Report
Instituto de Desenvolvimento Agrário (Agricultural Development Institute)
International Fund for Agricultural Development
MINAGRI
Ministry of Agriculture
MINFAMU
Ministry of Family Affairs and for the Promotion of Women
MOSAP
Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project
NPV
PDO
PGC
PIM
PIU
PPCC
PCC
SADCP
SECAP
Net Present Value
Project Development Objective
Provincial Governance Committee
Project Implementation Manual
Project Implementation Unit
Provincial Project Coordination Committee
Project Coordination Committee
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project
Social Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures
iv
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Map of the ARP Area
v
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Executive Summary1
Background – Since  the  2011-12  agricultural  season,  the  southern  part  of Angola has  been
experiencing recurring droughts, affecting mostly the three southern provinces of Cunene, Huila and
Namibe,  and  others,  such  as  Beguela.  Although  some  sporadic  rains  during  this  timeframe  brought
some relief, it was insufficient for full recovery. The 2015-16 agricultural season brought dryness once
again, and some areas in the south experienced the driest season in 35 years, alongside other parts
of  southern  Africa.  This  region  of  the  country  is,  traditionally,  agro-pastoral  and  livestock  is  an
important  livelihood  asset,  primarily  cattle  but  also  goats,  sheep,  pigs  and  poultry. The  prolonged
droughts  resulted  in  lack  of  adequate  pasture  and  reduced  availability  of  water that
increased
vulnerability to disease.
The  effect of  the  prolonged  droughts on  food  security  was  catastrophic  for  millions  of  the  region's
population, in addition to wider humanitarian needs due to water scarcity, including impacts on access
to  water  resources,  sanitation,  education,  health  services  and  status  of  livelihoods.  The recurrent
droughts reduced agricultural  production,  thus  increasing  poverty  levels,  particularly  in  areas  where
populations are dependent on rain-fed agriculture. Though the full impact is  yet to be assessed, the
Regional  Inter-Agency  Standing  Committee  (RIASCO)  that  developed  the  response  plan  for  the  El
Niño-induced drought in Southern Africa (May 2016 - April 2017) concluded that some farmers were
likely  to  abandon  their  land,  leading  to  increased  migration  to  urban  areas  and  cross-border
movement of people in search of food and livelihood opportunities.
Rationale – Most agriculture in Angola is rain-fed and therefore highly vulnerable to climatic events.
The  dry  conditions  were  more  pronounced  in  the  southern  provinces  and  reduced  production  of
cereals, including  millet  and  sorghum,  which  are  the  predominant  crops  in  the  region.  In  the  three
provinces (Cunene, Huila and Namibe) assessed during the undertaking of the Post Disaster Needs
Assessment  (PDNA),  precipitation  was  significantly  below  average  between  2012  and  2015,  though
Cunene  reported  normal  rains  in  2012.  The  consecutive  years  of  dryness  lasted  until  2016  in  most
areas  with  some  measure  of  relief  provided  by  occasional  short  rains.  Therefore,  a  cumulative
negative impact occurred over time with a progressive erosion of livelihoods and food security, as well
as of the environmental conditions.
The  impact  of  the  drought  has  been  made  worse  by  the  drastic  fall  in  oil  prices  and  the  associated
to  drastically  reduced  public
implications,  such  as  reduced  government  revenues leading 
expenditures. Access to food, basic goods and public services was constrained by high inflation and
reduced  government  spending,  which  worsened  the  impact  of  the  drought.  High  inflation,  driven  by
the  cuts  in  fuel  subsidies,  reduced  food  supply  in  local  markets,  and  devaluation  of  the  currency
(Kwanza).
Local authorities lack the resources to fully implement the drought response. Water projects (repairs
and construction of boreholes) initiated by local governments have come to a standstill due to the lack
of  resources  to  pay  contractors  and  purchase  equipment.  In  addition,  disruptions  in  the  supply  of
of  some  inpatient  and  outpatient  treatment  centres  in
nutritional supplements led to the closure
affected areas.
The Agricultural Recovery Project (ARP) will contribute to the agriculture sector recovery programme
and  GoA  priorities  included  in  the  PDNA.  The  priorities  in  each  of  the  sub-sectors  (crops  and
livestock)  have  been  integrated  into  the  activities  that  will  be  implemented  through  the  Project.  The
GoA  recovery  planning  also  emphasises  the  need  to  focus  on  promoting  sustainable  farming
practices and agricultural technologies adapted to local conditions; improving information systems for
food security and animal health surveillance; introducing proper rangeland management systems; and
1Mission Composition: The Mission was composed of Mr Richard Abila, IFAD Technical Specialist Fisheries and Aquaculture -
Lead  Adviser  for  ARP;  Ms Paxina  Chileshe,  IFAD  Adaptation  Specialist;  Mr  Shakib  Mbabaali,  IFAD  Consultant  and  Team
Leader;  Giacomo  Branca,  IFAD  Consultant – Economics  and  Financial  Analysis; Mr.  Alaudio  Chingotuane – Financial
Management  Consultant;    Mr  David  Kahan,  IFAD  Consultant – Farming  Systems;  Ms  Mariana  Garcia  Bolanos,  Water
Consultant; and Ms Isabel Barreiros, Gender and Targeting Consultant.  Ms Abla Benhammouche, Country Director, occupied
in HQ with SADCP-C&H negotiations and its Executive Board Presentation, worked closely with the team.
vi
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
promoting income diversification activities. ARP interventions will contribute to most of these thematic
areas.
Project  Area – ARP  focus  area  will  comprise eight  municipalities  from  three  provinces – Benguela,
Cunene  and  Huila.  The  three  provinces  are  situated  in  the  southwestern  Angola  and  have  suffered
repeated El  Niño droughts  during  the  period  2011-16.  More  recently, Cunene province  has in
particular experienced  the  opposite  extreme  condition, La  Nina,  characterised  by  localised  flooding.
This situation has accentuated the fragility of the area’s population that lives, primarily, on agricultural
and livestock production. It has aggravated the social, economic and environmental conditions of the
region  and  its  population.  It  contributed  to  increased  malnutrition,  family  abandonment,  domestic
violence, loss of income, increased deforestation and reduction of the already scarce water resources.
Target  Group – The  core  ARP  target  group  will  comprise 8,000 households  (representing 48,000
people); they will primarily be low-income households that work in farming or pastoralism and/or are
members of Farmer Field Schools (FFSs) established during the  emergency  programmes2. Many  of
the  target  households  have  benefited/are  benefiting  from  the  emergency  interventions  by  GoA  and
some  of  its  development  partners.  ARP  interventions  will  build  on  the  work  done  by  the  emergency
programmes and either fill in some of the identified gaps or reach some of the areas not reached by
the emergency programmes. Support will be provided to strengthen already established FFSs so that
the  beneficiary  households  can  complete  their  transition  from  emergency  to  recovery. A few  new
FFSs will be established in the vicinity of existing ones where the potential exists to form clusters that
would provide benefits in management and supervision.
Project Goal and Development Objective – The Project goal is to “contribute to improved food and
nutrition  security  of  targeted  communities”. This  underlines  the  central  importance  of  ensuring  food
and  nutrition  security  as  a  prerequisite  to  enable  them  to  participate  in  development  activities.  The
Project’s Development Objective is the “restoration of productive  assets and capacity  of households
affected  by  recurrent  droughts”. This  is  to  be  achieved  through  the  provision  of  agricultural  and
livestock support packages that include both inputs and technical capacity building and construction of
basic supporting infrastructure.
technical  component  (Sustainable  Livelihoods  Recovery) with 
Project  Components – ARP’s  development  objective  will  be  achieved  through  the  effective
implementation  of  one 
three
complementary  and  mutually  reinforcing  subcomponents: 1.1) Recovery  of  Household  Productive
Assets; 1.2)  Recovery  of  Community  Productive  Assets;  and 1.3)  Capacity  Building.  It  should  be
noted  that,  by  virtue  of  the  target  area’s  climatic  conditions,  droughts  and  floods  will  reoccur.
Therefore, while Subcomponent 1.1 will facilitate production restoration, Subcomponents 1.2 and 1.3
will enable the target households and communities to achieve full recovery and also enhance their risk
management  capacity to make  them  less  dependent  on  emergency interventions.  The  second
component is Project Coordination  and Management, a cross-cutting component that  will service  all
three technical subcomponents through effective overall coordination and management.
Component  1:  Sustainable  Livelihoods  Recovery –The  objective  of  this  component  is to  restore
the  productive  assets  of  the  targeted  communities  and  households  in  selected  municipalities  of  the
target Provinces.
Subcomponent  1.1:  Recovery  of  Household  Productive  Assets – This  subcomponent  aims  at
addressing  the  needs  of  farm  household  members.  Consistent  with  the  preceding  emergency
interventions, e-FFSs (existing and new) will be used as the main instruments for reaching the target
households  although  other  vulnerable  households  that  are  not  FFS  members  will  also  be  reached.
Agricultural productivity  will  be  enhanced  under  rain-fed  crop  and  livestock  systems  (integrated
systems) and livelihoods developed and diversified accompanied by capacity building of beneficiaries
and institutional  stakeholders  to  ensure  sustainability  of  activities  (Subcomponent  1.3).  Two
generalised  household  packages  are  proposed:  a)  a crop  based, food  security  package  for  farm
households; and b) livestock based packages consisting of poultry, goats, sheep and pigs, depending
2 The Farmer Field Schools established under emergency programmes differ from the conventional Farmer Field School model
in terms of course duration and content. ARP refers to these schools by the acronym e-FFS.
vii
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
on  the  beneficiaries' asset  base. The  expected  outcome  is  increased  on-farm  productivity  and
improved food security through livelihoods diversification.
Subcomponent  1.2:  Recovery  of  Community  Productive  Assets – When  households  are  recovering
from a shock, they rely on their community networks and as such, community assets are a means of
managing the risks. Land management practices and the rehabilitation/ development of water sources
is a key factor for livelihoods recovery in the Project areas. Potential beneficiaries consider the lack of
water and pasture as the main issues affecting their lives. The Project aims at developing the water
infrastructure by rehabilitating and constructing multi-purpose water sources. The subcomponent will
be  implemented  through  the  Farmer  and  Agro-Pastoral  Field  School  extension  modality  adapted  to
the  varied  agro-ecologies  of  the  Project  area. The  expected  outcome  is  “stabilised/improved
livelihoods  through  use  of community  productive  infrastructure”.  This  subcomponent  focuses  on  two
areas of interventions: a) water resources development; and b) natural resources management.
Subcomponent  1.3:  Capacity  Building  for  Recovery – This  subcomponent  will  provide  the  essential
capacity building to ensure effective implementation of subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2. Capacity building
will  be  undertaken  at  the  institutional,  community  and  household  levels. The  beneficiaries  and  their
communities  need  to  be  helped  to  reduce  their  vulnerability  to climate-related shocks. This  can  be
done in different ways, including through increased provision of knowledge and skills. The skills and
capacities required at the different levels will be strengthened to ensure that communities are able to
recover  from  climate-related shocks, and  the  relevant  institutions  are  able  to  provide  the  necessary
support and services to the communities and households.
Component 2: Project  Coordination  and  Management – The objective  of  this  component is to
strengthen ARP’s overall coordination, monitoring and evaluation through the Project Implementation
Unit  (PIU)  at  the  central  level.  ARP  will  finance  the  PIU operational  costs,  procurement  of  office
equipment,  office consumables,  vehicles  and  the  associated  equipment  maintenance  costs.  It  will
provide  Project  staff salaries  and  Technical  Assistance  (TA)  to  address  specific  needs.    In  turn,  the
PIU  will  be  charged  with  the  responsibility  of  coordinating  and  monitoring  implementation  of Project
activities, including: a) financial management and reporting; b) coordination of procurement for goods
and  services;  c)  preparation  and  coordination  of  ARP’s  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets  (AWPBs);
and d) monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management. This Component will ensure that the
Project is implemented correctly, on time, and in accordance with the Project Implementation Manual
(PIM) and the Financing Agreement.
Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP) –The  environmental  and
social categorisation of the ARP is B. Potential adverse environmental impacts are expected to be site
specific, reversible and with the possibility of being minimised using appropriate measures that can be
included  in  Environmental and  Social  Management  plans  for  the  water  infrastructure  development.
The  infrastructure  development  will  be  micro  and  small-scale  in  non-sensitive  locations.  Measures,
such  as  improved  water  management,  safe  handling  of  agrochemicals  and  waste management,  will
be  promoted  particularly  through  the  FFSs.  Efforts  have  been  made  to  minimise  the  social  risks
through community participation including a grievance mechanism and the development of community
based NRM plans. The climate risk classification of the ARP is high given the adverse impacts on the
agricultural sector due to prolonged and recurrent droughts during the El-Nino events and the floods
experienced  in  some  areas  due  to  the  subsequent  La-Nina  events.  A  drought  vulnerability  analysis
has  already  been  undertaken  as  part  of  the  response  strategy  led  by  the  GoA  (see  Appendix  14),
while  an  assessment  of  the  impacts  of  the  floods  is  also  in  progress.  The  beneficiaries  will  benefit
from  climate  change  adaptation  capacity  building  through  the  FFSs.  The  curriculum  will  include
techniques  and  appropriate  technologies  for  the  smallholders  to  adopt.  Some  of  the  adaptation
measures  were  also  recommended  as  part  of  the  climate  vulnerability  analysis  during  the  design  of
the SAMAP.
Approach – The ARP will build on the work done by the different emergency programmes funded by
GoA and other development partners in the Project areas. Many of the emergency programmes are
being  implemented  by  FAO  using  the e-FFS  approach.  FFSs  have  been  proved  to  be an  effective
means  to  develop  the  requisite  skills  for  farmers  to  make  the  best  use  of  inputs in  the  emergency
context  of  the  country. In  addition, the  FFS  has  been  adopted  by  IDA  as  the  preferred  extension
viii
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
approach  bearing  in  mind  the  special  conditions of  the  drought  affected  areas.  There  are  also
discussions  at  federal  and  provincial  levels for the  FFS to be  institutionalised  as  the  extension
approach to be followed nationally. The FFS methodology is well known in the ARP target area and
provincial  technical  officers  and  community  members are  familiar  with  the  approach which  is  also
inclusive of vulnerable groups and women. Support will, consequently, be provided to strengthen the
FFSs that have been set up by the emergency programmes to complete their learning and adoption
cycles as well as establish new schools where the potential exists. The FFS locations identified under
the  emergency  programme  prioritised  municipalities  and  communities  located  in  the  most  severely
affected areas. ARP will strengthen the e-FFS investments made at community level while targeting
individual households, members of the FFSs and others in the vicinity. Consideration will be given to
set  up  a  limited  number  of  new  schools  in  areas  not  previously  covered  by  the  emergency
programmes so as to engage more target households. Consideration will also be given to qualifying
target areas that are in the vicinity of those previously established so  as to form clusters that  would
provide benefits in management and supervision.
Organisational  Framework –The Ministry  of  Agriculture (MINAGRI) will  be  the  lead  executing
agency and will work closely with the other line ministries and partners whose mandates have a direct
bearing on the achievement of the Project objectives. The Project delivery systems will be integrated
into  the  decentralised  government  organisational  and  operational  structures  that  cascade  from  the
national level to communal level. IDA (Instituto de Desenvolvimento Agrário (Agricultural Development
Institute))  will  be  charged  with  the  responsibility  of  administration  and  coordination  of  the  Project.
MINAGRI will  be  supported  by  the Project Coordination Committee (PCC)  as  an  oversight  body,
chaired by the Minister of Agriculture or his nominee, and composed of membership from institutions
with direct relevance to the achievement of ARP’s objectives.
Programme  Costs  and  Financing – Total  ARP  costs,  including  price  contingencies,  duties  and
taxes, are estimated at about USD 7.6 million over the four-year Project implementation period. IFAD
will fund the Project through a grant of about USD 1.0 million and a loan of about 5.0 USD million. The
loan  will  be  on  ordinary  terms.  GoA  will  finance  the  taxes  and  duties  as  well as  general  office
expenses  for  the  Project  coordination  and  management  unit
for  a  total  of  USD  0.7  million,
representing about 10% of total costs. The estimate of taxes and duties is based on the rates in effect
at the time of the design. In conformity with the principle that no taxes or duties will be financed out of
the proceeds of the IFAD Loan/Grant, any changes in the rates of taxes and duties would have to be
met by GoA. Beneficiaries will contribute USD 0.4 million representing about 5% of Project costs, and
will  consist  mainly  of  in  kind  contribution  (labour). FAO  will  contribute  with  about  0.5  USD  million
through  Technical  Assistance  (provided  through  its  Technical  Cooperation  Programmes),  cars  and
related Operations & Maintenance, salary of one driver and office equipment for the PIU.
Project  Benefits  and  Beneficiaries – Financial  benefits  will  be  in  the  form  of  increased cash
incomes  of  beneficiary  households.  Social  benefits  will  include  a  reduction  in  poverty  rates,  with
special  measures  taken to  ensure  inclusion  of  disadvantaged  groups.  Environmental  benefits  will
consist of reduced land degradation and increased carbon sequestration of rangelands. Due to limited
data  availability,  only  the  increased  returns to  households are  taken  into  account.  Primary  Project
beneficiaries  will  be  approximately 7,000 households increasing  crop  and  livestock  production,  and
adopting climate-resilient practices. Total beneficiaries will be about 42,000 people.
Economic Internal Rate of Return and Net Present Value – The Economic Internal Rate of Return
(EIRR) of the Project is estimated at 18,3% (base case) which is above the opportunity cost of capital
in  Angola  estimated  at  12%.It  is  emphasised  that this EIRR  is  a  minimum  because  it  has  been
estimated in a very conservative way. Also, this is a reasonable result given the recovery aspect of the
Project, logistic and climatic difficulties in rural areas, and overall country macroeconomic situation. It
is  based  on  the  assumption  that  adoption  is  limited  to 66%  of target  farmers.  In  case  of  higher
adoption rates, the EIRR will increase. The Net Present Value (NPV) is USD 4.16 million over a 20-
year period.
Sensitivity Analysis –The EIRR and NPV were subjected to sensitivity analysis in order to measure
variations due to unforeseen factors. Variations include: 10, 20 and 50% cost over-run; 10 and 20%
increase in benefits; 10 to 50% benefit decrease; and 1 to 2 years of delay in the implementation. The
ix
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
analysis indicates a relatively strong resilience to limited increases of costs and reductions of benefits
as well as benefit delays.
x
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Agricultural Recovery Project: Logical Framework
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
Baseline3
Mid-Term
End Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
(A) / Risks (R)
Baseline
study and
Completion
surveys
ARRP M&E
System,
Service
Provider
Reports, and
FFSs
records
ARRP M&E
System,
Service
Provider
Reports, and
FFSs
records
Baseline and
completion
PIU, IDA
Annual
Annual
Annual
Annual
Annual
Annual
PIU,
IDA, Service
Providers
PIU,
IDA, Service
Providers
Goal: Contribute to improved food
and nutrition security of targeted
communities
 Number of beneficiaries reached*
0
 Number of households reporting
250
improved dietary diversity*
6,000
5,000
8,000
7,000
Development Objective:
Restoration of productive assets and
capacity of households affected by
recurrent droughts
 Number of households with
500
3,000
7,000
increased agricultural and livestock
production*
 Number of households reporting
0
1,400
2,800
adoption of environmentally
sustainable and climate resilient
technologies and practices*
Outcome 1: Enhanced recovery of
the target households
 Number of households producing a
100
2,000
5,000
surplus for the market*
Outputs:
1.1. Livestock health and production
improved
1.2. Agricultural inputs distributed to
the target group
1.3. Nutrition sensitive actions
integrated
Outcome 2: Improved livelihoods
through use of community productive
infrastructure
Outputs:
2.1. Water infrastructure developed
 Number of households accessing
250
1,000
1,500
livestock services*
 Number of households accessing
production inputs/packages*
 Number of households reached
500
250
3,000
5,000
7,000
7,000
with nutrition enhancing
interventions*
 Number of households practicing
100
1,000
3,000
Annual
sustainable management of natural
resources and climate-related
risks*
 Number of water-related
infrastructure constructed or
rehabilitated
300
1,500
4,000
Annual
ARRP M&E
System,
Service
PIU,
3To be provided after baseline survey
* These indicators will be disaggregated by gender and age
xi
Results Hierarchy
2.3. Community-based natural
resource management plans
prepared
2.4. Provincial and Municipality
officers trained in Disaster Risk
Management (DRM)
2.5. Farmer Field Schools (including
those on agro-pastoralism)
established and/or strengthened
2.6. Community members trained in
DRM
2.7. Improved agricultural practices
promoted
2.8. Project is well coordinated and
managed
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Name
Indicators
Baseline3
 Number of community-based
natural resources management
plans prepared and being
implemented
 Number of Provincial and
Municipality officers trained in DRM
3
0
Means of Verification
Mid-Term
End Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
10
20
Annual
IDA, Service
Providers
Provider
Reports, and
FFSs
records
200
600
Annual
Assumptions
(A) / Risks (R)
 Number of Farmer Field Schools
80
120
150
(including those on agro-
pastoralism) established and/or
strengthened
 Number of community members
0
trained in DRM*
 Number of households trained in
improved agricultural practices*
 Number of AWPBs produced by
PIU and timely submitted for
approval
 Number of statutory audits with
‘unqualified’ audit opinions.
400
1
0
1,500
2,000
2
2
4,000
5,000
4
4
Annual
Annual
Annual
Annual
xii
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
I.
Situation Background and Rationale
A.
Situation Background
1.
The Republic of Angola,  with a size  of 1.25 million km, is located in SW Africa and  extremely
vulnerable to climate change impacts, such as drought and floods particularly in the southern regions.
Long-term rainfall projections from different models indicate a wide range of changes in precipitation.
Furthermore, IPCC scenarios project an increase of temperature in the region by 1.2 to 3.2°C by the
2060s.  Climate  models  predict  that  Angola  will  experience  increased  temperatures,  more  extreme
weather  events,  an  expansion  of  arid  and  semi-arid  regions,  seasonal  shifts  in  rainfall,  localised
floods,  increased  wildfires,  sea  level  rise,  increased  rainfall  in  the  northern  parts  of  the  country,
changes in river flows and changes in sea and lake temperatures. According to the Angolan National
Adaptation Programme of Action (2011), the major expected climate change threats and impacts are:
floods,  soil  erosion,  drought  episodes,  rise  in  sea-level.  The  main  sectors  identified  as  affected  by
climate change  are: a) agriculture and food security;  b) forest and biodiversity;  c) fisheries; d) water
resources;  e)  human  health;  f)  infrastructure;  g)  coastal  zones;  and  h)  energy. These threats  and
impacts were reiterated in the Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (2015).
Angola's population is 24.3 million people of whom some 38% are living in rural areas4. Angola
2.
has a very young population, with circa 54% of the total population below the age of 18. 5 After four
decades  of  civil  war,  much  of  the  country’s  economy  collapsed,  infrastructure was destroyed  and
institutions weakened. Since the return of peace, about 14 years ago, the Government, together with
its  national  and  international  partners, have  made  substantial  progress  in  re-establishing  the
foundation  needed  to  address  these  problems.  This  has  resulted  in  the  development  and
implementation  of  programmes  aimed  at  restoring  order  and  security,  revitalising  the  economy,
restoration of basic social services and the rehabilitation of infrastructure.
3.
The  project  area  is  characterized  by  savannah  grass  and  woodlands  with  deserts  in  the
adjoining  province  of  Namiba.  The  production  system  is  largely  agro-pastoral  with  livestock  a major
source  of  livelihood.  The  zone  is  characterised  by  a  unimodal  rainfall  pattern  with  an  average
precipitation of around 200-400 mm per annum. There are two seasons, a rainy season which lasts
from  mid-October  to  March  and  a  dry  season  from  April  to  early  October.  Average  annual
temperatures are variable but increasing from north to south. The topography of the area is generally
flat and undulating. The area is sparsely populated  with a population density  at  around five persons
per  square  kilometre  (National  Population  Census-2000).The  farming  population  are    marginal  and
vulnerable  to  the  vagaries  of  the  rainfall  patterns.  These  conditions  result  in  highly  variable  grain
production.  Droughts  lead  to  a  lack  of  pasture  and  surface  water,  which  occasionally  results  in
significant loss of livestock.
4.
Over  85%  of  the  rural  population  are  smallholders,  planting  an  average  of  1.5  ha  per  family.
The  farm  household  systems  are  non-mechanized,  with  low  levels  of  animal  traction  use.  Use  of
improved  inputs  is  low,  resulting  in  low  soil  fertility. As  a  result  of  risks  of  drought  and  floods,
smallholders  are  risk  averse  and,  without  intensifying  their  production  systems  are  not  likely  to
increase  production.  Even  amongst  those  farm  households  that  are  food-secure  a  broad  range  of
issues constrain productivity and their livelihoods - limited production and marketing experience, lack
of  household  resources  to  buy  seeds  and  inputs,  and  limited  skills  to  engage  in  alternative  off-farm
occupations. In  the  absence  of  viable  credit  programmes  and  very  few  smallholders  has  the  cash
needed to purchase even small amounts of the required inputs.
Maize,  millet  and  vegetables  are  produced  for  household  consumption  with  vegetables
5.
cultivated  along  the  main  rivers  and  valleys.  Normally  local  production  of maize  and  millet  provides
staple food for up to half of the year, while in the second half of the year consumption needs are met
through  food  purchases.  Seasonal  river  fishing  is  also  carried  out  by  the  local  population  to
4
Government of Angola (2016), “Censo 2014. Resultados definitivos do recensamento geral da populaçao e de habitaçao de
Angola 2014”, Instituto Nacional de Estatística.
5 Source: https://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/angola_statistics.html#118, UNICEF
1
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
supplement their diet. Livestock rearing is one of the main activities and sources of income with cattle
and small ruminants (goats and sheep) accounting for more than half of the total production. Pigs and
poultry  production  are  significant  especially  at  a  household  level,  and  are  mainly owned  by  women.
Given the high rainfall variability, transhumance pastoralism and the seasonal migration of livestock is
commonly found with herds of livestock moving between the lowlands and adjacent mountain areas. A
succession of shallow lakes and ponds provides pasture for cattle in the dry season. The permanent
Tchimporo ponds in Kuvelai also play an important role in the household economy by providing fishing
opportunities and reserve  pasture during critical periods. Two farm systems models can be found  in
the project area. In Cunene a typical holding is around 1.5 hectare and comprises maize, millet and
beans   In Huila and Benguela, the area under maize is higher given the better resource endowment.
6.
Since the 2011-12 agricultural season, the southern part of the country has been experiencing
recurring droughts, affecting mostly the three southern provinces of Cunene, Huila and Namibe, and
others,  such  as  Benguela. Although  there were some  sporadic  rains  during  this  timeframe  that  has
brought some relief, it was insufficient for recovery. The 2015-16 agricultural season brought dryness
once again, and some areas in the south experienced the driest season in 35 years, alongside other
parts  of  southern  Africa.  This  region  s,  traditionally,  agro-pastoral  and  livestock are an  important
livelihood  asset,  primarily  cattle  but  also  goats,  sheep,  pigs  and  poultry.  Livelihoods  depend  on  a
combination of livestock raising, milk production, cereal production, market food purchases, seasonal
fishing (coastal and riverine areas), horticulture and gardening, as  well as labour markets fuelled by
trade  and  industry.  The  main  food  crops  grown  are  millet  and  sorghum,  also  maize  and  beans,
especially in Huila where the northern region is one of the key areas supplying cereals.
7.
The livestock subsector, which is an important source of livelihood for the southern provinces,
was worst affected by the droughts. The prolonged droughts resulted in lack of adequate pasture and
reduced availability of water thus animal health conditions were adversely affected through increased
vulnerability to disease. Transhumant livestock migrations started earlier and lasted for longer periods
to provide adequate feed and water for livestock. These migration patterns impeded the participation
of  herders  in  the  national  vaccination  campaigns  in  2012  and  2013,  which  increased  the  risk  of
exposure to disease. An outbreak of Foot and Mouth disease worsened the livestock health conditions
in 2015. The agricultural background conditions are elaborated on in detail in Appendix 13
8.
Following the 2015-16 drought associated with El Niño, which followed four consecutive years
of drought in southern Angola, GoA requested the technical assistance of the United Nations in May
2016  to  undertake  a  Post-Disaster  Needs  Assessment  (PDNA)  in  the  most  affected  provinces  of
Cunene, Huila and Namibe.
9.
Relevant Policy and Institutional Issues – The 2015-16 El Niño event resulted in the  worst
drought for most of the southern African countries in over three decades. The effect on food security
was catastrophic, in addition to wider humanitarian needs due to water scarcity, including impacts on
access  to  water  resources,  sanitation,  education,  health  services  and  status of  livelihoods.  The
droughts resulted in the decline in agricultural production, thus increasing poverty levels, particularly
in the rural areas where populations are dependent on rain-fed agriculture. Though the full impact is
yet  to  be  assessed,  the  Regional  Inter-Agency  Standing  Committee  (RIASCO)  that  developed  the
response plan for the El Niño-induced drought in Southern Africa (May 2016 - April 2017) concluded
that some farmers are likely to abandon their land, leading to increased migration to urban areas and
cross-border movement for people in search of food and livelihood opportunities.
According  to  the  PDNA,  whose  undertaking  was  coordinated  by  the  National  Civil  Protection
10.
National Committee (CNPC) the drought affected 1.5 million people in 2015 and 1.2 million in 2016.
This is in  line  with the existing institutional framework through  which  the GoA recently approved the
Plan of Readiness, Contingency, Response and Recovery from Calamities and Disasters, as well as
the  Strategic  Plan  for  Prevention and  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  However,  recognising  the  impact  on
rural  livelihoods  of  recurring  droughts  and  intermittent  floods  as  a  result  of  the El  Niñoand  La-Niña
events, the PDNA will be followed by a Disaster Recovery Framework to be developed in 2017. The
Framework will build on existing legislation processes for land use zoning to incorporate disaster risk.
The  PDNA  was  developed  by  an inter-ministerial  task  force  responsible  for  national
11.
preparedness  and  response  to  new  disasters.  The  task  force  includes  the  Ministry  of  Social Affairs
and Reintegration, which is responsible for responding to the most vulnerable population falling within
the  high  levels  of  poverty  bracket.  Given  the  impact  on  food  security,  the  Office  of  Food  Security
2
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
(Gabinete  de  Segurança Alimentar  (GSA))  within  the  Ministry  of Agriculture  (MINAGRI)  plays  a  key
role in the task force, in cognisance of its mandate for monitoring levels of food security. There may
be  a  need  to  further  consolidate  the  regulatory  framework  through  the  development  of  a  national
drought  policy.  The United  Nations  Convention  to  Combat  Desertification (UNCCD) is  providing
support to several countries in formulating national drought policies.
12.
Climate Change –The agriculture sector is particularly vulnerable to hazards such as droughts
and floods, as well as changes in the onset and duration of the growing season, which are anticipated
to become more frequent, intense and variable with climate change. Potential adverse impacts on the
predominantly  rain-fed  agriculture include:  crop  failures  due  to  heat  and  drought  stress,  production
losses due to unpredictable onset of rains, reduced planting area due to consumption of seed stores,
and increased susceptibility to pests and disease.
B.
Rationale
13. Most  agriculture  in Angola  is  rain-fed  and  therefore  highly  vulnerable  to  climatic variation  and
climate change. Dry conditions have been more pronounced  in the southern  provinces and reduced
production  of  cereals, including  millet  and  sorghum,  which  are  the  predominant  crops.  In  the  three
provinces  (Cunene,  Huila  and  Namibe) assessed  during  the  undertaking  of  the  PDNA, precipitation
was  significantly  below  average  between  2012  and  2015,  though  Cunene  reported  normal  rains  in
2012. The consecutive years of dryness lasted until 2016 in most areas with some measure of relief
provided by occasional short rains, but not enough for recovery of agricultural productivity. Therefore,
a  cumulative  negative  impact  occurred  over  time  with  a  progressive  erosion  of  livelihoods  and  food
security, as well as of the environmental conditions in the region.
14.
The Agricultural  Recovery  Project  (ARP) will contribute to  the  agriculture  sector  recovery
programme and GoA priorities included in the PDNA. The priorities in each of the sub-sectors (crops
and  livestock)  have  been  integrated  into  the Project activities. The  GoA  recovery  planning  also
emphasises  the  need  to  focus  on  promoting  sustainable  farming  practices  and  agricultural
technologies adapted to local conditions; improving information systems for food security and animal
health  surveillance;  introducing  proper  rangeland  management  systems; and promoting  livestock
based livelihood diversification activities as part of a ‘building back better’ strategy.. ARP interventions
will contribute to most of these thematic areas.
15.
There  is  one  ongoing  IFAD-supported  Project  in Angola – the  Artisanal  Fisheries  and
Aquaculture Project (AFAP) effective from August 2015 till September 2020. AFAP is implemented in
Bengo,  Cuanza  Norte,  Luanda  and  Malange  provinces  in  the  central-northern  region.  These  areas
have not been severely affected by the droughts. The second IFAD-supported Project has only been
recently  approved  in  April  2017 – the  Smallholder  Agriculture  Development  and  Commercialisation
Project (SADCP-C&H also known as Smallholder Agriculture and Market Access Project (SAMAP)). It
will  be  implemented  in  Cuanza  Sul  and  Huila  provinces,  which  have  communities  affected  by
droughts. The ARP will intervene in the southern part of Huila while the SAMAP will focus on the more
productive areas, situated in the central highlands. A requested by GoA, SAMAP will be encouraged
to create  synergies with  ARP  in  terms  of  support  to  climate  resilience  activities  and  others.    The
surplus produce from the central highlands is accessible for the southern population to purchase. In
addition,  the  SAMAP  management,  which  has  a  larger  Project  Implementation  Unit  (PIU),  could
render  support  to  ARP  in  some  of  the  critical  fiduciary  areas  (financial  and  administrative,
management and procurement), as needs arise. The design of ARP  also  benefited from the climate
risk vulnerability analysis undertaken during the design of SAMAP.
16.
ARP will contribute to the  goal of the Angola Country Strategy Note (2017-2018), which  is “to
ensure  food  security  and  increase  incomes,  particularly  among  the  most  vulnerable  groups  in food
and nutrition-insecure areas of the central highlands and littoral zones”. The main contribution will be
to the targeted vulnerable populations in the littoral zones that have been impacted by the droughts.
The ARP  will  also  contribute  to  the  third  objective  of  the  Country  Strategic  Note  (CSN),  “Enhancing
the resilience to climate shocks of rural communities in the central highlands and littoral zones”. The
main climate shock being addressed is the recent droughts as a result of the El Niño event. However,
during the design of the ARP, localised flooding was reported in Cunene, making some of the potential
target areas unreachable. GoA had initiated an assessment of the impact of floods with the support of
various  Development  Partners  that  are  active  in the  area.  The  flooding  events  bring  a  different
dimension to building resilience of affected communities.
3
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
17.
As part of the response to the devastating droughts, GoA and some of its development partners
have  supported  the  implementation  of  different  emergency  programmes, within  the  framework
established  by  the  National  Plan  for  Preparation,  Contingency  Response  and  Recovery  2015-2017.
GoA  planned  response  was  estimated  at  over  USD  260  million,  of  which USD  56  million  was  for
agricultural inputs. Some of the other planned investments relate to infrastructure, mainly for irrigation.
However,  the  Government  has  not  been  able  to  raise  all  the  funds  needed,  estimated  at  USD189
million for the agriculture and  water sectors (PDNA). This is mostly due to  a shortfall in government
revenues related to the fall in oil prices. The funding shortfall makes IFAD a relevant partner given the
current  engagement  and  commitment  to  supporting  GoA  in  ensuring  food  and  nutrition  security  for
rural populations.
18.
Some  of  the  emergency programmes funded  by  GoA’s  development  partners  include:  a)  the
Land  Rehabilitation  and  Pasture  Management  in Agro-Pastoral  Production  Systems  of  Small-Scale
Producers of Southwest Angola (RETESA), supported by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and
implemented  by  FAO;  b)  Disaster  Risk  Reduction/Management 
to  Support  Agro-Pastoral
Communities  affected  by  Recurrent  Droughts  and  other  Natural  Disasters  in  Southern  Angola  and
Northern Namibia (PIRAN), supported by the US Agency for International Development (USAID) and
also  implemented  by  FAO;  and  c)  the  Central  Emergency  Response  Fund  (CERF)  (supported  by
several  UN  agencies – UNICEF,  WHO  and  FAO),  mostly  implemented  by  FAO  using  the  FFS
approach. The  response  and  recovery  projects  integrate humanitarian  response  with  livelihood
support  and  income  generation,  partly  in  anticipation  of  the  effects  of  La  Niña  and  the  floods
experienced in Cunene. The livelihood and income generation support will be continued through the
ARP,  reaching more  households  and  also consolidation  of  the  efforts  made  through  the  emergency
programmes. In line with the principles, which guide IFAD's approach in post-crisis situations6, IFAD
will  promote  synergies  between  APR  and  the  emergency  programmes,
funded  by  the  other
development  partners.  FAO,  as  implementing  agency  of  most  of the  above-listed programmes will
facilitate  the  creation  of  these  synergies  and  avoid  duplications,  whilst  also  playing  an  instrumental
role in the implementation of e-FFSs in APR.
19.
The  impact  of  the  drought  has  been exacerbated by  the  fall  in  oil  prices its  effect  on public
expenditure. Access to food, basic goods and public services has also been affected by high inflation.
High inflation, driven by the cuts in fuel subsidies, reduced food supply in local markets, and caused
devaluation of the currency (Kwanza). As a  result,  local  authorities  lack  the  necessary  resources  to
fully  implement  the  drought  response.  Local  water projects (repairs  and  construction  of  boreholes)
initiated  by  local  governments  have  come  to  a  standstill  due  to  the  lack  of  resources.  In  addition,
disruptions in the supply of nutritional supplements led to the closure of  some medical centres  in
affected areas.
20.
Theory of Change – The problem that ARP seeks to address is ”food and nutrition insecurity
exacerbated by recurring climatic events” in the target areas. The problem tree and theory of change
shown  in  Figure  1  identifies  six  major  causal factors  that  include:  a)  low  agricultural  productivity;  b)
limited access to improved technologies; c) variable rainfall distribution and intensity; d) limited access
to  water  resources  for  productive  use;  e)  lack  of early warning systems; and  f)  limited  coordination
among different policies and agencies related to disaster response and development planning. In turn,
each of these causal factors has a number of contributory elements some of which will be tackled by
the  Project  in  order  to  address  the  core  problem  of  food  and  nutrition  insecurity exacerbate by  the
recurring  unfavourable  weather  conditions  .  The  theory  of  change  indicates  how  the  Project  will
pursue  its  objective  of restoring  productive  assets  and  capacity  of  households  affected  by  recurrent
droughts.
6 IFAD Guidelines for Disaster Early Recovery page 13
4
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Figure 1: Problem Tree Analysis and Theory of Change
Proposed
solutions
Development
Issue
Underlying
causes
Nutrition
Mainstre
aming
Capacity
building on
improved
agricultural
practices
Livelihoods
diversification to
improve income
generation
Improved
access to water
resources
Institutional strengthening
through training and
equipping centres
Improved access
to support services
and infrastructure
Resilience
monitoring
Food and nutrition insecurity exacerbated by recurring climatic events
Low agricultural
productivity
Limited access to
improved technologies
Variable rainfall
distribution and
intensity
Limited access to water
resources for productive
use
Lack of Early
warning Systems
Limited
Coordination
among policies
and agencies
Basic causes
Lack of access to
quality agricultural
inputs
Limited farm power
Use of sub-optimal
agricultural practices
Limited asset base
Limited access to
advisory services
Recurring droughts
and intermittent
floods
Lack of water
storage
infrastructure
Limited availability
of water
resources
Lack of quality
climate
information and
analytical
capacity
Limited
capacities
Lack of
specific policies
e.g. related to
droughts
5











REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
II. Agricultural Recovery Project Description
Project Area and Target Group
A.
Project  Area – The ARP  focus  area  will  comprise eight  municipalities7. in three  provinces –
21.
Benguela, Cunene and Huila. The three provinces are situated in the southwestern Angola and have
suffered  repeated El  Niño droughts  during  the  period  2011-16. More  recently, some provinces  have
experienced  the  opposite  extreme  condition, La  Nina,  characterised  by localised flooding. This
situation  has  accentuated  the  fragility  of  the  population  that  lives,  primarily,  on  agricultural  and
livestock  production. It  has  aggravated  the  social,  economic  and  environmental  conditions  of  the
region  and  its  population.  It  contributed  to  increased  malnutrition,  family  abandonment,  domestic
violence, loss of income, increased deforestation and reduction of the already scarce water resources.
22.
Target  Group – The  core ARP  target  group  will  comprise 8,000  households (representing
48,000 people). They will primarily be low-income households, which work in farming or pastoralism
and/or are members of e-FFSs established as part of the emergency programmes by GoA and some
of its development partners. Interventions will build on the work done by the emergency programmes.
In some cases, ARP will fill in some of the gaps while, in other cases, it will try to reach some of the
areas  not  reached  by  the  emergency  programmes. The  FFSs will  be  strengthened so  that  the
beneficiary households can complete the transition from emergency to recovery. The establishment
and support provided to FFSs, in fact, is part of a holistic approach followed by both IFAD and FAO in
disaster  risk  reduction/management  (DRR/M),  which  views  FFSs  as  a  key  element  in  the  recovery
and  resilience  of  smallholder  farmers.  Moreover,  this  approach  builds  on  the  experiences  gained
during 12 years of implementation of the FFS approach, which was first brought to Angola in 2005 by
the Danish Refugee Council, and has been characterized by a strong involvement of FAO, as further
outlined in Section III-A.8 As part of this effort to ensure this relief-recovery transition, ARP will also
set up some new FFSs under the emergency FFS model, to reach additional households that are not
members of the existing FFS network.
23. Of the primary target group, women, in particular heads of households, will account for at least
30% and youth (between 18 years and 35 years old) for 30%. Youth are also an important segment of
the  population  and  will  require  special  attention.  Lack  of  opportunities  in  rural  areas  leads  to  the
migration  of  many  young  people  to  urban  centres. To  offer  real  opportunities  to  young  people  the
Project will provide specialised technical training for livestock based activities such as apiculture and
aquaculture.
24.
There  is  a  secondary  target  group  that  includes the public  sector (IDA  technical  staff),
Community-Based Organisations (CBOs), and some community members/farmers that will be key for
the successful implementation of the Project. This secondary target group will be provided with, inter
alia, capacity building including in gender action learning (training, improved mobility, etc.) which will,
in turn, enable them to be of effective service to the Project.
Targeting Strategy – The Project  will  use  three targeting  mechanisms  to  ensure that the
desiring communes and households are duly reached. These will include: a) geographical targeting;
25.
b)  self-targeting;  and  c)  empowering  measures. Geographical  targeting  will  involve  selection  of
communes  that  are:  a)  most  affected  by  drought;  b)  participating  in  the  emergency  programmes
whereby  ARP  interventions  will  facilitate  transition  to  the  recovery  phase;  and  c)  have  a  high
population  density;  and  d)  with  geographical  contiguity  to  maximise  efficiency  of  Project  operations.
Where  emergency  programmes  have  not  been  working,  this  would  involve  selecting municipalities
and communes that are the most vulnerable to drought and floods The second level involves within-
community targeting through the application of beneficiary selection criteria.
7 A tentative selection of municipalties include: Huela: Humpata, Gambos; Cunene Cahama, Curoca Cuvelai, Ombanja and
Benguela: Chongorai and Baia Fartal.
8 In  Angola,  the FFS approach  was  introduced  by  the  Danish  Refugee  Council  in  2005  in  the  Uige  and  Malanje  provinces,
northern Angola to support sustainable development among the resettled farmers. After that, FAO integrated FFS in the SPFS
in Bie and Huambo, between 2006 and 2012. Now FAO is implementing the FFS component of a World Bank funded project
(MOSAP) that works in Bie, Huambo and Malanje. Currently some Global Environment Facility projects, which will also have
FFS components, are in the process of being developed. Farmer Field Schools FAO 2014
6
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Self-Targeting will  be  used mostly  with  regard  to  FFS  and  non  FFS  members  within  the
26.
selected  communes for the crop  and  livestock-based  packages.  Awareness  creation  will
inform
households  about the  available crop  and  livestock  packages. After  receiving  information  on  the
options qualifying households will be able to choose the preferred alternatives. Each household will be
provided  with  only  one  package  of  their  informed  choice.  The  awareness  raising  will  be
complemented  with  a  needs  assessment  of  the  asset  bases  of  the  target  households  prior  to  the
droughts  where  this  has  not  already  been  done. Capacity  building  will  be  provided  to  equip  the
households  with  the  required  skills  to  effectively make  use  of  the  packages  particularly  for  the  non
FFS  members. Empowering  measures  will  promote  the  participation  of  women,  youth  and  poor
smallholder farmers to encourage their participation. This will include: a) information and mobilisation
campaigns using local meetings; b) ensuring that the e-FFSs are inclusive; c) offering a broad range
of  skills  training  activities;  and  d)  monitoring  for  the  inclusiveness  of  the  youth  and  women. These
empowering  and  capacity  building  activities  will  provide women,  youth  and  poor  smallholder  farmer
households with  the  necessary  knowledge,  skills  and  assets  necessary  to  recover  from  years  of
recurring drought and improve their livelihoods.
The Gender Approach – Women are socially, culturally and economically disadvantaged and
27.
yet they are responsible for ensuring the well-being of their families by securing the greater part of the
family  income,  mostly  from  agricultural  activities.  Therefore,  they  are  disproportionately  affected  by
climate-related  shocks.  The Project will  focus  on  supporting  women  to  access  assets,  training  and
input packages. This will be done through encouraging women to: a) become members of e-FFSs; b)
enhance their skills in agricultural practices, with particular reference to poultry rearing, apiculture and
crop production; c) enhancing women’s representation of at least 30% in decision-making structures
of e-FFSs;  and d)  improving their  knowledge  on  nutrition-sensitive  agriculture.  The  Project  will
promote  approaches  deepening  impact  by  strengthening  communication  and  win-win  collaboration
including  action-learning  exercises  with  different
between  vulnerable  and  more  powerful  actors,
stakeholder  groups  (e.g.  male  and  female  farmers)  at  both  the  individual  and  collective  levels.  The
participation  of  women  in  ARP  activities  will  be  monitored  and  gender  training  for Project
implementers  provided  to  ensure  effectiveness  of  implementation.  In  addition, the  natural  resources
management  activities and  community-based  planning  will  support  the  use  of  labour-saving
technologies  that  bring  resources  closer  to  the  communities.  The  curriculum  of  the  FFS  will  also
include gender discussions to stimulate debates at the household level regarding workloads which are
expected to result in a more equitable allocation of tasks between household members.
The Youth Approach – Youth  are  an  important  segment  of  the Angolan population  and  will
28.
require special attention from the project. Lack of opportunities in rural areas leads to the migration of
many  young people  to  urban  centres.  To  offer  real  opportunities  to  young  people,  the  Project  will
provide  specialised  technical  training  for  livestock-based  activities  as  well  as  apiculture  and
aquaculture. Opportunities for off-farm activities will also be offered to  youth, including petty  trading,
provision of commercial services and post-harvest managing.
29.
Beneficiary Selection Criteria – ARP beneficiaries will be selected mainly from participants in
the  different  emergency/humanitarian  programmes  in  the  Project  area,  with  the  intention  of
transitioning them  to  the  recovery  phase. The  project  will  target  about  8,000  smallholder  farmers
directly. The beneficiaries will include both existing members of FFS and non-members that have not
been  reached  by  the  emergency/humanitarian  programmes. Provincial  Governance  Committees
(PGCs) will  play  a  critical  role  in  selecting  of  beneficiary  households  and  communes. Provincial
Governorates are already involved in the identification of vulnerable households including establishing
databases  with  this  information,  which  will  facilitate  the  implementation  of  APR  both  in  terms  of
targeting  and  poverty  focus.  The  Governorates  also  play  a  key  role  in  ensuring  complementarity
among different initiatives and projects in their areas and thus non duplication of efforts. PGCs will be
established in the three provinces and will be composed of traditional leadership and local authorities.
More  information  about  PGCs  is  presented  under  Section  III.B.  Organisational  Framework.  PGCs
together  with  the  concerned  communities  will  be  involved  in  selecting  beneficiary  households  and
communes  through  a  process  that  will  be  participatory  and  transparent  to  the  whole  communities
involved9. Criteria to be  used  in  the  selection  of  beneficiary  households  and  communes include:  a)
communes most affected by the drought; b) most vulnerable (economically and socially) households,
9IFAD has successfully tested the above approach in a post-genocide returnees recovery programme in Rwanda and in then-
conflict-affected Burundi during the 1990s.
7
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
giving particular attention to women-headed households; c) households with signs of mal-nutrition; d)
size of the households; e) youth that are not integrated in the schooling system; and f) youth that are
unemployed.
Development Objective and Impact Indicators
B.
30.
The  Project  goal  is  to “contribute  to  improved  food  and  nutrition  security of  targeted
communities”. This  underlines  the  central  importance  of  ensuring  food  and  nutrition  security  of  the
beneficiaries  as  a  prerequisite  to  participate  in  development  activities. The  Project’s  Development
Objective is  the  “restoration  of  productive assets  and  capacity  of  households  affected  by  recurrent
droughts”. This is to be achieved through the provision of agricultural and livestock support packages,
which include  both  inputs  and  technical  capacity  building, and construction  of  basic  supporting
infrastructure. Two  indicators will be  used  to  assess  the  Project’s  effectiveness  at  this  level  of  the
results  framework:  a)  Number  of  households  with  increased  agricultural and  livestock production
(approximately 7,000  households,  to  be  disaggregated  by  gender  and  age);  and  b) Number  of
hectares of land under climate-resilient practices (target 4,000 hectares).
C.
Outcomes/Components
31. Outcomes – ARP  intends  to  contribute  towards  the  restoration  of  the  productive  assets  of
households  affected  by  recurrent  and/or  prolonged  droughts  and  provide  means  for  enhancing  their
production and  building better livelihoods. The  Project  is  expected  to  have  a  positive  impact  on  the
social  and  economic  conditions  through  infrastructure  rehabilitation  and  construction,  increased
access to quality and sustainable livestock health and veterinary services, improved food and nutrition
security  and  livelihoods  and  skills development.  The  Project  will  also  strengthen  the  capacity  of
provincial  and  municipal  institutions  through  the  provision  of  training,  as  well  as  strengthening  of
coordination mechanisms for improved disaster risk management.
technical  component
(Sustainable  Livelihoods  Recovery) with 
Components – ARP’s  development  objective  will  be  achieved  through 
the  effective
32.
three
implementation  of  one 
complementary  and  mutually  reinforcing  subcomponents:  a) Recovery  of  Household  Productive
Assets;  b)  Recovery  of  Community  Productive Assets;  and  c)  Capacity  Building. It  should  be  noted
that,  by  virtue  of  the  target  area’s  climatic  conditions,  droughts  and  floods  will  reoccur.  Therefore,
whilst subcomponent 1.1 will facilitate production restoration, focusing on the recovery of the targeted
beneficiaries, subcomponents  1.2  and  1.3  will  enable  the  target  households  and  communities  to
achieve  full  recovery, enhance  their  risk  management  capacity and  ensure  the  sustainability  of  the
project's  interventions,  making  the  beneficiaries less  dependent from emergency  interventions. The
second  component  is Project  Coordination  and  Management,  that  will  service  all  three  technical
subcomponents through effective coordination and management.
33.
Component  1:  Sustainable  Livelihoods  Recovery –The  objective  of  this  component  is to
restore  the  productive  assets  of  the  targeted  communities  and  households.  This  will build  on  the
emergency  operations undertaken by GoA  and its Development Partners. The  expected  outcome  is
“enhanced  recovery  of the  target  households’  crop  and  livestock  production  capacity  in  the  target
provinces”.  The  component includes three  subcomponents:  a)  Recovery  of Household  Productive
Assets; b) Recovery of Community Productive Assets; and c) Capacity Building for recovery.
Subcomponent  1.1:  Recovery  of  Household  Productive Assets – This  subcomponent  aims  at
34.
addressing  the  needs  of farm  household members. Agricultural  productivity  will  be  improved  under
rain-fed  crop  and  livestock  systems  and  household  livelihoods  diversified. This  will  be  accompanied
by capacity building of beneficiaries and institutional stakeholders to ensure sustainability of activities
(Subcomponent  1.3).  Two  generalised  household  packages  are  proposed  to  address  food  security
and diversify household livelihoods: a) a crop based package for farm households10; and b) livestock
based packages for improved food security and livelihoods diversification11; The expected outcome is
restoration of their assets base, improved food security through increased on-farm productivity. Some
10 The e-FFS curriculum will include application of fertiliser to early-planted and well-weeded crops, waste management, use of
organic waste for manure, promote conservation agriculture and suitable water harvesting and management techniques as well
as climate change adaptation measures.
11The livestock based package will include a choice from poultry, goats, sheep and pigs.
8
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
of  the  recommended packages  are  elaborated  below.  Consistent  with  the  preceding  emergency
interventions, e-FFS (existing and new) will be used as the main instruments for reaching the target
households although other vulnerable households that are not FFS members will also be reached.
35.
Crop-Based Packages – Smallholders  in  the  Project  area  use  local  crop  varieties,  produce  no
cash  crops,  do  not  use  purchased  inputs  and  produce  only  35 - 40%  of  their  food  requirements.  The
recurring  droughts  further  reduce  food  production  and  food/nutrition  security. Food  consumption  has
decreased in terms of quality and quantity of meals (1 or 2 meals a day, mostly millet porridge). As a
result, cases of malnutrition have been rising since 2012. The Project will promote production of ‘food
security’ crops,  including  maize,  sorghum  and  millet,  whilst  diversifying  the  rain-fed  farming  system
and household diets by including cassava12, sweet potato and beans in order to reduce the risk of crop
failure. Implementation of this activity will involve offering a starter-pack for food security to vulnerable
households. The package of inputs will consist of short season varieties of cereals (maize and millet),
beans, cassava13 and sweet potato cuttings, 25 kg of fertiliser (NPK) and hand tools. A target of 5,000
households has been set to receive the crop based package. The package will be accompanied with
extension  advice  through  the  FFS  on  minimum  tillage  and  intercropping  with  legumes. Attention  will
be given to integrate and expand cassava into the cropping system and for smallholders to view the
crop as a nutrition source and potential value addition14. The improved crop production package will
be  complemented with the  sustainable  land  management  practices  described  under  Subcomponent
1.2.
Livestock-Based Packages – Individual farm households  will also be  eligible for assistance to
36.
develop and diversify their livelihoods through livestock based packages. Small stock (local chickens,
pigs, goats and sheep) are found around the farm homesteads for a dual purpose of providing animal
protein and easy liquidation to access cash for household needs. Interventions, such as poultry (free-
range  local chicken), and  goat, sheep and  pig rearing and fattening will be undertaken as livelihood
diversifying  and  risk  reducing  strategies. Consideration  will  be  given  to  appropriate  livestock  breeds
that  are  tolerant  to  heat  and  water  stress  conditions.  Efforts  to  promote  improved  husbandry  will
include reliable water and feed resources and limit reliance on exotic breeds. The livestock package
will  target  2,000  households15. The  design  of  ARP’s  livestock-related  interventions  has  been  (and
implementation  of  the  same  will  be)  consistent  with  the  IFAD  prescribed  ‘Emergency  Livestock
Interventions  in  Crisis  and  Post-Crisis  Situations’. That  is,  the  design  responded  to  the  three  key
questions: a) what types of livestock systems have been affected by the disaster and how? b) which
groups  are  most  affected  or  vulnerable,  and  what  are  their  priority  needs?;  and  c)  which  livestock
intervention is the most appropriate (considering the types of problems and target group)?
37.
The poultry package will target women, benefiting around 1,500 households. The package will
consist of, at most, 15 hens or pullets (coming into lay) with one cockerel. The beneficiary households
will be required to provide management inputs – feeding, watering and shelter for the poultry as part
of  their  counterpart  contribution. Interventions  on  goats  and  sheep  and  pig  will  be  offered  to  all
households  but  with  a  particular  focus  on  women,  women  headed  households  and  the  most
vulnerable. The  goats  and  sheep  will  be  targeted  to  families  that  have  some  labour  and  access  to
grazing land.
38. Off  farm  activities  will  also  be  offered  to  able  bodied  households  and  youth  for  petty  trading,
provision  of  commercial  services  (mechanization  and  spraying)  as  well  as  food  preservation  and
drying. The more complete menu of activities are given in Appendix 4.
12Cassava is being promoted in most drought prone areas given that it is more tolerant to water stress compared to other crops.
Recognising  that  it is  not  suitable  for  all  locations  the  promotion  through  ARP  will  be  based  on  suitability  mapping  and
dissemination of more drought tolerant varieties.
13Cassava is being promoted in most drought prone areas given that it is more tolerant to water stress compared to other crops.
Recognising  that  it  is  not  suitable  for  all  locations  the  promotion  through  ARP  will  be  based  on  suitability  mapping  and
dissemination of more drought tolerant varieties.
14The  use  of  appropriate  crop  varieties  and  more  resilient production  systems  (e.g.  through  better  soil,  water  and  nutrient
management) can significantly reduce production risks and household vulnerability in drought years. Opportunities to improve
its  use  in  food  security  exist  by  promoting  ‘sweet’  varieties  offering  edible  tops  (protein)  and  good  tuber  yields  (energy,  b-
carotene) of manageable size.
15The scavenging poultry and goat/ sheep packages consist of an 80% grant with a household contribution of cash, feed, water
and fencing/ housing
9
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
39.
In  all  cases  the  livestock  and  crop  based  packages  and  support  for  off-farm  activities  will be
limited  to  a  financial  ceiling  of  US$180  per  household.  Recipient  households  may  decide  to  come
together as a group for ease of implementation. For goat and pig rearing and fattening schemes the
livestock recipients may be organised into small groups of 5-15 households in order to participate in a
pass-on scheme which will strengthen social bonds between member households with peer pressures
used to ensure that Project rules are followed.16
40.
Apiculture – Honey is in high demand and a valuable nutrient. The Department of Forestry has
prioritised  apiculture  and  initiated  a development programme  targeting  the  southern  provinces
focusing on Lubango in Huila provinces, Namibe (along the Belo river) and Cunene where there are
plans to set up an apiculture school. This programme, supported by FAO, aims at organising groups
of  100 households and  providing  each  with  10-30  hives.  The  ARP intervention  will
include the
provision  of a  protection  kit,  smoker  and  barrel  filter  and  bottle,  estimated  at  around  $250  per
household. A processing unit will be installed for each 100 households and includes a honey manual
radial  extractor,  a  press,  a  filter  and  metallic  tins  with  covers17. Cuvelai Municipality,  in  Cunene
Province in particular, has been identified as having great potential. A total of 550 households will be
targeted to benefit from this intervention in those areas of Cunene and Huila where the potential for
apiculture exists.
41.
Aquaculture:  Aquaculture  (where  perennial  water  sources  are  available,  including  Spirulina
algae  production)  tree nursery  establishment,  seed  multiplication,  agro-processing  and  off-farm
enterprises.  Examples  include  compost  making,  sales  of fodder,  and  the  multiplication  and  sale  of
seedlings. Selection of activities will be made according to beneficiary interest.
42.
Selection of activities will be demand driven and drawn from a menu of options (livestock and
crop  based  packages,  aquaculture  and  off-farm  activities).  Communities  will  be  informed,  through
awareness  creation  campaigns,  about  the  menu  and  the  associated  terms  of  partnership  for  each
activity. By offering households the choice of technical packages, they will be able to select an activity
that matches their skills, resources and market demands. Local leadership and community members
will  be  instrumental  in  selecting  the  beneficiary  households,  ensuring  effective  participation  and
transparency.
Nutrition Mainstreaming – Recurrent droughts have contributed to increased malnutrition in the
43.
target  areas.  ARP  will
therefore intensify  nutrition  mainstreaming  in  Project  interventions.  The
proposed crop  and  livestock packages  are  potential  entry  points  to  reach  vulnerable  households  on
nutrition activities. These activities will focus on the promotion of improved varieties of food crops that
are nutrient-rich and also drought-tolerant, such as iron rich beans. Promotion of diversified nutrient-
dense  foods,  including  orange-fleshed  sweet potato, animal  proteins  (eggs,  chicken  and  red  meats
from  the  livestock  interventions), and  Spirulina  (blue-green  algae) will  contribute  to  food  security  as
well  as  good  nutrition.  The e-FFS  is  an  effective  approach  for  integration  of  nutrition  education  to
ensure diversified dietary intake.
44.
Subcomponent  1.2: Recovery  of  Community  Productive Assets – When  households  are
recovering from a shock, they rely on their community networks and, as such, community assets are a
means  of  managing  the  risks. Land  management  practices  and  the rehabilitation/development  of
water  sources are  key  elements  of livelihoods  recovery  in  the Project areas.  Potential  beneficiaries
consider  the  lack  of  water  and  pasture  as  the  main  issues  affecting  their  lives.  The  Project will
therefore rehabilitate and  construct  water  sources  that  cover  all  uses. The  subcomponent  will  be
implemented through the Farmer and Agro-Pastoral Field School extension modality modified in terms
of  duration  and  content  to  the  recovery  conditions  of  the  project  area.  This  is  described  more  fully
under  subcomponent  1.3. The  expected  outcome  is  “stabilised/improved livelihoods  through  use  of
community productive  infrastructure”.  This  subcomponent includes two  areas  of  interventions: a)
water resource development; and b) natural resources management.
16Criteria  for  selection  of  households  for  the  pass-on  scheme  are:  a)  willingness  and  interest  to  participate  in  the  activity;  b)
experience and skills in keeping livestock; c) size and make-up of the household; d) access to adequate feed and water for the
animals; e) agreement to keep the livestock until full repayment is made; f) agreement to report any sickness or death to the
Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWs); and g) agreement to keep records for health control.
17The  major  costs  in  beekeeping  are:  hives,  processing equipment  (honey  extractor/separator)  and  tables.  Minor  cost  items
include protective clothing, smoker, trays, and some tools. The package will be provided as micro-project IGA grant.
10
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
45. Water  Resource  Development – Water  resource  development18 covers  two main  areas  of
intervention: a) rehabilitation, construction and maintenance of water infrastructure; and b) rainwater
harvesting.
46. Water Resource Infrastructure – The progressive decline of available water is a major problem
in the Project area as a result of the recurring droughts. Rivers are drying up and aquifer recharge is
declining. Since  2013,  there  has  been  a  progressive  drying  of  two  fertile  oases  which  are  rich  in
biological resources and ecosystems. The water table is declining and about 80 percent of boreholes
are non-functional, due to water scarcity and disrepair (approximately 2,400 boreholes damaged). It is
estimated  that  less  than  20  percent  of  communities  have  access  to  safe  water. The  entry  point  for
recovery  will  be  through  rehabilitation,  construction  and  maintenance  of  water  infrastructure. The
selection  of  low- maintenance water  sources  is  a  key  factor  to  assure  long-term  impact  and
sustainability. Activities  will include the rehabilitation or the establishment of multi-purpose  wells and
related infrastructure necessary for animal health (such as watering points, dip tanks, etc.) and human
consumption (tap stands) as well as improving water demand management. At the community level,
the  Project  will  support  the  construction  or  rehabilitation  of  agricultural  weirs  for  domestic  and
livestock use while ensuring that water is efficiently and effectively utilised. Water User Groups will be
created and their capacity developed prior to the rehabilitation and construction of water infrastructure
for effective management and maintenance.
47.
Rainwater Harvesting – Rehabilitation of ponds and construction of subsurface dams will be the
main activities under the water harvesting intervention. Ponds, which are naturally recharged, are an
important  water  source  for  cattle and frequently provide  domestic  water during  the  dry  season,
although  the  water  quality  is  questionable and  therefore  some  form  of  zoning  will  be  required  and
community commitment obtained for the management in  line  with the investments being made. The
storage  capacity  decreases over  time  due  to  siltation. Subsurface dams have  proven  to  be  an
excellent  solution  with  the  advantages  of  increasing  water  quality  and  drastically  reducing
evaporation.  New  structures  will  be  constructed  instead  of  rehabilitation  of  existing  dams19.
Considering the relatively high investment costs of the proposed structures (ranging from $15,000 to
$50,000 per unit), strict selection criteria will be applied including: a) organisation level of users and
willingness to contribute to the maintenance costs of the structures; b) technical feasibility; c) access
to the water source; d) closeness to local materials, such as gravel and stones; e) number of potential
users; and f) cost/ benefit ratio of the investment.
48.
Natural  Resources Management – The  fragile  biophysical  environment,  shallow  soils,  poor
vegetative  cover  and  the  irregular  and  often  high  intensity  of  rainfall,  has  resulted  in  severe  soil
erosion and reduced  soil  fertility. Deforestation and  charcoal  burning  have also  contributed  to  land
degradation and soil erosion on communal (forest and rangelands) and private cultivated land. Land
degradation is exacerbated by overgrazing, depletion of rangelands and a spiral of unsustainable land
management.  Interventions  are proposed  to  redress  this  vicious  cycle  by  rehabilitating  rangelands
and pastures and undertaking soil and water conservation measures.
Rangeland  and  Pastures – Rangeland  development  will 
49.
focus  on  ecosystem-based
rehabilitation around the water points. Activities will include community led improvement of fodder and
natural grasses and shrubs and the establishment of livestock exclusion areas. This intervention will
be supported by range and herd management practices, improvements in livestock health to reduce
livestock  pressure  on  already  degraded  areas.  The  intervention will also  require  technical  support
from a cadre of CAHWs at municipality and community level who will be provided with veterinary kits
and  technical  training.  Attention  will  also  be  given  to  scaling-up  the  provision  of  mineral  block
production (initiated under one of the emergency programmes), certifying CAHWs to improve access
to  veterinary  services  and  creating  awareness  within  communities  of  the  need  for  improved  animal
18Water user groups (WUGs) or associations will be established, in some instances independently from the e-FFSs, especially
in  newly  constructed  or  rehabilitated  water  points in  order  to  ensure  direct  management  control  of  their  operations  and
maintenance and ultimate sustainability of the structures. Members of the water user associations will have rights (the use of
water for multiple purposes) and obligations (to contribute maintenance fees, etc.). Each group will be expected to draw up a
constitution  with  rules  and  regulations that clarify  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  group  organization  and their members.
The WUGs will be provided with training in water demand management, which will also be delivered through e-FFS.
19Subsurface dams are an ancient technique fairly widespread worldwide but the existence of this type of dams made during
colonial times is unknown and in case they exist, the documents and maps with the exact location may have been destroyed
during the Angolan civil war.
11
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
health  care  and  inoculation.  Consideration  will  be  given  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  the  animal
vaccination programme by broadening the range of vaccines offered to include small scale livestock
and developing the vaccination cold chain at local level.
50.
Soil  and  Water  Conservation – Soil  conservation  and  runoff  control  measures  are  lacking  in
many  parts  of  the Project  area. Soil  and  water  conservation  measures  will  be  identified  through  the
preparation of community level natural resources management plans that will be incorporated within
the FFS methodology  (see Subcomponent  1.3)20.  Some  of  the  good practices  of  community-based
natural  resources management  and  climate  change  adaptation  will  be introduced at  both  micro-
catchment  and  household  level. This  will  include low-cost physical  and  biological  conservation
measures  on  communal  and  cultivated  land. Measures  could  include  contour  stone  bunds,  multi-
purpose  vegetative  bunds,  micro  basins  and  trenches,  natural  regeneration  of  trees  in  farmed  and
communal areas and nursery establishment. These activities will be supported through FFS or farmer
based  organisations  (interest  groups)  to  help  implement  these  initiatives.  Special  attention  will  be
given to vegetative stabilisation of the soil and water conservation measures with dual purpose fodder
species.
Subcomponent  1.3:  Capacity  Building  for  Recovery – This  subcomponent  will  provide  the
51.
capacity building to ensure effective implementation of subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2. Capacity building
will  be undertaken  at  the  institutional,  community  and  household  levels. The  beneficiaries  and  their
communities need to be helped to reduce their vulnerability to shocks through provision of knowledge
and  skills. The  skills  and  capacities  required  at  the  different  levels  will  be  strengthened  to  ensure
communities  are  able  to  recover  from shocks  and  the  relevant  institutions  are  able  to  provide  the
necessary services to communities and households.
52.
Disaster  and  Climate  Risk  Preparedness – This  activity  will  build  on  existing  initiatives  at  the
Provincial  level,  such  as  the  preparedness,  contingency,  response  and  recovery  plans  and  the
municipal  strategies. ARP  will  assist  these  plans  and  strategies  to  be  operationalised  at  the
community  level.  Concurrently,  efforts are  already  being  made  in  training  technicians  and
communities  in  disaster  risk  management.  ARP  will  support  training  activities  and  ensure  that
sufficient  capacity  is  available  at  the  Provincial  coordination  level.  The  Project  will  also  support  the
roll-out of a disaster recovery framework in collaboration with other partners. These activities will also
contribute to the strengthening of early warning systems. Specific activities are elaborated below.
53.
Institutional  (Provincial  and  Municipal)  Level  Interventions – The target  provinces  have
developed action plans  for  enhanced  coordination  and  information  management  as  well  as pilot-
strategies  to  ensure effective  disaster  response capacities.  The  Project will support  further  capacity
building efforts through seminars and workshops for Provincial level officials to review key concepts of
Disaster  Risk  Management  (DRM)  in  the  process  of  recovery  from  the  protracted  drought.  The
seminars will also facilitate mapping of vulnerable groups and action planning through inter-sectorial
interactions. Standard operating procedures for emergency response and action plans to improve the
Provincial Contingency Plan will be reviewed where necessary. Simulation exercises will be organised
for  the  participating  officers  with  support  from  specialised  agencies,  such  as  the  Office  for  the
Coordination  of  Humanitarian Affairs  (OCHA).  The  expected  output  is  20  disaster  risk  management
trainers  at  provincial  levels  trained  in  rolling  out  the  national  training  programme  for  mainstreaming
disaster  risk  management  into  local  development  planning.  In  addition,  10  response  simulation
exercises  will  be  conducted, 
improvement  of  response  and  provision  of  basic
communication equipment.
including 
Support  the  Rollout  of  a  Disaster  Recovery  Framework – Based  on  the  drought  PDNA
54.
conducted with the support of the UN, the EU and the World Bank, the Civil Protection Commission
(CNPC)  is  developing  a  Disaster  Recovery  Framework  for  the  drought-affected  Southern  provinces.
The ARP will support the roll out of the Framework to the municipalities in the target provinces. The
roll-out  will  mainly  involve  convening  of  meetings,  workshops  and  training  sessions  for  selected
20The community level natural resources management plans will need to be adapted to the needs of specific communities. A
starting point is the Agro-pastoral Farmer Field School methodology that has been used by the FAO implemented RETESA and
PIRAN  projects  where  agro-silvipasture  predominates.  There  are  sites  in  Cunene  and  Huila  where  more  conventional
crop/livestock  production  is  relevant.  The  community  led  natural  resource  management  methodology  should  include  the
following  steps: a) meeting  the  community  and  organising  a  planning  team; b)  identifying  micro-watersheds; c)    conducting
biophysical  and  socio-economic  surveys; d)  identifying  and  prioritizing  interventions; e)  approval  of  interventions  by the
community; and f) preparation of a plan for implementation (mapping, input requirements, action plan).
12
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
officials.  The  expected  outputs  would  be  600  officials  of  the  inter-sectorial  CNPC  at  municipal  and
provincial levels trained in planning, implementing and monitoring disaster recovery interventions.
Community  Level  Interventions – Climate  risk  management  training  will  be  undertaken
55.
through the e-FFSs. Target communities will be provided with training in the management of droughts
and floods as part of the e-FFS curriculum. The training will be delivered by the FFS facilitators and
trainers  that  benefited  from  capacity  building  activities  in  the  emergency  operations  and  also  earlier
GoA/FAO interventions. The DRM training will build on on-going sessions that are being provided by
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and OCHA. The Project will support the training
sessions in the target communities, including simulation exercises. The expected outputs are at least
6,300 smallholders  trained  in  climate risk  management  and  4,000  community  members  trained  in
DRM21.
56.
Technical  Training – Specific  technical  training  will  be  required  to  support  households  and
groups  involved  in the livestock diversification  activities.  These  activities  are  most  likely  to  be
conducted outside the FFS curriculum – as households selected may not be FFS members and/or the
training  may  be  specialised  and  may  not  interest  all  FFS  members.  It  is  expected  that  the  training
support  will  be  largely  informal  through  service  provider  contracts. Details  of  the  content  of  the
training is provided in Appendix 4.
57.
Technical training at local level will also be required by developing and upgrading the existing
cadre  of  CAHWs  at  municipality  and  community  level,  developing  the  cadre  of  Community
Development  Facilitators  at  local  level  and  strengthening  the  capacity  of  the FFS facilitators.  The
CAHWs  will  be  trained  in  animal  health  for  cattle  and  small  livestock (including  poultry). One  of  the
main constraints to household poultry production is the high mortality among chicks due to diseases,
predation and exposure as a result of poor housing. The Project will provide focused training in poultry
health, supplementary feeding, housing and general management. The livestock department does not
have adequate frontline livestock extension staff in most districts of the country, therefore the Project
will train CAHWs to complement efforts of the department.
Provision  of  Logistical  Support – At  the  Municipal  level,  motor  cycles  will  be  provided to
58.
facilitate  the  process  of  technical  backstopping  and  strengthen  extension  services  for  effective
implementation of the different ARP activities.
59.
Component 2: Project Coordination and Management – The objective of this component is
to strengthen ARP’s coordination, monitoring and evaluation through the Project Implementation Unit
(PIU).  ARP  will  finance  the  PIU operational  costs,  procurement  of  office  equipment,  office
consumables, vehicles and the associated equipment maintenance costs. It will provide Project staff
salaries and Technical Assistance (TA) to address specific needs. In turn, the PIU will be charged with
the  responsibility  of  coordinating  and  monitoring  implementation  of  Project activities,  including:  a)
financial  management  and  reporting;  b)  procurement of goods  and  services;  c)  preparation  and
coordination of Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs); and d) M&E and knowledge management.
This will ensure that the Project is implemented correctly, on time, and in accordance with the Project
Implementation Manual (PIM) and the Financing Agreement. Given the  lean nature of the ARP PIU,
the  PIU  of the IFAD-supported SAMAP will  play  a  critical  role  in  overseeing  some  of  the  functions,
particularly  the  financial  management,  procurement  and M&E functions.
In  order  to  ensure
effectiveness under such an arrangement, both Projects will have to use the same fiduciary systems
and procedures; this is further elaborated  under Section III. D. Financial Management, Procurement
and Governance. At the provincial and municipality levels, the Project will work through and in close
collaboration  with  the  Provincial  Directorates of  IDA,  Provincial  Directorates of  Agriculture  and  the
Estacões  de  Desenvolvimento  Agrário ((EDA)/IDA  office  at municipal 
level).  Detailed  ARP
management procedures will be contained in the PIM.
The ARP PIU  will  include  the  following  positions:  a)  Project  Coordinator;  b) Accountant;  c)
60.
Procurement Assistant; d) Monitoring and Evaluation Assistant; e) Project Assistant; and f) Driver.
21
The Municipal Strategies will be adjusted in line with the community level plans. In some cases the municipal
strategies  will  be  shared  with  the  community  as  part  of  a  validation  process  and  the  feed-back  from  the
community will enable the municipal technical staff to refine and improve their plans.
13
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
D.
Lessons Learned and Adherence to IFAD Policies and SECAP
61.
Some  lessons  learnt  from  previous drought recovery interventions have  been  used  to inform
the design of the ARP. These lessons include: a) ensuring effectiveness through improved information
flow  to  avoid  duplication  or  overlap  of  coverage  areas; b) the  need  to  establish  linkages  with  public
agencies  and  private  sector  organisations; c) the  needs  assessment  should  be done in  stages  to
identify which parts  of  the  country  are  more  affected, specific  needs  within  target  communities,  and
selection of beneficiaries in these communities; d) the critical steps to establish a procedure to identify
beneficiary  households  and  involving  the  local  community  in  the  selection  process; e) developing
input  packages  and  ensuring  timely  distribution;
f) use  of  market  oriented  strategies  for  input
distribution;  g)  to  support  the  rapid  and  efficient  implementation  of  early  recovery  activities,  field
supervision/monitoring needs to be strengthened, particularly during the initial period; and h) ensure
that capacity is built at the local level for reporting on progress related to early recovery activities.
62.
Also,  there  are  some  practical  experiences  from  Project  implementation  in  Angola  that  are
implicitly embedded in ARP design. Such experiences/lessons include: a) the FFS approach builds on
positive  lessons  learned  in  addressing  capacity  weaknesses  of  the  extension  service  at  field  level.
The  project  builds  on  the  positive  experience  but  also  takes  into  account  the  weaknesses  of  the
emergency programme in not be able to target the most vulnerable households; b) a lesson learned
from MOSAP is that more needs to be done to ensure that women play an equal role in the FFSs and
are active in the decision making processes.; c) much of the field implementation will be conducted by
FAO as service provider.  MOSAP and  other projects recognise the need for an experienced service
provider in order to develop community and farm level organizational capacity for implementation; and
d)  another  lesson  learnt  is  the  need  to  build  government  capacity  to  ensure  good  governance,
accelerate  project  implementation  and  ensure  country  ownership  of  results.  Government  capacity
building  has  proved  to  be  essential,  especially  to  improve  the  competence  and  motivation  of
government  staff  involved  in  the  supervision  of  municipality  level  extension  agents  and  FFS
facilitators.
63.
Although  ARP  is  not  an  emergency  Project,  there  are  some  lessons  from  the  "Livestock
Emergency  Guidelines  and  Standards"  that  will  help  guide  the  Project’s  effective  implementation. A
couple  of  such  lessons  include:  a)  there  is  a  need  to  ensure  that  the  proponents  of  a  given
intervention understand and take into account local development activities, particularly those aiming at
strengthening  local  livelihoods;  and  b)  there  is  the  need  to  support  existing  local  service  providers,
suppliers, and markets, wherever feasible and relevant. This is known to enable recovery  and long-
term development.
64.
ARP will  be  implemented  in  compliance  with  a  number  of  IFAD’s  policies,  including  IFAD’s
Strategic  Framework  2016-25.  The  goal  of  the  IFAD  Strategic  Framework  is  to “enable  rural
households and communities to gain increasingly remunerative, sustainable  and resilient livelihoods
that help them permanently move out of poverty and food insecurity”. ARP design has been guided by
the  IFAD  Guidelines  for  Disaster  Early  Recovery (2011) in  many  aspects  including  vulnerability  and
risk assessment (already undertaken as part of the PDNA). Some of the findings have been used to
guide design while others will be used to inform implementation, collaboration with GoA and its other
development partners to ensure coordination of responses, capacity identification, etc. The Project will
also be implemented in compliance with IFAD Policies on Natural Resources Management (NRM) and
Climate  Change as  the  disaster  was  a  result  of  climatic  events. The  design recognises smallholder
land holdings being part of the productive landscape as well as a natural asset. The Project adheres
to the principle of promoting the recognition and greater awareness of the economic and social value
of natural assets through the capacity building for farmers in environmental management practices.
65.
The Project  is  also  aligned  with  IFAD’s Targeting  Policy – Reaching  the  Poor  (2010).Target
groups have been defined, a targeting strategy developed and means of operationalising that strategy
integrated  into  Project  design  and  implementation  modalities. ARP  is also fully  in  line  with  IFAD’s
policies  on  Gender  Equality  and  Women’s  Empowerment.  Measures  are  included  to  ensure  that
women and youth benefit from Project interventions.
66.
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) –The environmental
and social categorisation of the ARP is B. Potential adverse environmental impacts are expected to be
site  specific,  reversible  and  with  the  possibility  of  being  minimised  using  appropriate  measures  that
can  be  included  in  Environmental  and  Social  Management  plans  for  the  water  infrastructure
14
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
development.  The infrastructure development will be micro and small-scale in non-sensitive locations.
Measures,  such  as  improved  water  management,  safe  handling  of  agrochemicals  and  waste
management, will be promoted through the FFSs. Efforts have been made to minimise the social risks
through encouraging community participation including a grievance mechanism and the development
of community based NRM plans. The climate risk classification of the ARP is high given the adverse
impacts of prolonged  droughts  during  the El  Niñoevents  and  the  floods  experienced  in  some  areas
due to the subsequent La-Nina events. A drought vulnerability analysis has already been undertaken
as  part  of  the  response  strategy  led  by  the  GoA  (see  Appendix  14),  while  an  assessment  of  the
impacts of the floods is also in progress. The target beneficiaries of the ARP will benefit from climate
change  adaptation  capacity  building  through  the  FFSs.  The  curriculum  will  include  techniques  and
technologies  for  the  smallholders  to  adopt.  Some  of  the  adaptation measures  were  also
recommended as part of the climate vulnerability analysis during the design of the SAMAP.
III. ARP Implementation
Approach
A.
67.
The  ARP  will  build  on  the work  done under  various emergency  programmes in  the Project
areas. Many of the emergency programmes are being implemented by FAO using the FFS approach,
FFSs  have proved  to  be  an  effective  means under  emergency  conditions  mobilise  the  community,
undertake communal public works and provide training and extension support. Notwithstanding these
benefits there are noticeable weaknesses in household adoption of improved practices and reaching
the  most  vulnerable  households22.  Some  100  have  been  established  FFSs  under  the  emergency
programme in the ARP target area with 4,200 household members. Farm households are familiar with
the approach which is widely accepted. The schools are located in FFS locations prioritised to include
municipalities and communities that were most severely affected by drought and flooding. Support will
be  provided  to  strengthen  these  e-FFSs,  set  up  by  the  emergency  programmes,  to  impact  at
household  level  through  the  prescribed  targeting  strategies.  New  e-FFSs  will  also  be  established
where  the  potential  exists.  The  30  month  length  of  the  training  cycle,  that  typifies  the  conventional
approach, will be-adapted to match the recovery nature of ARP. A list of possible topics to be covered
are  given  in  Appendix  4.In  all  of  the  e-FFS  situations,  lead  farmers  will  be  identified  as  extension
facilitators at community level and will be trained in both technical and social areas of development. In
this  way  ARP  will  strengthen  the  FFS  investments  at  community  level  while  targeting  individual
households; members of the FFSs and others in the vicinity.
68.
For the new e-FFSs, consideration will be given to set up a limited number of new schools in
areas  not  previously  covered  by  the  emergency  programmes  so  as  to  cover additional households.
Consideration will be given to selecting areas that are near those previously established so as to form
clusters  that  would  provide  benefits  in  management  and  supervision. For  new e-FFSs,  the  process
will follow four steps: a) agro-ecosystem analysis/preparation of natural resource management plans;
b)
FFS  awareness
raising/sensitisation, organisation of farmers, curricula development; and c) distribution of household
level food security, livestock and off-farm packages.
construction  and  establishment  of 
infrastructure; 
community 
c)
69.
The FFS approach is regarded as the principal extension approach in Angola and will be the main
instrument to promote recovery and resilience. In most situations, the FFS is used to create social and
financial capital whilst acting as a new technology delivery mechanism. The Project will work with the
existing  e-FFSs  to  fill  in  the  identified  gaps  and  enable  the  beneficiaries  to  fully  recover  from  the
disasters. A limited number of additional e-FFSs will be established to reach some of the beneficiaries
that  had  not  been  served  by  the  emergency  programmes.  Through  the  emergency  programmes,
focus  of  attention  was  given  to  development  of  the  communal  plot  which  provides  opportunities  for
crop and nutrition diversification for FFS members, whilst creating a capital fund to sustain the school
in the future. The activities implemented under the emergency programmes are at a fledgling level of
22 In many of the cases the FFS under the emergency programme has experienced weaknesses of low adoption
at household level because of the short time frame of the programme and the primary focus on activities
implemented through the common plot. The programme also experienced challenges of lack of mentoring
support of the Master Trainers that did not have adequate operational funds to support the FFS at community
level
15
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
development  and  considerably  more  work  is  needed  for  farm  households  to  adopt  the  agricultural
practices on their own plots. The approach of ARP will be to: a) strengthen the capacity of the e-FFS
organisation; b) support construction/ maintenance of communal infrastructure; c) support production
from the community plot; and d) impact FFS members at household level by fostering the replication
and  adoption  of  the  new  technologies  (short  duration,  drought  resistant  varieties  of  cereals  and
cassava  cuttings)  and  the  introduction  of  livestock  based  packages  and  off  farm  livelihood
opportunities.
70. Implementation and phasing of the ARP field activities will depend on the status of the FFS that
have been established or planned.
For  those  FFSs,  set  up  under  the  emergency  programme,  where  public  goods  investment  have
already  been  made, households  will  be  eligible  from  the  beginning  of  project  implementation  to
receive a choice of livelihood packages.
For  communities  where  new  e-FFSs  will  be  established,  the  process  will  follow  these  steps:  a)
agro-ecosystem analysis/preparation of natural resource management plans; b)  FFS awareness
raising/sensitisation,  organisation  of  farmers,  curricula  development; c)  establishment  and
implementation  of  communal  productive  infrastructure  activities  together  with  FFS  training
support;(year 1);  d) household level livelihoods assessment and targeting;  and e) the provision
of the crop, livestock and off-farm recovery packages to targeted households (women, youth and
the most vulnerable) (from years 2 and 3).
For communities where no FFSs are envisaged, development will commence by a) conducting an
agro-ecosystem  analysis,  followed  by  preparation  of  natural  resource  management  plans;  b)
establishing  communal  productive  infrastructure  through  community  mobilization – years  1-2  c)
provision of crop, livestock and off-farm household recovery packages – years 2-4.
71.
In  all  cases  each  household  will  be  eligible  to  receive  the technical  package  as  a  one-time
support, conditional on the community contribution in the form of labour to the community productive
assets.    Support  for  the  household  crop  and  livestock  packages  will  take  place  only  after  the
community  level  productive  assets  have  been  established.
During  implementation  the  targeting
process will be  refined and  the approach below followed: (1)  assessment of crop and livestock system:
upport  will  be  made  available  through  the  project  to
election  of  households:  (5). preparation  of
(2)  community  sensitization;  (3)
strengthen the technical capacity of the beneficiary households in crop and livestock production and
Terms  of  Partnership:  and  (6)  package  delivery:  S
provide the skills required  to more effectively cope  with droughts  and floods and facilitate  the target
beneficiaries to transition to the recovery phase.
household  profiling:  (4)  s
72.
Attention will be placed on developing self-reliance amongst the e-FFSs, farmer organisations
and interest groups formed around the livelihoods diversification activities through a well-tested social
mobilisation/community  development  process.  The  Project, will  introduce  procedures  aimed  at
strengthening  the  capacity  of  school  and  group  members  to  resolve their own  problems,  clarifying
from  the  outset,  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  Project  and  those  of  the  community.  The
community  development  plans and  the  livelihood  packages  for  individual  households  will  identify
training needs, extension worker inputs, and internal and external resource requirements. Community
led M&E will also play an important part in this process.
73.
Individual household mentoring will be conducted through the cadre of community development
facilitators identified  from  within  the  Project  areas  and  recruited  by  the  Project  to  lead  the  social
mobilisation  and  group  formation/strengthening  processes.  Support  for  social  mobilisation  will  come
from  local  NGOs  contracted  for  this  purpose. NGOs  will  work  with  the  community  development
facilitators once they have been identified, selected and trained.
The implementation strategy will involve an immediate recovery period where efforts will focus
74.
on  the  rehabilitation  and  construction  of  productive  infrastructure  and  restocking  of  livestock  (small
stock).  It  will  include  establishing  animal  watering  points,  regeneration  of  pastures  and  vaccination
and veterinary care. In the crop sub-sector, efforts will focus on the rehabilitation of crop production by
providing  the  necessary  seeds  and  other  agricultural  inputs,  especially  for  key  staples  and
horticultural crops.
16



REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
75.
Efforts will be made to: a) promote crop diversification through the selection of drought-tolerant
varieties and the promotion of other crops that can be cultivated in a sustainable manner under local
conditions; and b) promote livestock diversification.
76.
In  line  with  the  principles  embodied  in  IFAD’s  Guidelines  for  Disaster  Early  Recovery,  the
Project will seek to achieve: a) rapid implementation within to support the recovery of livelihoods; b)
collaboration with government and other agencies in the target areas to make full use of the structures
that are in place; and c) building up national capacity as part of the recovery efforts.
Collaboration  with  other Development  Partners’ Programmes/Projects – ARP  will
77.
coordinate  and  harmonise  with  Programmes/Projects 
financed  by  government  and  various
development partners that support ARP-related thematic areas. This is aimed at taking advantage of
synergies and avoiding duplications. Some of such Programmes/Projects include:
Strengthening  Resilience  and  Food  and  Nutrition  Security  in  Angola – The  objective  of  this
project  is to  contribute  to  the  reduction  of  hunger,  poverty  and  vulnerability  to  food  and
nutrition  insecurity,  in  the  provinces  most  affected  by  climate  change – Cunene,  Huila  and
Namibe.  This  is an  EU  funded  project costing EUR  70  million. It  will  focus  on:  a) basic
nutrition;  b)  water  and  sanitation;  c)  agriculture  (land,  water,  inputs,  extension,  services,
cooperatives);  d)  environmental  protection;  e)  disaster  prevention  and  preparedness;  and  f)
developmental food security assistance. Given that this project will be in the same Provinces
as ARP, coordination  will  be critically  important to ensure that different municipalities and/or
communes  are  targeted and  complementarity  of  different  activities. The  resilience  focus  of
this  project  will  complement  the  activities  of  the  ARP.  Climate  vulnerability  mapping  will  be
done as part of the project to further inform the resilience building activities. The investments
in land and water resources management are crucial for the resilience enhancement.
Some  UN  agencies  and  NGOs  are  working  closely  with  the  GoA  within  the  framework
established by the National Plan for Preparation, Contingency Response and Recovery 2015-
2017.  ARP  will  build  on  some  of  the  projects  in  its  areas  of  focus,  such  as  those  financed
through the Central Emergency Response Fund.
UN  Agencies  are  also  providing  support  to  the  Government  in  strengthening  capacities  for
Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Resilience  Building.  UNDP  is  one  of  the  lead  agencies  in
providing the DRM support and the ARP will contribute to filling some of the funding gaps in
ensuring sufficient national, provincial and municipal level capacity.
The  African  Development  Bank  (AfDB) will  be  supporting  the  operationalisation  of  the  four
agro-ecological  centres  established  by the  Ministry  of  Environment  (MINAMB) in  Namibe,
Cuando  Cubango,  Huambo  and  Cabinda.  The  centre  in  Namibe  (Bibala)  could  be  used  for
training of smallholders on climate resilient agricultural practices and livelihood diversification
options  once  operational.  This  will  enhance  the  collaboration  between  MINAMB  and
MINAGRI  as  extension  officers  could  also  benefit  from  the  training.  The  project  will  benefit
from Global  Environment  Facility  financing  and  the  smallholders  targeted  under  the  ARP
could benefit from the capacity building that will be provided through the centre.
Agence Française De Dévelopment (AFD) is in the process of reengaging with GoA and has
finalised the  nature  of  the  interventions.  However,  discussions  with  the  AFD
not  yet
representative  suggest
the  likelihood  of  engaging  in  ARP-type  activities  in some  of  the
drought-affected  Provinces,  particularly Benguela and  Namibe.  Liaison  with  AFD  will  be
ongoing  to  ensure  effective  collaboration  between  ARP  and  the  eventual  intervention  that
AFD  will  support. AFD  support  is  likely  to  have  some  focus  on  developing  water  resources
and  investing  in  related  infrastructure.  These  investments  will  contribute  to  the resilience
building of the communities in southern Angola.
B.
Organisational Framework
78. MINAGRI will be the lead executing agency and will work closely with the other line ministries
and partners whose mandates have a bearing on the Project objectives. The Project delivery systems
will  be  integrated  into  the  decentralised  organisational structures  that  cascade  from  the  national  to
communal levels. IDA (Instituto de Desenvolvimento Agrário (Agricultural Development Institute)) will
the  lead  executing
be responsible  for administration  and  coordination  of  the  Project. MINAGRI,
17





REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
agency, will be supported by the Project Coordination Committee (PCC) as an oversight body, chaired
by  the  Minister  of  Agriculture  or  his  nominee,  and  composed  of  membership  from  institutions  with
direct  relevance to  of  ARP’s  objectives. The PCC will  be  responsible  for:  a)  providing  strategic
implementation;  b)  promoting  inter-ministerial  coordination;  c) review  and
guidance  for project
approval of the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB); d) review and approval of the annual progress
reports  and  providing guidance  on  measures  to  solve  implementation  issues; and e) ensure  that
interventions are coordinated with other relevant Programmes and Projects. The Director General of
IDA will be the Secretary of the PCC.
79.
There  will  be  a  Provincial  Project Coordination Committee  (PPCC)  in  each  participating
province with  composition  and  tasks  reflecting  those  of  the PCC.  The PPCCs will  include  the
Provincial  Director  of Agriculture,  the  Provincial  Director  of  IDA  and  the Area  Project Coordinator,  a
two
representative  of  civil  society  or  NGO,  a  representative  of  the  private  sector  and at  least
representatives of beneficiaries/producers’ organisations. The PPCCs will also meet twice a  year, or
more frequently, if required. The responsibilities of the PPCCs will include: a) speeding up decisions
and procedures; b) review and approval of the beneficiary and IGA selection processes; c) review the
provincial  level  AWPB  prepared  by  the Provincial  Directorates  of  Agriculture and  the  main  area
service providers; and d) review the provincial level annual progress reports.
80.
Provincial  Governance  Committee  (PGC) – PGCs  will  be  established  in  each  participating
province  to  ensure  good  governance  and  accountability.  They  will  be  composed  of  local  authorities
and traditional leaders who will be supported when the need arises by a representative/agent of the
oversight  committee.  The  functions  of  the  PGCs  will  be  to  oversee  good  governance  and
accountability.  This  being  a  recovery  Project with  a  very  limited  budget, the  process  of selecting
beneficiaries and the targeting of the crop and livestock packages could generate some grievances.
The  PGCs  will  establish  a  grievance  mechanism to  address any  grievances that  could arise  during
implementation.  The  PGCs will  keep  records  of  evidences  and  complaints  with  minutes  of  the
discussions,  recommendations  and  decisions. The  PGCs  will  establish  detailed  mechanisms for  the
grievance  and  complaint  process,  describing  format,  language,  time  for  reply  and  alternative
resources, including access to Courts of Law as a last resort. Open dialogue will also be promoted as
this  is  the  most  suitable  way  of  addressing  any  grievances expressed.  The  oversight  agent  will  be
entitled to spot-check the beneficiary selection and IGA sub-project approval process at the PGC level
to ensure fairness and transparency, and will report to the PCC.
Planning, M&E, Learning and Knowledge Management
C.
81.
Planning – Annual planning will be a decentralised process, starting at the municipality levels
where  the EDAs will prepare municipality-specific  plans.  The  contents  will  depend  on  the type  of
recovery  activities to be  implemented in each municipality. Municipality plans will be consolidated at
the provincial level by the office of the Provincial Director of Agriculture and forwarded to the PIU for
consolidation  into  a  Project-wide  draft AWPB. The  consolidated  AWPB will be  sent  to  the PCC for
review and endorsement and subsequently to IFAD for review and expression of “No Objection”. The
draft should be sent to IFAD latest by 31st October of every year or 60 days before the start of the next
Project  Year.  IFAD will have  30  days  for  reviewing and  provision  of “No  Objection” and  the  PIU will
have  a  full  month  to  revise  and  finalise  the  AWPB. This  process  is  critical  to  ensure  the  timely
submission  of  the  draft  to  each  level  of  approval.  The finalised AWPB will be  distributed  to  all ARP
implementing  agencies  by  31st December  of  every  year  to  ensure  a  smooth  transition  from  year  to
year. The AWPBs  will  be  the  basis  for  implementation  and will be  results-oriented with a  clear  link
between planned activities and outputs.
82. Monitoring  and  Evaluation – A  M&E  system  will  be  established  to  provide  information  on
progress  and  performance  that monitors  the  recovery  process  and contributes  to  effective  Project
management,  decision  making  and  reporting,  including  to  government  and  IFAD.  Reporting  to  IFAD
will be  consistent  with  the  stipulations  of  the  Guidelines  for  Disaster  Early  Recovery. Monitoring will
focus on collecting data on the status of planned activities in the AWPB, and on creating a cumulative
overview of the direct results (deliverables/outputs) from Project start-up until completion.
In  line  with  the  implementation  approach,  the  M&E  system  will  be  decentralised.  The  M&E
83.
Assistant will provide the necessary guidance, develop tools and follow-up. Considering that ARP will
be building on emergency programmes, it will consider strengthening any existent and relevant tools,
as  opposed  to  starting  afresh.  Training  and  backstopping  will  be  provided  to  those  involved  in  data
18
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
collection  and  collation  at  the  different  levels. Since many  of  the  activities will be  subcontracted  to
service  providers,  the different  service  provider agreements  would  specify  responsibilities  for
monitoring and include templates for consistent reporting.
84.
The M&E system will assess progress and achievements of the interventions. Provision will be
made  for  close  monitoring  and  supervision  of ARP  activities;  especially  during  the  first  two  years  to
ensure that implementation of early recovery activities proceeds smoothly, and that any problems are
dealt with in a timely manner. The M&E system will also monitor and assess early recovery objectives
and priorities regularly. This will support prompt identification of problems (such as objectives that are
not being met or are off-track) so that remedial actions can be taken. This will also help to ensure that
recovery  activities  are  underpinned  by  the  principles  of  “do  no  harm”  and  “build  back  better”,  as
required by the IFAD Guidelines for Disaster Early Recovery.
An M&E Assistant,  under  the  supervision  of  the  Project  Coordinator,  will  be  responsible  for
85.
M&E.  The  M&E  &  Knowledge  Sharing  Specialist  of SAMAP will  oversee  the  M&E  function.  The
relevant  units  at  the  different  government  levels,  the  main  service  providers,  the  implementation
partners and the beneficiaries will play an important role in M&E functions.
86.
A baseline survey will be undertaken during the first year to benchmark the existing situation in
the  Project  area. To  the  extent  possible,  the  information  contained  in  the  PDNA  and  other  reports,
especially those on emergency interventions, should be used to inform the baseline. An effort will be
made to identify gender issues and gaps so that these can be addressed. A Mid-Term Review (MTR)
will evaluate whether the Project is on course to achieve the objectives. It will identify any constraints
and recommend remedial measures to achieve the objectives. The recommendations will consider the
likelihood of achieving the Project's targets during the remaining time and may modify those targets.
Before completion, an impact assessment will be undertaken to inform the Project Completion Report
(PCR)  which  will  provide  an assessment of  the  accomplishments  of  ARP  and  analysis  of  its
performance.
87.
Learning  and Knowledge  Management – Knowledge  Management  (KM)  will  ensure  that
Project implementation is a continuous learning process in which quantitative and qualitative data will
be compiled,  analysed  and  disseminated  as  lessons  learned, together  with thematic  studies  and
stories from the field that explain challenges encountered and results achieved. The information to be
generated  by  the  M&E system  will  enable  IDA/MINAGRI,  other related  ministries,  the  Provincial
Directorates and  other  relevant  stakeholders  to  carefully  monitor  the  Project  and  provide  reliable
information  on  the  different  recovery  interventions  and  the  resultant  impacts (or  lack  thereof).
Information  sharing  with  other  recovery  projects  in  Angola  and  the  region will receive  particular
attention. Knowledge gained in other countries of the region will be made available to ARP. In turn, the
ARP experience will inform regional learning on post-disaster recovery interventions.
Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
D.
88.
disbursements, financial reporting, internal controls and auditing are detailed in Appendix 7.
Financial  Management arrangements  including,  staffing,  budgeting,  accounting,  funds  flow,
Based on IFAD’s single currency lending framework, the loan will be denominated in US dollars
89.
on  ordinary  lending  terms,  subject  to  the  availability  of US  dollars  at IFAD;  this is to  be  confirmed
during  loan  negotiations.
In  case  of  unavailability  of sufficient USD  resources,  the  loan  will  be
denominated  in  Special  Drawing  Rights  (SDR). The  Public  Expenditure  and  Financial Accountability
(PEFA)  assessment  for  Angola  was  carried  out  in  2016  and,  as  of  April  2017,  is  still  due  for
publication.  Angola  ranks  164/177  in  the  2016  Transparency  International  Corruptions  Perception
risk23.  The  World  Bank  carried  out  an  assessment  of  the financial  management and  procurement
systems  during  design  of  the Smallholder  Agriculture  Development  and  Commercialisation  Project
(SADCP-WB) and concluded that inherent fiduciary risk of the project is classified as “substantial”.
90.
IDA shall open a Designated Account denominated in USD in a Commercial Bank in Luanda in
order  to  receive  the  financing  proceeds. IDA  shall also  open  an  Operational  Account  in Angolan
Kwanza (AOA) in the same bank where the Designated Account will be opened. As GoA institutional
accounts  require  at  least  two  signatories,  the  Project  Coordinator  will  be  one  of  the  mandatory
signatories of the Designated Account and Luanda Operational Account. Additional signatories will be
23https://www.transparency.org/news/feature/corruption_perceptions_index_2016#table
19
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
senior  staff  of  IDA. An  additional Project Account  denominated  in Angolan AOA  will  be  opened  in  a
Commercial  Bank  in  Lubango.  This  account  will  have  as mandatory  signatories  the  Project
Coordinator  and  staff  from  the  Provincial  Directorate  of  IDA  and/or  the  Provincial  Directorate  of
Agriculture.
91.
ARP will use the PRIMAVERA accounting software (also used by the IFAD-supported Projects
MOSAP and AFAP, and will be procured for the newly approved Project, SAMAP). The software will
be  procured  and  installed  prior  to  first  disbursement.  ARP  will  also  employ  electronic  archiving  of
financial and procurement documentation from its inception. This will be accomplished from available
software enterprise solutions in Luanda, subject to a  reasonable cost-benefit ratio due to the limited
amount of project resources. As the Mozambique portfolio is employing an electronic archiving system
developed  in-house,  ARP  will  explore  the  possibility  of  acquiring  the  same  software  based  on
comparison of costs relative to the commercially available software packages in Luanda.
92.
Staffing and Financial Management Arrangements – The financial management of IDA is highly
centralised such that the provincial administration of the Institute in Lubango operates a very limited
budget for operational expenses (petty-cash) and is staffed by an Administrative and Finance Officer.
The  same  Officer  is  also  responsible  for  Procurement.  For  this  reason,  ARP  will  hire  a  dedicated
Accountant  who  will  be  supported  by  the  IDA  Finance  Officer  in his/her  day-to-day  activities.  The
accountant of ARP will report to the Project Coordinator and will be under the direct guidance of the
Financial  Management  Specialist  of  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP  (henceforth  Financial  Management
Specialist) in Luanda, who will double as Financial Management Specialist for ARP. In agreement with
IDA, the FM Specialist’s TORs will be broadened to include these additional responsibilities.
93.
The very small financial management structure of ARP in Lubango poses substantial difficulties
for  internal  control  and  adequate  segregation  of  duties.  To  increase  quality  of  internal  control, the
following  arrangements  will  be  elaborated  in  the  Financial Management  Procedures  Manual,  which
will be part of the PIM: a) the Project Account in Lubango will be used solely for the management of
recurrent costs (operations and maintenance, fuel, travel expenditures, small purchases) and will be
replenished on a revolving fund basis; b) for large purchases of goods and services (to be determined
during implementation, but ideally expenses above the SOE threshold), payments will be processed
by  the  ARP Accountant,  approved  by  the Financial  Management Specialist  and  authorised  by  the
Project  Coordinator. These  expenditures  will  be  paid  from  the Project’s Operational Account  in AOA
opened  in Luanda;  c)  for  purchases  below  the  SOE  threshold,  payments  will  be  processed  by  the
ARP  Accountant  and  authorised by  the  Project  Coordinator  and  paid  from  the  Project  Account in
Lubango. As this account will be managed on a revolving fund basis, replenishments will depend on
the  regular  financial  reports  prepared  by  the  ARP  Accountant  and  submitted  to  the  Financial
Management Specialist  for  approval by the  Project  Coordinator.  The  Project  accountant  will,
nonetheless, be responsible for posting all expenditures in the accounting system. The IDA Finance
and Administrative Officer in Lubango will support the Accountant in the day-to-day activities including
record-keeping,  archiving  of  supporting  documentation,  reconciliation  of  the  Project  accounts,  and
preparation of financial reports.  Both the Project Accountant and the IDA Finance and Administrative
Officer  will  be trained  in  the  use  of  the  accounting  software.  The  Interim  Financial  Reports  to  be
submitted to IFAD as well as the consolidated Financial Statements for the yearly audit exercise will
be  prepared  by  the  Financial Management Specialist,  with  assistance  from  the  Project Accountant,
under the overall responsibility of the Project Coordinator.
IDA, through its Directorate for Administration and Finance (DAF/IDA) will maintain oversight of
94.
financial operations of the Project, especially in the process of AWPB approval and flow of funds.
95.
Retroactive  Financing – As  requested  by  GoA,  the  financing  agreement  will  allow  for
retroactive financing. The amount to be retroactively financed will not exceed 10% of the total Project
cost.  Expenditures  to  be  retroactively  financed will  not  be  incurred  before  the  Project’s  approval  at
IFAD's  Quality  Assurance  stage.  Over  the  last  few  years,  FAO  has  implemented  emergency
programmes in Angola’s southern provinces funded by USAID, OCHA and FAO. MINAGRI and FAO
have agreed that FAO will pre-finance some of the Project’s activities prior to signing of the Financing
Agreement. This retroactive financing is meant to ensure a timely start of the agricultural campaigns in
ARP’s target areas. All expenditures to be retroactively financed must meet IFAD’s eligibility criteria as
set  forth  in  the  IFAD  General  Conditions  for Agricultural  Financing  as  amended  on April  2014,  with
particular emphasis on IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines. The activities to be retroactively financed will
be included in the first AWPB, and any purchases of goods and services disclosed in the Procurement
20
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Plan.  The  total  amount  of  retroactive  financing will  also  be  disclosed  in  the  first audited Financial
Statements. Based  on  disbursement  instructions  from  GoA,  IFAD  will  reimburse  FAO  upon
confirmation that all conditions for first disbursement have been met. However, as detailed in the IFAD
guidelines for retroactive financing, IFAD will take no liability for any pre-financed amounts in case the
Project is not approved by its Executive Board.
96.
An  advance  of  USD  300,000  will  be  made  available  upon  entry  into  force  of  the  Financing
Agreement for start-up activities. Withdrawal Applications will be under the Statement of Expenditure
(SoE)  procedure,  with  SoE  threshold  that  will  be  detailed  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower.  The
Designated Account will be managed following imprest account procedures, with an initial deposit of
USD 500,000.
97.
Audit – Internal  control  systems  at  the  PIU  level  will  be  established  and  detailed  in  the
Financial  Management  Procedures  Manual.  IDA  will  ensure  regular  internal  audit  activity  provided
either  by  the  internal  audit  unit  of  MINAGRI  or  by  an  independent  service  provider.  As  the  ARP
Accountant will be under the oversight of the SADCP-C&H-SAMAP Financial Management Specialist,
the  Project  may  sub-contract  the  internal  auditor  competitively  selected  by  SADCP-C&H-SAMAP.
Supervision Missions will also report on the activity of the internal audit by reviewing the audit reports
and assessing management’s responsiveness to the auditor’s recommendations. Internal controls will
also be verified during the annual external audit exercise and reported to IFAD in management letters,
in line with IFAD’s audit guidelines.
In compliance with IFAD’s General Conditions, ARP financial statements will be audited on an
98.
annual basis in accordance to IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits. The audit reports together with the
related management letters must be submitted to IFAD no later than six months after the end of each
fiscal year. The annual audit will also be in line with the IFAD Guidelines for Disaster Early Recovery
which  call  for  a  fully-fledged  audit  to  be  undertaken  once  a  year  to  confirm  the  eligibility  of
expenditures and compliance with procedures.
99.
Procurement – All  procurement  will  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  IFAD  Procurement
Guidelines  and  IFAD  “Policy  on  preventing  fraud  and  corruption  in  activities  and  operations”.
Procurement responsibility  will rest  with the MINAGRI/IDA. All procurement will be executed against
approved AWPBs which  align  with  the  Procurement  Plans,  specifying  items  to  be  procured,
responsibility  for  the  procurement  and  the  appropriate  procurement  methods.  All  procurement
financed by IFAD will be exempt from duties and taxes. Details on the procurement arrangements are
presented in Appendix 8.
Supervision
E.
100. Supervision  and  implementation  support  will  be  jointly  undertaken  by  IFAD  and  GoA. During
Year  1 supervision  will  be  undertaken  every  three  months.  Depending  on  progress  and  the  level  of
risk  assessed,  subsequent  supervision missions  will  be  fielded  at  least  twice,  but  preferably  three
times a year. Considering the perceived Financial Management risk, IFAD will undertake an additional
financial management Implementation Support Mission in conjunction with the other IFAD-supported
Projects  (AFAP  and  SAMAP)  in  the  first  two  years  of  implementation.  This will support  capacity
building of financial management staff, as well as on-site review of SOEs, supporting documentation
and  procurement  arrangements. Supervision and  implementation  support  will  be  based  on  IFAD’s
operational  modalities  and  practices. Supervision  will  not  be  conducted  as  a  general  inspection  or
evaluation  but,  rather,  as  an  opportunity  to  assess  achievements  and  lessons  learned  and  to  jointly
reflect  on  ways  to  improve  implementation  and  increase  the  likelihood  of  achieving  the  Project’s
objectives. IFAD will also provide implementation support either during the Supervision Missions or as
and when needed. Key features likely to require attention by the Missions will include: a) setting up of
a functional M&E system; b) procedures and systems causing implementation and reporting delays; c)
the procurement function; d) process of selecting the qualifying beneficiaries; and e) effective delivery
of capacity building interventions. During the first year, attention will be given to ensuring that capacity
is built at the local level for reporting early recovery activities.
F.
Risk Identification and Mitigation
101. The main issues and risks are weak institutional capacity for implementation, especially in the
areas of procurement, financial management, agricultural extension services, veterinary services and
21
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
social  mobilisation  and  community  development and  climate  variability.  The  Project  will  strengthen
institutional  capacity  and  skills  through  training  as  well  as  support  from  NGOs  and  consultants
(national  and  international)  who  will  work  closely  with  the beneficiaries and  government  institutions.
The critical operational risks, their  impact and probability and the proposed mitigation measures are
presented in the table below.
Risk
Limited Public Sector Capacity at
Local Levels – The provincial and
municipal levels will have important
roles in planning, coordination and
supervising Project implementation.
The municipalities, and communes in
particular, have limited capacity in
terms of staff numbers, skills,
experience and facilities.
Limited Capacity at Community
Level – Few service providers with
required knowledge and skills for
social mobilisation, community
development and income generation.
Limited Availability of Qualified
Financial Management Staff– The
extremely competitive market for the
few qualified FM staff in the country
might render difficult for the hiring of
experienced FM unit, unless
unsustainable salaries are proposed.
Protracted Procurement Process –
The procurement process takes more
time than expected.
Scarcity of Foreign Currency and
Emergence of a Parallel Exchange
Market – as at May 2017, the parallel
exchange market rate was double the
official exchange rate.
Poor Coordination with Other
Projects – Failure to establish
appropriate liaison with other post-
emergency projects in the ARP areas
of focus.
Table 2: Risk Identification and Mitigation
Impact and Probability
Less than effective Project
implementation, coordination and
supervision. High probability of
occurring.
Mitigation Measures
The Project will provide capacity
building for selected provincial and
municipality staff who will remain in
place after the Project is completed to
continue to deliver services.
Less than effective Project
implementation. Social mobilisation
and community development are vital
to ensure smooth implementation and
lay the foundation for sustainability.
High probability of occurring.
Financial management arrangements
would likely suffer, with lower quality
of internal control, resulting in
ineligible expenditures. Medium
probability of occurring.
Provision of technical assistance and
local level community support. The
Project will be responsible for
identifying, selecting and training
community level staff.
ARP will receive FM support from the
SADCP-C&H-SAMAP, which is also to
be implemented by IDA. In addition,
IFAD will provide detailed FM training
and frequent FM support during the first
12 months.
Late delivery of good quality agro-
inputs leads to missing of the
agricultural season. Medium
probability of occurring.
Procurement planning, including strict
adherence to the timing of the
processes as per the Procurement
Plan.
The purchasing power of the Project
is reduced taking into account that
cost tables reflect the official
exchange rate. High probability.
Careful planning of funds flow from
Designated Account in USD to
Operational Account in AOA to mitigate
the risk of eroding purchasing power.
Inadequate coordination may lead to
duplication of efforts and inefficient
use of scarce resources. Low
probability of occurring.
All interventions (emergency/post-
emergency) will be through Provincial
and Municipal governments. Project
management will work very closely with
local governments to ensure effective
targeting (with regard to areas of focus
and beneficiaries).
The Project will analyse and minimise
negative impacts through an
environmental management plan.
Training will be provided and site
management plans for infrastructure.
The Project will take into consideration
the ethnic and economic aspects of the
population, especially during targeting
of beneficiaries by setting very clear
selection criteria, widely agreed upon.
Provincial Governance Committees will
guide these processes.
Negative Impact on the
Environment – Implementation of
some activities may lead to
undesirable consequences on the
environment.
Failure to Respect Social
Framework – Selection of
participating villages and beneficiaries
fails to take into account the social
and cultural aspects of the area.
Some Project activities alter the
physicochemical structure of the area;
this could destabilise the ecological
balance. Low probability of occurring.
Lack of acceptance of Project
interventions, Project abandonment
and/or boycott from different actors.
Low probability of occurring.
22
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Risk
Creation of Dependency Syndrome
– The transition between emergency,
recovery and longer-term
development interventions needs to
be managed with care; badly
managed, this could create a
dependency syndrome.
Climate related shocks – The
climate variability continues be to
pronounced
Impact and Probability
The dependency syndrome could
make the target group less willing to
participate in recovery activities,
especially considering that
emergency humanitarian assistance
has been going on for some years.
Low probability of occurring on any
significant scale.
Agricultural productivity is adversely
affected and efforts in livelihoods
recovery continue to be undermined.
Medium probability of occurring.
Mitigation Measures
A good M&E system will identify
households struggling with the
transition; these will be supported by
the proven individual household
mentoring approach to assist them in
overcoming the dependency syndrome.
The concept on building back better
including diversification of livelihoods
will stabilise or enhance productivity.
Capacity building of the smallholders in
climate change adaptation through the
FFSs will also reduce vulnerability to
climate shocks.
IV. ARP Costs, Financing, Benefits and Sustainability
A.
ARP Costs
102. Total ARP  costs,  including  price  contingencies,  duties  and  taxes  are  estimated  at  about  USD
7.6  million  over  the  four-year  Project  implementation  period.  Of  this  amount,  about  26%  represents
the foreign exchange content, and about 8.6% are duties and taxes. Total base costs amount to USD
7.3 million, while contingencies are estimated to add to this amount another USD 0.3 million (of which
USD  0.1  million  are  physical  contingencies  and  USD  0.2  million  are  price  contingencies),
corresponding to 3.8%  of the  base costs. Investment costs account for 69%  of  the  base costs (and
recurrent  costs  for  the  remaining  31%).  Funds  allocated  to  Project  management  and  coordination
amount  to  about  USD  1.3  million  or  17%  of  total  Project  costs.  A  summary  breakdown  of  the
Programme costs by component is shown in the table below:
Table 3: Summary of Project Costs by Component (including contingencies)
(US$ '000)
Local Foreign
Total
%
Foreign
%  Total
Base
Exchange Costs
A. Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
1. Recovery of Household Productive Assets
2. Recovery of Community Productive Assets
3. Capacity Building for Recovery
Subtotal Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
B. Project Coordination and Management
1. Project Coordination and Management
Subtotal Project Coordination and Management
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
1,121
1,363
1,963
4,446
1,025
1,025
5,471
45
117
5,633
771
574
228
1,573
279
279
1,852
67
54
1,973
1,892
1,936
2,191
6,019
1,304
1,304
7,323
112
171
7,606
41
30
10
26
21
21
25
60
31
26
26
26
30
82
18
18
100
2
2
104
Inflation Rate – National inflation rate used in the COSTAB is based on forecasts provided by
103.
the  Economist  Intelligence  Unit  (EIU).  Inflation  in  Angola  has  peaked  since  2015  following  the
successive reductions in fuel subsidies and the Kwanza's continued weakness against the US Dollar,
which continues to push up the cost of imported goods. During the project implementation period an
average  international  inflation rate of  1.6%  has  been used,  based  on  the  Unit  Value  Index  (in  US
dollars)  of  manufactures  (MUV).  Both  local and  foreign  inflation  rates  are  compounded  at  mid-year.
Inflation  figures  used  in  the  calculation  of  the  Project  costs  are  shown  in the  table below.  Price
23
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
contingencies  have  been  applied  on  all  costs,  with  the  exception  of  grants  and  subsidies.  Physical
contingencies (5%) have been applied to equipment and materials, works, goods, services and inputs.
Table 4: Inflation Rates
Inflation Rates (%)
2017 2018 2019 2020
Annual
Local
Foreign
Compound
Local
Foreign
24.0
1.6
15.0
1.6
10.0
1.6
7.0
1.6
27.7
1.7
52.0
3.3
70.7
5.0
85.1
6.7
104. Exchange Rate – The initial exchange rate for the analysis has been set at Kwanza (AOA) 165
to US$ 1, the official rate prevailing in April 2017. In the absence of AOA/US$ exchange rate forecasts
provided  by  the  Central  Bank,  a  constant  purchasing  power  exchange  rate, as  calculated  by
COSTAB,  has  been  used. Considering  the high local  inflation  rate,  the  difficulties  in  forecasting  the
AOA/US$ exchange rates and the desire to mitigate cost overruns, costs in the COSTAB have been
set in US$.
105. Taxes  and  Duties – Import  duties  (on  vehicles,  office  furniture  and  equipment)  and  taxes  are
applied  to  costs  of  all  transactions  where  appropriate.  Both  consumption  and  production  taxes  are
applied on all imported and locally procured goods and services, except for training, workshops and
international technical assistance which are tax exempted. For directly recruited local staff, the Project
will  cover  the  social  insurance  charges  of  8%.  The  Government  will  waive  duties  and  taxes  or  will
finance the cost of all taxes on goods procured under the Project.
106. Expenditure  Categories – The  expenditure  categories  are  based  on  the  standardisation  that
IFAD is adopting after phasing its Loan and Grants System. Project costs by expenditure category are
shown in the table below:
Table 5: Project Costs by Expenditure Categories
(US$ '000)
Local Foreign
Total
%
Foreign
%  Total
Base
Exchange Costs
 I. Investment Costs
1. Consultancies and TA
2. Equipment & materials
3. Works
4. Vehicles
5. Workshops
6. Training
7. Goods, services & inputs
8. Grants & subsidies
9. Unallocated
10. Duties & Taxes
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
1. Operating costs
2. Salaries & allowances
3. Duties & Taxes
Total Recurrent Costs
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
220
42
518
144
3
-
784
-
-
-
1,711
141
-
-
141
1,852
67
54
1,973
292
88
259
55
48
1,109
301
750
-
394
3,295
84
1,873
219
2,176
5,471
45
117
5,633
512
130
778
199
50
1,109
1,085
750
-
394
5,006
225
1,873
219
2,317
7,323
112
171
7,606
43
32
67
72
5
-
72
-
-
-
34
63
-
-
6
25
60
31
26
7
2
11
3
1
15
15
10
-
5
68
3
26
3
32
100
2
2
104
24
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
B.
ARP Financing
107. The following financiers will be contributing to the Project: a) IFAD (through a loan and a grant);
b) the Government of Angola; c) FAO; and d) the Project beneficiaries. IFAD will fund the Project
through a grant of about USD 1.0 million and a loan of about USD 5 million. The loan will be on
ordinary terms. GOA will finance the taxes and duties as well as general office expenses for the
Project  coordination  and  management  unit  for  a  total  of  USD  0.7  million,  representing  9.5%  of
total costs.  The estimate of taxes and duties is based on the rates in effect prevailing at the time
of the design. In conformity with the principle that no taxes or duties would be financed out of the
proceeds of the IFAD Loan/Grant, any future changes in the rates and/or structures of taxes and
duties  would  have  to  be  met  by  GOA.    Beneficiaries  will  contribute  about  USD  0.4  million,
representing  5% of Project costs; it will consist mainly  of in-kind contributions (unskilled  labour).
FAO  will  contribute  with  0.5  USD  million  through Technical  Assistance  (provided  through  its
Technical Cooperation Programmes), cars and related Operations & Maintenance, salary of one
driver  and  office  equipment  for  the  PIU. The  proposed  financing  plan  for ARP  is  summarised  in
the table below.
Table 6: Project Financing Plan
The Government
Amount
%
FAO
Amount
%
IFAD loan
Amount
%
IFAD grant
Amount
Beneficiaries
Total
% Amount % Amount %
A. Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
1. Recovery of Household Productive Assets
2. Recovery of Community Productive Assets
3. Capacity Building for Recovery
Subtotal Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
B. Project Coordination and Management
1. Project Coordination and Management
Total PROJECT COSTS
312 15.5
7.2
146
5.1
113
9.1
571
155 11.5
9.5
726
294 14.6
-
-
7.2
161
7.3
454
36
491
2.7
6.5
1,286 64.0
1,606 79.3
954 42.8
3,845 61.4
1,154 85.8
5,000 65.7
-
-
-
-
1,000 44.9
1,000 16.0
117
5.8
273 13.5
-
-
6.2
390
2,008
2,024
2,227
6,260
26.4
26.6
29.3
82.3
-
-
1,000 13.1
-
390
-
5.1
1,346
17.7
7,606 100.0
108. Details  about  Project  costs  and  financing  are  presented  in  Appendix  9  and  the  associated
annexes.
C.
Summary Benefits and Economic Analysis
109. The  Project  will  contribute  to  improved  food  and  nutrition  security  through  the restoration  of
productive  assets  and  capacity  of  households affected  by  recurrent  droughts.  ARP  will  provide
agricultural  and  livestock  support  packages  that  include  inputs,  services  and  technical  capacity
building, and will build basic supporting infrastructure.
110. ARP will promote the production of staple food surpluses, whilst diversifying the rain-fed system
and household diets  by  including other crops (e.g. cassava  and beans). It  will  therefore support  the
diversification of the cropping system in order to mitigate the risk of crop failure. Implementation of this
activity  will  involve  offering  a  starter-pack  for  food  security  to  vulnerable  households,  together  with
extension  advice  (through  FFS)  on  minimum  tillage,  intercropping  with  legumes  and  other  climate-
tolerant practices.  In addition, beneficiaries will be helped to diversify their livelihoods through a range
of  income  generating  activities,  such  as  small  livestock  keeping.    ARP  will  also  promote  water
resource development and natural resource management (through rehabilitation of pastures and soil
and  water conservation).  The end result  will be: a) increased crop  and  livestock production;  and  b)
expanded land under climate-resilient practices.
111. Project  Benefits – Financial  benefits  will  be  in  the  form  of  increased  financial  returns  of  the
beneficiary households. Social benefits will include a reduction in poverty rates with special measures
taken  to  ensure  inclusion  of  disadvantaged  groups.  Environmental  benefits  will  consist  of  reduced
25
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
land degradation and  increased carbon sequestration of rangelands.  Due to limited  data availability,
only the direct household-level returns are taken into account.
112. Direct  Project  Beneficiaries – Primary  Project  beneficiaries  will  be  approximately 8,000
households  increasing  crop  and  livestock  production,  and  adopting  climate-resilient  practices.
Assuming an average household size of six people, total beneficiaries would be about 48,000 people.
Indirect  Project  Beneficiaries – There  will  also  be  large  numbers  of  people  who  will  benefit
113.
improved  crop  and  livestock
indirectly  from  the  Project  through:  diffusion  of  knowledge  about
production; improved access  to  water;  better  quality  agriculture  products  and  more  diversified  food,
with  positive  effects  in  terms  of  nutrition  and  food  security.  In  addition,  all  those  living  in  the Project
areas  will  benefit  from  strengthened  local  economies  resulting  from  inflows  of  income  and
strengthened local demand.  Thus, Project activities will indirectly stimulate the whole rural economy
benefiting rural population (including the rural poor) and possibly reducing rural-urban migration.
114. Economic Internal Rate of Return and Net Present Value – The Economic Internal Rate of
Return (EIRR) of the Project is estimated at 18.3% (base case) which is above the opportunity cost of
capital in Angola estimated at 12% (see Table 2 above). It is emphasised that the computed EIRR is a
minimum because it has been estimated in a very conservative way. Also, this is a reasonable result
given  the  recovery  aspect  of  the  Project,  logistic  and  climatic  difficulties  in  rural  areas,  and  overall
country macroeconomic situation. It is based on the assumption that adoption is limited to less than
66%  of  target  farmers. In  case  of  a  higher adoption rate,  the  EIRR  will  increase.  The  Net  Present
Value (NPV) is USD 4.16 million over the 20-year period.
115. Sensitivity  Analysis – In  order  to  test  the  robustness  of  the  above  results,  a  sensitivity
analysis  has been carried  out. The EIRR and NPV  were subjected to sensitivity analysis in  order to
measure variations due to unforeseen factors and account for risk.  Criteria adopted in the sensitivity
analysis  are:  10,  20  and  50%  cost  over-run;  10  and  20%  increase  in  benefits;  10  to  50%  benefit
decrease; and 1 to 2 years of delay in the implementation. Results are presented in the table below.
They indicate a relatively strong resilience to limited increases of costs and reductions of benefits as
well as benefit delays.
Table 7: Results of Sensitivity Analysis
Base case
scenario
Cost increments
Benefits increments
Benefits decrease
Benefits delay
EIRR
NPV ($)
18.3%
4,159,180
+10%
14.8%
3,337,880
+20%
11.9%
2,516,580
+50%
5.1%
52,680
+10%
14.4%
5,396,398
+20%
26.1%
6,633,616
-10%
14.4%
2,921,962
-20%
10.6%
1,684,744
- 50%
-3.2%
2,026,910
-
1 year
13.3%
3,187,967
2 year
10.2%
2,263,003
Minimum
number of
beneficiaries
to have a
positive NPV
3,000
Minimum
adoption rate %
to have a
positive NPV
44%
116. Risk  analysis – The  bulk  of  risk  considered  in  the  sensitivity  analysis  relates  to:  a)  limited
public  sector  capacity  at  local  levels;  b)  limited  capacity  at  community  level;  c)  the  procurement
process takes more time than expected; d) the Project fails to establish appropriate liaison with other
post-emergency  projects  in  the  ARP  areas  of  focus;  e)  undesirable  consequences  on  the
environment; f) selection of participating villages and beneficiaries fails to take into account the social
and cultural aspects of  the  area;  g)  the  transition  between  emergency,  recovery  and  longer-term
development  interventions  could  create  a  dependency  syndrome.  The  table  below  presents  the
impact  of  each  of  these  key  risk  components  on  Project  economic  performance  indicators.  The
probability of occurrence is supposed to affect the entity of cost/benefit increases/decreases reported
above, i.e. a low probability translates into a 10% decrease in benefits (or a 1-year delay in benefits),
while a medium probability is supposed to determine a 20% benefits decrease (or a 2-year delay in
benefits).  It is important to notice that these impacts should be considered purely as indicative and do
not rely on any proven evidence.
26
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table 8: Risk Analysis
Risk description (link with the risk matrix)
Prob. of occurrence
INSTITUTIONAL: Limited Public Sector Capacity at Local Levels
SOCIAL: Limited Capacity at Community Level
INSTITUTIONAL: Protracted Procurement Process
INSTITUTIONAL: Poor Coordination with Other Projects
SOCIAL: Negative Impact on the Environment
SOCIAL: Failure to Respect Social Framework
SOCIAL: Creation of Dependency Syndrome
Medium
Low
Medium
Low
Low
Low
Medium
Proxy to compare with SA
results
Benefits delay 2 years
Decrease in benefits (10%)
Benefits delay 2 years
Decrease in benefits (10%)
Increment in costs (10%)
Benefits delay 1 year
Increment in costs (20%)
EIRR (%)
NPV ($)
6.9%
10.0%
6.9%
10.0%
10.4%
9.7%
7.3%
962,983
1,759,262
962,983
1,759,262
2,083,347
2,074,138
925,844
117. Details about the Economic and Financial Analysis of the Project are presented in Appendix 10
and the associated annexes.
D.
Sustainability
118. Being  a  recovery  Project,
the emphasis  will  be  on  enabling  the  beneficiaries  and  their
communities  to  transition  from  the  emergency to recovery  phases and  subsequently into  the
development  phase. Consequently, efforts  will  be  made  to  ensure  that,  by  the  end  of  the  Project,
beneficiaries and their communities have been facilitated to return to a situation, at least as good as
before the disaster but preferably an improved situation; based on the principles of “do no harm” and
“build back better”.
119.
In addition to “building back better” stakeholders will be provided with the ability to continue with
the  ARP-initiated  interventions  when  the  Project  ends. Capacity  building  will  be  undertaken  at  the
institutional, community and household levels. The skills and capacities required at the different levels
will be strengthened to ensure communities are able to recover from climate-related shocks and the
relevant institutions are able to provide the necessary support and services. Also, the Project will lead
to improved pasture availability and management as well as increased and improved water sources;
this  would  contribute  to  enhance  the  sustainability  of  the  beneficiaries’  livelihoods. From  the
environmental point of view, ARP’s interventions will contribute to environmental sustainability through
the enhanced disaster risk management capacity and improved community-based natural resources
management; this  would contribute  to the strengthening of the social networks. The sustainability of
the community level natural resources management institutions will be ensured through the capacity
building and benefits to be realised in strengthening the local level networks that communities usually
depend on in recovery from various shocks. In addition the proposed linkages with Municipality level
strategies, which  are  more  established  institutions  that  are  provided  with  resources  from  the
budgeting processes will also ensure sustainability of the community level structures.
27
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Appendix 1: Country and Rural Context Background
A.
Country Context
1.
Angola  is  located  in  South-western  Africa  and  bordered  by  the  Atlantic  Ocean  to  the  west,
Namibia to the south  and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia to the north  and east,
respectively. The  country is Africa’s  second  largest  oil  producer  and, as  such,  oil  production  is  the
main sector of the economy; it accounts for about 47% of total Gross Domestic Product (GDP), 98%
of export earnings and 75% of government revenues. Angola also possesses a wealth of other natural
resources,  including  minerals  (it  is  the  world’s  fourth  largest  producer  of  diamonds),  water,  arable
land, forests and fisheries. It covers an area of 1,247,000 km2 and is the third largest country in sub-
Saharan Africa. The 2014 census estimated its population at 24.3 million people of whom some 38%
are living  in rural areas24. After four decades  of civil  war, much of the country’s economy collapsed,
infrastructure destroyed and institutions weakened. Since the return of peace, about 14 years ago, the
Government, together  with its national  and international partners have made substantial progress in
re-establishing  the  foundation  needed  to  address  these  problems.  This  has  resulted  in  the
development  and  implementation  of  programmes  aimed  at  restoring  order  and  security,  revitalising
the economy, restoration of basic social services and the rehabilitation of infrastructure.
Although the agriculture sector contributes on average only 5.5% to GDP, 44% of the employed
2.
population  work in  the  sector,  according  to  the  recent  census.  Moreover, 46%  of  households  were
engaged  in  some  agricultural  activity  and  6%  were  engaged  in  fishing.  The  Food  and  Agriculture
Organisation (FAO) estimates that almost 68% of economically active adults worked in the agriculture
sector  in  2014.  More  than  half  of  Angola’s  poor  are  located  in  rural  areas  and  depend  almost
exclusively on agriculture for their livelihood. Almost a third of agricultural households are headed by
women. Women are responsible for 70% of traditional subsistence agriculture and 24% of commercial
agriculture.
Poverty  and  Inequality – Angola  partially  met  its  Millennium  Development  Goals  targets  in
3.
2015. Angola ranks low on both human development and business environment indicators. Its overall
institutional  capacity  has  not  been  rehabilitated  since  the  return  of  peace  and  bureaucratic  hurdles
inhibit  private  sector  growth.  Performance  related  to  social  indicators  is  mixed:  good  progress  has
been made in poverty reduction, primary education, and gender equality since 2002, but other social
indicators  remain  very  poor.  For  example,  maternal  mortality  is  450  per  100,000  births,  and
malnutrition is acute with 30% of children less than five years of age suffering from stunting and 16%
underweight.
The overall poverty rate declined from 62% in 2001 to about 37% in 200925. This was a major
4.
achievement,  but  much  more  needs  to  be  done  to  reduce  poverty  as  part  of  the  shared  prosperity
agenda. Major disparities in the poverty rate exist across different provinces as well as between rural
and urban areas. The rural poverty rate is almost 58%, in contrast with an urban poverty rate of less
than  30  percent.  In  the  capital  city  (with  a  population  of  about  five  million),  the  poverty  rate  is  only
about  9%.  Smallholder  agricultural  production  and  productivity  development  and  commercialisation
are hence critical to reduce rural poverty.
5.
Critical  Issues  Emerging  from  Rural  Poverty  Analysis – The  arid  and  semi-arid  agro-
ecological zone in Southern Angola is characterized by desert, savannah grass and woodlands. The
region is sparsely populated and often impacted by recurrent drought and intermittent flooding. Most
of  the  rural  communities  in  the  region  are  marginal  and  have  low  levels  of  socio-economic
development. Agriculture is the main economic activity of the majority of the population. Precipitation
averages about 200-400 mm per annum based on a unimodal rainfall pattern. The rainy season starts
in mid-October and ends in March while the rest of the year is dry. The Cunene and Cuvelai are the
primary  basins  in  the  region  consisting  of  the  Curoca,  Giraul  and  Lucira  rivers. The  region  also  has
seasonal rivers and streams, which support some horticulture and aquaculture activities that provide
an additional source of food, nutrition and income.
24
Government of Angola (2016), “Censo 2014. Resultados definitivos do recensamento geral da populaçao e de habitaçao de
Angola 2014”, Instituto Nacional de Estatística.
25 IBEP 2008-2009.
28
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
B.
Agricultural Sector
6.
Although Angola used to be a major agricultural exporter, a large share of the food consumed in
the country is currently imported, with the exception of roots and tubers. Almost 36 percent of cereal
consumption (about 1.1 million tons) is met through imports. This is due in part to the destruction of
the  agricultural  production  and  marketing  infrastructure  during  the  civil  war  and,  in  part,  to  the
improvements in terms of trade that came from high oil prices and increased oil export volume. The
fall in oil price registered in the last two years and the consequent currency devaluation is a natural
incentive for domestic production to increase and substitute part of the imports. However, the extent to
which  this  incentive  will  materialise  depends  on  other  factors  such  as  adequate  macroeconomic
framework, improvements in the business climate, infrastructure and labor skills. The Government is
in  the  process  of  implementing  policies  that  will  increase  revenue  and  reduce  expenditure.  At the
same  time,  the  Government  is  striving  to  improve  the  business  climate  to  promote  economic
development, diversification of the non-oil economy (including agriculture), and competitiveness.
7.
Angola  has  an  estimated  35  million  ha  of  arable  land,  of  which  less  than  4  million  ha  are
currently  under  cultivation.  Overall,  agricultural  productivity  and  crop  yields  are  extremely  low.  The
soils are generally fertile in the north and the central highlands (Bié, Huambo, and Malanje provinces)
and  average  rainfall  exceeds  1,000  mm  per  year.  The  country  has  enormous  potential  to  increase
cropped  area,  raise  crop  yields,  and  exploit  the  potential  of  its  diverse  agro-climatic  regions  to
increase production. Inclusive growth in the agriculture sector can reduce rural poverty, diversify the
economy, accelerate economic growth, increase food security, improve social indicators in rural areas,
and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
8.
Constraints  and  opportunities  for  agricultural  and  rural  development – Most  of  the
agriculture  in  Angola  is  rain-fed  and  therefore  highly  vulnerable  to  climatic  events.  The  drought
conditions  experienced  since  the  2011/12  agricultural  season  manifested  through  a  combination  of
rainfall deficits, uneven rainfall distribution and dry spells. The dry conditions were more pronounced
in the southern provinces and reduced production of cereals including millet and sorghum, which are
the predominant crops in the region. In the three provinces assessed in the PDNA (Cunene, Huila and
Namibe)  precipitation  was  significantly  below  average  between  2012  and  2015,  though  Cunene
reported normal rains in 2012. The consecutive years of dryness lasted until 2016 in most areas with
some measure of relief provided  by  occasional short rains but not enough for recovery. Therefore a
cumulative  negative  impact  occurred  over  time  with  a  progressive  erosion  of  livelihoods  and  food
security of affected populations, as well as of the environmental conditions the region.
9. The climatic variability exacerbated the low agricultural productivity levels in the southern region
that  is  illustrated  in  the  national  production  data  on  the  main  crops.  Prior  to  the  droughts  an
increase  of  19%  in  cereal  production  and  27%  in  production  of  pulses/oilseeds,  was  recorded
compared to the previous  year. The positive results  were  partly  due to an  increase  in cultivated
area of 6% and investments made by GoA in agricultural activities. However, with the onset of the
El  Niñoevent  crop  production  losses  were  particularly  high  in  2012,  due  to  widespread  drought
conditions  during  the  agricultural  season  that  affected  10  provinces,  especially  in  the  coastal
regions  and  central  highlands,  the  key  crop  producing  areas  in  Angola.  A  total  of  1.8  million
people  in  the  affected  provinces  were  exposed  to  food  insecurity  due  to  the  drought.  Cereal
production declined  by  approximately 64% (from 1,412,826 tonnes  in 2011 to  509,705 in 2012).
Production  figures  in  2013/14  and  2015/16  showed  some  recovery  but  2016/17  is  expected  to
show a reversal  with  a decline in outputs. During the 2011/12 agricultural season, production of
pulses  declined  by  68.4%  (from  over  304,000  to  96,000  tonnes).  Cassava  production,  the
country’s main crop in terms of quantity and value, decreased by 25.8% (from 14.3 million to 10.6
million tonnes) during this  same period. Production figures recovered  in 2013 for all crops apart
from potatoes which remained low through 2014 and cassava production dropped again in 2014.
In  2015  yield  losses  were  estimated  at  75%  in  the  three  most  drought  affected  provinces.
Estimates  for  2016  are  in  the  magnitude  of  40%  production  deficit  due  to  the  poor  agricultural
season  in  2015/16  (National  Institute  of  Cereals,  MINAGRI).  Further  analysis  of  the  drought
conditions undertaken by WFP is presented in Appendix 14.
10. While  the  agriculture  sector  is  essential  to  promote  national  development  and  economic
diversification,  its  potential  will  remain  untapped  if  productivity  does  not  increase  significantly.
Agricultural  production  has  increased  gradually  since  2002  (end of  the  war),  but  crop  yields  remain
29
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
very low compared to other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. According to FAO, the average yield of
beans  in Angola  is  0.34  ton  per  ha  compared  to  0.60  ton  per  ha  in  the  southern African  region;  the
average  yield  of  groundnuts  is  0.38  ton  per  ha  compared  to  0.88  ton  per  ha  in  the  region;  and  the
average  millet  yield  is  0.24  ton  per  ha  compared  to  the  regional  average  of  0.70  ton  per  ha.
Substantial  scope  clearly  exists  for  increasing  crop  yields  and  crop  production  through  use  of
improved  agricultural  technology  as  well  as  through  an  increase  in  cultivated  area.  This  will  require
the use of animal traction,  mechanisation, adoption of improved agronomic practices, improvements
in  soil  fertility,  use  of  modern  agricultural  inputs,  increased  cropped  area  under  irrigation,  and
dissemination of agricultural knowledge to farmers. In addition, there is substantial scope for a value
chain  approach,  strengthening  market 
improving  commercialisation,  and  building
agribusiness facilities through local entrepreneurs.
linkages, 
The livestock subsector, which is an important source of livelihood for the southern provinces,
11.
was the most affected by  the drought. The prolonged droughts resulted  in  lack of adequate pasture
and  reduced  availability  of  water  thus  animal  health  conditions  were  adversely  affected  particularly
through  increased  vulnerability  to  disease.  Transhumance  livestock  migrations  started  earlier  and
lasted  for  longer  periods  of  time  to  provide  adequate  feed  and  water  for  livestock. These  migration
patterns impeded the participation of herders in the national vaccination campaigns both in 2012 and
2013,  which  increased  the  risk  of  exposure  to  disease. An  outbreak  of  the  Foot  and  Mouth  disease
worsened the livestock health conditions in 2015.
The  smallholder  response  to  droughts  is  usually  resorting  to  alternative  sources  of  food  and
12.
income, such as producing and selling charcoal, gathering wild food for consumption and sale, fishing,
and selling other forest products for income to purchase food. These typical coping strategies for the
lean  season  have  intensified  and  are  being  practiced  for  longer  periods,  adding  pressure  on  highly
stressed  environmental  resources.  Intensification  of  charcoal  production  increases  the  deforestation
rate and reduces soil moisture retention capacity and, thus, accelerates soil degradation and reduces
the carbon sequestration capacity of local forests.
13.
The  recovery  process  from  the  recurrent  droughts,  which  had  cumulative  adverse  impacts  on
agricultural  based  livelihoods  provides  opportunities  for  strengthening  the  disaster  risk management
capacity of the smallholders and building back better through improved and more sustainable coping
strategies. The opportunities lie in supporting alternative livelihoods that promote sustainable natural
resource management as coping strategies and climate resilient agricultural practices using improved
inputs as well implementing measures that help to reduce future disaster risks. The improved inputs,
such  as  drought tolerant  seed  varieties  and  crops  that  are  suitable  to  the  local  conditions, can  be
disseminated.  In  addition, the  smallholders  can  be  equipped  with  skills  to  improve  their  agricultural
productivity, such as soil fertility management, soil and water conservation techniques among others.
The key constraint of water resources availability also needs to be addressed as a critical element of
recovery through dissemination of water harvesting techniques,  rehabilitation of existing water points
and improved capacity to manage these or newly constructed sites. The skill sets of the officers that
provide support and advisory services to the smallholders also need to be improved.
C.
Relevant Policy and Institutional Issues
14.
The  2015-16  El  Niño  event  resulted  in  the  worst  drought  for  most  of  the  southern  African
countries  in  over  three  decades.  The  effect  on  food  security  was  catastrophic  for  millions  of  the
region's population,  in addition  to  wider humanitarian  needs due to  water scarcity, including impacts
on  access  to water  resources,  sanitation,  education,  health  services  and  status  of  livelihoods.  The
recurrent  droughts  since  2011-12  resulted  in  the  decline  in  agricultural  production,  thus increasing
poverty levels, particularly in the rural areas where populations are dependent on rain-fed agriculture,
compromising  the  earlier  developmental  gains.  Though  the  full  impact  is  yet  to  be  assessed,  the
Regional  Inter-Agency  Standing  Committee  (RIASCO)  that  developed  the  response  plan  for  the  El
Niño-induced  drought  in  Southern Africa  (May  2016 - April  2017)  concluded  that  some  farmers  are
likely to abandon their land, leading to increased migration from rural to urban areas and cross-border
movement for people in search of food and livelihood opportunities.
In Angola, the 2015 El Niño-induced drought affected 1.5 million people and 1.2 million in 2016,
15.
specifically in the southern regions (National Civil Protection National Committee (CNPC)). The CNPC
coordinated  the  drought Post-Disaster  Needs  Assessment  (PDNA)  conducted  in July  2016  as  the
30
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
agency  with  the  mandate  for  disaster  preparedness  and  response.    This  is  in  line  with  the  existing
institutional framework through which the GoA recently approved the Plan of Readiness, Contingency,
Response and Recovery from Calamities and Disasters, as well as the Strategic Plan for Prevention
and  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  However,  recognising  the  negative  impact  on  rural  livelihoods  of
recurring  droughts  and  intermittent  floods  as  a  result  of  the El  Niñoand La-Nina  climate  events,  the
PDNA will be followed by a Resilience Building Framework to be developed in 2017. The Resilience
Building  Framework  will  build  on  existing  legislation  processes  for  land  use  zoning  to  incorporate
disaster risk.
16.
The  PDNA  was developed  by  an  Inter-ministerial  task  force  responsible  for  national
preparedness  and  response  to  new  disasters.  The  task  force  includes  the  Ministry  of  Social Affairs
and Reintegration, which is responsible for responding to the most vulnerable population falling within
the  high  levels  of  poverty  bracket.  Given  the  impact  on  food  security,  the  Office  of  Food  Security
(Gabinete  de  Segurança Alimentar  (GSA))  within  the  Ministry  of Agriculture  (MINAGRI)  plays  a  key
role in the task force, incognisance of their mandate for monitoring levels of food security. There may
be  a  need  to  further  consolidate  the  regulatory  framework  through  the  development  of  a  national
drought  policy.  The United  Nations  Convention  to  Combat  Desertification (UNCCD)  is  providing
support to several countries interested in promulgating national drought policies.
D.
Climate Change
Climate models predict Angola will experience higher temperatures (1.2 to 3.2°C by the 2060s),
17.
more extreme weather events, an expansion of arid and semi-arid regions, seasonal shifts in rainfall,
localised  floods,  increased  wildfires,  sea  level  rise,  increased  rainfall  in  the  northern  parts  of  the
country, changes in river flows as well as changes in sea and lake temperatures (NAPA, 2011). The
agriculture  sector  is particularly  vulnerable  to  the  impacts  of  hazards  such  as  drought  and  flood,  as
well as changes in the onset and duration of the growing season. Other possible changes are likely to
include reduced duration of the growing season in southern and coastal regions, and a shift from two
growing seasons to one in the northern regions (Lotz-Sistika and Urquhart, 2014). Potential impacts
include: crop failures due to heat and drought stress, production losses due to unpredictable onset of
rains, reduced planting area due to consumption of seed stores, and increased susceptibility to pests
and  disease.  These  are  expected  to  adversely  affect  productivity  as  most  of  the  agricultural
production is rain-fed.
31
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Appendix 2: Poverty, Targeting and Gender
A.
Poverty
1.
Between 2002 (when the civil war ended) and 2014, the growth of real gross national income
(GNI) per capita increased from US$2,900 to US$6,800, largely led by oil production. On the average,
the oil sector represents about 47% of the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and accounts for
about  98%  of  the  country’s  total  exports.  However,  the  country  is  currently  experiencing  a  major
financial crisis, mainly due to declining world market oil prices, which fell by two-thirds in 2015.
Since  the  end  of  the  civil  war,  social  indicators  have  generally  improved,  though  at  a  pace
2.
slower  than  that  of  the  economy  at  large. There  is  still  a  large  gap  between  income  per  capita  and
other  welfare  indicators  such  as  poverty  rates,  life  expectancy,  educational  attainment or  access  to
water and basic sanitation.
According to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 2015 Human Development
3.
Report (HDR), the country’s Human Development Index (HDI) increased by about 36% between 2000
and 2014. However, the country continues to be in the low human development category as it ranks
149 out of 188 countries and territories (HDR, 2015). Over the same period, life expectancy at birth
increased  from  about  45  years  to  about  52  years  and  expected  years  of  schooling  increased  from
about 5.5 years to 11.4 years.
4.
Although  the  national  poverty  rate  has  declined  sharply  (62%  in  2001  down  to  37%  in  2009),
the  contrast  at  national/provincial  and  rural/urban  levels  is  clear. Poverty remains  high  and  is  more
severe and widespread in rural areas, at about 58%, than urban areas, 19%. It also varies across the
country,  surpassing  50%  in  the  east  and  centre  regions  (including  Cuanza  Sul).  The  poverty  rate
increases with the head of household’s age and decreases with his/her level of education. Poverty is
greater in female-headed households, particularly in rural areas. Many women are de facto heads of
households  because  they  are  members  of  polygamous  households,  or  because  of  male labour
migration. The latest census (2014) estimates that 38% households are headed by women, and they
form  the  majority  of  the  households  living  in  poverty. The  country's  poverty  situation  affects  a  large
number  of  the  population;  many  lack  access  to  basic  services,  such  as  potable  water,  energy  and
sanitation. With the oil price crisis striking Angola, the country’s economy suffered a major reversal in
its  growth  pattern,  leading  to  scarcity  of  foreign  currency,  devaluation  of  national  currency  and
inflationary  pressures.  This  has  led  to  rising  prices  for  consumables  and  decreasing  the  most
economically  and  socially  disadvantaged  households’  access  to  essential  consumer  goods. Given
their  socio-economic  characteristics  and  years  of  recurring  droughts,  the  Project’s  target  provinces
have  tended  to  feel  the  impact of  the  worsening  macroeconomic  crisis  more  since  their  productive
capacity was seriously eroded by the droughts.
The country has a Gini coefficient26 of 0.55; hence the high inequality. It is estimated that, the
5.
country’s richest 20% of the population receive 59% of all incomes; the poorest 20% receive only 3%.
A high level of inequality, between households and between regions, presents serious challenges for
poverty reduction.
B. Women and Youth
6.
While  efforts  have  been  made  to  reach  gender  parity  in  net  enrolment  for  primary  schooling,
girls continue to have less access to secondary education. Illiteracy rates are substantially higher in
women (47%) than among men (20%). The increase in primary school coverage and efforts to reach
gender parity in school enrolment since the end of the war have contributed to reduce this rate to 30%
among young women (15-24 years old). Despite these efforts, two million children are still outside the
school system and girls continue to have less access to secondary education, vocational training and
higher education.
7.
The  combination  of  limited  access  to  formal  vocational  training  and  higher  education
opportunities strongly condition women´s reduced income levels as such circumstances relegate them
26The Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality; it ranges from 0 to 1. The lower the Gini coefficient the lower the inequalities
32
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
to sectors such as subsistence agriculture and informal trade. Women and men participate in unequal
terms  in  the  management  and  control  over  assets  and  in  decision-making,  both  at  household  and
community level. Over 23% of households are women headed households. Angola is signatory to all
major international and regional conventions and protocols relevant for the advancement of women´s
rights and elimination of all types of violence against women. The Ministry of Family Affairs and for the
Promotion  of  Women  (MINFAMU)  developed  the  National  Gender  Policy  and  Implementation
Strategy.  Despite  the  approval  of  the  Family  Law  and  the  Law  Criminalising  Domestic  Violence,  the
use of customary law, strongly favouring men, is still widespread.
8.
The Angolan Government defines youth as people aged 15 to 35. The youth represent about a
third of all citizens in the country (32.4%). Migration levels among youth peaks at 24.5% for the age
group between 25 and 35 years. The youth in rural areas are faced with the challenge of wanting to
explore alternative livelihood opportunities to subsistence farming while having little formal training to
equip them to face the labour market. School completion rates decrease  after the primary  level  and
progressively drop along the education pathway. Poverty is lower among the 15 – 35 year old range
group than any other age group.  Most households are youth headed, growing in size progressively
with age. It is more frequent for the youth aged 20 – 24 years to have more than one sexual partner,
placing this particular group, their partners and their unborn children at greater risk of HIV. This same
group reported to have the highest level of knowledge on HIV/AIDS.
C.
Project Area and Target Group
9.
Project  Area – ARP  focus  area  will  comprise eight  municipalities  from  three  provinces –
Benguela, Cunene and Huila. The three provinces are situated in the southwestern Angola and have
suffered repeated droughts during the period 2011-16; the situation was exacerbated by the El Niño
phenomenon  that  hit  the  region  during  the  same  period.  More  recently,  the  provinces  have
experienced  the  opposite  extreme  condition, La  Nina,  characterised  by  localised  flooding.  This
situation has accentuated the fragility of the area’s population that lives, primarily, on agricultural and
livestock  production. About  755,930 people  in  Cunene,  205,507  in  Huíla  and  273,000  in  Benguela
were affected by the droughts. It has aggravated the social, economic and environmental conditions
of the region and  its population. It contributed to  increased malnutrition cases, family abandonment,
domestic violence, loss of income, increased deforestation and reduction of the already scarce water
resources. Access  to  water,  sanitation  and  electricity  is  extremely  poor.  In  Cunene  only  11%  of
households have sanitation and electricity and 23% have access to drinking water; in Huíla, 26% of
the  households  have  sanitation,  16%  have  access  to  electricity  and  35%  have  access  to  drinking
water.  In  Benguela  22%  of  the  households  have  access  to  drinking  water,  25%  have  access  to
electricity and 32% of the households have sanitation.
10. GoA  (through  the  leadership  of  the  National  Commission  for  Civil  Protection  (CNPC)),  the
United  Nations,  European  Union  and  the  World  Bank  undertook  a  post-disaster  assessment  and
provided  recommendations  for  an  immediate  response.  This  work  was  complemented  by  other
mission assessments carried out by FAO and the MOH-DNSP and confirming the seriousness of this
acute  and  chronic  situation.    In  2016,  a  UN  team  of  OCHA,  RCO,  WHO,  UNICEF  and  FAO  also
visited  the  affected  regions  and confirmed  the  need  of  a  humanitarian  intervention  in  support  of  the
Government of Angola. Additional information on the three target provinces is provided hereunder.
11.
Benguela  Province – The  2014  Census  indicates that  about  2.23  million people  live  in  the
Benguela  Province,  1.06  million  (47%  of  the  total) and  1.18  females (53%  of  the  total).  Unlike  the
Provinces of Cunene and Huíla, the Benguela population is predominantly urban (about 63. % versus
37% rural population).
12.
The  Municipality  of  Benguela  is  the most  populated,  consisting  of 25%  of  the  Province’s
population, followed by the Municipalities of Lobito (16%), Cubal (14%) and Ganda (11%). These four
Municipalities together  account  for 66%  of  the  Province’s  resident  population.  The  Municipality  of
Chongoroi averages 81,467 inhabitants (4% of the resident population of the Province).
13.
Proximity to the Benguela Cold Current (an oceanographic phenomenon consisting of the rise
of  deep  waters – rich  in  nutrients – towards  shallower  ocean  regions  that  attracts many  shoals  and
thus enables very profitable catches, in PNDB, 2015) has created ideal conditions for large-scale fish
capture and an overall abundance of fish.
33
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
14.
There are currently 268 fishing vessels in the Province, catching about 80,000 tonnes of fish –
mainly sardines (about 52,000 tonnes) and horse mackerels (about 13 500 tonnes). This accounts for
close to a quarter of the total country catches (Ceso 2015). However, the overall majority of artisanal
vessels are not motorized and are therefore limited to the near coastal zone with an obvious loss to
their productivity.
The  production  of  sea  salt  is  another  activity undertaken throughout  the  Province’s  seaside
15.
areas  but  has  not  earned  any  particular  attention 
from  Provincial  Government  or  other
promotors/investors.  The  productive  process  is  a  traditional  and  labour-intensive  one,  employing  a
large number of workers, mostly women.
16. With regard to agricultural activity, and despite very favourable climatic and soil conditions, the
sector is poorly developed and needs much further technological advancements to better profit from
proper land preparation, harvesting and industrialization – the same can be said of livestock related
activities.
17.
These  weaknesses  are  highlighted  in  the Strategic  Development  Plan  for  the  Province that
acknowledges that, despite inputs  and equipment supply to the population  working  in  agricultural  or
livestock on a recurring basis, the lack of a technical assistance system and other structured support
has not led to the desired results.
18.
Agriculture is being done in a traditional way and output is for household consumption needs;
some occasional surplus gets sold at local markets. The same applies to cattle raising as veterinarian
support  and  knowledge  of  pasture  optimization  are  scarce. All  these  factors  have  kept  productivity
very low.
19.
Cunene Province – According to the 2014 Census, the population of Cunene is about 965,288
people; about 450,814  male  (47%)  and  514,474  female  (53%),  the  majority  of  which  are  located  in
rural areas. The Province also has a young age structure (56% of the resident population is under 20
years of age). With regard to literacy, 513.374 (53%) of the Province’s residents do not know how to
read or write, the majority being women (55%), compared to 45% men.
Agriculture is  essentially undertaken  at  a subsistence level  by  small  traditional  family-type
20.
farmers,  is  rain-fed,  productivity  is  low and  the  resultant  harvests are small. The  situation  is  made
worse by the recurring droughts since 2012 and the fact that water reservoir infrastructures are almost
non-existent (from Development Plan for the Cunene Province).
Cereals are the main crop of the region, with a predominance of species that are more tolerant
21.
to drought or irregular rainfall, namely millet (massango) and sorghum (massambala); these are more
prominent in areas with lesser rainfall. Corn and bean production are more viable in areas with higher
rainfall  or  where  irrigation  systems  exist. The  produce  is  primarily  for  home  consumption;  any
production surplus, if at all, is sold on the informal markets to supplement family income.
22.
Huila Province – The 2014 Census puts the Huila population at about 2.5 million people reside
in the Province of Huíla – 1.17 million (47%) being males and about 1.32 million (53%) females. About
69% of the population live in rural areas while 18% of the population are 15 to 24 years old (of which
about 204,752 are males and 234,756 females).
23.
Agriculture,  including  livestock, plays  a  prominent  role  in  the  socio-economic  lives of  the
population;  it  is  the  community’s  main  source  of  income. However,  agriculture is  at  the subsistence
level,  undertaken  by  small-scale farmers,  rain-fed  and  characterised  with  low  productivity. Like  in
Cunene, Huíla’s low productivity is exacerbated by the recurring droughts.
24.
The  soil  and  climatic  characteristics  of  the  Province  have  led  to  the development  of  a  multi-
purpose and diversified agriculture. Corn, millet (massango) and sorghum (massambala) are the main
crops, representing more than 90% of the Province’s cultivated area (Development Plan for the Huíla
Province). There has been practically no variation of plantation types over the years.
25.
In some  of  the  provincial  municipalities, agriculture  is  done along  the  rivers  and  main
waterlines,  aiming  to  use  naturally  drained  and  more  fertile  soils. In  some  of  these  provinces,  the
exploitation of dry farming is unfeasible due to the irregularity of rainfall – except in the north, where
rivers  carry  enough  water  to  feed  a  number  of  dams. The  main  crops  in  this  area  are  corn,  beans,
sweet potatoes, horticulture, millet and sorghum.
34
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
26.
In  some  of  the  provincial  municipalities, the  climate is semi-arid with very limited  availability
surface  water  resources - to  such  an  extent  that  droughts  totally  break  down  the  flow  of  the  main
rivers.  The  way  of  life  of  the  population  is  essentially  focused  on livestock.  Dry  farming  is  almost  a
marginal  activity,  confined  to  limiting  the  small  plots  that  surround  dwellings  and  is  based  on  the
cultivation of drought tolerant cereals, such as millet and sorghum. Corn is kept for the heaviest lands
(CESO, 2015).
27.
In general, livestock rearing is one of the main activities and sources of income in the Province,
with cattle and small ruminants (goats and sheep) accounting for more than half of the Province's total
production; cattle  represents  44%  of  livestock  production.  However, pigs  and  poultry  production  is
significant and cannot be disregarded, especially at a household level, in terms of production for self-
consumption (Development Plan for the Huíla Province). More importantly, pigs and poultry are mainly
owned by women, hence investing in them can be a gender improvement strategy.
28.
The main constraints and difficulties encountered by the small-scale livestock producers in the
Province  are  water  supply,  the  absence  of  veterinary  services,  adequate  pasture  management  and
difficulties in commercializing livestock.
29.
Livestock production in  the  region  is  based  on  natural  pastures  and  although  grassland
capacity  varies  from  one  region  to  another  (depending  on  the  level  of  rainfall,  type  of  soil  and
vegetation), it  is  clear  that  enlarging  the  size  of  herds  in  an  attempt  to  raise  income  leads  to  the
degradation of pastures. This activity is strongly affected by severe and recurring droughts that lead to
large losses in the sector.
30.
Target  Group – The  core  ARP  target  group  will  comprise 8,000  households  from  eight
municipalities; they will primarily be low-income households that work in farming or pastoralism and/or
are  members  of  Farmer  Field  Schools  (FFSs). The  average  household  size  is  6;  hence  the  project
aims at reaching at least 48,000 people (8,000 households x 6). Many of the target households have
benefited/are  benefiting  from  the  emergency  interventions  (such  as  the  Land  Rehabilitation  and
Pasture  Management  in Agro-Pastoral  Production  Systems  of  Small-Scale  Producers  of  Southwest
Angola  (RETESA);  it  is  being  supported  by  the  Global  Environment  Facility  (GEF)  and  the  Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF) (supported by several UN agencies – UNICEF, WHO and FAO),
mostly implemented by FAO using the FFS approach. As stipulated in Section III. A. Approach, ARP
interventions will build on the work done by the emergency programmes. In some of the cases, ARP
will fill  in some of the identified gaps  while, in  other cases, it  will  try to reach some of the areas not
reached  by  the emergency programmes. Support  will  be provided to strengthen the FFSs that  have
been  set  up  by  the  emergency  programmes  so  that  the  beneficiary  households  can  complete  their
transition from emergency to recovery and also establish new schools where the potential exists. ARP
will set up new FFSs in the vicinity of those previously established to form clusters that would provide
benefits in management and supervision.
31. Of the primary target group, women, in particular heads of households, will account for at least
30% and the youth (between 18 years and 35 years old) for 30%. Women are socially, culturally and
economically disadvantaged and yet they are responsible for ensuring the well-being of their families
by securing the greater  part of the family  income, mostly from agricultural  activities. Therefore, they
get disproportionately affected by weather-related shocks. Youth are also an important segment of the
population and will require special attention. Lack of opportunities in rural areas leads to the migration
of many young people to the main urban centres. To respond to this situation and offer young people
(who  want to dedicate themselves to  agricultural  activities and remain  in the rural environment) real
opportunities,  the  Project  will  provide  specialized  technical  training  for  specific  income  generating
activities, such as apiculture.
32.
There is a secondary target group of the Project that includes the public sector (IDA technical
staff), Community-Based Organisations (CBOs), and  some community members/farmers that  will be
key  for  the  successful  implementation  of  the  Project.  This  secondary  target  group  will  be  provided
with, inter alia, capacity building (training, improved mobility, etc.) which will, in turn, enable them to be
of effective service to the Project.
Targeting  Strategy – The  Project  will use three  targeting  mechanisms  to  ensure  that  the
33.
desiring communes and households are duly reached. These will include: a) geographical targeting;
b) self-targeting; and c) empowering measures.
35
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
34. Geographical Targeting – Within the targeted municipalities, the Project will seek to reach the
appropriate  communes.  The  main  selection  criteria  will  include:  a)  communes  most  affected  by  the
drought;  b)  communes  participating  in  the emergency programmes  and  ARP  interventions would
facilitate  the  target  beneficiaries  to  transition  to  the  recovery  phase;  c)  communes  with  a  high
population  density;  and  d)  communes  with  geographical  contiguity  to  maximise  efficiency  of  Project
operations.
35.
Self-Targeting – This  will  be  used  mostly with  regard  to  the  additional  reach  to  community
members  that  are  members  of  the  FFS  and  those  that  are  non-members  and  therefore  have  not
received input packages. Awareness creation will be made where households will be informed of the
available alternatives  with  regard to the different crop and livestock based packages. After receiving
information  on  the  different  alternatives,  qualifying  households  in  the  targeted  municipalities  and
communes will choose the preferred alternatives. Where needed, capacity building will be provided to
equip the households with the required skills to effectively make use of the selected packages.
36.
Empowering  Measures – Within  the  selected  municipalities  and  communes,  the  Project  will
promote the participation of women, youth and poor smallholder farmers by using empowerment and
capacity  building  measures  to  encourage  their  participation.  Empowering  measures  will  include:  a)
information  and  mobilisation  campaigns  using  local  information  meetings;  b)  inclusive  FFSs;  c)  a
broad range of skills training activities; and d) monitoring of inclusiveness of women and youth. These
empowering  and capacity  building programmes will provide the women,  youth and poor smallholder
farmer households with the necessary knowledge, skills and assets necessary to recover from years
of recurring drought and improve their livelihoods.
37.
Beneficiary Selection Criteria – ARP beneficiaries will mainly be selected from the group that
has been participating in the different emergency programmes in the Project area. The FFS members
will be provided with packages for the household level based on the previous assets they possessed
and a needs assessment to be undertaken in the initial phase of the project. For those that are non-
FFS members’ transparency in their selection will be ensured by involving local leadership and local
influential persons  in  the  community  in  selecting  Project  beneficiary  households  and  communes. An
initial identification of households requiring packages has already been done through  Provincial and
Municipal structures, which will be validated. Following hereunder is a summary some of the criteria
that  will  be  used  in  the  selection  of  Project  beneficiary  households  and  communes:  a)  communes
within  the  target  municipalities  most  affected  by  the  drought;  b)  most  vulnerable  (economically  and
socially)  households  that  have  not  received  input  packages  from  other  programmes;  c)  households
with signs of mal-nutrition; d) size of the households; e) female-headed households; f) youth that are
not integrated in the schooling system; and g) youths that are unemployed.
36
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Attachment 1: Gender checklist
Criteria
Design
1.  The project design report contains – and project
implementation is based on - gender-disaggregated
poverty data and an analysis of gender differences in
the activities or sectors concerned, as well as an
analysis of each project activity from the gender
perspective to address any unintentional barriers to
women’s participation.
2.  The project design report articulates – or the project
implements – actions with aim to:
Expand women’s economic empowerment through
access to and control over productive and household
assets.
Strengthen women’s decision-making role in the
household and community, and their representation in
membership and leadership of local institutions.
Achieve a reduced workload and an equitable workload
balance between women and men.
3. The project design report includes one paragraph in
the targeting section that explains what the project will
deliver from a gender perspective.
4. The project design report describes the key elements
for operationalizing the gender strategy, with respect to
the relevant project components.
5. The design document describes - and the project
implements - operational measures to ensure gender-
equitable participation in, and benefit from, project
activities.  These will generally include:
Yes. A gender poverty national assessment (appendix 2) was
made.  Women  are  one  of  the  primary  target  groups.  The
project will offer opportunities to empower women by means of
giving  then  support  to  access  assets  for  agriculture  related
activities.
Women  participation  in  ARP  activities  will  be  monitored  and
gender  training  for  Project  implementers  provided  to  ensure
implementation  effectiveness.  Empowerment  methods  were
taken into consideration.
Empowering  measures  to  promote  women  are  a  part  of  the
project  implementation.  Through  local  meetings,  women  will
engage in all activities and trainings proposed by ARP project
- means  of  information  and  mobilisation  campaigns,  ensuring
FFSs  will  be  inclusive,  delivering  skill  training  activities  and
monitoring  the  inclusiveness  of  women. These  empowering
and  capacity  building  activities  will  provide women with  the
necessary  knowledge,  skills  and  assets  required  to  improve
their livelihoods.
The  ARP  will  promote  approaches  intensifying  impact  by
strengthening  communication  and  win-win  collaboration
between  vulnerable  and  more  powerful  actors,  including
action-learning  exercises  with  different  stakeholder  groups
(e.g.  male  and  female  farmers)  at  both  individual  and
collective levels.
Management  of  activities  and  community-based  planning
proposed  by  ARP  will  encourage  the  use  of  labour-saving
technologies.  The  FFS  programmes  will  include  gender
discussions to stimulate debates at household level regarding
workloads  that  are  expected  to  result  in  a  more  equitable
allocation of tasks between household members.
Yes.  The gender  strategy  is  reported  in  the  PDR  and  will  be
put  into  action  by  engaging  women  in  all  proposed  activities
and  training  and by  supporting  women  to  access  assets,
training and input packages provided by ARP.
Key elements of operationalizing the gender strategy are
described in PDR and shall be enforced by supporting women
to: 1) become members of FFSs; 2) enhance their skills in
agricultural practices like poultry rearing, apiculture and crop
production; 4) comprise at least 30% of FFSs decision-making
structures and 5) improve their knowledge on nutrition-
sensitive agriculture.
37
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
5.1 Allocating adequate human and financial resources
to implement the gender strategy.
5.2 Ensuring and supporting women’s active
participation in project-related activities, decision-
making bodies and committees, including setting
specific targets for participation.
5.3 Ensuring that project/programme management
arrangements (composition of the project management
unit/programme coordination unit, project terms of
reference for staff and implementing partners, etc.)
reflect attention to gender equality and women’s
empowerment concerns.
5.4 Identifying opportunities to support strategic
partnerships with government and others development
organizations for networking and policy dialogue.
6. The project’s logical framework, M&E, MIS and
learning systems specify in design – and project M&E
unit collects, analyses and interprets sex- and age-
disaggregated performance and impact data, including
specific indicators on gender equality and women’s
empowerment.
The ARP will be implemented at the Provincial and
Municipality level through the officials in the Governorates,
which include the Ministry of Family Affairs and for the
Promotion of Women. Resources have been allocated for the
engagement and participation of the focal points from the
Ministry in the selection of beneficiaries and providing
technical support to the implementation of activities. These
focal points will work closely with the facilitators of the FFS
and social mobilisers. This will ensure the implementation of
the gender strategy.
Women, as one of the primary target groups, will account for
at least 30% of the target group. The Project will promote the
participation of women by using empowerment and capacity
building measures to encourage their participation in project
activities. This will be achieved throughout mobilization and
sensitization of the communities at project beginning. Women
should constitute, at least, 30% of FFs decision making
structures.
The ARP  is  aligned  with  IFAD’s  Targeting  Policy – Reaching
the Poor (2010). Target groups have been defined; a targeting
that
strategy  developed  and  means  of  operationalizing 
strategy  integrated  into Project  design  and  implementation
activities. ARP  is  also  in  line  with  IFAD’s  policies  for  Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment. Measures are included
to  ensure  that  women  benefit  from  Project  interventions  that
will lead to their empowerment.
IDA,  Community-Based  Organisations  (CBOs),  and  some
community members/farmers will be key partners for a Project
successful  implementation. ARP  will  provide  these  structures
with, inter alia, capacity building and gender action learning –
training,  improved  mobility – so  they  can  become  a  network
capable  of  generating  a  strategic  target  aimed  dialogue
amongst them.
A baseline survey will be undertaken during the first Project
year to benchmark the existing situation in the Project Area
and to identify gender issues and gaps so that these can be
addressed.
38
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Appendix 3: Country Performance and Lessons Learned
A.
Country Performance
1.
IFAD has been working in Angola since 1991, beginning with the Fund’s first project, Malanje
Smallholder Sector Rehabilitation Project. After the signing of the Lusaka Peace Accord in November
1994,  IFAD  began  formulating  new  projects. At  the time  of  the  preparation  of  the  Country  Strategic
Opportunities Paper  (COSOP)  in  1994,  there  were  two  active  loan-funded  projects,  the  Northern
Region  Food  Crops  Development  Project  (PRODECA)  and  the  Northern  Fishing  Communities
Development  Programme  (PESNORTE).  PESNORTE  became  effective  in  1999.  However,  with  the
new outbreak of war in late 1998, it was impossible to work in the field and operations all but ceased.
When the war ended in early 2002 and the security situation improved and the project area became
accessible again, project objectives were re-evaluated and judged to still be valid. The implementation
period  was subsequently  extended to the  end of 2007, providing valuable  operational  lessons to be
applied  in  future  lending  programmes.  Following  the  preparation  of  the  COSOP,  a  new  project,  the
Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSAP), was formulated by the World Bank for an
amount  of  USD  49.5  million  to  be  co-financed  by  IFAD  with  a  loan  of  USD  8.5  million  and  became
effective  in  2009.  MOSAP  implementation  fell  behind  schedule  early  on,  with  field  activities  having
started  only  around  mid-2012,  some  2.5  years  after  effectiveness.  This  delay  was  attributed  to  the
difficulties in recruiting and retaining project staff, as well as extremely limited capacity in the Ministry
of Agriculture to guide, manage and monitor the project. But after a project restructuring and after the
recruitment  of  FAO  to  run  a  smallholder  farmer  education  program  (“Farmer  Field  Schools”,  FFS),
project implementation accelerated and by the project closing date in March 2016, 91% of IFAD funds
had  been  disbursed  and  results  in  terms  of  smallholder  farmer  adoption  of  improved  technologies
were  highly  encouraging.    The  Angola  Fisheries  and  Aquaculture  Project  (AFAP)  recently  became
effective,  more than  a  year  after  IFAD  approval  and  the  Smallholder  Agriculture  Development  and
Commercialisation Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H-SAMAP) was approved
by the IFAD Executive Board of April 2017 and is expected to start implementation in 2017.
B.
Lessons Learned
2.
Some lessons learnt from previous interventions, albeit not specifically from IFAD operations in
Angola but more from the regional recovery interventions have been used to inform the design of the
ARP;  they will also  be  used  during  implementation.  These  lessons  include:  a)  ensuring  the
effectiveness  of  assistance  through  improved  information  flow  to  avoid  duplication  or  overlapping  of
coverage  areas;  b)  the  need  to  establish  linkages  with  public  agencies  and  private  sector
organizations; c) the needs assessment should be done in stages to identify what parts of the country
are  more  affected  and  thereafter  the  specific  needs  within  target  communities,  and  selection  of
household beneficiaries in these communities; d) the critical steps to establish a procedure to identify
beneficiary households and involving the local community in the selection process; e) developing the
input  packages  (including  farm  power  considerations)  and  ensuring  timely  distribution;  f)  use  of
market oriented strategies for input distribution; g) to support the rapid and efficient implementation of
early recovery activities, field supervision/monitoring needs to be strengthened, particularly during the
initial period; and h) ensure that capacity is built at the local level for reporting on progress related to
early recovery activities.
3.
Some other lessons generated from IFAD’s experience in the country, though not specifically
recovery-intervention related, have guided ARP design and will be used during implementation. These
include:  a) The  FFS  approach  to  agricultural  extension  is  very  effective  in  enhancing  smallholder
farmers’  capacity  to  adopt  improved  agricultural  practices  and  technology;  b) the use  of  service
providers  for  activities  that  are  outside  the  core  competences  of  the  Government  contributes  to
greater  efficiency  in  the  implementation  of  activities  as  well  as  greater  effectiveness  in  the
achievement of project results; and c) involvement of local authorities at the provincial, municipal and
communal levels in the monitoring of project activities facilitates local coordination and contributes to
a successful project implementation.
40
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Appendix 4: Detailed Project Description
1.
The  Project  goal  is  to  contribute  to  “improved  food  and  nutrition  security  of  targeted
communities”. This  underlines  the  central  importance  of  ensuring  food  and  nutrition  security  of  the
target beneficiaries as  a  prerequisite to enable them to ably  and actively participate  in development
activities. The Project’s Development Objective is the “restoration of productive assets and capacity of
households  affected  by  recurrent  droughts”. This  is  to  be  achieved  through  the  provision of
agricultural  and  livestock  support  packages  that  include  both  inputs  and  technical  capacity  building,
and construction of basic supporting infrastructure.
2.
Components  and  Activities – ARP’s  development  objective  will  be  achieved  through  the
effective  implementation  of  one  technical  component  (Sustainable  Livelihoods  Recovery) with  three
complementary  and  mutually  reinforcing  subcomponents:  a) Recovery  of  Household  Productive
Assets;  b)  Recovery  of  Community  Productive Assets;  and  c)  Capacity  Building.  It should  be  noted
that,  by  virtue  of  the  target  area’s  climatic  conditions,  droughts  and  floods  will  reoccur.  Therefore,
while Subcomponent 1.1 will facilitate production restoration, Subcomponents 1.2 and 1.3 will enable
the  target  households  and  communities  to  achieve  full  recovery  and  also  enhance  their  risk
management capacity; this will make them less dependent on emergency interventions. The second
component is Project Coordination  and Management, a cross-cutting component that  will service  all
three technical subcomponents through effective overall coordination and management.
3.
Component  1:  Sustainable  Livelihoods  Recovery –This  component aims  to  restore  the
productive  asset  potential  of  the  targeted  communities  and  households  in  selected  municipalities  of
the  three  target Provinces.  This  will  be  done  through Interventions  aimed  at  strengthening  the
community  and  household  productive 
the  development  and
diversification of rural  livelihoods. These interventions will be implemented through the Farmer Field
School modality for organizational development, extension and training. The component is expected
to augment recovery of the drought affected target households building on the emergency operations
conducted by government and Development Partners. The expected outcome is ‘enhanced recovery
of  the  target  households’  crop  and  livestock  production  capacity  in  the  target  provinces’. The
associated subcomponents and activities are described in the paragraphs that follow.
infrastructure  whilst  supporting 
Subcomponent 1.1 Recovery of Household Productive Assets – This subcomponent aims
4.
at  addressing  the  needs  of  farm  households  at  community  level – members  of  existing  and  new
Farmer  Field  Schools  and  other  vulnerable  households  that  are  not  e-FFS  members.  On-farm
productivity  will  be  enhanced  under  rain-fed  crop  and  livestock  systems  (integrated  systems)  and
livelihoods  developed,  and  diversified  through  the  introduction  of  small  livestock  and  off  farm
activities.  These  household  interventions  will  be  accompanied  by  capacity  building  of  beneficiaries
and  institutional  stakeholders  to  ensure  sustainability  of  activities  (Subcomponent  1.3).  Two
generalised  household  packages  are  proposed  to  address  food  security  and  diversify  household
livelihoods: a) a crop based package for farm households comprising a choice of inputs from cereal
seed (maize, millet), cassava, sweet potato, seedlings, bean seed, and hand implements (hoe, pale,
spade etc.); and b) livestock based packages for improved food security and livelihood diversification.
The expected outcome is restoration of their assets base, improved food security through increased
on-farm productivity. Packages on offer are elaborated in the proceeding paragraphs.
Crop  Based Packages – Smallholders in the Project area use local crop varieties, produce no
5.
cash  crops,  do  not use  purchased  inputs  and  produce  only  35 - 40%  of  their  food  requirements. The
Project will redress these food security issues by enhancing the production and sales of staple food
surpluses  including  maize  and  millet,  whilst  diversifying  the  rain-fed  system  and  household  diets  by
including cassava, sweet potato and beans. Cassava has already been introduced to the Project area
as a new crop with potential for improved nutrition and utilisation as a value adding activity. The Project
will  diversify  the  cropping  system  in  order  to  diminish  the  risk  of  crop  failure. Implementation  of  this
activity will involve offering a food security package to vulnerable households as a ‘one shot’ recovery
intervention.  Under  the  model,  the  pack  comprises  a  choice  of  inputs that  include  25  kg  of  NPK
(sufficient  for  0.25  ha),  with  maize,  millet  and  bean  seeds,  cassava  and  sweet  potato  cuttings  and
hand  tools.  The  package  is  intended  to  ensure  that  farmers  obtain  the  production  potential  of
improved  seeds  on  a  sustainable  basis,  while  benefitting  from  the  fertiliser  response.  It  has  been
42
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
estimated that in a normal rainfall year, this technology package would yield around 550 kg of maize
per  ha. Thus  beneficiary  farmers  would  produce  an  extra  100  kg  maize  on  average.  The  yield  of
beans is expected to increase from 230 kg/ ha to over 320 kg/ ha as a result of the package. The total
project contribution per household will not exceed US$165. A target of 5,000 households has been set
to receive the crop based package.
The  package  will  be  accompanied with extension  advice  through  the  FFS  on  minimum  tillage  and
intercropping with legumes.27 The area of cereals will be reduced whilst expanding into areas planted
with  locally  appropriate  mixes  of  cassava,  sweet  potato  and  field  beans. The  climate  resilient  crop
production  system  will  be  complemented  by  the  sustainable  land  management  practices  described
under Subcomponent 1.2. Attention  will be given  to  integrate cassava  into the  cropping system and
for  smallholders  to  view  the  crop  as  a  source  of  nutrition  and  potential  value  addition28. Other  crop
based  packages  could  include  seed  multiplication,  agro-processing,  compost  making,  selling  of
fodder,  group  nurseries  from  seeding  multiplication  and  sale.  Value  addition  activities,  such  as  food
preservation and drying will also be considered.
Livestock-based packages – The objective of the livestock based packages is to help rebuild
6.
their  assets,  or  to  build  new  livestock  assets  as  a  means  to  secure  their  household  livelihoods.
Individual farm households and groups will be eligible for assistance from the Project to develop and
diversify their livelihoods through a range of livestock based packages that include poultry, goats and
sheep,  pig,  as  a  general  strategy  as  well  as  apiculture  and  aquaculture  in  specific  locations  where
suitable.. For the more vulnerable households with restricted access to land, or limited opportunities to
support themselves, the basic package will provide an essential safety net.
7.
Small stock (local chickens, pigs, goats and sheep) are found around the farm homesteads for
a dual purpose of providing animal protein and easy liquidation to access cash for household needs.
Interventions, such as poultry (free-range local chicken), and goat and sheep rearing and fattening will
be  undertaken  as  enterprise  diversifying  and  risk  reducing  strategies. The  packages  will  utilize  the
genetic  potential  of  local  breeds  upgrading  them  through  minor  improvements  in  feeding. In  some
situations, the very vulnerable households will be introduced to the small species for the first time so
the  programme will be  accompanied by a support  package that  includes training for beneficiaries in
livestock management.29
8.
Communities  will  be  informed,  through  awareness  creation  campaigns,  about  the  possible
‘menu’  of  options  and  the  associated  Terms  of  Partnership  for  each  activity.  By  offering  the  farm
households  a  choice  of  livestock  opportunities,  households  will  be  able to  select  an  activity  that
matches existing skills, resources and needs. Possible activities include small livestock and apiculture
and a range of other livelihood options described in the proceeding paragraphs. Funds have been set
aside  to  sub-contract  local  NGOs  to  oversee  implementation  of  the livestock  based activities. The
livestock package will target 2,000 households30.
Free-range Poultry31 - A free-range poultry package has been designed to target women and in
9.
particular  women headed  households  with limited access to labour as the animals require minimum
maintenance and have a short reproductive cycle. The poultry package will be offered to around 1,500
households.  The  package  will  consist  of 15  hens  or  pullets  (coming  into  lay) with one cockerel.  In
some cases, younger birds (up to one month of age) will be distributed and these could be a mixture
27Emphasis will be placed on developing the “food security crops” as intercrops or pure stand. The package will
include bio-fortified varieties of sweet potatoes wherever available (with high levels of β-carotene) and high iron
bean varieties that have been bred through conventional means. Opportunities to improve its use in food security
exist  by  promoting  ‘sweet’  varieties  offering  edible  tops  (protein)  and  good  tuber  yields  (energy,  b-carotene)  of
manageable size.
28 The use of appropriate crop varieties and more resilient production systems (e.g. through better soil, water and
nutrient management) can significantly reduce production risks and household vulnerability in drought years. .
29 Local breeds will be distributed through the programme as they are better adapted to local conditions,
traditional management practices and feed availability and are likely to be more resistant to local diseases. They
are also be the breeds that the beneficiaries are familiar with.
30The scavenging poultry and goat/ sheep packages consist of an 80% grant with a household contribution of cash, feed, water
and fencing/ housing
31The free-range poultry activity has been estimated at around $180, with a package comprised of 15 hens and 1
cock.
43
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
of male and female birds with the males consumed or sold for meat. The poultry package includes an
initial stock of birds plus a starter kit consisting of feed (especially where young and growing stock are
involved). The package will include a limited provision of supplementary feed, to cover periods of feed
shortage and reduced scavengeable resources, as a safety buffer. Feed shortages occur regularly at
certain  times  of  the  year,  either  during  the  dry  season.  A  regular  supply  of  feed,  over  and  above
maintenance  requirements,  is  essential  to  maintain  productivity  in  the  poultry  system.  It  is  expected
that  locally  available  feed  resources  will  be used  from  the  by-products  of  crops  found  locally.  Feed
sources will include household kitchen waste; grains and grain by-products; roots and tubers; leaves
of  trees,  shrubs.  Feed  energy  sources  in  the  project  area  include  cassava  and  sweet  potato.  A
cafeteria  feeding  system  will  be  followed  which  gives  poultry  the  opportunity  to  select  nutrients
according to their physiological demands. The package will be supported by vaccination for Newcastle
disease,  improved feeding  systems, and regular provision of  water in  order to  enhance  production32
33. The beneficiary households will be required to ensure provision of adequate housing for the poultry
as part of their counterpart contribution to the Project. The poultry package will be provided as a grant.
The  other livestock  packages  will  be  offered  as  a  loan/  multiplier  system  with  repayment  in  cash  or
kind.
10. Goats, sheep, and pigs:  Interventions  on  goats, sheep and  pig will  target  all  households  but
with a  particular focus on  women, women headed households  and the most vulnerable. Free range
goat rearing is a common activity but a broader range of options will be made available that include
breeding and fattening34. The sheep and goats will be earmarked for families that have some labour
and access to grazing land.
11.
In  all  cases  the  livestock  and  crop  based  packages  and  support  for  off-farm  activities  will  not
exceed  a  financial  ceiling  of  US$180  per  household.  Recipient  households  may  decide  to  come
together as a group for ease of implementation. For goat and pig rearing and fattening schemes the
livestock recipients may be organised into small groups of 5-15 households in order to participate in a
pass-on scheme which will strengthen social bonds between member households with peer pressures
used to ensure that Project rules are followed.35
Apiculture – Honey is in high demand and a valuable nutrient. The Department of Forestry has
12.
prioritized apiculture  and has initiated a programme targeting the southern provinces to  develop the
sector  further,  focusing  on  Lubango  in  Huila  province,  Namibe  (along  the  Belo  river)  and  Cunene
where  there  are  plans  to  set  up  an  apiculture  school.    This  government  programme,  supported  by
FAO,  aims  at  organizing  farm  households  into  units  of  100  and  providing  each  household  with
between 10-30 hives. The ARP intervention, under apiculture, will include the provision of a protection
kit, smoker and barrel filter and bottle, estimated at around $250 per HH36 37. A processing unit will be
installed for each 100 households and it includes a honey manual radial extractor, a press, a filter and
metallic tins with covers Cuvelai Municipality, in Cunene Province in particular, has been identified as
having  great  potential. A  total  of  550  households  will  be  targeted  to  benefit  from  this  intervention  in
those areas of Cunene and Huila where the potential for apiculture exists.
Aquaculture – Aquaculture (including  Spirulina  algae  production) will  be  encouraged where
13.
perennial water sources are available.
32 Vaccines against Newcastle disease are available locally and of good quality. They can be purchased locally
but quality assurance is needed and the approval of local veterinary expertise. The vaccines need to be
maintained at the correct temperature from manufacture to injection and this will be achieved through a system of
fridges, cold boxes and vaccine carriers. The livestock department should ensure the availability of vaccine for
Newcastle disease.
33 Point of lay hens are preferred in order to avoid sell out. The cock will promote exchange between farmers.
34 The scavenging poultry and goat/ sheep packages consist of an 80% grant with a household contribution of
cash, feed, water and fencing/ housing
35 Criteria for selection of households for the pass-on scheme are: a) willingness and interest to participate in the activity; b)
experience and skills in keeping livestock; c) size and make-up of the household; d) access to adequate feed and water for the
animals; e) agreement to keep the livestock until full repayment is made; f) agreement to report any sickness or death to the
Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWs); and g) agreement to keep records for health control.
36The major costs in beekeeping are: hives, processing equipment (honey extractor/separator) and tables. Minor
cost  items  include  protective  clothing,  smoker,  trays,  and  some  tools.  The  package  will  be  provided  as  micro-
project IGA grant.
37 Household contribution of 30% for labour and traditional beehives
44
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
14. Off farm activities– Off farm activities will also be offered to able bodied households and youth
for  petty  trading,  provision  of  commercial  services  (mechanization  and  spraying)  as  well  as  food
preservation and drying.
15.
Selection  of  activities  will  be  demand  driven  drawn  from  the  menu  of  options  as  described
above.  and  presented  the  community  planning  process.  Communities  will  be  informed,  through
awareness creation campaigns, about the menu of options (livestock and crop based packages) and
the  associated  terms  of  partnership  for  each  activity.  By  offering  households  the  choice  of  technical
packages,  they  will  be  able  to  select  an  activity  that  matches  their  skills,  resources  and  market
demands. Local leadership and community members will be instrumental in selecting the beneficiary
households, ensuring effective participation and transparency.
16.
Nutrition  Mainstreaming –Recurrent  droughts  have  contributed  to  increased  malnutrition  in
the  target  areas.  ARP  will  therefore  intensify  nutrition  mainstreaming  in  Project  interventions.  The
proposed  crop  and  livestock  packages  are  potential  entry  points  to  reach  vulnerable  households  on
nutrition activities. These activities will focus on the promotion of improved varieties of food crops that
are nutrient-rich and also drought-tolerant, such as iron rich beans. Promotion of diversified nutrient-
dense foods, including orange-fleshed sweet potato and Spirulina (blue-green algae), will contribute to
food  security  as  well  as  good  nutrition.  The  FFS  is  an  effective  approach  for  integration  of  nutrition
education to ensure diversified dietary intake.
the 
risks, 
if  well  managed. Land  management  practices  and 
17. Subcomponent  1.2:  Recovery  of  Community  Productive  Assets – When  households  are
recovering from a shock, they rely on their community networks and, as such, community assets are a
means  of  managing 
the
rehabilitation/development  of  water  sources  is  a  key  factor  for  livelihoods  recovery  in  the  Project
target  areas.  Potential  beneficiaries  consider  the  lack  of  water  and  pasture  as  the  main  issues
affecting  their  lives.  The  Project  aims  at  developing  the  water  infrastructure  by  improving,
rehabilitating  and  constructing  water  sources  that  cover  all  uses. The  subcomponent  will  be
implemented  through  the  Farmer  and Agro-Pastoral  Field  School  extension  modality  adapted  to  the
varied  agro-ecologies  of  the  Project  area;  this  is  described  under  subcomponent  1.3. The  expected
outcome is “stabilised/improved livelihoods through use of community productive infrastructure”. This
subcomponent focuses on two areas of interventions: a) water resources development; and b) natural
resources management.
18. Water  Resource  Development – Water  resource  development  covers  two  main  areas  of
intervention: a) rehabilitation, construction and maintenance of water infrastructure; and b) rainwater
harvesting38.
19. Water Resource Infrastructure – The progressive decline
of available water is a major problem
in the Project area as a result of the recurring droughts. Rivers are drying up and the water flow to the
aquifer of river basins in the region is dropping. Since 2013, there has been a progressive drying of
two  fertile  oasis  which  are  rich  in  biological  resources  and  ecosystems.  The  water  table  is  also
declining and about 80 percent of the existing boreholes are non-functional, due to water scarcity and
disrepair  (approximately  2,400  boreholes  damaged).  It  is  estimated that  less  than  20  percent  of
communities  have  access  to  safe  water. The  entry  point  for  recovery  will  be  through  rehabilitation,
construction and maintenance of the water infrastructure. The selection of low-demanding community
water  sources  in  terms  of  maintenance  at  field  level  is  a  key  factor  to  assure  long-term  impact  and
sustainability. Activities  will include the rehabilitation or the establishment of multi-purpose  wells and
related basic infrastructure necessary for animal health (such as watering points, dip tanks, etc.) and
human consumption (tap stands). At the community level, the Project will support the construction of
agricultural weirs for domestic and livestock use while ensuring that water is efficiently and effectively
utilized. The weirs will also store water during the dry season and elevate the water table during the
rainy season in order to allow enough water depth for ease of access to water in areas where rivers
are close to depletion in the driest periods.
38Water user groups (WUGs) or associations will be established, in some instances independently from the e-FFSs, especially
in  newly  constructed  or  rehabilitated  water  points in  order  to  ensure  direct  management  control  of  their  operations  and
maintenance and ultimate sustainability of the structures. Members of the water user associations will have rights (the use of
water for multiple purposes) and obligations (to contribute maintenance fees, etc.). Each group will be expected to draw up a
constitution  with  rules  and  regulations that clarify  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  group  organization  and their members.
The WUGs will be provided with training in water demand management, which will also be delivered through e-FFS.
45
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
20. Rainwater Harvesting – Rehabilitation of ponds and construction of subsurface dams will be the
main under the water harvesting intervention. Ponds, which are naturally recharged, are an important
water  source  for  cattle  but frequently serve  as  a  drinking  water  source  for  people during  the  dry
season, although the water quality is questionable. The storage capacity decreases from year to year
due to the high amounts of water runoff from the surroundings that causes siltation. Subsurface dams
have  proven  to  be  an  excellent  solution for  underground  water  retention  with  the  advantages  of
increasing  water  quality  and  drastically  reducing  the  evaporation  rates  when  compared  to  open  air
water  storage.  New  structures  will  be  constructed  instead  of  rehabilitation  of  existing  dams39.
Considering the relatively high investment costs of the proposed structures (ranging from $15,000 to
$50,000  per  unit),  strict  selection  criteria  will  be  carefully  applied:  a)  organisation  level  of  users  and
willingness  to  contribute  to  the  maintenance  costs  of  the  structures;  b)  technical  feasibility  of  the
emplacement;  c)  access  to  the  water  resource;  d)  closeness  to  the  nearby  local  materials,  such  as
gravel and stones;  e) number of potential  users; and f) prioritisation of identified emplacements that
give an adequate cost/ benefit ratio.
21. Natural  Resource  Management – The  fragile  biophysical  environment,  shallow  soils,  poor
vegetative  cover  and  the  irregular  and  often  high  intensity  of  rainfall,  has  resulted  in  severe  soil
erosion  in  places,  reduced  soil  fertility  with  resultant  decreases  in  crop  yields.  Deforestation  and
charcoal burning have also contributed to land degradation and soil erosion on communal (forest and
rangelands)  and  private,  cultivated  land. Land  degradation  has  led  to  overgrazing,  depletion  of
rangelands  and  a  spiral  of  unsustainable  land  management. Interventions  are  proposed  to  redress
this  vicious  cycle  by  rehabilitating  rangelands  and  pastures  and  undertaking  soil  and  water
conservation measures40.
22. Rangeland and Pastures – Rangeland development will focus on ecosystem-based rehabilitation
around  the  water  points where  agro-pastoral  systems  are  predominant.  Activities will  include
community  led  improvement  of  fodder  and  natural  grasses  and  shrubs  and  the  establishment  of
miseen  défense areas  (area  closures).  This  intervention  will  be  supported  by range  and  herd
management  practices,  improvements  in  livestock  health to  reduce  livestock  pressure  on  already
degraded  areas.  The  intervention will also  require  technical  support  from  a  cadre  of  CAHWs  at
municipality and community level who will be provided with veterinary kits and technical training. It is
intended  that  an  adequate  supply  of  CAHWs'  will  be  in  place and  a  viable  channel  of  supply  of
vaccines  and  vet  products, before  the  distribution  of  the  livestock  packages. Attention  will  also  be
given  to  scaling-up  the  provision  of  mineral  block  production  (initiated  under  one  of  the emergency
programmes),  certifying  CAHWs  to  improve  access  for  herders  to  veterinary  services  and  creating
awareness  within  communities  of  the  need  for  improved  animal  health care  and  inoculation.
Consideration  will  be  given  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  the  animal  vaccination  programme  by
broadening  the  range  of  vaccines  offered  to  include  small  scale  livestock  and  developing  the
vaccination cold chain at local level.
23. Soil and Water Conservation – Soil conservation and runoff control measures are lacking in many
parts  of  the  Project  area. Soil  and  water  conservation  measures  will  be  identified  through  the
preparation of community level natural resources management plans that will be incorporated within
the  Farmer  Field  School  methodology  (see  Subcomponent  1.3)41.  Some  of  the  ‘good practices’  of
community-based natural resources management and climate change adaptation measures found in
39Subsurface dams are an ancient technique fairly widespread worldwide but the existence of this type of dams
made during colonial times is unknown and in case they exist, the documents and maps with the exact location
may have been destroyed during the Angolan civil war.
40The WOCAT (World Overview of Conservation Approaches and Technologies) database of sustainable soil and
water  technologies  will  be  reviewed  with  special  emphasis  on  Angola  and  nearby countries  will  be  used  to
provide insights on what could work under the local conditions.
41The  community  level  natural  resources  management  plans  will  need  to  be  adapted  to  the  needs  of  specific
communities. A starting point is the Agro-pastoral Farmer Field School methodology that has been used by the
FAO  implemented  RETESA  and  PIRAN  projects  where  agro-silvipasture  predominates.  There  are  sites  in
Cunene  and  Huila  where  more  conventional  crop/livestock  production  is  relevant.  The  community  led  natural
resource  management    methodology  should  include  the  following  steps:  a)  meeting  the  community  and
organising  a  planning  team;  b)  identifying  micro-watersheds;  c)    conducting  biophysical  and  socio-economic
surveys;  d)  identifying  and  prioritizing  interventions;  e)  approval  of  interventions  by  the  community;  and  f)
preparation of a plan for implementation (mapping, input requirements, action plan).
46
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
the country will be introduced at both micro-catchment and household level. Attention will be given to
the  design  and  implementation  of  low  cost physical  and  biological  soil  and  water  conservation
measures  on  communal  and  cultivated  land.  Soil  and  water  conservation  measures  could  include
contour  stone  bunds,  multi-purpose  vegetative  bunds,  micro  basins  and  trenches,  the  natural
regeneration of trees in farmed and communal areas and nursery establishment. These activities will
be  supported  through  Farmer  Field  Schools  or  farmer  based  organizations  (interest  groups)  to  help
implement  these  initiatives.  Special  attention  will  be  given  to  vegetative  stabilization  of  the  soil  and
water conservation measures with dual purpose fodder species.
24. Subcomponent  1.3.  Capacity Building  for Recovery – This  subcomponent  will  provide  the
essential capacity  building for the objectives to be achieved. Capacity building  will be undertaken at
the  institutional,  community  and  household  levels. The  skills  and  capacities  required  at  the  different
levels will be strengthened, and developed where lacking, to ensure communities are able to recover
from climate induced shocks and  the relevant institutions are able to provide the necessary support
and services to the communities and households. The subcomponent includes the following activities.
25. Disaster and Climate Risk Management – This activity aims at building capacities to achieve the
objective  set  out  under  subcomponent  1.1  for  the  recovery  of  household  productive  assets. The
activities  will  build  on  existing  initiatives  at  the  Provincial  level,  such  as  the  preparedness,
contingency, response and recovery plans as well as the municipal strategies for building resilience.
These plans and strategies will need to be operationalized at the community level and this step-down
process  will  be  supported  by ARP.  Concurrently,  some  efforts  are  already  being  made  in  training  of
technicians and communities in disaster risk management in relation to both the droughts and floods
that  have  adversely  affected  the  Southern  Provinces.  The ARP  will  support  training  activities  in  the
target  areas  and  ensure  that  sufficient  capacity  is  available  at  the  Provincial  coordination  level. The
recurring disasters in the ARP target areas are linked to climatic events such as El Niñoand La-Nina.
Considering  that  productivity  of  the  various  activities  undertaken  by  the  target  group  is  climate
sensitive, the  Project will contribute to efforts to improve the climate risk management capacity. The
capacity  building activities  will  result  in  enhanced  resilience  to  climate  risks  of  the  ARP  target
beneficiaries,  which  can  be  substantiated  through  an  appropriate  monitoring  system  yet  to  be
developed.  The  ARP  will  thus  support  the  establishment  or  the  roll-out  of  a  resilience  monitoring
framework in collaboration with other partners. To that effect, main activities under this subcomponent
will include: a) preparation of community-based natural resources management plans; b) community-
level  training  in  disaster  and  climate risk  management;  c)  strengthening  of  provincial  disaster
prevention systems; and d) support to developing/rolling out of a resilience monitoring framework. The
activities are elaborated as follows:
26. Institutional: Provincial  and  Municipal – The  ARP target  provinces  have  developed  Action
Plans  for  enhanced  coordination  and  information  management  as  well  as  Pilot-Strategies  to  ensure
building  resilience  of  vulnerable  communities  before  and  after  a  disaster.  The ARP  would  therefore
support further capacity building efforts through seminars and workshops for Provincial level officials
to review key concepts of DRM and Resilience-Building in the process of recovery from the protracted
drought.  The  seminars  will  also  facilitate  mapping  of  vulnerable  groups  and planning  for  resilience-
building action through inter-sectorial interactions. If required Standard Operating Procedures (SOP)
for  emergency  response  and  the  Action  Plans  to  improve  the  Provincial  Contingency  Plan  will  be
reviewed.  Simulation  exercises  will  be  organised  for  the  participating  officers  with  support  from
specialised agencies such as OCHA. The expected output is 20 disaster risk management trainers at
provincial levels trained in rolling out the national training programme for mainstreaming disaster risk
management  into  local  development  planning  and  10  response  simulation  exercises  conducted,
including improvement of response and provision of basic communication equipment. The estimated
cost is USD 100,000.
27. Support the roll out of a resilience monitoring framework – Based on the drought PDNA conducted
with the support of the United Nations, the European Union and the World Bank, the Civil Protection
Commission (CNPC) is developing a Disaster Recovery Framework for the El Niño-induced drought-
affected Southern provinces to break a cycle of recurrent drought. The ARRP will support the rolling
out  of  the  Framework  to  the  Municipalities  in  the  target  Provinces.  The  roll-out  will  mainly  involve
convening  of  meetings,  workshops  and  conducting  training  sessions  for  the  selected  officials.  The
expected outputs would be 600 officials of the inter-sectorial CNPC at municipal and provincial levels
47
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
trained in planning, implementing and monitoring resilience-building interventions. The estimated cost
of this activity is USD150,000.
28 Community Level Interventions – Climate risk management training will be undertaken through
the FFS. Target communities will be provided with training in the management of droughts and floods
related  to  their  livelihoods  as  part  of  the  FFS  curriculum.  The  training  will  be  delivered  by  the  FFS
facilitators  and  trainers  that  benefited  from  capacity  building  activities  in  the  emergency  operations
and  also  earlier  Government/FAO  interventions. The  disaster  risk management  training  will  build  on
on-going sessions that are being provided by UNDP and OCHA. The ARRP will support the training
sessions  in  target  communities  including  simulation  exercises.  The  expected  outputs  are  at  least
6,290  smallholders  trained  in  climate  risk management  and  4,000  community  members  trained  in
disaster  risk  management.  The  estimated  cost  for  the  disaster  risk  management  training  is  USD
100,000.
29. Community Level Institutional  and Human  Resource Development – The  objective  of  the
activity is  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  the  target  beneficiaries  and  institutional  stakeholders  at  local
level  to  ensure  the  effective  implementation  and  sustainability  of  the  interventions  described  under
sub-component  1.1  and  1.2.  Envisaged  activities  include:  a) establishment  and  strengthening  of
Farmer Field Schools on crop and livestock husbandry; b) establishment and strengthening of Farmer
Field  Schools  in  agro-pastoralism  and  natural  resource  management;  and  c) specialised training  in
livestock based activities (small livestock, apiculture, etc.)
30. Farmer  Field  Schools – Support  will  be  provided  to  strengthen  the  Farmer  Field  Schools  that
have been set up through the emergency projects to complete their learning and adoption cycles as
well as establish new schools where the potential exists. Consideration will be given to set up schools
in  the  vicinity  of  those  previously  established  to  form  ‘clusters’  that  would  provide  benefits  in
management and supervision.
31 FFS Background and Status – The Project will build on the FFS approach introduced by FAO under
its  emergency  programme  and  regarded  as  the  principal  extension  approach  in  Angola  for
institutionalization and scaling up. This activity lies at backbone of the implementation strategy and is
the main conduit for recovery and resilience to occur. In most situations the school is used to create
social and financial capital whilst acting as a new technology delivery mechanism for crop production,
agro-pastoralism  and  nutrition.  The  school  is vital  to  support  the  activities  listed  under  Sub-
components  1.1  and  1.2.To  date,  over  100  FFSs  have  been  set  up  in  the  Project  provinces.  Some
new  e-FFSs  will  be  set  up  to  reach  target  beneficiaries  not  helped  by  the  emergency  programmes.
Through the emergency programmes, focus of attention was given to development of the communal
plot  which  provides  opportunities  for  crop  and  nutrition  diversification  for  FFS  members,  whilst
creating  a  capital  fund  to  sustain  the  school  in  the  future.  The  activities  implemented  under  the
emergency programme are at a fledgling level of development and considerably more work is needed
for farm households to adopt the agricultural practices on their own plots. The approach of ARP will be
to:  a)  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  FFS  organisation;  b)  support  construction/  maintenance  of
communal infrastructure; c) support production from the community plot; and d) impact FFS members
at household level by fostering the replication and adoption of the new  technologies (short duration,
drought  resistant  varieties  of  cereals  and  cassava  cuttings)  and  introduction  of  livestock  based
packages.  The  new  FFSs  will  targeted,  preferably,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  existing  schools  to  create
clusters for more cost-effective extension support.
32. Implementation and phasing of the ARP field activities will depend on the status of the FFS that
have been established or planned.
For  those  FFSs,  set  up  under  the  emergency  programme,  where  public  goods  investment  have
already  been  made,  households  will  be  eligible  from  the  beginning  of  project  implementation  to
receive a choice of livelihood packages.
For  communities  where  new  e-FFSs  will  be  established,  the  process  will  follow  these  steps:  a)
agro-ecosystem analysis/preparation of natural resource management plans; b)  FFS awareness
raising/sensitisation,  organisation  of  farmers,  curricula  development;  c)  establishment  and
implementation  of  communal  productive  infrastructure  activities  together  with  FFS  training
support;(year 1);  d) household level livelihoods assessment and targeting;  and e) the provision
of the crop, livestock and off-farm recovery packages to targeted households (women, youth and
the most vulnerable) (from years 2 and 3).
48


REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
For communities where no FFSs are envisaged, development will commence by a) conducting an
agro-ecosystem  analysis,  followed  by  preparation  of  natural  resource  management  plans;  b)
establishing  communal  productive  infrastructure  through  community  mobilization – years  1-2  c)
provision of crop, livestock and off-farm household recovery packages – years 2-4.
In all cases each household  will be eligible  to receive the  technical package as  a one-time support.
Interventions, however, will be phased to build self-reliance and ensure sustainability. Support for crop
and  livestock  development  will  take  place  only  after  productive  assets  have  been  established  and
household commitments made.
33. e-FFS Establishment – Each e-FFS group will receive a grant of USD 500 at the start of the first
cycle which will allow the group to purchase the necessary learning materials and field inputs needed
for  the  FFS.  Part  of  the  funds  will  be  used  for  a  communal  field  to  generate  some  income  for  the
group  to  continue  activities  for  the  following  learning  cycles.  Beneficiaries  are  expected  to  make in-
kind contributions to the e-FFSs. The FFS group will consist, of, on average, 30 smallholder farmers
(both  men  and  women)  from  the same or  surrounding  villages.  The  training  is  expected  to  be
conducted within the village and on a common plot. Women farmers are expected to comprise around
50 percent of all trainees. The project expects to cover those communes and municipalities prioritised,
by the end of the third year, with at least 30% of total target covered in the first year and 60% in the
second year. This will ensure that all farmers in the target schools benefit from at least one full FFS
training cycle during the Project period.42
34. Training Methodology – The core of the programme is the training of Master Trainers – identified as
government staff from different ministries as well as NGOs in the vicinity – although greater emphasis will
be given to develop a cadre of government counterpart staff. Trainers of Master Trainers will be selected
from a resource pool of  national staff previously trained  by  FAO43. The core team of trainers  will  be
used to train a local cadre of master trainers from the project area.44 This core team of trainers will be
complemented by trainers working in neighbouring projects (RETESA, IFAD and MOSAP). Four 3-month
Master Trainer training programmes have been scheduled over the duration of the Project to broaden the
core base of capacity. For effective implementation of the FFS approach, the government will need to
ensure  that  each  municipality  participating  in  the  Project  has  at  least  three  agricultural  extension
specialists at each EDA and field staff will be deployed at communal level. Ultimately the intention is
for  the  FFS  facilitators  to  be  absorbed  by  IDA  as  front  line  extension  workers  on  the  government
payroll. The Master Trainers will in turn train the Farmer Field School Facilitators in a 3-4 week intensive
training programme complemented by periodic refresher training. Two FFS facilitators will be selected for
each community and trained. The two facilitators will form a team to implement the FFS curriculum at field
level. The existing cadre of FFS facilitators will undertake a refresher training and a further 300 new
FFS  facilitators  will  be  trained  as  the  new  schools  are  established.45 The  FFS  facilitators  will  be
supported and mentored with technical support from the Master Trainers and Project technical staff46.
42The key selection criteria for determining smallholder farmers’ eligibility as beneficiaries of the FFS training
program are: (a) farming as a household activity; (b) willingness to work in a group/organisation; (c) awareness
and willingness to resolve their agricultural problems; (d) preferred location with easy access to the FFS site; (e)
average farm size not greater than 5 ha; (f) gender, such that at least 50 percent of FFS participants are women;
(g) potential for knowledge transfer to other villages in the same area; and (h) existence of farmer leaders and
champions for improving food security.
43The season-long master training will have a 90 day duration. This is the preferred option to train new master
trainers because it allows trainers to acquire the necessary technical, methodological and organizational skills to
run FFS programmes. Currently there are about 50 persons that have the necessary skills and experience to
work as Master Trainers, the majority trained in previous master training courses and others through the earlier
shorter courses and experience gained throughout the years.
44Each master trainer (MT) will organize and support at least two FFSs. Some master trainers will support three
to four FFSs depending on their motivation and experience and the distance between different FFS groups.
Some master trainers will also be used to supervise activities at provincial and municipal levels.
45Two Farmer Field School facilitators per community
46At  Municipio  level  (two  persons  in  each  local  EDA  office  and  2  from  NGOs)  will  be  trained  as  Training
Coordinators.  Each  Training  Coordinator  would  train  up  to  4  Farmer  Facilitators  each  year.  The  project  will
increase local capacities by training staff from national institutions (EDA) and from civil society (NGO) in order to
assure sustainability.
49

REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Finally,  in  addition  to  training  new  trainers  and  facilitators,  the Project  will  also  organize  refresher
courses  for  trainers  and  facilitators  over  the  course  of  its  duration.  In  each  province,  over  the 24
month training period, there will be two refresher trainings for each of the FFS facilitators of 2 weeks
duration to ensure that new topics are included in the programme. The content of the training will be
developed based on the needs that emerge. Government will have to ensure that the Master Trainers
are assigned on a permanent basis to the Province and that support will be available from municipal
technical staff. To facilitate networking and interaction between the groups, the FFSs will be placed in
clusters of between 3-4 FFSs, in the vicinity of the core FFS. It is intended that  the FFS  will  lay the
foundation  for  establishing,  on  a  voluntary  basis, smaller  affinity  groups  based  on  livelihood
diversification  interests, rotating  savings  and  credit  associations  (ROSCAS), amongst  others. The
proposed  methodology developed  by  FAO  call  for  a  complete  FFS  training  cycle  that  has  been
estimated at approximately 30 months (12 months in cycle 1, 6 months in cycle 2, and 12 months in
cycle 3).
35, Training  Content – The  FFS  curriculum  for  farmers  will  cover  a 24 month  duration  and  will  be
developed  seasonally  or  annually  by the master  trainers and  the trained  FFS  facilitators.  The
curriculum  will  be  further  enhanced  and  modified  after  their  implementation  in  the  field  and  during
refresher courses.
36, Initially, it  is  expected  that  the  FFS  members  will  be  expected  to  prepare  Community-Based
Natural  Resources  Management  Plan47.  The  ARP  will  support  the  development  of  action  oriented
natural  resources  management  plans  that  allow  communities  to  effectively  map  their available
resources  and  outline  agreed  approaches  to  achieve  the  common  objective  of  sustainable
management48.  A  first  stage  of  preparation  of  the  NRM  plan  is  an  agro-ecosystem  analysis  where
farmers  are  expected  to  better  understand  their  ecosystem,  and  the  consequences  of  poor
management practices and opportunities that could arise from better management of the system. The
approach  will  be  to  develop  community  resource  management  plans  on  the  basis  of  identified
problems  and  challenges  in  land,  water,  grassland  and  forest  resource  use,  in  order  to  develop  a
vision of the future and ownership of the approach. Agreement will have to be reached by the various
community  members,  which  will  require  the  active  engagement  of  community  leaders  and  a
participatory  process.  The  expected  output  is  the  development  of  at  least  20  community  natural
resources management plans. The community level plans will be aligned with the Municipal Strategies
already  developed  to  enhance  disaster  resilience  of  identified  vulnerable  groups  in  the  targeted
Provinces.49 In addition the Provincial Strategies for Building Resilience may need to be updated. The
estimated cost for this activity is USD 100,000.
37. On  completion  of  the  community  based  natural  resource  management  plan  the  Farmer  Field
School members with the support of the Master Trainers will prepare the FFS curricula to cover a 24
month cycle. Typically, the first cycle will start with basic production techniques such as seeding and
weeding, progressively tackling more complex matters, such as soil fertility management, aspects of
conservation agriculture, nutrition and social/organizational issues. The content of the FFS, however,
will need to be modified to match the training needs of the different agro-ecological areas and sites in
the  target  provinces.  Attention  will  be  given  to  incorporate  sessions  on  climate  change  and  agro-
pastoralism  (introduced  in  the  Farmer  Field  Schools  methodology  particularly  in  Namibe),  soil  and
water  conservation,  seed  up-grading  and  distribution, Integrated  Pest  Management  (IPM),  minimum
tillage husbandry practices, crop diversification and crop storage. Other topics that are suggested for
inclusion in the curriculum are:50
47Municipal  level  strategies  for  building  resilience  have  been  developed  in  the  target  provinces  in  line  with  the
Provincial plans. However the lowest level of planning, at commune level, has not adequately been covered.
48Facilitators will need to be recruited by the project as principle agents to guide the development of the plans,
supported  by  Municipal  level  officials  that  have  been  trained  through  earlier  interventions  by  UNDP  and  other
partners.
49The Municipal Strategies will be adjusted in line with the community level plans. In some cases the municipal
strategies  will  be  shared  with  the  community  as  part  of  a  validation  process  and  the  feed-back  from  the
community will enable the municipal technical staff to refine and improve their plans.
50It should be pointed out that the FFS training curriculum should focus on subject areas of common interest to
their members. More specialised technical training will be required for specific interest groups particularly in
50
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Improvement of animal kralls for farmyard manure management;
Use of animal urine for bio-fertilizer and bio-pesticides;
Integration of leguminous crops in intercropping and crop rotations;
Green manuring of legumes and non-leguminous plants;
Composting and use of Effective Micro-organisms (EM)
Use of bio-fertilizers such as rhyzobium, azola, micorhyzae and biogas slurry; and
Utilisation  of  agro-forestry  techniques  to  provide  for  increased  soil  cover,  restrained  run-off,
improved soil fertility and mulching opportunities.
Cassava  seed  handling,  phytosanitary  measures  and  seed certification  scheme  to  minimize
disease and pest build up that threaten cassava production.
Small scale livestock management
Integration of fish farming with livestock and crop production
Record keeping, business management and marketing51.
38 Social Mobilisation and mentoring: Attention will be placed on developing self -reliance amongst
the  FFS,  farmer  organizations  and  interest  groups  formed  around the  livelihood activities  through  a
well-tested social mobilization/ community development process. This will be a challenge considering
that the FFSs to date were set up under an emergency programme where self-reliance, savings-first
and revolving funds were not required. The project, through its community development process will
attempt  to  redress  these  deficiencies  by  introducing  appropriate  procedures  aimed  at  strengthening
the capacity of school and group members to resolve their own problems. In order to do so it will be
important to clarify from the outset, the roles and responsibilities of the project and those of the rural
community. Clear Terms of Partnership will be formed, setting out the responsibilities and obligations
of  both  parties:  the  project  and  the  beneficiary.  As  noted  above,  community  members  will  prepare
community  based  development  plans.  Community  led  monitoring  and  evaluation  will  also  play  an
important  part  in  this  process.  The  FFS and farm household based  groups  will  be  encouraged  to
create and manage their own in-kind and cash revolving funds through which access to critical inputs
would be facilitated and sustained at group level. Other group members should then be able to utilise
the funds to replicate the activity. This will create internal social pressure on those household to repay
the funds in time to make them available to others in the group.
39. Individual  household  mentoring  will  be  conducted  through  the  cadre  of  community  development
facilitators identified  from  within  the  Project  areas  and  recruited  by  the  Project  to  lead  the  social
mobilization  and  group  formation/strengthening  processes.  Support  for  social  mobilization  will  come
from local NGOs selected and contracted for this purpose. Funds have also been set aside for sub-
contracting. However, as capacity amongst local NGO potential partners to undertake this task is low,
the Project will be expected to develop and strengthen their skills. NGOs however will still be used to
implement  the  social  mobilization  and  community  development  process  once  the  social  facilitators
have been identified, selected and trained.
40. Mentoring  is recognised as an  important vehicle to foster social inclusion  by reaching out to the
households that have not been reached through the emergency programme. The mentoring support
will also be needed to identify and assist the more vulnerable households in the community that are
often  beyond  the  reach  of  the  mainstream  Project  activities.  Clear  criteria  are  needed  to  identify
community development facilitators as mentors:
Technical competence in thematic areas (for example, finance, natural resource management);
Interest and the time available to undertake this work on a full time basis;
Good communication skills, including the ability to listen, build rapport, show respect for different
opinions and address sensitive issues constructively;
Empathy with the people they work with, and their hopes and challenges;
Motivation and skills to support group members in their change process and to share the process
with new households;
support of livelihood diversification activities. The proposed TA will be expected to cover these specialised
trainings.
51Consideration will be given to using the FFSs records through their facilitators as sources of data for the M&E
system.
51
















REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Commitment to supporting an individual’s change process;
Ability  to work  equitably  with  both  male  and  female  household  members  (including  youth  and
people with disabilities) in a participatory and inclusive manner; and
Ability to network and provide linkages to other services, such as health, credit.
41. It  should  be  emphasized  from  the  outset  that  mentoring  is  about  developing  self-reliance  rather
than  dependency  and  that  the  support  is  time-bound.  This  will  ensure  that  the  more  vulnerable
households  do  not  become  dependent  on  the  mentors. The  community  development  facilitators  will
need to be supported by service providers. As the capacity of many of the local service providers is
low, the project has created two full time position for a nationally recruited Social Development Expert
to be supported by 4 months of International Social Development expertise.
42. Technical Training – Specific  technical  training  will  be  required  to  support  households  and
groups  involved  in  specialised  livelihoods  diversification  activities – small  livestock, apiculture, etc.
These activities  are  most  likely  to  be  conducted  outside  the  FFS  curriculum – as  the  households
selected  may  not  be  FFS  members  and/or  the  training  may  be  specialised  and  may  not  interest  all
FFS members. It is expected that the training support will be largely informal through service provider
contracts.
43 In  the  case  of  apiculture  the  training  sessions  will  be  provided  directly  in  the  selected  target
communities  and  will  include  around  15  training  days  of  theory  and  practical  exercises.  The  best
performing training  participants  will  be  encouraged  to  transfer  the  knowledge  to  other  community
members as new resource persons. The content of the training would include:
Environmental and agricultural context and importance of beekeeping;
Conservation and maintenance of the existing bee colonies;
Increasing bee colony number, productivity and honey quality;
Manufacturing  of  basic  beekeeping  equipment  (protective  equipment,  honey  collection  tools,
hives etc.);
Honey collection, straining, bottling, storing;
Control over diseases, pests and enemies of honeybees;
Diversification of bee products; and
Marketing.
44. Technical training will also be required to develop and upgrade the capacity of the existing cadre
of Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWs) at municipality and community level, train additional
CAHWs  in  areas  where  their  coverage  is  limited, develop  the  cadre  of  Community  Development
Facilitators  at  local  level  and  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  Farmer  Field  School  facilitators. More
women will be trained as CAHWs so as to allow women livestock owners’ easier access to services
relevant for the small livestock managed by women – poultry, sheep and goats. The CAHWs will be
trained  in  both  animal  health  for  cattle  and  health  of  small  livestock52.53. The  training will
include
priority diseases, treatment regimes, and vaccination protocols.
45. Qualified veterinary oversight will be made available to support the CAHWs through the veterinary
institute  or  alternatively  through  a  local  private  veterinarian. Regular  refresher  training will also be
provided. The project will assist with course design to ensure that priority and high-risk diseases are
covered, including treatment and vaccination protocols..
.
52One  of  the  main constraints  to  improved  household  poultry  production  is  the  high  mortality  especially  among
chicks  due  to diseases  and  to  predation  by  wild  animals  and  exposure  as  a  result  of  poor  housing.  The
programme  will  provide  focused  training  in  poultry  health,  supplementary  feeding,  housing  and  general
management. Because the livestock department does not have adequate frontline livestock extension staff on the
ground in most districts of the country, the programme will train community animal health workers (CAHWs) to
provide extension service to complement efforts of the department.
53 The Institute of Veterinary Services will be committed to ensure that quality drugs are available and accessible
to CAHWs. Efforts will also be spent on developing a functioning cold chain which can be maintained.
52











REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Appendix 5:
Institutional Aspects and Implementation
Arrangements
1.
MINAGRI will be the lead executing agency and will work closely with the other line ministries
and  partners  whose  mandates  have  a  direct  bearing  on  the  achievement  of  the  Project  goal  and
development  objectives.  The  Project delivery  systems  will  be  integrated  into  the  decentralized
government  organisational  and  operational  structures  that  cascade  from  the  national  level  to
communal level.
2.
National  Level – MINAGRI  will delegate it  responsibility  to the  Institute  for  Agrarian
Development  (Instituto  de  Desenvolvimento Agrário - IDA). As  part  of  its  mandate,  the  institution  is
responsible for supporting smallholder agriculture in the country, promoting production increases and
the improvement of livelihoods of rural households; this this in well with objectives of the Project. IDA
will take the role of the main implementing partner on behalf of MINAGRI. It will play a key role in both
the  overall  project  management  and  the  coordination  of  government  and  non-government  agencies
participating in the Project.
3.
Provincial Level – At the provincial level, the MINAGRI Provincial Directorates are responsible
for the agriculture sector support and policy issues relating to their respective provinces, as well the
overall coordination  of the  actions carried out by  agriculture  institutions present  in the province. The
involvement  of  the  provincial  directorates  of  agriculture  in  the  project  will  be  important  for  overall
oversight of provincial Project implementation at field level by IDA/contracted service providers.
4.
Municipal Levels – Considering that most of the Project activities will be taking place on farms
and  in  villages  at  the  Commune  and  Municipal  levels,  the Estacões  de  Desenvolvimento  Agrário
(EDAs) will  play  a  critical  role.  EDAs are  the  field  offices  of  IDA  at  municipal  level;  this  is where
frontline extension  staff  is  located.  They  are  responsible  for  extension  and capacity  building  of
farmers. They are also responsible for collecting data for MINAGRI and for implementation of various
government-sponsored programmes.
The  Veterinary  Service  Institute  (ISV) – The  Project  has  interventions  in  the  area  of  small
5.
livestock. Therefore, ISV  will provide advice to IDA  and EDAs on all  aspects related to the  Project’s
livestock activities.
6.
Other  Ministries – ARP,  being  a  recovery  Project,  will  have  implications  for  some  other
ministries,  in  addition  to  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture.  The  most  obvious  ones  include:  a)  Ministry  of
Finance  (MoF) – This  is  the  representative  of  the  borrower.  In  addition,  it  is  responsible  for the
financial  supervision  of  all  government  programs;  it  is  also  responsible  for  supervising  the  budget
process and the allocation of project financing for all those projects with external sources of financing;
b)  Ministry  of  Family  and  Women’s  Promotion (these  will  be  instrumental  to  ensure  appropriate
mechanisms for gender and targeting; c) Ministry of Health – the recurring droughts have resulted in a
considerable degree of malnutrition. The Ministry will interested in ensuring that nutritional aspects of
the target beneficiaries are progressively being addressed; and d) Ministry of Environment – this will
be a major stakeholder in the ARP implementation; many of the capacity building activities will directly
involve the Ministry.
7.
Service  Providers – These  will  play  a  critical  role  during  ARP  implementation.  All  the
emergency  programmes  onto  which  ARP  would  be  building  have  been/are  being  implemented
through  different  service  providers.  These  range  from  UN  agencies,  such  as  FAO,  to  specialised
NGOs. In  addition,  services  of  consultancy  firms  and/or  individual  consultants  may  besought  during
the course of ARP implementation. As stipulated in Appendix 8: Procurement, the needed services will
be  procured  following  the  appropriate  procedures,  and  used  to ensure  the  achievement  of  ARP
objectives.
8.
Oversight  Function – There  will  be  oversight bodies at  two  different  levels;  the  national  and
provincial.  At  the  national  level,  MINAGRI  will  be  supported  by a Project Coordination Committee
(PCC).  The PCC will  be chaired  by  the  Minister  of  Agriculture  or  his  nominee,  and  composed  of
membership from institutions with direct relevancy to the achievement of ARP’s goal and development
objective.  The PCC will  be  responsible  for:  a)  providing  strategic  guidance  for  the  effective  ARP
implementation; b) promoting inter-ministerial coordination; c) reviewing and approval of the AWPB; d)
reviewing and approval of the annual Project implementation progress reports and provide guidance
53
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
on corrective measures to solve any existent implementation issues; and e) ensure that interventions
are  coordinated,  where  appropriate,  with  other  Programmes  and  Projects  with  similar  or  related
objectives. The Director General of IDA will be the Secretary of the PCC. It will meet at least two times
per year or more frequently, as and when need arises.
9.
At  the  provincial  level,  there  will  be  a  Provincial  Project Coordination Committee  (PPCC)  in
each participating province. The composition and tasks of the PPCC will reflect the composition and
tasks of the PCC. The PPCC will include the Provincial Director of Agriculture, the Provincial Director
of IDA and the Area Project Coordinator, a representative of civil society or NGO, a representative of
the  private  sector  and  two  (minimum)  representatives  of  beneficiaries/producers’  organisations.  The
PPCC will also meet twice a year, or more frequently, if required. The responsibilities of the PPCC will
include: a) speeding up decisions and procedures; b) review and approval of the beneficiary and IGA
selection  processes;  c)  review  the  provincial  level AWPB  prepared  by  the  Provincial  Directorates  of
Agriculture  and  the  main  area  service  providers;  and  d)  review  the  provincial  level  annual  Project
implementation  progress  reports.  The PPCC will  also  meet  at  least  two  times  per  year  or  more
frequently, as and when need arises.
Provincial  Governance  Committee  (PGC) – In  addition  to  the PPCCs,  PGCs  will  be
10.
established  in  each  of  the  participating  provinces  to  ensure  good  governance  and  accountability
during Project implementation. They will be composed of local authorities and traditional leaders who
will be supported, as and when the need arises, by a representative/agent of the oversight committee.
The role and functions of the PGCs will be to oversee implementation from a good governance and
accountability point of view. This being a recovery Project with a very limited budget, the process of
selecting the direct beneficiaries and allocation of IGA sub-projects could, potentially, generate some
grievances.  The  PGCs  will  establish  a  grievance  mechanism  which  will  be  used  to  address  any
grievances that could develop during the course of ARP implementation. The PGCs will keep records
of evidences and complaints with minutes of the discussions, recommendations and decisions taken.
The  PGCs  will  establish  detailed  mechanisms  for  the  grievance  and  complaint  process,  describing
format, language, time for reply and alternative resources, including access to Courts of Law as a last
resort after exhausting all the viable peaceful local alternatives/options. Permanent and open dialogue
will  also  be  promoted  as  this  is  the  most  suitable  way  of  peacefully addressing  any  grievances
expressed. The oversight agent will be entitled to spot-check the beneficiary selection and IGA sub-
project approval process at the PGC level to ensure fairness and transparency and will report to the
PCC.
Project  Management – MINAGRI  will  establish  a  Project  Implementation  Unit  (PIU)  at  the
11.
national level, but will be located in Lubango, Huila Province. The PIU will be responsible for: a) the
day-to-day  Project  coordination  and  management,  including  technical  supervision  and  coordination,
overall  Project  planning,  quality  oversight,  communication,  reporting,  procurement, 
financial
management,  monitoring  of  Project  activities  and  of  its  progress  on  a  regular  basis,  and  impact
evaluation; and b) manage fiduciary issues in conformity with the standards and requirements agreed
upon with IFAD, in accordance with the Financing Agreement and other Project documents, such as
the  Project  Design/Appraisal  Documents  and  the  PIM. The  PIU  will  be  accountable  to  the  Director
General of IDA. The PIU will be accountable to the Director General of IDA.
12.
The  ARP  PIU  will  include  the  following  positions:  a)  Project  Coordinator;  b)  Accountant;  c)
Procurement  Assistant;  d)  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Assistant;  e)  Project  Assistant;  and  f)  Driver.
However,  the  PIU  of  the  SADCP  C&H-SAMAP  will  provide  an  oversight  role  to  the  ARP  PIU,
especially in the areas of Financial Management, procurement and monitoring and evaluation.
54
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Appendix 6: Planning, M&E and Learning and Knowledge
Management
the  Project will
Effective  implementation  of
1.
require  functional  Planning,  Monitoring  and
Evaluation  (PM&E)  systems  that  provide  Project management  with  data  on  problems,  progress  and
results, and facilitate management decision making. Equally  important is a Knowledge Management
(KM) function to ensure that experience gained and lessons learnt are taken into account and used to
improve  plans  and  implementation  performance  throughout  the  life  of  the  Project. These  systems
would be particularly important for ARP where it is critically important to ascertain, during the first few
months of implementation, whether early recovery is actually taking place as expected.
the
Planning – Annual  planning  will  be  a  decentralized  process,  starting  at 
2.
communal/municipality  levels  where  the  respective  EDAs  would  prepare  municipality-specific  plans.
The  contents  will  depend  on  the  type  of  recovery  activities  that  are  being  implemented  (or to  be
implemented) in a certain municipality. Municipality plans will be consolidated at the provincial level by
the  office  of  the  Provincial  Director  of Agriculture  and  forwarded  to  the  PIU  for  consolidation  into  a
Project-wide  draft  AWPB.  The  consolidated  ARP  AWPB  would  be  sent  to  the PCC for  review  and
endorsement and, eventually, sent to IFAD for review and expression of a ‘No Objection’. The draft to
IFAD should be sent latest by 31st October of every year or 60 days before the start of the next Project
Year.  IFAD  would  have  30  days  for  reviewing  and  provision  of  its  ‘No  Objection’  and  the  PIU  would
have  a  full  month  to  revise  and  finalise  the  AWPB.  This  process  is  critical  to  ensure  the  timely
submission of the draft to each level of approval. The finalised AWPB would be distributed to all ARP
implementing  agencies  by  31st December  of  every  year  to  ensure  a  smooth  transition  of
implementation  from  year  to  year.  The  AWPBs  will  be  the  basis  for  implementation  and  would  be
results-oriented; there should be a clear link between planned activities and Project outputs.
3.
Monitoring  and  Evaluation – An  M&E  system  will  be  established  under  ARP  whose  key
function  would  be  to  provide  information  on progress  and  performance  that  contributes  to  effective
Project  management,  decision  making  and  good  quality  reporting,  including  to  government  (the
relevant  ministries)  and  to  IFAD.  Reporting  to  IFAD  would  be  consistent  with  the  stipulations  of  the
Guidelines  for  Disaster  Early  Recovery.  Monitoring  would  focus  on  collecting  data  on  the  status  of
planned  activities  in  the  AWPB,  and  on  creating  a  cumulative  overview  of  the  direct  results
(deliverables/outputs) that follow implementation, from Project start-up until completion.
4.
In line with the implementation approach, the Project’s M&E system will be decentralised. The
Project’s Monitoring & Evaluation Assistant would provide the necessary guidance, develop tools and
follow-up;  considering  that  ARP  will  be  building  on  emergency  programmes,  it  will  consider
strengthening  any  existent  and  relevant  tools,  as  opposed  to  starting  afresh.  Training  and
backstopping will be provided to those involved in data collection and collation at the different levels.
Given the fact that many of the activities are to be subcontracted to Service  Providers, the different
Service Provider agreements would specify responsibilities for monitoring and include templates that
facilitate consistent reporting by all Service Providers.
5.
The M&E  system  will  devote  significant  attention  to  assessing  progress  and  achievements  of
the  interventions.  To  ensure  that  implementation  of  early  recovery  activities  proceeds  smoothly  and
that any problems are dealt with in a timely manner, provision would be made for close monitoring and
supervision  of  ARP  activities;  especially  during  the  first  two  years  (see  section  on  Supervision).  In
addition  to  the  monitoring  of  activities,  the  M&E  system  will  also  monitor  and  assess  early  recovery
objectives  and  priorities  regularly.  This  will  support  prompt  identification  of  problems  (such  as
objectives that are not being met or are off-track) so that the necessary actions can be taken. This will
also  help  to  ensure  that  recovery  activities  are  underpinned  by  the  principles  of  “do  no  harm”  and
“build back better”, as required by the IFAD Guidelines for Disaster Early Recovery.
6.
An M&E Assistant, under the supervision of the Project Coordinator, will be responsible for the
monitoring and evaluation of the Project; the M&E & Knowledge Sharing Specialist of the SAMAP will
oversee the ARP M&E function. The relevant units at the different government levels, the main service
providers,  the  implementation  partners  and  the  beneficiaries  will  play  an  important  role  in  M&E
functions.
56
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
7.
A baseline survey will be undertaken during the first year of implementation to benchmark the
existing situation in the Project area, against which the outcomes and impact of ARP will be assessed.
To the extent possible, the information contained in the PDNA and other reports, especially those on
the  emergency  interventions  undertaken  in  the  ARP  areas  of  focus,  should  be  used  to  inform  the
baseline. An effort will be made to concretely identify gender issues and gaps and that information will
be used to inform different interventions to address the identified issues and gaps. A Mid-Term Review
(MTR) will be undertaken halfway through Project implementation; it will evaluate whether the Project
is on course to achieve the objectives. It will identify any prevailing constraints and recommend such
re-orientation as may be required to help the Project get back on course to achieve its objectives. The
recommendations  will  take  into  consideration  the  likelihood  of  achieving  the  Project's  targets  during
the remaining time period and may modify those targets. At completion, an Impact Assessment will be
undertaken;  it  will  be  used  to  prepare  the  Project  Completion  Report  (PCR)  which  will  provide  an
overview of the accomplishments of ARP and analysis of its performance.
8.
Learning  and  Knowledge  Management – Knowledge  Management  (KM)  will  ensure  that
Project implementation is a continuous learning process during which quantitative and qualitative data
would be compiled, analysed and disseminated as lessons learned, thematic studies and stories from
the field that explain challenges encountered and results achieved. The information to be generated
by  the  M&E  system  will  enable  IDA/MINAGRI,  all  the  other  directly  elated  ministries,  the  relevant
Provincial Directorates of the three participating provinces and other relevant stakeholders to carefully
monitor  the  Project  and  provide  reliable  information  on  the  different  recovery  interventions  and  the
resultant  impact  (or  lack  thereof).  Considering  that  IFAD  does  not  have  much experience  with
recovery interventions in the country, information sharing  with  other recovery projects in Angola and
the region would receive particular attention. Knowledge gained in other countries of the region will be
made  available  to  ARP.  In  turn,  the  ARP  experience  will  inform  regional  learning  on  post-disaster
recovery interventions.
57
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Appendix 7: Financial Management and Disbursement Arrangements
1.
Implementing  Organization – The  ARP  PIU  in  Lubango will  be  responsible  for  the  day-to-day
financial management of the Project. The financial management of IDA is highly centralized such that the
provincial  administration  of  IDA  in  Lubango  operates  a  very  limited  budget  for  small  purchases  (petty-
cash),  and  is  staffed  by  one  Administrative  and  Finance  Officer  (AFO),  who  is  also  responsible  for
Procurement. As such, the oversight of the financial management unit of ARP, which will be staffed by an
Accountant, will be guaranteed by the Financial Management unit of SADCP-C&H-SAMAP in Luanda.
2.
Financial  Staffing – The  PIU’s  financial  team  will  be  quite  lean,  essentially  comprising  an
Accountant. This  arrangement  raises  the  financial  management  risk  of ARP,  due  to  difficulties  in  proper
segregation  of  duties  at  the  Lubango  level,  considering  that  the  FM  unit  will  be  staffed  by  only  one
accountant  contracted  by  the  project.  The Accountant  will  report  to  the  Project  Coordinator  and  will  be
supervised by the Financial Management Specialist of SADCP-C&H (henceforth FM Specialist), who will
have the additional responsibility of overseeing the FM arrangements of ARP besides her/his commitment
to  manage  the  FM  unit  of  SADCP-C&H.  In  agreement  with  IDA,  his/her  TORs  will  be  broadened  to
include this assignment. The IDA AFO in Lubango will support ARP on a pro-rata basis. Specific tasks will
comprise: supporting the ARP accountant in preparing bank reconciliations, bookkeeping and archiving of
financial documentation. As an important institutional support to IDA, the AFO will be trained together with
the remaining project team on IFAD FM guidelines as well as on use of the accounting software.
3.
The  selection  of  the  Accountant  will  be  carried  out  by  IDA,  in  accordance  with  Government
practices for appointment of staff. The selection  will  be based on a competitive process open to staff of
the Ministry of Agriculture as well as external candidates. Knowledge of accounting software should also
be taken into account in selecting the candidate.
4.
Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) – The AWPB will be prepared on the basis of guidelines
and regulations reflecting government and IFAD’s policy. The FM Specialist will actively participate in the
preparation  of  the  AWPB,  overseeing  the  work  of  the  Accountant  in  preparing  the  yearly  budget.  The
procedures for preparing the annual budget and project financing needs will be documented in the Project
Implementation  Manual  (PIM).  The  budget  will  cover  all  project  activities  and  will  be  prepared  no  later
than  two  months  prior  to  the  end  of  each  fiscal year.  This  draft  AWPB  will  be  endorsed  by  IDA,  and
submitted to IFAD prior to  implementation. The AWPB  will describe all  the activities to be implemented,
description of expenditures by component, category, funding sources and timelines for implementation. It
will  also  contain  a  procurement  plan  for  the  relevant  implementation  period.  Timely  preparation  and
approval of AWPB will be key to guarantee budgetary control. The budget information should be entered
and available in the accounting system to allow for the timely recording of commitments, payments, and
accruals.  Finally,  IDA  will  send  to  IFAD  the  first  AWPB  for  no-objection  as  a  condition  of  first
disbursement.
Accounting  Policies  and  Procedures – The  Project  will  comply  with  the  International  Public
5.
Accounting Standards (IPSAS). The Financial Statements will be prepared in accordance with the “cash
basis” method of accounting. A Financial  Management Procedures Manual (FMPM)  will be prepared as
an  annex  of  the  Project  Implementation  Manual.  The  FMPM  will  be  elaborated  based  on  the  best
practices and experience of the ongoing projects AFAP and SADCP-C&H, to guarantee an alignment of
the FM procedures of all three projects. The FMPM will contain the accounting policies and procedures,
including  the  chart of  accounts,  method  of  determination  of  the  exchange  rates  and  the  financial
management  arrangements  to  be  created  for  the  Project. The  FMPM  should  also  lay  down  the  precise
internal  control  arrangements  of  the  Project,  with  particular  emphasis  on  the  role of  the  FM  Specialist
within the project’s FM structure. Based on the experience of AFAP and SADCP-C&H, ARP will procure
and install the accounting software PRIMAVERA, and this shall be a pre-condition for first disbursement.
6.
Financial  Reports – The  Project’s  accounting  system  will  generate  the  necessary  financial
information for the Project financial progress reports as well as the year-end Financial Statements that will
identify sources of financing, expenses by component and category against the Project’s AWPB and the
58
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
cumulative  expenditures  to  date. Available  resources  will  be  applied  exclusively  for  the  achievement  of
Project objectives. All expenditures will need to have supporting documentation and presented to IFAD by
means  of  Summary  Sheets  (SS)  and  Statements  of  Expenditures  (SOEs).  The  format  and  content  of
these reports will be presented in the FMPM. All Project interim financial reports should be prepared by
the  accountant  and  FM  Specialist,  with  the  latter  bearing  the  responsibility  for  accuracy.  However,  the
consolidated  Financial  Statements  of  the  Project  for  auditing  purposes  will  be  prepared  by  the  FM
Specialist under the overall responsibility of the Project Coordinator. All supporting documentation should
be kept in good order by the ARP accountant and available for review within a reasonable amount of time
in  case  of  requests  by  IFAD.  Any  amounts  to  be  retroactively  financed  by  IFAD  shall  be  part  of  the
Financial Statements and subject to the normal yearly auditing exercise.
7.
Disbursements  Arrangements – The  disbursement  methods  available  to  IDA/MINAGRI  for  the
withdrawal  of  financing  proceeds  from  the  loan  account  are:  advances,  direct  payments  and
reimbursement.  The  documentation  of  the  uses  of  advances  will  be  through  SOEs.  The  ceiling  of  the
Designated Account, the limits of contracts subject to prior review and detail of supporting documentation
required to accompany the application for disbursement will be defined in the Letter to the Borrower.
8.
Flow of Funds – IDA shall open a bank account in USD to receive the proceeds of the financing
(Designated Account)  in  a  commercial  bank  in  Luanda. IDA  shall  also  open  an  Operational Account  in
Angolan  Kwanza  (AOA)  in  the  same  commercial  bank  where  the  Designated  Account  will  be  opened.
Mandatory  signatories  of  these accounts will  be  the  Project  Coordinator  and  IDA  senior  staff. The
Designated Account will be opened in Luanda due to the fact that the main Finance Unit of IDA is located
in  its  headquarters,  and  Government  owned  accounts  require  at  least  two  signatories  to  approve
transactions.  One  operational  account  in  AOA  will  be  opened  in  a  commercial  bank  in  Lubango.
Mandatory signatories of this account will the Project Coordinator and senior staff from the IDA Provincial
Directorate in Lubango, and/or senior staff of the Provincial Agriculture Directorate in Lubango.
fund  basis.  For 
9.
The  Project  Account  in  Lubango  will  be  used  solely  for  the  management  of  recurrent  costs
(operations  and  maintenance,  fuel,  travel  expenditures,  small  purchases)  and  will  be replenished  on  a
revolving 
large  purchases  of  goods  and  services  (to  be  determined  during
implementation, but ideally expenses above the SOE threshold equivalent) payments must be processed
by  the  ARP  accountant  upon  approval  by  the  FM  Specialist  and  authorization  by  the  ARP  Project
Coordinator.  These  expenditures  will  be  paid  from  the  project’s Operational  Account  in  Luanda. The
Designated  Account  shall  be  used  solely  for  the  replenishment  of  the  Operational  Accounts  (one  in
Luanda,  and  one  in  Lubango),  and  occasionally  for  the  payment  of  large  expenditures  in  USD. For
purchases below the SOE threshold equivalent, payments will be processed by the ARP accountant and
authorized by the Project Coordinator and paid from the Project Account. On exceptional basis, and under
the direct payment procedure detailed in the paragraph on disbursement arrangements, the project may
request  that  IFAD  pays  suppliers  of  goods  and  services  directly  from  the  project’s  loan  account.  This
procedure should normally be used for payment of invoices above USD 100,000.
10.
The flow of funds from the Designated Account to the Operational Account in Luanda will be based
on advances to cover monthly budgetary requirements. Particular care must be taken not to transfer large
amounts of project funds to this Operational Account to mitigate against the risk of further depreciation of
the  AOA  against  the  USD. The  flow  of  funds from  the  Designated  Account  to  the Project  Account in
Lubango will be managed on a revolving fund basis. Replenishments will depend on the regular financial
reports prepared by the ARP Accountant and submitted to the FM Specialist for approval under the overall
responsibility  of  the  Project  Coordinator.  The  Financial Management  Procedures  Manual  should  detail
that the replenishment of the Project Account will require that the Accountant is able to justify 50% of the
most recent advance, and 100% of any previous advance to the operational account.
11.
Finally, Government of Angola will transfer its counterpart funds to the AOA Operational Account of
ARP in Luanda. The flow of funds chart will be confirmed during Negotiations and included in the PIM. A
draft flowchart is presented hereunder.
59
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Flow of Funds
IFAD
Project Loan Account (USD)
Government of Angola
Designated
Account (USD)
[Luanda]
Project Account
(AOA)
[Lubango]
Operational
Account (AOA)
[Luanda]
Suppliers of Goods and Services
12. Government contribution – In addition to the counterpart funds deposited in an account held by
IDA for the payment of taxes by the Project, Government will also contribute in the form of office space for
the  Project  in  the  Provincial  Installations  of  IDA  in  Lubango.  The  contribution  will  be  accounted  by  the
Project  based  on  the  prevailing  market  rate  for  a  comparable  office  area  in  Lubango.  The  rate  may  be
evaluated by independent real estate agents operating in the city, and should be reviewed annually. As it
is envisioned that Government will also contribute in the form of logistics and personnel, contribution will
be  evaluated  pro-rata. Where  possible,  the  Project  will  keep  copies  of  invoices  and  receipts  for  Project
goods and services paid directly by government.
13.
Retroactive Financing – As requested by GoA, the financing agreement will allow for retroactive
financing.  The  total  amount  to  be  retroactively  financed  shall  not  exceed  10%  of  the  total  Project  cost.
Expenditures to be retroactively financed shall not be incurred before the Project’s approval by the Quality
Assurance  Secretariat.  Over  the  last  few  years,  FAO  has  implemented  emergency  programmes  in
Angola’s  southern  provinces  funded  by  the  US Agency  for  International  Development  (USAID),  OCHA
and FAO. MINAGRI and FAO have agreed that FAO will pre-finance some of the Project’s activities prior
to signing of the Financing Agreement. This retroactive financing is meant to ensure a timely start of the
agricultural campaigns in ARP’s target areas. All expenditures to be retroactively financed shall meet the
Fund’s eligibility criteria as set forth in the IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Financing as amended
60
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
on  April  2014,  with  particular  emphasis  on  IFAD’s  Procurement  Guidelines.  The  activities  to  be
retroactively financed shall be included in the first Annual Work Plan and Budget of the Project, and any
purchases  disclosed  in  the  Procurement  Plan.  The  total  amount  of  retroactive  financing  shall  also  be
disclosed  in  the  first  Project  Financial  Statements,  which  shall  be  audited.  Based  on  disbursement
instructions  from  GoA,  IFAD  will  reimburse  FAO  upon  confirmation  that  all  conditions  for  first
disbursement  are  met.  However,  as  detailed  in  the  IFAD  guidelines  for  retroactive  financing,  IFAD  will
take no liability for any pre-financed amounts in case the Project is not approved by its Executive Board.
14.
Financial Records – ARP will keep accurate records of all financial and procurement transactions.
All  original  documents  related  to  Project  transactions  should  be  safeguarded,  and  the  Project  will
continuously  sensitize  IDA  on  the  need  to  safeguard  all  supporting  documentation  related  to  Project
activities  for  a  period  of  10  years  following  Project  closure.  To  mitigate  the  risk  of  loss  of  financial and
procurement documentation, ARP will employ the  use of electronic archiving from project inception. The
Project team  should  either procure the  services  of  a  competent archiving  company operating  in  Luanda
for  the  digitization  of  supporting  documentation,  or  (and  in  the  spirit  of  better  regional  integration  with
other Projects within ESA), contact the Projects in the Mozambique portfolio that are employing a custom-
built software for electronic archiving.
15.
Assessment,  Risk  Mitigation  and  Internal  Controls – The  Public  Expenditure  and  Financial
Accountability (PEFA) assessment for Angola was carried out in 2016 and, as at May 2017, is still due for
publication. Angola  ranks  164/177  in  the  2016  Transparency  International  Corruptions  Perception  risk54
with a score of 18, a slight improvement over the year 2015. The World Bank carried out an assessment
of the FM and procurement systems during the design of the Project SADCP-WB (also implemented by
IDA) and concluded that inherent risk of the project is classified as “substantial”. As such, the same level
of inherent risk is applied to APR.
16.
The location of the project in Lubango adds an additional risk, as the Provincial Department of IDA
in  Lubango  has  very  limited  FM  oversight  capability  to  support  ARP. The  provincial  department  has  a
small Finance Unit, staffed by only an Administrative and Finance Officer. The provincial department only
processes small payments through its petty cash, and no accounting software is in use.
17.
To mitigate the internal control risk the following measures will be employed by IDA: a) preparation
of the FMPM upon approval of ARP design report by government; b) purchase and install an accounting
system,  which  will  be  a  pre-condition  for  first  disbursement;  c)  hiring the  Project’s Accountant  as  a  pre-
condition for first disbursement; d) revise the TORs of the FM Specialist of SADCP-C&H to include overall
supervision  of  the  work  of  the ARP  accountant  and  e)  hiring  an  internal  auditor  within  six  months  after
Project effectiveness.
Internal  control  will  be  insured  through  effective  segregation  of  functions  with  the  strong
18.
involvement  of  the  SADCP-C&H  FM  Unit,  monthly  reconciliation  of  accounts,  and  different  levels  of
approvals required depending on amounts of expenses. The need for countersignature from government
officials for major bank operations will be a fundamental internal control measure. Physical management
of  cash  is  discouraged,  with  the  use  of  bank  transfers  and  check-books  employed  for  the  majority  of
expenditures.  The  PIU  will  detail  the  internal  control  arrangements,  flow  of  funds,  roles,  responsibilities
and procedures in the FMPM. The FMPM should specially detail the supervisory role of the SADCP-C&H
FM Specialist over the project accountant, the level of approvals needed to process payments, as well as
the  minimum  supporting  documentation  that  must  be  presented for  justification  of expenditures  such  as
travel, per diem and fuel.
19.
Internal Audit – In order to assess the degree of compliance with the internal controls laid down in
the  Project’s  PIM, ARP  will  contract  the  services  of  an  internal  auditor. As  the  project’s  FM  unit  will  be
under the overall supervision of the FM Specialist of SADCP-C&H, ARP may directly contract the internal
auditor  competitively  selected  by  the  latter  project.  The  internal  auditor  should  have  relevant  work
experience with Projects funded by International Financial Institutions. As the level of perceived risk of the
Project is high, the Project should be audited at least twice per Project year.
54 https://www.transparency.org/news/feature/corruption_perceptions_index_2016#table
61
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
External Audit – Project financial statements will be audited by independent auditors, satisfactory
20.
to  IFAD,  in  accordance  with  International  Standards  of Auditing  (ISA) and  IFAD’s  guidelines  on  Project
audit. The selection of the auditor should be on an open competitive process, and an important selection
criteria should be experience in auditing projects of other IFIs operating in Angola. The auditor’s report will
be submitted to IFAD no later than six months after the closing of the borrower’s fiscal year. The external
audit  will  be  conducted  in  accordance  with  Terms  of  Reference  acceptable  to  IFAD (sample  TORs  are
attached  as  Annex  1).  Auditors  will  be  required  to  issue  an  opinion  on  project  financial  statements,
including an opinion on SOEs and Designated Account, as per the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits, and
will  produce  a  management  letter,  identifying  any  internal  control  weaknesses,  or  areas  in  need  of
improvement.
62
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Annex 1: Draft TORs: AUDITOR
1.
Audit objective. The objective of the audit is to enable the auditor to express an opinion on the
financial reports of the ARP for the fiscal year then ending as reported in the special-purpose Project
Financial  Statements  (PFS)  and  special-purpose  Statements  of  Expenditures  (SOE’s)  and  special
account (SA). The Project’s accounting system (books and records), which provides the basis for the
preparation  of  the  special-purpose  PFS  and  special-purpose  SOE’s,  was  established  to  record  the
financial  transactions  of  the  Project,  and  is  maintained  by  the  Project’s  implementing  agency,  the
Instituto do Desenvolvimento Agrário (IDA) do Ministério da Agricultura.
2.
The audit will be carried out in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and IFAD
Guidelines  on  Project  Audits  and  will  include  such  tests  and  reviews,  as  the  auditor  considers
necessary under the circumstances. Special attention will be paid to establishing that: (i) all external
funds have been used in accordance with the conditions stipulated in the financing agreements, with
due  attention  to  economy  and  efficiency,  and  solely  for  the  purposes  for  which  the  financing  was
provided;  (ii)  counterpart  funds  have  been  provided  by Minister  of  Agriculture/IDA  and  used  in
accordance  with  national  or  organizational  financial  regulations,  with  due  attention  to  economy  and
efficiency, and solely for the purposes for which they were provided; (iii) goods, consultancy and other
services, and  civil  works  financed  out  of  project  funds  have  been  procured  in  accordance  with
stipulations  in  the  financing  agreement  and/or  government  regulations;  (iv)  all  necessary  supporting
documents,  records  and  accounts  have  been  kept  in  respect  of  all  project  ventures,  including
expenditures reported via SOEs or SAs; (v) the SA has been used in accordance with the provisions
of  the  financing  agreement;  and  (vi)  the  project  accounts  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with
consistently applied cash basis and give a true and fair view of the financial status of the Project at [dd
/ mm/ yyyy] and of resources and expenditures for the year ended on that date.
Project  financial  statements. The  Project  Financial  Statements  (PFS’s)  should  include:  (i)
3.
yearly  and  cumulative  statements  of  sources  and  application  of  funds,  which  should  disclose
separately  IFADs funds,  counterpart  funds  (government),  other donor funds  and  beneficiaries funds;
(ii)  balance  sheet,  which  should  disclose  bank  and  cash  balances  (that  should  agree with  the
statement of sources and application of funds), fixed assets and liabilities; (iii) yearly and cumulative
SOEs  by  withdrawal  application  and  category  of  expenditures;  (iv)  reconciliation  of  the  SA;  and  (v)
consolidated financial statements, where a project consists of more than one entity.
4.
A  reconciliation  between  the  amounts  shown  as  received  by  the  project  and  those  shown  as
being disbursed by IFAD should be attached as an annex to the PFS. As part of that reconciliation, the
auditor  will  indicate  the  procedure  used  for  disbursement  (SA  funds,  letters  of  credit,  special
commitments,  reimbursement  or  direct  payment)  and  indicate  whether  the  expenditure  is  fully
documented or uses the SOE format.
Statements of expenditures (SOEs). In addition to the audit of the PFS, the audit will include
5.
a review of SOEs used as the basis for submitting withdrawal applications. The auditor will carry out
tests and reviews as necessary and relevant to the circumstances. SOE expenditures will be carefully
compared  for  eligibility  with  relevant  financial  agreements,  and  the  disbursement  letter,  and  with
reference  to  the  Project  Document  Report  for  guidance  when  necessary.  Where  ineligible
expenditures  are  identified  as  having  been  included  in  withdrawal  applications  and  reimbursed,
auditors  will  note  these  separately.  A  schedule  listing  individual  SOEs  withdrawal  applications  by
reference number and amount should be attached to the PFS. The total withdrawals under the SOE
procedure should be part of the overall reconciliation of IFAD disbursements described above.
6.
Special  accounts  (SAS). The  auditor  is  also  required  to  audit  the  activities  of  the  SA(s)
associated  with  the  project,  including  the  Authorized  Allocation  or  Initial  Deposit,  replenishments,
interest that may accrue on  the outstanding balances, and the year-end balances. The auditor must
form an opinion as to the degree of compliance with IFAD procedures and the balance(s) of the SA(s)
at year’s end. The audit should examine: (i) the eligibility of withdrawals from the SA during the period
under review; (ii) the operation of the SA in accordance with the relevant financing agreement(s); (iii)
the adequacy of internal controls within the project appropriate for this disbursement mechanism; and
(iv)  the  use  of  correct  exchange  rate(s)  to  convert  local  currency  expenditures  to  United  States
dollars.
64
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
7.
Audit opinion. Besides a primary opinion on the Project Financial Statements, the annual audit
report of the Project Accounts should include a separate paragraph commenting on the accuracy and
propriety of expenditures withdrawn under SOE procedures and the extent to which the IFAD can rely
on  SOE’s  as  a  basis  for  loan  disbursement.  The  financial  statements,  including  the  audit  report,
should  be  received  by  the  IFAD  no  later  than  six  months  after  the  end  of  the  accounting  period  to
which the audit refers. The auditor should submit the report to the borrower’s designated agent rather
than to any staff member of the project entity. The agent should then promptly forward two copies of
the audited accounts and report to the IFAD.
8.
Management  letter. In  addition  to  the  audit  reports,  the  auditor  will  prepare  a  “management
letter”, in which the auditor: (i) give’s comments and observations on the accounting records, systems,
and controls that were examined during the course of the audit; (ii) Identifies specific deficiencies and
areas  of  weakness  in  systems  and  controls  and  make  recommendation  for  their  improvement;  (iii)
reports  on  the  degree  of  compliance  of  each  of  the  financial  covenants  on  the  financing  agreement
and  give  comments,  if  any,  on  internal  and  external  matters  affecting  such  compliance;  (iv)
communicates  matters  that  have  come  to  attention  during  the  audit  which  might  have  a  significant
impact  on  the  implementation of  the  project;  and  (v)  brings  to  the  borrower’s  attention  any  other
matters that the auditors considers pertinent.
9.
General. The auditor should be given access to all legal documents, correspondence, and any
other  information  associated  with  the  Project  and  deemed  necessary  by  the  auditor.  Confirmation
should also be obtained of amounts disbursed and outstanding at the IFAD. It is highly desirable that
the  auditor  become  familiar  with  the  relevant  IFAD Audit  Guidelines  or  IFAD  Guidelines  for  financial
management and procurement.
10.
Auditor’s  qualifications. The  person  appointed  as  the  project  auditor  should:  (i)  have  an
internationally  recognized  professional  accounting  qualification  i.e.  the  person  appointed  should  be
either a certified public accountant, a chartered accountant or should be the holder of an equivalent
professional  accounting  qualification;  (ii)  be  a  member  in  good  standing  of  a  body  of  accountants
affiliated  to  the  International  Federation  of  Accountants  (IFAC);  and;  (iii)  have  experience  and
knowledge of the World Bank or IFAD`s current financial management requirements.
11.
Key Staff. (i) Team Leader – a senior consultant with ten (10) years of audit works with audits
in  the WB  projects  or  IFAD  projects,  and  a  Master  degree  in  one  of  the  following  fields:  Economic,
Accountability  or  Management,  and  recognized  as  a  professional  accounting  qualification;  (ii)  an
Auditor – a  consultant  with  five  (05)  years  of  audit  works  with  audits  in  the  WB  projects  or  IFAD
projects,  and  a  Economic  Degree  or  any  other  related  area;  and  (iii)  an Auditor  Assistant – A
consultant  with  three  (03) years  of  audit  works,  an  Economic  degree  or  any  other  related  area,  and
good audit knowledge.
65
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Annex 2: Financial Management Assessment Questionnaire (FMAQ)55
Project: Agricultural Recovery Project (ARP)
Implementing Entity: Institute for Agricultural Development (IDA)
within Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI)
Self-assessment completed by
Review completed by:
GUIDANCE: NOTES
Date: May 2017
Date :
Date: May 2017
The FMAQ provides an indicative list of issues and questions to be considered in the financial management assessment. It is
clearly difficult for a single questionnaire to adequately cover the diversity of IFAD’s operating environment and projects. The
FMAQ should be customized to better address specific project circumstances by adapting the questions (adding, deleting, or
modifying) to better suit the assessment objectives.
The FMAQ has been designed to primarily cover an assessment of a Lead Project Agency which is a Government Department
and/or a PIU.
Before commencing the assessment, it is essential to have a clear view of the probable project implementation arrangements -
where the project financial management arrangements are administered through a PIU which primarily uses stand-alone
financial systems the PIU is effectively the Implementing Entity and so focus of the FMA should be on the financial
management arrangements in the PIU.
Advice on applying the Financial Management Questionnaire (FMAQ) for a self -assessment should be sought from the CFS
Finance officer.
If there is more than one implementing agency, an FMAQ should be completed for each entity that will receive and disburse
project funds.
Implementing Entity:
Topic
Response
Remarks
1.
Organization and
Staffing
Implementing Entity
NOTE:
In the case of a Government Department, the FMS should initially focus on the status of the country PFM
systems in order to gauge level of fiduciary risks to which the proposed project may be exposed.
Once an understanding of the PFM environment has been ascertained, the FMS should switch focus
down to project level and focus on the department(s) or unit(s) that will financially administer the project.
1.1 Which entity is the LPA?
What is the entity’s legal
status?
1.2 Will financial
management of the
project be the
responsibility of the LPA
or be undertaken within
the-PIU?
As per Government
decree nr. 228/12 of 3
December 2012, IDA is a
collective person with
legal personality under
the tutelage of MINAG.
Financial Management of
the project will be the
responsibility of a
standalone PIU
As a legal entity, IDA enjoys administrative and
financial autonomy. It may hold its own assets and
has its own statute separate from MINAG.
As per other donor projects, IDA will be creating a
standalone PIU for the management of the project,
including Financial Management. Up until January
2017 IDA was fully dependent on the Financial
Management arrangements of MINAG, and did not
operate its budget independently (contrary to its
statute). As such, there’s little available capacity to
manage the project funds, hence the creation of a
dedicated FM unit.
55This questionnaire should be used as guidance for and in support of the Summary Project Fiduciary Risk Assessment @
Design (Annex III).
66
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Topic
Response
Remarks
1.3
Has the entity
implemented a donor
financed project in the
past - if so, please
provide details?
Yes.
In the past 5 years IDA has implemented the
following projects: MOSAP – a project jointly
financed by the World Bank and IFAD and
supervised by the Bank, SADCP-WB – an up-
scaled version of MOSAP, financed by the World
Bank, with the same PIU that implemented
MOSAP. The IFAD project SADCP – C&H (or
SAMAP as its known by the Angolan counterparts)
was approved by the IFAD EB in April 2017 and
should become effective before end of third quarter
2017.
The accounting department will be working with the
minimum staff needed to guarantee segregation of
duties.
TORs as per design document are attached.
One Financial
Management, one
accountant. While not part
of the Accounting Unit, a
Procurement Specialist
and Assistant will be part
of the project team.
At this current point in
project design no FM staff
have been proposed.
Partial.
Design team has proposed TORs for Finance
Manager and Accountant. Attached.
Staffing
1.4 What is the (proposed)
organizational structure
of the accounting
department? Attach an
organization chart.
Identify the (proposed)
accounts staff, including
job title, responsibilities,
educational background
and professional
experience. Attach job
descriptions and CVs of
key accounting staff.
Are written position
descriptions that clearly
define duties,
responsibilities, lines of
supervision, and limits of
authority for all of the
officers, managers, and
staff?
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
Is the finance and
accounts staff adequately
qualified and
experienced?
At this current point in
project design no FM staff
have been proposed.
Are the project accounts
and finance staff trained
in IFAD procedures?
At this current point in
project design no FM staff
have been proposed
At this current point in
project design no FM staff
have been proposed
Are any Finance Staff
appointed on contract?
What is the duration of
the contracts
Indicate key positions not
contracted yet, and the
estimated date of
appointment
67
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Topic
Response
Remarks
1.10 What is training policy for
the finance and
accounting staff?
No policies in place
(based on assessment of
other IFAD and WB
financed projects)
Based on the assessment of FM arrangements of
the IFAD-financed project AFAP (ongoing), IFAD
should provide FM training to the project as soon
as the project’s FM team has been established.
No evidence.
1.11
Is there evidence that
finance staff are regularly
transferred to other
Government departments
At what frequency are
personnel transferred?
1.12
Is the project finance and
accounting function
staffed adequately?
At this current point in
project design FM unit not
staffed yet.
IDA currently operates a very small finance team.
As stated in line 1.2, up until January 2017 IDA did
not have financial autonomy, and depended
heavily on MINAG’s FM structure.
2.
2.1
2.2
2.3
3
3.1
Topic
Response
Remarks
Budgeting
Who is responsible for preparation and approval
of project budgets?
Are project budgets prepared for all significant
project activities in sufficient detail to provide a
meaningful tool with which to monitor
subsequent performance?
Most of the responsibilities of
preparing ARP’s budget will rely on
the PIU. IDA to approve this budget
prior to submitting
IDA and ARP PIU
will be responsible
for preparation
and approval of
budget.
No draft 18-month
AWPB submitted
so far.
Are procedures in place to plan project
activities, collect information from the units in
charge of the different components, and
prepare the budgets?
No draft 18-month
AWPB submitted
so far.
Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Does the Implementing Entity have previous
experience of using imprest fund and donor
funding SOE procedures?
Were there any problems or issues
encountered by project staff in the operation of
the imprest fund or SoE procedures in the past?
Yes, IDA has
experience using
imprest fund and
SOE procedures.
No issues so far.
IDA has implemented the project
MOSAP jointly financed by IFAD
and the World Bank. Additionally,
IDA will also implement the newly
approved IFAD project SADCP-
C&H.
Most of the FM team of MOSAP
has been recruited for SADCP-WB
(World Bank project). As such, this
will allow for synergies between all
the donor funded projects in the
operation of imprest funds.
68
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Topic
Response
Remarks
3.2
Does the Implementing Entity have experience
in the management of disbursements from IFAD
or other donors?
Yes.
No major issues
recorded so far.
Have there been the major problems in the past
in receipt of funds by the entity?
3.3
Does the entity have/need to develop capacity
to manage foreign exchange risks?
No.
As noted above, IDA has recently
implemented the project MOSAP
and is now implementing SADCP-
WB and will start implementation of
SADCP-C&H (IFAD project).
While there’s indeed capacity at the
project level (mostly
MOSAP/SADCP-WB), IDA itself
does not have the capacity to
manage this risk.
3.4
Are the beneficiaries required to contribute to
project costs?
How are payments made for the counterpart
funds?
If counterpart funds are to be contributed in kind
(in the form of labour), are proper guidelines
formulated to record and value the labour
contribution?
No beneficiary
contributions
foreseen,
Counterpart funds
will be transferred
to project
accounts.
Government will transfer its
counterpart contributions in AOA to
the project’s Operational Account in
Luanda. The PDR appendix on
Financial Management discusses
how project will account for in-kind
contribution from Government.
3.5
Is part of the project implemented by
communities or NGOs?
Does the PIU have the necessary reporting and
monitoring features built into its systems to
track the use of project proceeds by such
agencies?
The project will be
implemented
solely by
PIU/PPIUs.
Yes
69
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Topic
Response
Remarks
.6
Describe (proposed) project funds flow
arrangements; (attach flow chart and
explanation of the flow of funds from IFAD,
government and other financiers.
Yes. (attached)
3.7
In which bank will the Imprest Account be
opened?
In a Commercial
Bank to be
chosen by IDA.
70
1. IDA shall open a bank account in
USD to receive the proceeds of the
financing (Designated Account) in a
commercial bank. An additional
Operational Account will be opened
in AOA in the same bank where the
Designated Account will be opened
for the day-to-day operations of the
project. Mandatory signatories of
these accounts will be the Project
Coordinator and IDA senior staff.
As the main Finance Unit of IDA is
located in its headquarters, and due
to the fact that Government-owned
accounts require at least two
signatories to approve transactions,
the Designated Account will be
opened in Luanda.
2. One project account in AOA, will
be opened in a commercial bank in
Lubango. Mandatory signatories of
this accounts will the Project
Coordinator and senior staff from
the delegation of IDA in Lubango,
and/or senior staff of the Provincial
Delegation of the Ministry of
Agriculture in Lubango.
3. As it is envisioned that ARP will
create Provincial Programme
Implementation Units (PPIU), the
project will open provincial
operational accounts in the
provinces of Cunene and Namibe.
These accounts will be used only
for small purchases to support the
PPIU, as most of the payments will
be centralized in Lubango.
4. Finally, Government of Angola
will transfer its counterpart funds to
the AOA operational account of
ARP in LuANDA. The
arrangements for the transfer of
resources to the provinces will be
detailed in the project’s FMPM and
reflected in the audit plan. The flow
of funds chart will be confirmed
during Negotiations and included in
the PIM.
As per the latest meetings with IDA
staff, the imprest account has been
opened in Banco Angola de
Investimento (BAI) and the
signatories of the account will be
confirmed once the financing
agreement is signed.
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Topic
Response
Remarks
3.8
Are the (proposed) arrangements to transfer the
proceeds of the  financing (from the government
/ Finance Ministry) to the Implementing Entity
satisfactory?
Yes.
Proceeds of the financing will flow
directly to the Designated Account
in the name of the implementing
entity from IFAD.
71
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Topic
Response
Remarks
The FM Unit of ARP will be
comprised of a Finance Manager
and an Accountant. This will
guarantee that authorization and
recording of transactions are done
by different persons. Custody of the
assets will still be done by either
the Finance Manager or
Accountant, reducing level of
internal controls. Possible
synergies with SADCP-C&H will be
explored during implementation to
assess if the FM unit of ARP may
benefit from support of the SADCP
FM unit.
Ordering and receiving goods will
be the responsibility of
Procurement Specialist and
Assistant. Accounting for and
paying goods and services will be
done by FM unit, with its 2-person
unit.
The 2-person Finance Management
Unit will not allow enough
segregation of duties for bank
reconciliations to be performed by
someone other than the Finance
Manager and Accountant.
ARP will procure the accounting
software PRIMAVERA, as the
same software was used by
MOSAP, and is currently being
used by SADCP-WB, AFAP and
will also be procured for SADCP-
C&H. The choice of accounting
software guarantees some
uniformity in the portfolio, and ease
of access to technical support from
other more experienced projects.
The control structure will be built
into the project’s PIM.
4.
4.1
4.2
4.3
5.
5.1
5.2
5.3
Internal Controls
Segregation of duties - are the following
functional responsibilities performed by different
units or persons: (i) authorization to execute a
transaction; (ii) recording of the transaction; and
(iii) custody of assets involved in the
transaction?
Yes, however
partially.
Are the functions of ordering, receiving,
accounting for, and paying for goods and
services appropriately segregated?
Yes.
Are bank reconciliations prepared by someone
other than those who make or approve
payments?
No.
Accounting Systems, Policies and
Procedures
Does the entity have an integrated accounting
system that allows for the proper recording of
project financial transactions, including the
allocation of expenditures in accordance with
the respective components, disbursement
categories, and sources of funds? Will the
project use the entity accounting system?
No integrated
accounting
system in use by
IDA.
Are controls in place concerning the preparation
and approval of transactions, ensuring that all
transactions are correctly made and adequately
explained?
Partially.
Is the chart of accounts adequate to properly
account for and report on project activities and
disbursement categories?
No chart of
accounts
proposed so far
(project still in
design phase).
72
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
5.4
5.5
5.6
Topic
Response
Remarks
Can cost allocations to the various funding
sources be made accurately?
Yes.
Based on the experience of the
other ongoing projects, the
accounting software is able to
perform budget monitoring.
Are the General Ledger and subsidiary ledgers
reconciled and in balance?
Are all accounting and supporting documents
retained on a permanent basis in a defined
system that allows authorized users easy
access?
No General
Ledger or
subsidiaries in
place thus far.
No system in
place at the
current design
phase.
Design report proposes that ARP
implements electronic archiving
already from inception to guarantee
that all accounting and supporting
documentation are retained for the
required 10 year period.
5.7
What is the basis of accounting (e.g., cash,
accrual)?
Cash basis.
As per national laws.
5.8
What accounting standards are followed?
IPSAS.
Does the project have an adequate policies and
procedures manual to guide activities and
ensure staff accountability?
Not at this current
phase of design.
The project will implement IPSAS
cash basis.
However, all manuals will be
developed based on the manuals
being used by SADCP-C&H and
AFAP.
Do procedures exist to ensure that only
authorized persons can alter or establish a new
accounting principle, policy or procedure to be
used by the entity?
Is there a written policies and procedures
manual covering all routine project financial
management activities?
Are manuals distributed to appropriate
personnel?
Payments
Not at this current
phase of design.
This procedure will be included in
the project’s PIM.
Not at this current
phase of design.
However, all manuals will be
developed based on the manuals
being used by SADCP-C&H and
AFAP.
5.9
5.10
5.11
5.12
Are all invoices stamped PAID, dated, reviewed
and approved, and clearly marked for account
code assignment?
Records not
accessible at this
current stage of
design..
5.13
5.14
5.15
Cash and Bank
Does the organization maintain an adequate,
up-to-date cashbook, recording receipts and
payments?
Yes.
Are bank and cash reconciled on a monthly
basis?
Indicate names and positions of authorized
signatories of project bank accounts.
Not assessed at
this current phase
of design.
Not shared with
design team at
this time.
However, transactions are very
limited so far. Up until January
2017 IDA was not an independent
budget unit.
73
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Topic
Response
Remarks
Safeguard over Assets
5.16
Is there a Fixed Asset accounting system, with
a Fixed Asset Register, fully implemented - as
part of an integrated accounting system
Not assessed at
this current phase
of design.
Is the system maintained up to date ?
5.17
Are there periodic physical reconciliation of
fixed assets and stocks?
5.18
5.19
5.20
6.
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6
Not assessed at
this current phase
of design.
Not assessed at
this current phase
of design.
Not in place so
far.
Project will staff will be trained on
IFAD’s guidelines on fraud and
corruption
Not in place so
far.
Project Implementation Manual will
capture all payroll related matters.
Other
Has the project advised employees,
beneficiaries and other recipients to whom to
report if they suspect fraud, waste or misuse of
project resources or property?
Do policies and procedures clearly define
conflict of interest and related party transactions
(real and apparent) and provide safeguards to
protect the organization from them?
Do controls exist for the preparation of the
project payroll and are changes to the payroll
properly authorized
Reporting and Monitoring
Does the reporting system need to be adapted
to report on the project components?
No reporting
system in place.
Does the project have established financial
management reporting responsibilities that
specify what reports are to be prepared, what
they are to contain, and the frequency of
production.?
What is the frequency of preparation of financial
statements? Are the reports prepared in a
timely fashion so as to useful to management
for decision making?
Do the financial reports compare actual
expenditures with budgeted and programmed
allocations?
Are financial reports prepared directly by the
automated accounting system or are they
prepared by spreadsheets or some other
means?
(In case of need of consolidated financial
statements) Is the accounting system
sufficiently equipped to ensure proper
consolidation of entities’ financial data?
No Financial
Management
Procedures
Manual
established so far.
Financial
statements will be
prepared once per
year.
To be assessed
No accounting
system in use so
far. Financial
reports prepared
by spreadsheets.
To be assessed
during
implementation.
The reporting system implemented
by ARP will be tailored to report as
per IFAD’s requirements.
However, all manuals will be
developed based on the manuals
being used by SADCP-C&H and
AFAP.
This will be assessed during
implementation.
Once project acquires PRIMAVER,
all financial reports will be
generated by the accounting
software.
74
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Topic
Response
Remarks
6.7
6.8
6.9
Information Systems
Is the financial management system
computerized?
Can the system produce the necessary project
financial reports?
Is the staff adequately trained to maintain the
system?
6.10
Are adequate systems in place to “back up”
financial records
Yes.
Yes.
To be assessed
once the PIU staff
has been
recruited.
To be assessed
during
implementation.
7.
7.1
Internal Audit
Is there an internal audit department in the
LPA?
No, not within
IDA.
7.2
What are the qualifications and experience of
internal audit department staff?
To be assessed at
a later stage.
The FM system proposed under
ARP s fully computerized.
PRIMAVERA has been shown to
accurately prepare reports as per
IFAD’s giui
However, sister project AFAP,
being implemented by the Institute
for Fisheries Development (IPA)
does not have back-up capabilities.
Recent mission of May 2017
recommended that AFAP should
purchase a mini-server to house
primavera.
IDA is audited, together with
MINAG, by Inspeção Geral do
Estado (IGE) an entity answering to
the Ministry of Finance. However,
there are concerns on the actual
capacity of IGE to conduct a
lengthy internal audit.
ARP will contract the services of an
internal auditor to review
compliance of internal controls with
IFAD guidelines
7.3
To whom does the internal auditor report?
Will the internal audit department include the
project in its work program?
Ministry of
Finance.
Yes.
It is possible to explicitly request
IGE to include IDA in its audit of
MINAG.
Are actions taken on the internal audit findings? To be assessed at
a later stage.
7.4
7.5
ARP will contract an independent
external auditor.
8.
External Audit
8.1
Who is the external auditor of the entity?
8.2
8.3
Are there any delays in audit of the entity?
When are the audit reports issued?
Is the audit of the entity conducted according to
the International Standards on Auditing?
No external
auditor for the
IDA.
No external
auditor for the
IDA.
No external
auditor for the
IDA.
75
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Topic
Response
Remarks
8.4
8.5
8.6
Were there any major accountability issues
brought out in the audit report of the past three
years?
Were there any issues noted in prior audit
reports related to the operation of project
imprest accounts or use of SOE procedures?
No external
auditor for the
IDA.
Will the entity auditor audit the project accounts
or will another auditor be appointed to audit the
project financial statements?
No.
Has the project prepared acceptable terms of
reference for an annual project audit?
Not assessed at
this stage of
design.
ARP will contract an independent
external auditor.
76
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Attachment 3: Summary of Project Fiduciary Risk Assessment at Design
Project: Agricultural Recovery Project
Implementing Entity: Institute for Agriculture Development (IDA) within Ministry of Agriculture
(MINAGRI)
Initial Risk
Assessment
Proposed Mitigation
Final Risk
Assessment
Inherent
Risk
1. TI Index
2. RSP Score
Control Risks
H
18
3.0
NA
NA
1. Organization and
Staffing
H
2. Budgeting
H
3. Funds flow and
Disbursement
Arrangements
M
4. Internal Controls
H
5. Accounting Systems,
Policies & Procedures
M
The extremely competitive market for the few highly
qualified FM staff in the country might render difficult
the hiring of experienced FM unit, unless
unsustainable salaries are proposed. If hired FM
staff does not have the required (relevant) years of
experience, ARP should receive FM support from
the projects SADCP-WB and SADCP-C&H, which
are both implemented by IDA. Additionally, IFAD
should provide a detailed training on FM guidelines
and procedures during project inception, and
guarantee continuous FM support for the first 6
months of implementation.
The ongoing economic crisis in Angola has caused
a scarcity of foreign currency, especially USD in the
financial market. Due to this, a parallel exchange
market has thrived to the extent that the exchange
rate in the parallel market have reached twice the
official rate in May 2017 (reports show that the high
has reached almost 5 times by end of 2016). While
cost tables have been prepared based on official
rates, there’s a risk of loss of purchasing power of
the project due to some prices being pegged against
unofficial exchange rates. Due to the volatile
situation, careful planning of funds flow from the
Designated Account (USD) to the AOA account will
need to be put in place, due to the risk of further
depreciation of the AOA.
IDA has garnered sufficient experience in the
management of donor’s funds (especially, imprest
funds) in the past 5 years. Funds flows and
disbursement arrangements should not pose severe
issues to the project. However, as noted in the line
above, the FM team will need to avoid transferring
large amounts of funds to the AOA account due to
the risk of rapid depreciation against the USD.
Current proposal of FM unit is one Finance Manager
and one accountant. A Procurement Officer and an
Assistant are also proposed. This structure is the
minimum needed to guarantee some level of
segregation of duties. A Financial Management
Procedures Manual (FMPM) should be elaborated
as an annex to the PIM detailing every aspect of the
functional arrangements of the FM unit. Ideally, the
FMPM should be ready before start-up costs are
disbursed.
As stated above, the FMPM should be elaborated
as soon as the project becomes effective. In
addition, the project should purchase the accounting
77
H
H
H
H
H
M
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
software PRIMAVERA as soon as start-up costs are
disbursed. All accounting procedures should be
drawn in the FMPM.
The use of accounting software will significantly
reduce the risk of low quality of reporting and
financial monitoring.
While in principle the Inspeção Nacional de
Finanças, INF (from Ministry of Finance) is
responsible for the internal audit of Government
entities, reports from the implementing agency
(IDA), as well as from the implementing agency of
the IFAD project AFAP (IPA – Institute for Artisanal
Fisheries) show that these audits are not frequent.
The World Bank assessment concluded that the INF
has weak capacity, and as such the project will need
to contract an independent internal auditor.
ARP to be audited by an independent external
auditor due to issues of internal capacity of INF to
provide external audit services.
M
H
H
H/M/L
6. Reporting and Monitoring H
7. Internal Audit
8. External Audit
Project Fiduciary Risk @
Design
H
H
H
Summary of Project Fiduciary Risk Assessment at Design (cont’d)
Comments/Notes: Strengths:
1. The  project’s  Implementing  Agency  has  experience  implementing  IFIs  projects  (1  joint  IFAD-WB  project
already closed, 1 ongoing WB project, 1 IFAD project approved and starting by end of third quarter of 2017),
and is thus familiar with imprest fund procedures and IFAD’s FM procedures and guidelines.
2. There’s  a  very  good  opportunity  for  strong  FM  collaboration  between  the  three  above-mentioned  projects
that IDA will be implementing in the next few years.
Weaknesses:
1. Available FM expertise in-country is scarce, and could prove expensive for the project. FM staff that will be
hired for the project might not have the needed years of relevant experience.
2.
IDA does not have a strong FM unit, given that until January 2017 IDA managed only a very small budget for
recurrent costs, being fully dependent on the Ministry for its operational budget.
3. MINAG  does  not  have  the  capacity  to  conduct  internal  audits  of  the  project,  and  the  World  Bank  has
assessed that the  Ministry  of Finance unit  responsible  for  internal  audits  of  Government entities  (Inspeção
Nacional de Finanças, INF) lacks capacity to audit its projects.
Proposed Mitigations:
1. FM staff that will be hired will require extensive training, especially on IFAD’s FM and procurement
guidelines. IFAD should also provide continuous (remote) support to the FM staff for the first 6 months after
FM staff has been hired.
2. A very detailed Financial Management Procedures Manual (FMPM) should be written by the project after
effectiveness. This manual can be based on the SADCP-WB manual, which itself based on the manual used
for the joint IFAD-WB project MOSAP.
3. The project should hire an internal auditor to review compliance with internal control from time-to-time. This
auditor could be the same hired by the newly approved IFAD project SADCP-C&H, also implemented by
IDA.
78
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Appendix 8: Procurement
All procurement will be carried out in accordance with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and IFAD
1.
“Policy on preventing fraud and corruption in activities and operations”. Procurement responsibility will
rest with the MINAGRI/IDA. All procurement financed by IFAD will be exempt from duties and taxes.
Procurement of Goods, Works and Services financed by the IFAD loan will be undertaken by the PIU
in accordance with the IFAD’s Procurement guidelines and procedures. These will be described in the
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) with additional requirements of IFAD’s Prior-Review procedures
specified in the Letter to the Borrower (LTB).
2.
Project specific principles governing  project procurement will be the following:
a. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the Financing Agreement,  the Letter to the
Borrower  and  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  and  any  subsequent  changes reflected  in
IFAD‘s mission reports (e.g. supervision reports, mid-term reviews, etc.); All procurements shall
be carried out in accordance with the IFAD’s procurement guidelines. The overall procurement
responsibility will rest with the MINAGRI/IDA.
b. Procurement  shall  be  conducted  within  the  project  implementation  period  (from  the  date  of
effectiveness to the date of completion). Procurement cannot be undertaken between the date
of completion and the closing date;
c. Procurement must not exceed the availability of funds duly allocated by the financial agreement;
d. Procurement  Plans  must  be  consistent  with  the  approved  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget
(AWBP); and
e. The  principle  of  value  for  money  must  be  sought:  Best  value  does  not  necessarily  mean  the
lowest  initial  price  option,  but  rather  represents  the  best  return  on  investments,  taking  into
consideration the unique and specific circumstances of each procurement activity; the balance
of time, cost and quality required; and the successful overall outcome of the contract in meeting
its original objectives.
3.
Further,  ICB  procurement  will  be  done  in  accordance  with  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and
Handbook, using the World Bank’s Standard Bidding Documents (SBD). All ICBs will be subject to the
IFAD’s prior review and the SBD will be agreed between IFAD and the PIU/IDA.
4.
The following project activities are subject to IFAD’s procurement procedures:
a. Goods. This  activity  will  include  procurement  of  vehicles  and  motorcycles,  agricultural
implements, IT equipment, and furniture. Goods will  also include any  activities included in the
selected subproject proposals.
b. Works. This activity will include rehabilitation and construction of water infrastructure and any
activities included in the selected IGA subproject proposals.
c. Consultancies. This activity will include: i) recruitment of the various service providers; and (ii)
recruitment of Project staff.
Particular Methods of Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services
a.
International  competitive  bidding  (ICB).  Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  the  paragraph
below, Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services shall be procured under contracts awarded
on the basis of ICB.
b. Other  methods  of  procurement  of  goods,  works,  and  non-consulting  services. The
following  methods,  other  than  ICB,  may  be  used  for  procurement  of  goods,  works,  and  non-
consulting services for those contracts specified in the Procurement Plan.
Other Procurement Methods
Procurement Method
(a) National Competitive Bidding (NCB), subject to the provisions of the paragraph below on NCB
79
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
(b) National Shopping
(c) Direct contracting
(d) Community participation procedures acceptable to the Bank/Fund
5.
For NCB, Angolan regulations will apply. All bid documents will need to be satisfactory to IFAD
and subject to the additional procedures and modifications stipulated below and to be reflected in the
Financing Agreement.
General. The  procedures  followed  for  NCB  shall  be  those  set  forth  in  ‘Lei  No.  20/10  da
6.
Contratação  Pública’ of  the  Republic  of  Angola  of  September  7,  2010,  (‘the  Law’),  with  the
modifications described in the following paragraphs.
7.
Eligibility. The  eligibility  of  bidders  shall  be  as  defined  in  the  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines;
therefore, no bidder or potential bidder shall be declared ineligible for contracts financed by the fund
for  reasons  other  than  those  provided  in  guidelines.  Bidding  shall  not  be  restricted  to  domestic
bidders. No restriction based on nationality of bidders and/or origin of the goods shall apply other than
those  imposed  by  primary  boycotts  as  contemplated  in  the  guidelines.  Foreign  bidders  shall  be
allowed to participate in NCB without restriction and shall not be subject to any unjustified requirement
that  will  affect  their  ability  to  participate  in  the  bidding  process  such  as,  but  not  limited  to,  the
submission of evidence of good standing  with regard  to taxes paid to the Angolan Government and
with regard to social security contributions made in Angola.
Prior  registration  or  obtaining  a  license  or  authorisation  shall  not  be  a  requirement  for  any
8.
bidder to participate in the bidding process.
9.
Government-owned  enterprises  or  institutions  of  Angola  shall  be  eligible  to  participate  in  the
bidding  process  only  if  they  can  establish  that  they  are  legally  and  financially  autonomous,  operate
under commercial law, and are not dependent agencies of the borrower or sub-borrower.
10.
Bidding documents. Standard bidding documents acceptable to the Fund shall be used.
11.
Participation by joint ventures. Participation shall be allowed from joint ventures on condition
that  such  joint  venture  partners  will  be  jointly  and  severally  liable  for  their  obligations  under  the
contract.
12.
Preferences. No domestic/regional preference or any other kind of preferential treatment shall
be  given  for  domestic/regional  bidders,  for  domestically/regionally  manufactured  goods,  and/or  for
domestically/regionally originated related services.
13.
Applicable  procurement  method. Subject  to  these  provisions,  procurement  shall  be  carried
out  in  accordance  with  the  ‘Public  Competitive  Bidding’  method  (Concurso  Público)  set  forth  in  the
Law.
14. Qualification. Qualification criteria shall entirely concern the bidder’s capability and resources
to  perform  the  contract  considering  objective  and  measurable  factors.  The  qualification  criteria  shall
be  clearly  specified  in  the  bidding  documents,  and  all  criteria  so  specified  and  only  such  criteria  so
specified  shall  be  used  to  determine  whether  a  bidder  is  qualified.  Qualification  criteria  shall  be
assessed on a ‘pass or fail’ basis, and merit points shall not be used. Bidders’ qualifications shall be
assessed  by  post-qualification  and  such  an  assessment  shall  be  conducted  separately  from  the
technical and commercial evaluation of the bids.
Advertisement. A  shorter  version  of  the  advertisement  text,  including  the  minimum  relevant
15.
information, may be published in a national newspaper of wide circulation provided that the full text is
simultaneously published in the official gazette (Diário da República) or on a widely used website or
electronic portal with free national and international access.
Bid preparation time. Bidders shall be given at least 28 days from the date of the invitation to
16.
bid or the date of availability of bidding documents, whichever is later, to prepare and submit bids.
17.
Bids submission and bid opening. Bids may be submitted by electronic means only provided
that  the  Fund  is  satisfied  with  the  adequacy  of  the  system,  including,  among  other  things,  that  the
system  is  secure,  maintains  the  integrity,  confidentiality,  and  authenticity  of  the  bids  submitted,  and
uses an electronic signature system or equivalent to keep bidders bound to their bids.
80
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
18.
Bids  shall  be  opened  in  public,  immediately  after  the  deadline  for  their  submission  in
accordance  with  the  procedures  stated  in  the  bidding  documents.  The  public  bid  opening  shall  take
place in only one session. At the public bid opening, the names of the bidders and the total amount of
each bid and of any alternative bids if they have been requested or permitted, shall be read aloud and
recorded  when  opened.  Bids  shall  not  be  evaluated  as  part  of  the  bid  opening  process,  and  no  bid
shall  be  rejected  during  the  public  bid  opening  session,  except  for  late  bids.  Bidders  shall  not  be
allowed to complete their bids after the deadline for submission of bids has expired.
Bid  validity. No  automatic  extension  of  the  bid  validity  shall  apply.  If  justified  by  exceptional
19.
circumstances, an extension of the bid validity may be requested in writing from all bidders before the
original bid validity expiration date and it shall cover only the minimum period required to complete the
evaluation  and  award  of  the  contract.  The  extension  of  the  bid  validity  requires  the  IFAD’s  No
Objection for those contracts subject to prior review.
20.
Bid evaluation: Evaluation of bids shall be made in strict adherence to the evaluation criteria
declared in the bidding documents. Evaluation criteria other than price shall be quantified in monetary
terms  and  the  manner  in  which  they  will  be applied  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  lowest
evaluated bid shall be established in the bidding documents. A weighting/scoring system shall not be
used.
a. A  contract  shall  be  awarded  to  the  qualified  bidder  offering  the  lowest-evaluated  and
substantially responsive bid. No negotiations shall be permitted.
b. Bidders shall not be eliminated on the basis of minor, non-substantial deviations.
c. Requests for clarification and the bidder’s responses shall be made in writing and they shall not
be notified to other bidders.
d. After  the  public  opening  of  bids,  information  relating  to  the  examination,  clarification,  and
evaluation  of  bids  and  recommendations  concerning  the  awards  shall  not  be  disclosed  to
bidders or other persons not officially concerned with this process until publication of the award
of the contract.
Rejection of all bids and re-bidding. All bids shall not be rejected, the procurement process
21.
shall not be cancelled, and new bids shall not be solicited without the IFAD’s prior concurrence.
22.
Securities. Bid securities shall not exceed 3 percent of the estimated cost of the contract; and
performance securities shall not exceed 10 percent of the contract price. The successful bidder shall
be given at least 15 days from the receipt of notification of contract award to submit a performance
security. No advance payment shall be made without a suitable advance payment security.
23.
Publication of contract award. Information on contract award shall be published at least in a
national newspaper of wide circulation within two weeks of receiving the IFAD’s No Objection to the
award  recommendation  for  contracts  subject  to  prior  review  and  within  two  weeks  from  the  award
decision  for  contracts  subject to  post review.  The  publication  shall  include  the  following  information:
(a)  the  name  of  each  bidder  who  submitted  a  bid;  (b)  bid  prices  as  read  out  at  bid  opening;  (c)
evaluated prices of each bid that was evaluated; (d) the names of bidders whose bids were rejected
and  the  reasons  for  their  rejection;  and  (e)  the  name  of  the  winning  bidder,  the  final  total  contract
price, and the duration and summary scope of the contract.
24.
Contracts Register: Procurement carried out at Project level would be recorded and registered
against the Procurement Plan. In addition, all contracts, with or without prior IFAD approval, would be
listed  in  the  Contracts  Register  maintained  by  the  procuring  entity  with  the  dates  of  approval  as
provided by IFAD. When a contract is amended, the amendment would be recorded in the Register. If
a contract is cancelled or declared ineligible for financing by IFAD, this information would be written in
the  Contracts  Register.  As  this  register  facilitates  the  review  and  approval  of  payment  requests  on
contracts, it is to be updated and submitted to the IFAD Country Director on a quarterly basis.
Complaints  by  bidders  and  handling  of  complaints. The  borrower  shall  establish  an
25.
effective  and  independent  protest  mechanism  allowing  bidders  to  protest  and  to  have  their  protest
handled in a timely manner.
26.
Contract  and  contract  modifications. Contracts  shall  be  in  writing  and  the  bid  of  the
successful bidder shall become part of the contract documents without any modification introduced by
the  contracting  authority.  In  the  case  of  contracts  subject  to  prior  review,  the  IFAD’s  No  Objection
shall be obtained before agreeing to (a) a material extension of the stipulated time for performance of
81
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
a contract; (b) any substantial modification of the scope of services or other significant changes to the
terms  and  conditions  of  the  contract;  (c)  any  variation  order  or  amendment  (except  in  cases  of
extreme  urgency)  which,  singly  or  combined  with  all  variation  orders  or  amendments  previously
issued,  increases  the  original  contract  amount  by  more  than  15  percent;  or  (d)  the  proposed
termination of the contract. A copy of all contract amendments shall be furnished to the IFAD for its
record.
27.
Post-review – All  other  contracts  would  be  subject  to  post-review  and  may  be  subject  to
procurement  audit  by  the  Fund.  The  Procurement  unit  shall  maintain  accurate  records  of  all
procurement activities and documents related to the project. The procurement files will be maintained
for  review  by  IFAD  supervision  missions  and  independent  audits.  The  project  staff  would  also
consolidate procurement activities into quarterly and annual progress reports.
Ex post review – The Project would retain all documentation up to five years after the closing
28.
date  of  the  financing  for  examination  by  IFAD  or  by  independent  auditors.  This  documentation
includes, but not be limited to, the signed original contracts, the evaluation of the respective proposals
and  recommendation  of  award.  IFAD  does  not  finance  expenditures  for  goods,  works  or  consulting
services  that  have  not  been  procured  in  accordance  with  the  procedures  specified  in  the  financing
agreement.  In  such  cases,  IFAD  may,  in  addition,  exercise  other  remedies  under  the  financing
agreement,  including  cancellation  of  the  amount  in  question  from  the  financing.  Even  if  the  contract
was awarded after obtaining a “No Objection” from IFAD, IFAD may still declare mis-procurement if it
concludes  that  the  “No  Objection”  was  issued  on  the  basis  of  incomplete,  inaccurate  or  misleading
information  furnished  by  the  Project  or  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  contract  had  been  modified
without IFAD’s approval.
Right  to  inspect/audit.
29.
In  accordance  with  the  Procurement  Guidelines,  each  bidding
document  and  contract  financed  from  the proceeds  of  the  financing  shall  provide  that  bidders,
suppliers, and contractors, and their subcontractors, agents, personnel, consultants, service providers
or  suppliers,  shall  permit  the  IFAD,  at  its  request,  to  inspect  their  accounts,  records,  and  other
documents relating to the submission of bids and contract performance and to have them audited by
auditors  appointed  by  the  IFAD.  Acts  intended  to  materially  impede  the  exercise  of  the  IFAD’s
inspection  and  audit  rights  constitute  an  obstructive  practice as  defined  in  the  Procurement
Guidelines.
Fraud  and  corruption.
30.
In  accordance  with  the  Procurement  Guidelines,  each  bidding
document  and  contract  financed  from  the  proceeds  of  the  financing  shall  include  provisions  on
matters pertaining to fraud and corruption. The IFAD will sanction a firm or individual, at any time, in
accordance  with  prevailing  IFAD  sanctions  procedures,  including  by  publicly  declaring  such  firm  or
individual ineligible, either indefinitely or for a stated period of time: (a) to be awarded a IFAD-financed
contract;  and  (b)  to  be  a  nominated  subcontractor,  consultant,  supplier,  or  service  provider  of  an
otherwise eligible firm being awarded a IFAD-financed contract.
31.
Debarment  under  the  national  system. The  IFAD  may  recognise,  if  requested by  the
borrower,  exclusion  from  participation  as  a  result  of  debarment  under  the  national  system,  provided
that  the  debarment  is  for  offenses  involving  fraud,  corruption,  or  similar  misconduct,  and  further
provided that the IFAD confirms that the particular debarment process afforded due process and the
debarment decision is final.
32.
Particular methods of procurement of consultants’ services
(a)
(b)
Quality- and  Cost-Based  Selection  (QCBS). Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  the  next
paragraph, consultants’ services shall be procured under contracts awarded on the basis of
QCBS.
Other  methods  of  procurement  of  consultants’  services.  The  following  methods,  other
than  Quality- and  Cost-Based  Selection,  may  be  used  for  procurement  of  consultants’
services for those contracts specified in the Procurement Plan:
Other Procurement Methods for Consulting Services
Procurement Method
(a) Quality-Based Selection (QBS)
(b) Selection under a Fixed Budget (FBS)
82
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
(c) Least-Cost Selection (LCS)
(d) Selection Based on the Consultants’ Qualifications (CQS)
(e) Single Source Selection (SSS)
(f) Selection of Individual Consultants (IC)
(g) Single source procedures for the selection of Individual Consultants
(h) Selection of UN agencies
(i) Procurement involving local communities will be conducted according to procedures to
be detailed in the PIM and acceptable to IFAD.
33.
IFAD  Review  of  Procurement  Decisions: The  review  thresholds  are  shown  in the below
Table. The Procurement Plan shall set forth those contracts that shall be subject to prior review by the
IFAD.  All  other  contracts  shall  be  subject  to  post  review  by  the  IFAD.  The  IFAD  may,  at  its  own
discretion,  require  that  a  sample  of  contracts  below  the  threshold  be  subject  to  prior  review,  at  any
time or when the Procurement Plan is updated.
Thresholds for Procurement and Review Methods
Expenditure
Category
Contract Value Threshold
(US$)
≥ 10,000,000
Procurement/Selection
Method
ICB
Contracts Subject to Prior
Review
All
Works
Goods
Consulting
Services –
Firms
Consulting
Services -
Individuals (IC)
≥ 3,000,000 < 10,000,000
< 3,000,000
< 100,000
All values
≥ 1,000,000
NCB
NCB
Shopping
Direct Contracting
ICB
All
None (Post Review)
None (Post review)
All
All
≥ 250,000 < 1,000,000
NCB
All
< 250,000
< 75,000
All values
≥ 200,000
< 200,000
All values
≥ 100,000
< 100,000
All Values
NCB
Shopping
Direct Contracting
QCBS/Other (QBS/FBS/
LCS)
CQS/Other (QCBS/QBS/
FBS/LCS)
SSS
UN Agencies
IC – Qualification
None (Post Review)
None (Post review)
All
All
None (Post Review)
All
All
IC – Qualification
None (Post review)
IC – SSS
All
The Procurement Unit
34.
ARP procurement  activities  shall  be  coordinated  by  a  Procurement  Assistant  (PA)  with  the
required  experience  and  familiarity  with  IFAD  and  WB  procurement  procedures.  The  PA will work
under the guidance of the SAMAP/SADCP-C&H Procurement Specialist. The position would be filled
through a competitive recruitment process and the PA will be responsible for undertaking procurement
activities  within  the  defined  thresholds  and  prepare  procurement  documents  for  processes  and
facilitate procurement for the ARP following guidelines to be specified  in the Project Implementation
Manual (PIM). These will include procurement procedures for Goods, Works and Services, community
based  procurement  procedures, 
internal  control,  reconciliation  and  dispute  resolution,  risk
management, post-procurement, audit and monitoring, etc.
Procurement Plan
83
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
35.
The implementing agency has to prepare its procurement plan for the activities to be carried out
during the first 18 months of Project implementation. The Procurement Plan shall be submitted to the
Project Coordination Committee for approval prior to submission to IFAD for review and No Objection.
This procurement plan shall be agreed between the borrower and the IFAD during negotiations. The
procurement  plan  will  be  made  available  at  the Project’s  database  and  on  the  IFAD’s  website  after
loan  approval.  The  Procurement  Plan  shall  be  prepared  annually  and  submitted  to  IFAD  for  review
and expression of No Objection 60 days before the beginning of each subsequent Project year. When
preparing the Procurement Plan, an accurate  and realistic planning and prioritisation  of needs is  an
essential prerequisite to effective procurement and a key tool for monitoring project implementation.
36.
The  frequency  of  procurement  supervision  missions  will  be  once  every  six  months.  Special
procurement  supervision  for  post-procurement  reviews  will  be  carried  out  at  least  once  every  12
months.
37.
Procurement Plan shall include the following:
a) A  brief  description  of  each  procurement  activity  to  be  undertaken  during  that  project
implementation period;
b) The estimated value of each activity in US$ equivalent to Angolan Kwanza (AOA);
c) The method of procurement to be adopted for each activity;
d) Works Procurement Packages with Methods and Time Schedule
e) Goods Procurement Packages with Methods and Time Schedule
f) Consultancy Assignments with Selection Methods and Time Schedule
g) The method of review IFAD will undertake for each activity (Post or Prior Review); and
h) Timelines showing milestones when the key stages of the procurement cycle will be achieved.
38. Goods and Works and Non-consulting Services – Procurement decisions will be subjected
to the following Prior Review Thresholds:
Expenditure
Category
Contract Value Threshold
(US$)
Procurement/Selection Method
Contracts Subject to
Prior Review
≥ 10,000,000
≥ 3,000,000 < 10,000,000
Works
< 3,000,000
< 100,000
All values
≥ 1,000,000
≥ 250,000 < 1,000,000
< 250,000
< 75,000
All values
Goods
ICB
NCB
NCB
Shopping
Direct Contracting
ICB
NCB
NCB
Shopping
Direct Contracting
All
All
None (Post Review)
None (Post review)
All
All
All
None (Post Review)
None (Post review)
All
 Reference  to  (if  any)  Project  Operational/Procurement  Manual: Procurement  related  to
goods, works and services, consultants’ services will be carried out, by PIU of ARP, following
procedures as laid down in the Operational Manual to be approved by the IFAD.
 Any  Other  Special  Procurement  Arrangements: PIU  shall  comply  strictly  with  procurement
provisions as indicated in the manual for sub-projects.
39.
Selection of Consultants – Selection decisions will be subjected to prior review by the IFAD.
In addition, all TOR’s for consultant’s services, irrespective of value of the contract, shall be reviewed
by the IFAD.
Expenditure
Category
Contract Value Threshold
(US$)
Procurement/Selection Method
Contracts Subject to
Prior Review
Consulting
≥ 200,000
QCBS/Other (QBS)
All
84
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Expenditure
Category
Contract Value Threshold
(US$)
Procurement/Selection Method
Contracts Subject to
Prior Review
Services –Firms
< 200,000
CQS/Other (QCBS/QBS/)
None (Post Review)
Consulting
Services -
Individuals (IC)
All values
≥ 100,000
< 100,000
All Values
SSS
UN Agencies
IC – Qualification
IC – Qualification
IC – SSS
All
All
None (Post review)
All
40.
Risk  Identification  and  Mitigation – The  risk  mitigation  measures  for  the  project  include
enhancement of the ARP’s procurement capacity by: (a) linking the ARP Procurement Unit to that of
SAMAP/SADCP-C&H for oversight and guidance; (b) training of IDA procurement personnel; and (c)
preparation of the procurement implementation manual. Considering the above mitigating measures,
the  residual  procurement  risk  for  the  project  is  considered  Moderate. Further the  potential  risks  to
project success and mitigation measures are summarised below:
Issues
Inadequate  and 
incomplete  TORs, 
specifications and Bill of Quantities (BOQ)
Inadequate contract administration
technical
Mitigation Measures
Capacity building and Technical assistance
Continuous capacity building and strict follow-up and
supervision
Make  Procurement  Planning  a  requirement  as  part
of the Annual Work Plan and Budget
Technical assistance and/or capacity building
Strict follow-up and supervision
Technical assistance and/or capacity building
Capacity building
Capacity building and/or technical assistance
Capacity building and/or technical assistance
Inadequate  procurement  planning  and  monitoring
and follow-up of procurement activities
Non-compliance with procurement regulations
Inefficiencies in procurement processes
Inadequate capacity in procurement
Inadequate record keeping
Improper Receipt of bids and opening
Bid 
improvements
examination 
evaluation 
requiring
and 
85
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Appendix 9: ARP Costs and Financing
1.
Main  Assumptions – This  Appendix  provides  the  analysis  of  costs  and  financing  for  the
Agriculture  Recovery  Project  (ARP).  It  describes  the  assumptions  made  in  estimating  the  Project
costs  which  in  turn  support  the  detailed  cost  tables  and  financing  plan.  The  analyst  has  used the
COSTAB  software  to  capture  the  financial  data  and  has  prepared  a  detailed  cost  table  for  each
component.  These  cost  tables  have  been  consolidated  into  summary  cost  tables  that  present  the
Project cost by component, expenditure account and financiers. The full set of detailed and summary
tables is presented in the Annexes to this Appendix.
ARP is to be financed over a four-year period (2017-2020). The information collected during the
2.
design mission provided the key parameters for the Project costs. Data collected have been checked
for consistency with average costs of goods and services in Angola. ARP costs have been estimated
on the basis of prices prevailing at the time of design in April 2017.
Economic Growth – Angola’s natural resources helped attracting foreign direct investment and
3.
ensured economic growth over the last ten years. The economy has recently undergone a structural
shock  due  to  lower  crude  oil  prices.  Forecasts  about  the  evolution  of  the  country’s  oil  exports  and
international commodity prices are uncertain. Average GDP growth is projected to remain at 3.5% in
2017,  in  line  with  2016  and  down  from  3.8%  in  2015:  oil  sector  will  grow  at  4%,  while  the  non-oil
sector is expected to show a small improvement, growing by 3.4%, driven mainly by a strong recovery
in  agriculture  sector  which  is  expected  to play  a  key  role  in  boosting  the  country’s  exports  and
generating earnings in foreign currency56. However, Angolan growth is expected to average just 2.8%
a year in 2017-2157.
4.
Inflation  Rate – National  inflation  inputted  in  the  COSTAB  is  based  on  forecasts  provided  by
the  Economist  Intelligence  Unit  (EIU).  Inflation  in  Angola  has  peaked  since  2015  following  the
successive  reductions  in  fuel  subsidies  and  the  Kwanza's  continued  weakness  against  the  US$,
which  continues  to  push  up  the  cost  of  imported  goods.  During  the  project  implementation  period
(2017-2020), an average yearly international inflation of 1.6% has been considered, based on the Unit
Value  Index  (in  US  dollars)  of  manufactures  (MUV),  which  is  commonly  used  as  a  deflator  in  the
commodity-price literature. Both local and foreign inflation rates are compounded at mid-year. Inflation
figures  used  in  the  calculation  of  the  Project  costs  are  shown  in  Table  1.  Price  contingencies  have
been  applied  on  all  costs,  with  the  exception  of  grants  and  subsidies.  Physical  contingencies  (5%)
have been applied to equipment and materials, works, goods, services and inputs.
Table 1: Inflation Rates
Inflation Rates (%)
2017 2018 2019 2020
Annual
Local
Foreign
Compound
Local
Foreign
24.0
1.6
15.0
1.6
10.0
1.6
7.0
1.6
27.7
1.7
52.0
3.3
70.7
5.0
85.1
6.7
5.
Exchange Rate – The initial exchange rate for the analysis has been set at Kwanza (AOA) 165
to US$ 1, the official rate prevailing in April 2017. In the absence of AOA/US$ exchange rate forecasts
provided  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Angola  (BNA)  a  constant  purchasing  power  exchange  rate,  as
calculated  by  COSTAB,  has  been  used.  .  Conversions  from  current  USD  values  into  AOA  use  the
constant purchasing power parity (CPPP) exchange rates reported in Table 2.
56 Source: African Development Bank, African Economic Outlook (AEO) 2016.
57 Source: the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU).
86
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table 2: CPPP Rates
Exchange Rate
Up to
negotiation
Up to Project
start-up
2017 2018 2019 2020
AOA to US$
165.0
165.0
207.1 242.6 268.3 286.3
Considering  the  two  digit  local  inflation  rate  and  the  difficulties  in  forecasting  the  AOA/US$
6.
exchange rate, the costs have been inputted in US$ in the COSTAB, also to mitigate cost overruns.
7.
Taxes and Duties – Import duties (on vehicles, office furniture and equipment) and taxes are
applied  to  costs  of  all  transactions  where  appropriate.  Both  consumption  and  production  taxes  are
applied on all imported and locally procured goods and services, except for training, workshops and
international technical assistance which are tax exempted. For directly recruited local staff the Project
will  cover  the  social  insurance  charges  of  8%.  Taxes  and  duties  have  been  estimated  using
information collected during the design mission. All items to be imported for the Project attract custom
duties of different proportions. The Government will waive the duties and taxes or will finance the cost
of  all  taxes  on  goods  procured  under  the  Project. Taxes  and  duties  applied  in  Project  costing,
displayed by expenditure category, are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3: Taxes, Duties and Foreign Exchange by Expenditure Category
Expenditure category
I. Investment Costs
A. Consultancies
B. Equipment & materials
C. Works
D. Vehicles
E. Workshops
F. Training
G. Goods, services & inputs
H. Grants & subsidies
I. Unallocated
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Operating costs
B. Salaries & allowances
% Taxes
and duties
% foreign
exchange
7.5
17
10
17
0
0
17
0
0
20
8
50
60
60
60
5
5
60
0
0
50
0
Project Costs – Total ARP costs including price contingencies, duties and taxes are estimated
8.
at about USD 7.6 million over the four-year Project implementation period. Of this amount about 26%
represents  the  foreign  exchange  content,  and  about  8.6%  are  duties  and  taxes. Total  base  costs
amount to USD 7.3 million, while contingencies are estimated to add to this amount another USD 0.3
million  (of  which  USD  0.1  million  are  physical  contingencies  and  USD  0.2  million  are  price
contingencies),  corresponding  to  3.8%  of  the  base  costs.  Investment  costs  account  for  69%  of  the
base  costs  (and  recurrent  costs  for  remaining  31%).  Funds  allocated  to  Project  management  and
coordination amount to about USD 1.3 million or 17% of total Project costs.
9.
Project  investments  are  organized  in two  components: a)  Component  1:  Sustainable
Livelihoods  Recovery;  and b)  Component  2:  Project  Coordination  and  Management.  The  first
component is divided into three subcomponents: 1.1: Recovery of household productive assets; 1.2:
Recovery of community productive assets; and 1.3: Capacity building for recovery.
10. A  summary  breakdown  of  the  Project  costs  by  component  is  shown  in  Table  4.  Project
summary and detailed costs are provided in Annexes 1 and 2.
87
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table 4: Project Costs Summary by Component (including contingencies)
(US$ '000)
Local Foreign
Total
%
Foreign
%  Total
Base
Exchange Costs
A. Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
1. Recovery of Household Productive Assets
2. Recovery of Community Productive Assets
3. Capacity Building for Recovery
Subtotal Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
B. Project Coordination and Management
1. Project Coordination and Management
Subtotal Project Coordination and Management
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
1,121
1,363
1,963
4,446
1,025
1,025
5,471
45
117
5,633
771
574
228
1,573
279
279
1,852
67
54
1,973
1,892
1,936
2,191
6,019
1,304
1,304
7,323
112
171
7,606
41
30
10
26
21
21
25
60
31
26
26
26
30
82
18
18
100
2
2
104
11. Expenditure  Categories – The  expenditure  accounts  are  based  on  the  standardisation  that
IFAD  is  adopting  after  phasing  its  Loan  and  Grants  System.  The  expenditure  and  disbursement
account structure for ARP is reported in Table  5 and a summary breakdown  of the Project costs by
expenditure category is shown in Table 6.
Table 5: Project Expenditure and Disbursement Accounts
I. Investment Costs
A. Consultancies
B. Equipment & materials
C. Works
D. Vehicles
E. Workshops
F. Training
G. Goods, services & inputs
H. Grants & subsidies
I. Unallocated
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Operating costs
B. Salaries & allowances
A. Consultancies
B. Equipment & materials
C. Works
D. Vehicles
E. Workshops
F. Training
G. Goods, services & inputs
H. Grants & subsidies
I. Unallocated
A. Operating costs
B. Salaries & allowances
88
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table 6: Project Costs by Expenditure Categories
(US$ '000)
Local Foreign
Total
%
Foreign
%  Total
Base
Exchange Costs
 I. Investment Costs
1. Consultancies and TA
2. Equipment & materials
3. Works
4. Vehicles
5. Workshops
6. Training
7. Goods, services & inputs
8. Grants & subsidies
9. Unallocated
10. Duties & Taxes
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
1. Operating costs
2. Salaries & allowances
3. Duties & Taxes
Total Recurrent Costs
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
220
42
518
144
3
-
784
-
-
-
1,711
141
-
-
141
1,852
67
54
1,973
292
88
259
55
48
1,109
301
750
-
394
3,295
84
1,873
219
2,176
5,471
45
117
5,633
512
130
778
199
50
1,109
1,085
750
-
394
5,006
225
1,873
219
2,317
7,323
112
171
7,606
43
32
67
72
5
-
72
-
-
-
34
63
-
-
6
25
60
31
26
7
2
11
3
1
15
15
10
-
5
68
3
26
3
32
100
2
2
104
12. Project Financing – The following financiers will be contributing to the Project: IFAD (through a
loan  and  a  grant);  the  Government  of  Angola  (GOA);  FAO  and  the  Project  beneficiaries.  IFAD  will
fund the Project through a grant of USD 1 million and a loan of 5 USD million. The loan is granted on
ordinary terms.
13. GOA  will  finance  the  taxes  and  duties  as  well  as general  office  expenses  for  the  Project
coordination  and  management  unit  for  a  total  of  USD  0.7  million,  representing  9.5%  of  total  costs.
The estimate of taxes and duties is based on the rates in effect prevailing at the time of the design. In
conformity with the principle that no taxes or duties would be financed out of the proceeds of the IFAD
Loan/Grant, any future changes  in the rates and/or structures of taxes and duties would have to be
met by GOA.  Beneficiaries will contribute about USD 0.4 million representing 5% of Project costs: it
will consist mainly of in kind contribution (unskilled  labour). FAO  will contribute  with 0.5 USD million
through  Technical  Assistance  (provided  through  its  Technical  Cooperation  Programmes),  cars  and
related  Operations  &  Maintenance,  salary  of  one  driver  and  office  equipment  for  the  Project
coordination and management unit. The proposed financing plan for ARP is summarised in Table 7.
Table 7: Project Financing Plan
The Government
Amount
%
FAO
Amount
%
IFAD loan
Amount
%
IFAD grant
Amount
Beneficiaries
Total
% Amount % Amount %
A. Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
1. Recovery of Household Productive Assets
2. Recovery of Community Productive Assets
3. Capacity Building for Recovery
Subtotal Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
B. Project Coordination and Management
1. Project Coordination and Management
Total PROJECT COSTS
312 15.5
7.2
146
5.1
113
9.1
571
155 11.5
9.5
726
294 14.6
-
7.2
7.3
-
161
454
36
491
2.7
6.5
1,286 64.0
1,606 79.3
954 42.8
3,845 61.4
1,154 85.8
5,000 65.7
-
-
-
-
1,000 44.9
1,000 16.0
117
5.8
273 13.5
-
6.2
-
390
2,008
2,024
2,227
6,260
26.4
26.6
29.3
82.3
-
-
1,000 13.1
-
390
-
5.1
1,346
17.7
7,606 100.0
14. Project  Sustainability – Most  ARP  costs  are  represented  by  investment  costs  (the  ratio
investment to recurrent costs is 2:1). Therefore, post Project sustainability is not considered a risk.
Summary of Project costs and financing, as well as detailed cost tables are presented in the Annexes
below.
89
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
ANNEX 1: ARP - SUMMARY COST TABLES
Table Description
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
A7
A8
Components Project Cost Summary, by year
Detailed Cost Estimate by Expenditure Category
Expenditure Accounts by Components
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers
Disbursement Accounts by Financiers
Local/Foreign/Taxes by Financiers
Project Components by Year – Investment/Recurrent costs
Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies
90
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table A1: Project Cost Summary by Components and by Year
Republic of Angola
Agriculture Recovery Project (ARP)
Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies
(US$ '000)
Total
2,008
2,024
2,227
6,260
1,346
1,346
7,606
Totals Including Contingencies
2019
2020
2018
2017
A. Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
1. Recovery of Household Productive Assets
2. Recovery of Community Productive Assets
3. Capacity Building for Recovery
Subtotal Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
B. Project Coordination and Management
1. Project Coordination and Management
Subtotal Project Coordination and Management
Total PROJECT COSTS
575
316
1,548
2,439
370
370
2,809
672
652
285
1,609
274
274
1,883
625
691
238
1,553
351
351
1,904
137
365
157
659
351
351
1,011
91
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table A2: Detailed Cost Estimate by Expenditure Category
Republic of Angola
Agriculture Recovery Project (ARP)
Detailed Cost Estimate by Expenditure Category
Foreign
(AOA '000)
Local
Total
%
Foreign
%  Total
Base
Exchange Costs
Foreign
(US$ '000)
Local
Total
%
Foreign
%  Total
Base
Exchange Costs
36,300
6,930
85,536
23,760
413
-
129,439
-
-
-
282,377
23,183
-
-
23,183
305,560
11,095
110,522
427,177
48,180
14,454
42,768
9,108
7,838
182,941
49,618
123,668
-
65,071
543,645
13,910
309,034
36,146
359,090
902,735
7,397
244,022
1,154,154
84,480
21,384
128,304
32,868
8,250
182,941
179,057
123,668
-
65,071
826,022
37,092
309,034
36,146
382,272
1,208,294
18,492
354,544
1,581,330
43
32
67
72
5
-
72
-
-
-
34
63
-
-
6
25
60
31
27
7
2
11
3
1
15
15
10
-
5
68
3
26
3
32
100
2
29
131
220
42
518
144
3
-
784
-
-
-
1,711
141
-
-
141
1,852
67
54
1,973
292
88
259
55
48
1,109
301
750
-
394
3,295
84
1,873
219
2,176
5,471
45
117
5,633
512
130
778
199
50
1,109
1,085
750
-
394
5,006
225
1,873
219
2,317
7,323
112
171
7,606
43
32
67
72
5
-
72
-
-
-
34
63
-
-
6
25
60
31
26
7
2
11
3
1
15
15
10
-
5
68
3
26
3
32
100
2
2
104
 A. Investment Costs
1. Consultancies and TA
2. Equipment & materials
3. Works
4. Vehicles
5. Workshops
6. Training
7. Goods, services & inputs
8. Grants & subsidies
9. Unallocated
10. Duties & Taxes
Total Investment Costs
B. Recurrent Costs
1. Operating costs
2. Salaries & allowances
3. Duties & Taxes
Total Recurrent Costs
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
92
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table A3: Expenditure Accounts by Components
Republic of Angola
Agriculture Recovery Project (ARP)
Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies
(US$ '000)
Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
Recovery of Recovery of
Community
Household
Productive
Productive
Assets
Assets
Capacity
Building
for
Project
Coordination
and
Management
Project
Coordination
and
Recovery Management
Total
 I. Investment Costs
A. Consultancies and TA
B. Equipment & materials
C. Works
D. Vehicles
E. Workshops
F. Training
G. Goods, services & inputs
H. Grants & subsidies
I. Unallocated
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Operating costs
B. Salaries & allowances
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
Taxes
Foreign Exchange
-
27
-
-
-
-
1,357
-
-
1,384
-
625
625
2,008
285
830
-
48
938
-
-
-
51
712
-
1,749
-
276
276
2,024
133
622
106
73
-
242
-
1,128
-
38
-
1,586
173
468
641
2,227
113
232
456
-
-
-
50
-
-
-
-
506
116
724
840
1,346
115
288
561
148
938
242
50
1,128
1,408
750
-
5,225
290
2,091
2,381
7,606
646
1,973
93
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table A4: Expenditure Accounts by Financiers
Republic of Angola
Agriculture Recovery Project (ARP)
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers
(US$ '000)
I. Investment Costs
A. Consultancies and TA
B. Equipment & materials
C. Works
D. Vehicles
E. Workshops
F. Training
G. Goods, services & inputs
H. Grants & subsidies
I. Unallocated
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Operating costs
B. Salaries & allowances
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
The Government
Amount
%
FAO
Amount
IFAD loan
Amount
IFAD grant
Amount
Beneficiaries
Amount
%
%
%
Total
Amount
%
%
For.
Exch.
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
Duties &
Taxes
34
13
94
41
-
-0
239
-
-
421
98
207
305
726
6.1
8.7
10.0
17.0
-
-
17.0
-
-
8.1
33.7
9.9
12.8
9.5
-
21
-
100
-
-
-
-
-
121
40
330
370
491
-
14.0
-
41.5
-
-
-
-
-
2.3
13.7
15.8
15.5
6.5
502
102
675
100
50
192
1,063
655
-
3,339
153
1,508
1,661
5,000
89.4
68.9
72.0
41.5
100.0
17.0
75.5
87.3
-
63.9
52.6
72.1
69.7
65.7
25
-
-
-
-
936
-
38
-
1,000
-
-
-
1,000
4.5
-
-
-
-
83.0
-
5.1
-
19.1
-
-
-
13.1
-
13
169
-
-
-
106
57
-
344
-
46
46
390
-
8.5
18.0
-
-
-
7.5
7.6
-
6.6
-
2.2
1.9
5.1
561
148
938
242
50
1,128
1,408
750
-
5,225
290
2,091
2,381
7,606
7.4
1.9
12.3
3.2
0.7
14.8
18.5
9.9
-
68.7
3.8
27.5
31.3
100.0
228
45
563
145
3
-
845
-
-
1,828
145
-
145
1,973
299
90
281
56
48
1,128
324
750
-
2,976
87
1,924
2,011
4,987
34
13
94
41
-
-
239
-
-
421
58
167
225
646
94
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table A5: Disbursement Accounts by Financiers
Republic of Angola
Agriculture Recovery Project (ARP)
Disbursement Accounts by Financiers
(US$ '000)
1. Consultancies and TA
2. Works
3. Vehicles
4. Equipment_material
5. Training
6. Workshops
7. Goods, services & inputs
8. Grants & subsidies
9. Salaries & allowances
10. Operating costs
11. Unallocated
Total PROJECT COSTS
The Government
Amount
%
FAO
Amount
IFAD loan
Amount
IFAD grant
Amount
Beneficiaries
Amount
%
%
%
Total
Amount
%
34
94
41
13
-0
-
239
-
207
98
-
726
6.1
10.0
17.0
8.7
-
-
17.0
-
9.9
33.7
-
9.5
-
-
100
21
-
-
-
-
330
40
-
491
-
-
41.5
14.0
-
-
-
-
15.8
13.7
-
6.5
502
675
100
102
192
50
1,063
655
1,508
153
-
5,000
89.4
72.0
41.5
68.9
17.0
100.0
75.5
87.3
72.1
52.6
-
65.7
25
-
-
-
936
-
-
38
-
-
-
1,000
4.5
-
-
-
83.0
-
-
5.1
-
-
-
13.1
-
169
-
13
-
-
106
57
46
-
-
390
-
18.0
-
8.5
-
-
7.5
7.6
2.2
-
-
5.1
561
938
242
148
1,128
50
1,408
750
2,091
290
-
7,606
For.
Exch.
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
Duties &
Taxes
228
563
145
45
-
3
845
-
-
145
-
1,973
299
281
56
90
1,128
48
324
750
1,924
87
-
4,987
34
94
41
13
-
-
239
-
167
58
-
646
%
7.4
12.3
3.2
1.9
14.8
0.7
18.5
9.9
27.5
3.8
-
100.0
95
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table A6:
Local/Foreign/Taxes by Financiers
Republic of Angola
Agriculture Recovery Project (ARP)
Local/Foreign/Taxes by Financiers
(AOA '000)
(US$ '000)
The Government
Amount
%
FAO
Amount
%
IFAD loan
Amount
IFAD grant
Amount
Beneficiaries
Amount
%
%
%
Total
Amount
The Government
Amount
%
%
FAO
Amount
IFAD loan
Amount
IFAD grant
Amount
Beneficiaries
Amount
%
%
%
Total
Amount
%
I.   Foreign
II.  Local (Excl. Taxes)
III. Taxes
Total Project
5,518
11,936
138,992
156,445
1.3
1.2
100.0
9.9
18,824
83,953
-
102,776
4.4
8.3
-
6.5
358,507
677,928
-
1,036,435
83.9
66.8
-
65.5
-
201,845
-
201,845
-
19.9
-
12.8
44,328
39,501
-
83,829
10.4
3.9
-
5.3
427,177
1,015,162
138,992
1,581,330
27.0
64.2
8.8
100.0
25
55
646
726
1.3
1.1
100.0
9.5
97
394
-
491
4.9
7.9
-
6.5
1,653
3,347
-
5,000
83.8
67.1
-
65.7
-
1,000
-
1,000
-
20.0
-
13.1
198
192
-
390
10.0
3.8
-
5.1
1,973
4,987
646
7,606
%
25.9
65.6
8.5
100.0
96
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table A7: Project Components by Year – Investment/Recurrent costs
Republic of Angola
Agriculture Recovery Project (ARP)
Project Components by Year -- Investment/Recurrent Costs
(US$ '000)
2017
Totals Including Contingencies
2019
2018
2020
A. Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
1. Recovery of Household Productive Assets
Investment Costs
Recurrent Costs
Subtotal Recovery of Household Productive Assets
2. Recovery of Community Productive Assets
Investment Costs
Recurrent Costs
Subtotal Recovery of Community Productive Assets
3. Capacity Building for Recovery
Investment Costs
Recurrent Costs
Subtotal Capacity Building for Recovery
Subtotal Sustainable Livelihood Recovery
B. Project Coordination and Management
1. Project Coordination and Management
Investment Costs
Recurrent Costs
Subtotal Project Coordination and Management
Total PROJECT COSTS
Total Investment Costs
Total Recurrent Costs
438
137
575
215
101
316
1,163
385
1,548
2,439
161
209
370
2,809
1,977
831
437
235
672
593
59
652
201
84
285
1,609
61
212
274
1,883
1,292
591
444
181
625
630
60
691
152
85
238
1,553
140
210
351
1,904
1,367
537
65
72
137
310
55
365
70
87
157
659
143
208
351
1,011
589
422
97
Total
1,384
625
2,008
1,749
276
2,024
1,586
641
2,227
6,260
506
840
1,346
7,606
5,225
2,381
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table A8: Expenditure Accounts by Years; Totals Including Contingencies
Republic of Angola
Agriculture Recovery Project (ARP)
Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies
(US$ '000)
Total
561
148
938
242
50
1,128
1,408
750
-
5,225
290
2,091
2,381
7,606
2017
Totals Including Contingencies
2019
2018
2020
 I. Investment Costs
A. Consultancies and TA
B. Equipment & materials
C. Works
D. Vehicles
E. Workshops
F. Training
G. Goods, services & inputs
H. Grants & subsidies
I. Unallocated
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Operating costs
B. Salaries & allowances
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
217
67
178
242
50
752
454
18
-
1,977
75
757
831
2,809
61
55
249
-
-
161
442
324
-
1,292
76
515
591
1,883
140
21
299
-
-
144
449
314
-
1,367
72
465
537
1,904
143
6
211
-
-
70
64
95
-
589
68
354
422
1,011
98
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
ANNEX 2: ARP DETAILED COST TABLES (USD)
Table
Description
B1
B2
B3
B4
1.1 Recovery of Household Productive Assets
1.2 Recovery of Community Productive Assets
1.3 Capacity building for recovery
2.1 Project coordination and management
99
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table B1: 1.1 – Recovery of Household Productive Assets
Unit
2017
2018
Quantities
2019
2020
Total
Unit Cost
(US$)
2017
Base Cost (US$ '000)
2019
2020
2018
Household
2,000
1,000
1,000
Household
Household
Household
Household
Number
250
-
-
50
-
500
250
250
200
2
500
250
250
200
2
-
250
-
-
50
1
1,500
500
500
500
5
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
5,000.0
4,000
180.0
360
180
180
person month
person month
lumpsum
lumpsum
2
24
1
24
1
24
-
24
4
96
6,000.0
2,000.0
Days
100
100
100
100
400
200.0
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.
Totals Including Contingencies (US$
'000)
2019
2020
2018
2017
Total
381
194
197
48
-
-
10
-
10
57
438
12
48
56
-
116
20
137
575
97
48
48
39
11
49
243
437
6
49
57
102
215
20
235
672
98
49
49
39
11
50
247
444
6
50
-
104
160
21
181
625
-
50
-
-
10
6
16
65
65
-
51
-
-
51
771
293
98
98
98
27
125
613
1,384
24
198
113
206
542
21
72
137
83
625
2,008
Total
720
270
90
90
90
25
115
565
1,285
24
192
111
200
527
-
45
-
-
9
5
14
59
59
-
48
-
-
48
20
68
127
80
607
1,892
45
-
-
9
-
9
54
414
12
48
56
-
116
20
136
550
90
45
45
36
10
46
226
406
6
48
56
100
210
20
230
636
90
45
45
36
10
46
226
406
6
48
-
100
154
20
174
580
 I. Investment Costs
A. Crop and livestock packages /a
B. Livelihood options
1. Free range poultry package /b
2. Small scale livestock package (goat, sheep, pig)
3. Off farm activities
4. Apiculture
a. Apiculture package /c
b. Apiculture processing units /d
Subtotal Apiculture
Subtotal Livelihood options
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salaries and allowances
1. Technical assistance
Social development specialist  - ITA
Social development specialist  - NTA
Apiculture specialist /e
Crop specialist /f
Subtotal Technical assistance
2. Field allowances
Per diem
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
_________________________________
\a Financial support will be offered to farm households up to a ceiling level of $180 per household.
\b The poultry package will be offered as a grant to target households. The package will consist of 25 hens or pullets (coming into lay) with two cockerels.
\c The package includes: a protection kit, smoker and barrel filter and bottle. The package will be provided as micro-project IGA grant.
\d A processing unit will be installed for each 100 households. It includes: a honey manual radial extractor, a press, a filter and metallic tins with cover
\e Funded through a FAO TCP
\f Funded through a FAO TCP
100
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table B2: 1.2 – Recovery of Community Productive Assets
Unit
2017
2018
Quantities
2019
2020
Total
Unit Cost
(US$)
2017
Base Cost (US$ '000)
2019
2020
2018
 I. Investment Costs
A. Nursery establishment on common plot /a
B. Water Resource Development
1. Water point rehabilitation /b
2. Water point rehabilitation/construction: weirs (in permanent rivers) /c
3. Rainwater harvesting: ponds /d
4. Rainwater harvesting: subsurface dams /e
Subtotal Water Resource Development
C. Natural Resource Management
1. Rehabilitation of pastures /f
2. Soil and water conservation /g
Subtotal Natural Resource Management
D. Livestock health and production
1. Basic package /h
2. Extended package /i
Subtotal Livestock health and production
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salaries and allowances
1. Technical assistance
Pasture management expert - ITA
Water resource engineer  - ITA
Livestock expert - ITA
Soil and water conservation expert - ITA
Subtotal Technical assistance
2. Field allowances
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Hectares
Hectares
Group
Group
person month
person month
person month
person month
35
1
2
3
2
-
-
150
20
3
3
2
2
30
2
2
4
3
10
2
2
5
4
10,000
500
10,000
500
150
20
150
20
1
1
-
1
1
1
-
1
-
2
2
3
2
-
500
150
-
1
1
-
-
75
7
8
15
11
600.0
22,000.0
20,000.0
22,000.0
20,000.0
20,000
1,500
600
60
21.4
190.0
25.0
541.0
6
6
2
4
6,000.0
6,000.0
6,000.0
6,000.0
Day
200
200
200
200
800
200.0
21
22
40
66
40
168
-
-
-
4
11
15
204
18
18
12
12
60
40
100
304
18
44
40
88
60
232
214
95
309
4
11
15
573
6
6
-
6
18
40
58
631
6
44
40
110
80
274
214
95
309
4
11
15
603
6
6
-
6
18
40
58
661
-
44
40
66
40
190
-
95
95
4
-
4
289
6
6
-
-
12
40
52
341
_________________________________
\a It includes: equipment, seeds and tools. Plot size: 0.5-1.5 ha.
\b Water point rehabilitation for human and livestock consumption. It includes: wells, trenches, animal water holes, pumping system (diesel) and  tapstand
\c Water point rehabilitation for human and livestock consumption, as well as for irrigation.
\d For domestic/ household consumption. It implies: removal and compaction of earth, construction of dykes and canals, decantation dykes and fencing
\e For domestic/ household consumption. Built in temporary rivers. Main need for the proposed subsurface dam is labour for digging from the community as the materials are locally available except for geotextile that will be installed to prevent leaking in
     som
\f Contract for fodder
\g These activities will be supported by matching grants to Farmer Field Schools or farmer based organizations (interest groups). Unit costs include: tools and TA.
\h It covers 6 municipalities (25 groups per municipality). Activity includes: technical support from a cadre of Community Animal Health Workers (CAHW). Packages include: mineral block, cold blocks, vaccines and store.
\i It covers 6 municipalities (10 groups per municipality). Activity includes: technical support from a cadre of Community Animal Health Workers (CAHW). Packages include: mineral block, cold blocks, vaccines and store.
101
Total
45
154
160
330
220
864
427
285
712
15
32
47
1,668
36
36
12
24
108
160
268
1,936
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.
Totals Including Contingencies (US$
'000)
2019
2018
2020
2017
Total
22
23
42
70
42
178
-
-
-
4
11
15
215
18
18
12
12
60
40
101
316
19
47
43
95
65
249
214
95
309
4
12
16
593
6
6
-
6
18
41
59
652
7
48
44
120
87
299
214
95
309
4
12
16
630
6
6
-
6
19
42
60
691
-
49
44
73
44
211
-
95
95
4
-
4
310
6
6
-
-
13
42
55
365
48
168
173
358
239
938
427
285
712
16
35
51
1,749
37
37
12
24
110
165
276
2,024
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Table B3 – 1.3 Capacity building for recovery
Table B4 - 2.1 Project coordination and management
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.
Unit
2017
2018
Quantities
2019
2020
Total
Unit Cost
(US$)
2017
Base Cost (US$ '000)
2019
2020
2018
 I. Investment Costs
A. Disaster and climate risk management training
1. Institutional - Provincial and Municipal
a. DRM and Resilience-Building training /a
b. Recovery Framework /b
Subtotal Institutional - Provincial and Municipal
2. Community level
a. Training through FFS /c
Subtotal Disaster and climate risk management training
B. Community level institutional and human resource development
1. Farmers Field Schools (FFS)
a. Training of Master Trainers /d
b. Training of FFS facilitators /e
c. Refresher training of current FFS facilitators
d. Establishment of new schools /f
e. Training in community based natural resource management planning
f. Implementation of FFS-  farm households /g
g. Community development
Training of community development facilitators /h
Social mentoring support to households
Subtotal Community development
h. Community animal health workers (CAHW)
Training of CAHW (municipality level)
Training of CAHW (para vet)
Subtotal Community animal health workers (CAHW)
Subtotal Farmers Field Schools (FFS)
2. Training of national personnel in FFS
3. Logistical support to FFS
Bicycles for FFS facilitators (1 per 2 schools)
Bicycles for social development facilitators (1 per 2 schools)
Subtotal Logistical support to FFS
Subtotal Community level institutional and human resource development
C. Institutional and technical support
1. Training of IDA/EDA in technical subjects
2. Social mobilization/IGA support
3. IGA_field level training to groups (through Service Provider)
a. Training/ mentoring of IGA recipients
b. Training in apiculture
c. Training in livestock husbandry
Subtotal IGA_field level training to groups (through Service Provider)
4. Institutional support
a. Institute of Agronomic Research (IIA) /i
b. Institute of veterinary research (IIV) /j
c. Water resources - NGO development
Subtotal Institutional support
Subtotal Institutional and technical support
D. Logistical Support
1. Vehicles
a. Double Cabin Pickup /k
2. Motorcycles /l
3. Office equipment
Desktop /m
Photocopier/Printer/Scanner
Office Furniture /n
Meeting room furniture
Subtotal ffice equipment
Subtotal Logistical Support
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salaries and allowances
1. Technical assistance
TA
2. Field allowances
Subtotal Salaries and allowances
B. Operations & Maintenance
1. Motorcycle O & M
2. Vehicles O & M /o
Subtotal Operations & Maintenance
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
Set
Set
Set
Number
Set
Session
Session
Session
Set
Set
Set
Number
Number
Set
Contract
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
Contract
Contract
Contract
Number
Number
Number
Number
Set
Set
lumpsum
Day
Number
Number
2
3
1
35
1
2,760
-
5
1
30
-
5,760
-
2
1
10
1
5,280
-
-
1
-
-
1,920
2
10
4
75
2
15,720
2
40
2
2
4
40
40
-
1
1
1
1
3
40
5
1
5
1
2
40
2
2
-
40
40
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
5
2
2
-
5
5
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
2
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
85
8
8
4
85
85
3
1
1
1
1
3
40
5
1
5
1
15,000.0
5,000.0
5,000.0
500.0
10,000.0
13.8
5,000.0
80.0
10,000.0
2,500.0
10,000.0
300.0
300.0
10,000.0
25,000.0
20,000.0
40,000.0
20,000.0
40,000.0
3,000.0
1,500.0
5,000.0
1,000.0
3,000.0
200
200
200
200
800
200.0
40
3
40
3
40
3
40
3
160
12
750.0
4,000.0
100
200
300
150
450
30
15
5
18
10
38
10
3
13
20
5
25
154
40
12
12
24
218
-
25
30
30
60
120
20
40
20
80
225
120
120
8
5
5
3
21
261
1,153
300
40
340
30
12
42
382
1,535
-
-
-
-
-
-
25
5
15
-
79
10
3
13
20
5
25
163
-
12
12
24
187
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
197
-
40
40
30
12
42
82
279
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
5
5
10
73
5
0
5
20
5
25
133
-
2
2
3
136
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
146
-
40
40
30
12
42
82
228
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
-
-
26
-
-
-
20
5
25
56
-
-
-
-
56
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
66
-
40
40
30
12
42
82
148
_________________________________
\a 20 disaster risk management trainers at provincial levels trained and 10 response simulation exercises conducted
\b About 600 officials of the inter-sectorial CNPC at municipal and provincial levels will be trained in planning, implementing and monitoring resilience-building interventions.
\c About 6,290 smallholders trained in climate risk management and 4,000 community members trained in disaster risk management.
\d It targets: 20 persons for 3 months.
\e It targets: 20 persons (i.e. 2 facilitators per school, for 10 new schools) for 2 weeks.
\f It consists of capital injection (seed money).
\g It covers cost of FFS facilitators.
\h Each session targets 20 persons and lasts 2 weeks.
\i It supports multiplication of cassava cuttings and seeds.
\j It supports multiplication of forage seeds.
\k Two pickups for the PIU and 1 pickup for the IDA Provincial Office in Huila.
\l Purchased in support to Municipalities: 15 for Huila, 15 for Cunene and 10 for Benguela
\m Package inclusive of printer and stabilization unit.
\n Each set consists of desk, chair, lamp and file cabinet.
\o Computed as 10% of purchase costs
102
Total
100
200
300
150
450
30
50
20
38
20
217
25
7
32
80
20
100
506
40
26
26
51
597
30
25
30
30
60
120
20
40
20
80
255
120
120
8
5
5
3
21
261
1,563
300
160
460
120
48
168
628
2,191
Totals Including Contingencies (US$
'000)
2019
2018
2020
2017
Total
101
202
302
151
454
30
15
5
18
10
38
10
3
13
20
5
25
155
40
12
12
24
220
-
25
30
30
60
121
20
40
20
81
227
121
121
8
5
5
3
21
263
1,163
302
40
343
30
12
42
385
1,548
-
-
-
-
-
-
26
5
15
-
81
10
3
14
20
5
26
167
-
12
12
25
191
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
201
-
41
41
31
12
43
84
285
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
5
5
10
76
5
0
6
21
5
26
139
-
2
2
3
142
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
152
-
42
42
31
12
44
85
238
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
-
-
28
-
-
-
21
5
26
60
-
-
-
-
60
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
70
-
42
42
32
13
44
87
157
101
202
302
151
454
30
51
21
38
20
224
26
7
32
83
21
103
520
40
26
26
52
612
31
25
30
30
60
121
20
40
20
81
258
121
121
8
5
5
3
21
263
1,586
302
165
468
124
50
173
641
2,227
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Unit
2017
2018
Quantities
2019
2020
Total
Unit Cost
(US$)
2017
Base Cost (US$ '000)
2019
2020
2018
 I. Investment Costs
A. Project Coordination Costs
1. Startup workshop
2. Baseline/preparatory studies /a
3. Mid Term Review and Impact assessment
4. Project Completion and Impact evaluation
5. Audits
6. M&E Studies
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Project Coordination
1. Staff salaries
Project Coordinator
Accountant
Procurement Assistant
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Assistant
Project Assistant
Driver
Subtotal Staff salaries
2. Field per diem
3. Operations and maintenance
General office expenses
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
workshop
Study
Study
Study
Contract
Study
person month
person month
person month
person month
person month
person month
Day
Month
1
1
-
-
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
24
100
12
-
-
-
-
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
24
100
12
-
-
1
-
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
24
75
12
-
-
-
1
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
24
50
12
1
1
1
1
4
4
48
48
48
48
48
96
325
48
50,000.0
50,000.0
75,000.0
75,000.0
55,000.0
5,000.0
5,000.0
2,500.0
2,000.0
2,000.0
1,500.0
800.0
200.0
1,000.0
50
50
-
-
55
5
160
60
30
24
24
18
19
175
20
12
207
367
-
-
-
-
55
5
60
60
30
24
24
18
19
175
20
12
207
267
-
-
75
-
55
5
135
60
30
24
24
18
19
175
15
12
202
337
-
-
-
75
55
5
135
60
30
24
24
18
19
175
10
12
197
332
_________________________________
\a It is assumed that much of the relevant baseline information is already available from the undertaken Post-Dasaster Needs Assessment but one would need to compile it into a document relevant to ARP's specifc target areas.
103
Total
50
50
75
75
220
20
490
240
120
96
96
72
77
701
65
48
814
1,304
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.
Totals Including Contingencies (US$
'000)
2019
2018
2020
2017
Total
50
50
-
-
55
5
161
60
30
24
24
18
19
177
20
12
209
370
-
-
-
-
56
5
61
61
31
25
25
18
20
179
20
12
212
274
-
-
78
-
57
5
140
62
31
25
25
19
20
182
16
12
210
351
-
-
-
79
58
5
143
63
32
25
25
19
20
185
11
13
208
351
50
50
78
79
227
21
506
248
124
99
99
74
79
724
67
50
840
1,346
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
This Appendix presents the financial and economic analyses of the Agriculture Recovery Project
1.
(ARP) that will be proposed to IFAD funding.
I. Project benefits and beneficiaries
2.
Overview.  The  Project  will  contribute  to  improved  food  and  nutrition  security  of  targeted
communities  through  the  restoration  of  productive  assets  and  capacity  of  HHs  affected  by  recurrent
droughts. ARP  will  provide  agricultural  and  livestock  support  packages  that  include  inputs,  services
and technical capacity building, and will build basic supporting infrastructure.
3.
ARP will promote the production of staple food surpluses, whilst diversifying the rain-fed system
and household diets by including other crops (e.g. cassava and beans). ARP will therefore support the
diversification  of  the  cropping  system  in  order  to  diminish  the  risk  of  crop  failure.  Implementation  of
this  activity  will  involve  offering  a  starter-pack  to vulnerable  HHs,  together  with  extension  advice
(through FFS) on minimum tillage, intercropping with legumes and other climate-resilient practices.  In
addition,  HHs  will  be  helped  to  diversify  their  livelihoods  through  a  range  of  income  generating
activities,  such  as  small  stock  keeping.    ARP  will  also  promote  water  resource  development  and
natural  resource  management  (through  rehabilitation  of  pastures  and  soil  and  water  conservation).
The end result for target areas will be: (i) increased crop and livestock production; and (ii) expanded
land under climate-resilient practices.
4.
Project Benefits. Financial benefits will be in the form of increased financial returns of the HHs
targeted by ARP. Social benefits will include a reduction in poverty rates in the areas targeted by the
Project,  with  special  measures  taken  to  ensure  inclusion  of  disadvantaged  groups.  This  will  be  the
effect  of  the  increased  financial  returns  for  HHs  consequent  to  Project  interventions.  Environmental
benefits will consist of reduced land degradation and increased carbon sequestration of rangelands.
Due to limited data availability, only the HH increased returns are taken into account here.
Direct  Project  Beneficiaries. Primary  Project  beneficiaries  will  be  approximately  7,000  HHs
5.
increasing  crop  and  livestock  production,  and  adopting  climate-resilient  practices.  Assuming  an
average household size of 6 people, total beneficiaries would be about 42,000 people.
6.
Indirect  Project  Beneficiaries. There  will  also  be  large  numbers  of  people  who  will  benefit
indirectly  from  the  Project  through:  diffuse  knowledge  of  improved  crop  and  livestock  production;
increased access to water; better quality agriculture products and more diversified food, with positive
effects in terms of improved nutrition and overall food security. In addition to this, all those living in the
rural  areas  where  supported  HHs  will  be  located  will  benefit  from  strengthened  local  economies
resulting from inflows of income and strengthened local demand.  Thus, Project activities will indirectly
stimulate  the  whole  rural  economy  benefiting rural  population  (including  the rural  poor)  and  possibly
reducing rural-urban migration.
II. Financial Analysis
7.
Objectives. The objectives of this financial analysis are: (i) to assess the financial viability of the
development interventions promoted under ARP; (ii) to examine the impact of Project interventions on
target  HHs  incomes;  and  (iii)  to  establish  the  framework  for  the  economic  analysis  of the  Project,
which will complement the financial analysis (see section III).
Methodology  and  financial  models.  The  analysis  is  developed  by  building  ‘activity’  and  HH
8.
financial  budget  models  for  crop  production.  ‘Activity’  models  simulate  revenues  and  costs  of
producing  crops  over  1  ha  of  land  or  keeping  livestock.  HH  models  simulate  some  possible
104
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
combinations  of  crop  and  livestock  ‘activity’  models,  since  ARP  will  enhance  on-farm  productivity
under rain-fed crop and livestock systems (integrated systems).
The analysis builds selected financial performance indicators, which will be used to examine the
9.
impact of Project interventions on economic activities of targeted smallholder HHs. Indicators include:
gross  margins,  for  ‘activity’  models;  gross  and  net
incomes  for  HH  models.  Gross  margins  are
computed as a difference between total revenue and total operating (variable) costs. Operating costs
include the costs for running the activities conducted every year during the production process. They
include costs for hiring external labour. Family labour is valued with a proxy (i.e. market rural wage) in
order to obtain sound financial results. Net margin is computed as a difference between gross margin
and cost of family labour valued as indicated above. In the HH models, farm income is computed as a
combination  of  the  net  margins  of  selected  crop  and  livestock  activities,  according  to their  weight  in
overall HH production. Net margins and incomes are computed before tax.
10. Returns to family labour are also computed: they are obtained as a ratio between gross margin
and  total  family  labour  used  in  farming  activities.  The  parameter  indicates  how  much  is  earned  for
each day of work attributed to the crop enterprise, irrespective of who provided the labour.
11. Activity and HH models have been built taking into account ARP interventions. However, a wide
range  of  crop  and  livestock  integrated  systems  potentially  exists  in  Project  provinces,  depending  on
different  agro-climatic  characteristics  and  HHs’  choices.  Models  taken onto  consideration  in  this
analysis  represent  a  limited  set  of  possible  livelihood  options  that  could  be  eventually  combined  in
more  complex  scenarios.  The  models  refer  to  both  ‘without  project’  (WoP)  and  ‘with  project’  (WP)
scenarios. They are related to 1 ha of farmland.
12.
The list of activity models used in the analysis is provided in Table 1. Given the recovery nature
of  the  project,  a  limited  range  of  crops  and  livestock  activities  is  taken  into  consideration.  It  is  also
assumed  that  farmers  barely  keep livestock  as  profitable  economic  activity.  Thus,  only  basic  goat
keeping is considered in the WoP scenario. A full description of the financial and economic models is
reported below. The detailed budgets are reported in the Annex 1 to the present Appendix.
Table 1: List of ‘Activity’ Models
System
Staple food production
Crop diversification
Improved small livestock
production
Source: own elaboration
WoP model
WP model
Maize_conventional
Cassava_conventional
Beans_conventional
Goat keeping_conventional
Maize_improved
Cassava_improved
Beans_improved
Goat keeping_improved
Free range poultry keeping_improved
13. Baseline  activity  models  (WoP).  These  financial  models  describe  the  traditional  practices
generally  adopted  by  smallholders  in  rainfed  crop  production  and  livestock  keeping.  Farmers  grow
low-yielding  local  crop  varieties,  do  not  use  purchased  inputs  and  do  not  adopt  climate-resilient
practices (e.g. drought resistant varieties). Yields are well below the potential and the returns to family
labour are very low. Livestock keeping is also conducted in a very basic manner, without use of feed,
nutrient  integrations  and  vaccines.  This  ‘without’  Project  scenario  is  assumed  to  coincide  with  the
current situation (i.e. baseline is assumed to be static).
14.
Improved  activity  models  (WP).  As  a  result  of  recovery  Project  interventions,  target
smallholders  will:  diversify  crop  production  including  legumes  in  crop  rotations/intercropping  with
positive  effects  in  terms  of  better  incomes  and  reduced  risk,  as  well  as  improved  food  and  nutrition
security;  adopt  climate-resilient  and  good  agricultural  practices 
including
reduced/zero tillage, manure application and improved residue management, use of improved hybrid
seeds60 and  proper  fertilization  with  effects  in  terms  of  better  yields  than  under  traditional  farm
in  rainfed 
fields, 
60We assumed that in the WP scenario farmers use improved and selected seeds which have a higher cost than recycled
seeds which are used in the WoP scenario. A difference in seed rate between the two scenarios is also kept.
105
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
management and overall enhanced production at farm level61; adopt improved and modern livestock
production  practices  according  to  the  logic  of  integrated  crop  and  livestock  farming  systems;  use
improved animal husbandry practices and produce good quality animal products. Yields are increased
gradually, given the difficult conditions in the rural areas.
15. Data. Financial output and input prices are derived from information compiled at national level
by IDA - Instituto de Desenvolvimento agrario (see the Boletim de Mercados e precos agricolas). All
technical parameters used to build the financial models were derived from information obtained during
the design mission (April 2017) through interviews with officers from the Ministry of Agriculture, IDA,
FAO  and  other  key  stakeholders.    Data  have  been  checked  for  consistency  with  average  costs  of
goods and services in the country.
16. Opportunity  cost  of  capital. The  financial  discount  rate  provides  the  alternative  financial
returns/opportunity costs to the investor. It has been used in this analysis to assess the viability and
robustness of the investments as compared with market alternatives. The discount rate is estimated at
12%, computed  as  average  between:  (i)  average  deposit  interest rate  paid  by  commercial  or  similar
Banks in the country; (ii) lending interest rate; (iii) real interest rate; and (iv) long-term bonds rate, as
shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Computation of discount rate to be used in the analysis
Indicator
Deposit interest
rate
Lending
interest rate
Real interest
rate
Long-term
bonds rate
Average
Rate (%)
3.3
20
16
8.75
12
Source: own elaboration
17. Activity  model financial  results. Expected  financial  benefits  for  targeted  households  are
summarized  in  Table  3.  Results  show  encouraging  results  in  the WP  models  as  compared  with  the
WoP  ones  for  all  the  proposed  crop  and  livestock  activities.  Results  suggest  significant  potential  for
creating  positive  benefits  for  targeted  households  in  selected  productive  activities  through  Project
interventions, Favourable cash flows show that the HHs will have the capacity to cover the operating
costs  (see  detailed  budgets  in Annex  1),  and  that  their  farming  activity  will  be  self-sustained  in  the
longer term (after the initial starter-pack). Results of the models have been validated using secondary
data collected during the design mission.
Table 3: Financial returns for crop and livestock activity models
Summary activity models
System
 Models
Staple food production
Crop diversification
Improved small livestock production
Source: own elaboration
Maize
Cassava
Beans
Goat keeping
Free range poultry keeping
Financial analysis
Without Project
(WoP)
Net margin
With Project
(WP)
Net margin
AoA
6,060
32,880
66,588
786
22,431
40,875
99,591
24,648
98,017
Incremental
gross margin
$/yr
99
48
200
145
594
61It is clearly possible that differences in yields (and production costs) are due to factors other than the adoption of practices
(e.g. the level of education or the capacity to access to capital which may vary among the farmers’ groups). However, it is
plausible to assume that similar variance exists within each group and unobserved HH characteristics have a similar probability
distribution within the group itself. Here we compare economic results within the same farmers’ groups (and not among different
groups). The same HH adopts both ‘conventional’ (WoP) and improved practices (WP). In this way, we deal with the element of
unobserved HH characteristics (microeconomic comparative static analysis).
106
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
18. HH  models. HH  models  have  also  been  built,  as  a  combination  of  the  crop  and  livestock
activity models described above. The models proposed here represent only a possible combination of
crop  and  livestock  activity  models.  Even  if  Project  area  is  characterised  by  a  semi-arid  climate,  HH
models  are  built  taking  into  account  the  potential  agro-climatic  differences  which  characterise  the
different  project  intervention  areas  (Provinces  and  Municipalities),  as  also reflected  through  the
different  crop  combinations  in  the  HH  models.  Specifically,  two  main  models  are  considered:
subsistence  farmers  cultivating  0.8  ha  in  drier  areas;  and  smallholder  farmers  cultivating  1.5  ha  in
wetter areas. Such HHs also keep livestock. For the sake of simplicity, unit herds are set equal to the
activity livestock models described above.
19. HH  model  assumptions. In  the  WoP  scenario  farmers  adopt  conventional  farming  practices
and make use of limited amount of external inputs. In the WP scenario, however, as a result of Project
interventions, smallholders will be able to increase their production (through more intensive cultivation
of their own land), and diversify productive activities (crop diversification and engagement in improved
small stock keeping). Overall, a conservative approach has been adopted in the models.
20. HH  model  results. Results  show  substantial  increases  in  farm  incomes  that  should  attract
smallholders in adopting improved technologies (see Table 4). Even  if HH models are built  in a very
conservative way, all financial farm models are commercially viable with significantly higher cash flows
in the with-project situation.  They have been built by taking into account the financial results per unit
of  activity  reported  in  Table  3,  combined  according  to  HH  model  assumptions  summarised  above.
Table  4  shows  both  WoP  and  WP  scenarios  for  HH  categories  (subsistence  and  smallholder)  in
different climatic  contexts  (lower  and  higher  rainfall  areas).  For  each farm category  the Table shows
farmland  area,  livestock  size,  and  farm  income  (the  latter  being  computed  as  weighted  average  of
activity gross margins). It is assumed that farmers will not expand their farmland area while engaging
in Project activities.
Table 4: Financial returns for HH models
        0.5
      393
WoP
 Farm type 1 -
subsistence in drier
areas
Unit
Maize Cassava Beans
WoP
Goat
keeping
Free range
poultry keeping
Total
Maize Cassava Beans
WP
Goat
keeping
Free range
poultry
keeping
Farmland area
Livestock size
Farm Income
ha
herd
AOA
        0.8
   4,545
           0.8         0.4          0.4             -
           0.5
   4,938.2    8,972   14,306
            -
           0.5                 -
    12,324                 -
Total
          0.8
          0.5
   35,603
 Farm type 2 -
smallholder in
wetter areas
Unit
Maize Cassava Beans
Goat
keeping
Free range
poultry keeping
Total
Maize Cassava Beans
WP
Goat
keeping
Free range
poultry
keeping
Total
Farmland area
Livestock size
Farm Income
Source: own elaboration
ha
herd
AOA
        0.8          0.3         0.4
        0.5
   4,848      9,864  26,635       393
          1.5
           1.5         0.6          0.4           0.5
           0.5
           1.0              1.0           2.0
 41,740.4  13,459   16,350    49,796     24,648        98,017  202,270
III. Economic Analysis
21. Objectives. The objectives of this economic analysis are: (i) to examine the economic viability
of the Project as a whole, from the national society standpoint, in which aggregated economic benefits
are compared with total economic Project costs; (ii) to assess Project impact and the overall economic
internal  rate  of  return  (EIRR);  and  (iii)  to  perform  sensitivity  analysis  in  order  to  measure  the
robustness of the economic analysis and to measure variations in the overall EIRR due to unforeseen
factors. A summary of the economic analysis is presented in Annex 2 to this Appendix.
22. Methodology  and Assumptions. The  analysis  is  conducted  over  a  20-year  period  (including
the 4-year Project implementation period) and is based on the estimation of economic benefits gained
from  the  increased  economic  performances  of  target  HHs.    Economic  prices  of  most  inputs  and
outputs - used to estimate the economic benefits - have been computed through calculating economic
import/export  parity  prices  at  farm  gate,  applying  conversion  factors  for  each  category  of  costs,
107
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
eliminating  taxes  and  transfers.  Specifically,  import  parity  prices  were  calculated  for  maize,  pulses
(soybean)  and  fertilisers  (urea)  on  the  basis  of  the World  Bank  projections  for  the  year  2025 –
considered as the middle year for the period of the analysis –expressed in 2010 constant prices and
adjusted to 2016 current process using the weighted index for each category of commodity index as
published on the World Bank web site (commodity price forecasts). Conversion factors (CF) used to
generate  shadow  prices,  derived  as  described  above,  are  shown  in  Table  5.  In  addition:  (i)  the
economic exchange rate (Shadow Exchange rate – SER) of AOA 148/US$ is adopted62; (ii) a social
discount  rate  of  5%  is  chosen,  as  recommended  by  The  World  Bank;  and  (iii)  an  economic  cost  of
labour  of  357 AOA  per  day  (computed  using  the CF, starting from the financial  cost  of 400 AOA  per
day) is used. HH net benefits are obtained by subtracting costs of family labour to the farm benefits.
Table 5: Conversion factors used in the economic analysis
Item
Maize
Soybeans
Urea
Conversion factor
1.59
0.75
0.50
Source: own elaboration
23. Economic benefits of the Project would accrue to the Angola economy in terms of the improved
farming  systems  that  will  sustainably  increase  food  crop  yields  and  livestock  production,  diversify
farming  activity,  and  increase  overall  food  and  nutrition  security.  Specifically,  main  quantifiable
economic  benefits  arising  from  the  Project  derive  from  increased  economic  returns  (net  benefits)  of
target HHs generated by  Project activities as compared with the baseline. Therefore, the analysis is
based  on  the  estimation  of  the  incremental  economic  net  benefits  estimated  as  the  difference
between  the  annual  net  benefits  in  the  crop  and  livestock  models  in  WP  and  WoP  scenarios.  Net
benefits are computed after (family) labour costs.
24.
Financial Project costs were converted to economic costs, excluding taxes and duties as well as
price contingencies, using  the  COSTAB  software  (CPP  option  is  used).  In  order  to  avoid  double
counting of the costs in the economic analysis, only the incremental economic costs are considered.
Costs already included in the estimation of the net incremental benefits (e.g. costs at farm level borne
by farmers engaging in the proposed activities and accounted for in the economic models) have been
excluded. There are no further investment costs after PY4.
25. Activity model economic results. A summary of the economic returns (gross and net benefits)
for  crop  and  livestock  activity  models,  computed  applying  the  methodology  described  above,  is
reported in Table 6.
Table 6: Economic returns for crop and livestock activity models
Summary activity models
System
 Models
Conventional (WoP)
Economic analysis
Improved (WP)
Gross
Benefit
Net benefit
Gross
Benefit
Net benefit Net benefit
Incremental net
benefits
Staple food production
Crop diversification
Improved small livestock production
Source: own elaboration
Maize
Cassava
Beans
Goat keeping
Free range poultry keeping
AoA
AoA
39,249
52,880
59,439
10,861
25,668
35,010
45,858
2,283
81,157
69,682
89,280
30,345
72,539
70,022
54,259
78,145
26,057
51,095
$
475
368
530
177
347
$/yr
301
131
219
161
347
62SER  is computed  as  follows:  SER=SCF*OER,  where  SCF=standard  conversion  factor  (equal  to  0.9  in  this  specific
case) and OER=Official Exchange Rate (AOA 148/US$). SCF is computed using the following formula: SCF = (M + X) I
[(M + Tm) + +O(X- Tx)], where M= total imports, X= total exports, Tm =import taxes, and Tx = export taxes". Angola
shows a surplus of its trade balance, which averaged 11,906 USD Million in the 2002-2016 period. Exports averaged
19,250 USD Million in the same period. Angola exports mostly crude oil (more than 90% of total exports). Trade surplus
was 4,470 USD Million in the second quarter of 2016 (see World Bank Data). As expected under these circumstances,
SER is lower than OER.
108
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
26. Economic benefits at HH level are then estimated through the economic HH models reported in
Table 7. They have been built by taking into account the economic results per unit of activity reported
in  Table  6,  combined  according  to  HH  model  assumptions  summarised  above.  Table  7  shows  both
WoP and WP scenarios for different HH categories (subsistence and smallholders) in different climatic
contexts (lower and higher rainfall areas), similarly to what already discussed in the financial analysis.
Table 7: Economic returns for HH models
 Farm type 1 -
subsistence in
drier areas
Farmland area
Livestock size
Net income
 Farm type 2 -
smallholder in
wetter areas
Unit
ha
herd
AOA
Maize
Cassava
Beans
               0.8
         19,251
Unit
Maize
Cassava
Beans
WoP
Goat
keeping
Free range
poultry
keeping
               0.5
           1,142
WoP
Goat
keeping
Free range
poultry
keeping
Farmland area
ha
herd
Livestock size
AOA
Net income
Source: own elaboration
               0.8                0.3                0.4
               0.5
         20,534          10,503          18,343            1,142
Total
Maize
Cassava
Beans
               0.8                0.4                0.4
               0.5
     20,392.4          28,009          18,991
Total
Maize
Cassava
Beans
WP
Goat
keeping
Free range
poultry
keeping
               0.5
         13,028
WP
Total
               0.8
               0.5
         60,028
Goat
keeping
Free range
poultry
keeping
Total
               1.5                0.6                0.4                0.5
               1.5
               1.0                1.0                2.0
               0.5
     50,522.1          42,013          21,703          39,073          26,057          51,095       179,941
27. Aggregation  and  phasing  of  implementation.  Overall  economic  benefits  of  the  Project  are
computed  by  aggregating  the  estimated  incremental  net  benefits  estimated  through  the  models.  A
breakdown of direct beneficiaries targeted over the years as a result of the implementation of Project
activities, and phasing, is reported in Table 8 (see ‘Households targeted and phasing in’).
The  adoption  rate  related  to  the  implementation  targets  has  been  estimated  in  a  conservative
28.
way,  given  the  difficult  in-country  circumstances.    In  the  base  case,  the  adoption  rate  for  planned
activities at smallholder level is estimated at 66%, as shown in Table 8 (see ‘Households reached and
phasing in’).
Table 8: Direct Project beneficiaries and phasing in
Activity benefits
Households targeted and phasing in
Crop package
Free range poultry package
Small scale livestock IGA package (goat keeping)
Other IGA activities (average crop&livestock)
Total
Adoption rate
Crop package
Free range poultry package
Small scale livestock IGA package (goat keeping)
Other IGA activities (average crop&livestock)
Total
Source: own elaboration
2017
2018
2019
2020
Total
2,000
250
0
450
2,700
1,000
500
250
450
2,200
1,000
500
250
100
1,850
4,000
1,500
500
1,000
7,000
250
0
-
250
Total incl. HH
members
24000
9000
3000
6,000
42,000
Households reached and phasing in
66% 66%
66%
66%
Total
1,320
165
-
297
1,782
660
330
165
297
1,452
660
330
165
66
1,221
-
165
-
-
165
2,640
990
330
660
4,620
Total incl. HH
members
15,840
5,940
1,980
3,960
27,720
29. Project  Economic  Internal  Rate  of Return. The  overall  Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return
(EIRR) of the Project is estimated at 18.3% (base case) which is above the opportunity cost of capital
in Angola estimated at 12% (see Table 2 above), indicating the economic convenience of the Project.
It  is  emphasized  that  computed  EIRR  has  been  estimated  in  a  conservative  way.  Also,  this  is  a
reasonable  result  given  the  recovery  aspect  of  the  Project,  logistic  and  climatic  difficulties  in  rural
areas,  and  overall  country  macroeconomic  scenario.  It  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  overall
adoption is limited to 66% of target farmers. In case of higher % adoption, the EIRR will increase due
to higher benefits, as shown in the sensitivity analysis below.
109
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
30. Net Present Value. The Net Present Value (NPV) is USD 4.16 million over the 20-year period
of analysis, with the benefit stream based on the quantifiable benefits as specified above. The flow of
Project costs and benefits is reported in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Flow of Project economic costs and benefits
Source: own elaboration
31. Sensitivity Analysis. In order to test the robustness of the above results, a sensitivity analysis
has  been  carried  out. The  EIRR  and  NPV  were  subject  to  sensitivity  analysis  in  order  to  measure
variations due to unforeseen factors and account for risk.  Criteria adopted in the sensitivity analysis
are:  10,  20  and  50%  cost over-run;  10  and  20%  increase  in  benefits;  10 to  50%  benefits  decrease;
and  1  to  2  years  of  delay  in  the  implementation.  Results  are  presented  in  Table  9. They  indicate  a
relatively strong resilience to limited increases of costs and reductions of benefits as well as benefits
delay.
32. Also,  the  minimum  number  of  beneficiaries  needed  in  order  to  obtain  a  positive  NPV  and
therefore  a  profitable  Project  has  been  computed.  This  indicator  can  turn  in  hand  during  the
implementation  of  the  Project  while  monitoring  Project  performances.  As  shown  in  Table  9  the
minimum number of beneficiaries amounts to about 3,000 HHs (corresponding to an adoption rate of
about 44%).
Table 9: Sensitivity analysis for informed decision-making
Base case
scenario
Cost increments
Benefits increments
Benefits decrease
Benefits delay
18.3%
4,159,180
EIRR
NPV ($)
Source: own elaboration
+10%
14.8%
3,337,880
+20%
11.9%
2,516,580
+50%
5.1%
52,680
+10%
14.4%
5,396,398
+20%
26.1%
6,633,616
-10%
14.4%
2,921,962
-20%
10.6%
1,684,744
- 50%
-3.2%
2,026,910
-
1 year
13.3%
3,187,967
2 year
10.2%
2,263,003
Minimum
number of
beneficiaries
to have a
positive NPV
3,000
Minimum
adoption rate %
to have a
positive NPV
44%
33. Risk analysis. In line with what is reported in the main report, the bulk of risk to be considered
in the sensitivity analysis relates to: a) limited public sector capacity at local levels; b) limited capacity
at community level; c) the procurement process takes more time than expected; d) the Project fails to
establish  appropriate  liaison  with  other  post-emergency  projects  in  the  ARP  areas  of  focus;  e)  the
implementation  of  some  of  the  ARP  activities  negatively  lead  to  undesirable  consequences  on  the
environment; f) selection of participating villages and beneficiaries fail to take into account the social
and  ethnic  aspects  of  the  area;  g)  the  transition  between  emergency,  recovery  and  longer-term
development interventions could create a dependency syndrome.
34.
Table  10  reports  the  impact  of  each  of  these  key  risk  components  on  Project  economic
performance  indicators. The  probability  of  occurrence  is supposed  to  affect the entity  of  cost/benefit
110
REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
Agricultural Recovery Project
Detailed Design Report
increases/decreases reported above, i.e. a low probability translates into a 10% decrease in benefits
(or a 1 year delay in benefits), while a medium probability is supposed  to determine a 20% benefits
decrease  (or  a  2  years  benefits  delay).    It  is important  to  notice  that  these  impacts  should  be
considered purely as indicative and do not rely on any proven evidence.
Table 10: Risk analysis
Risk description (link with the risk matrix)
Prob. of occurrence
INSTITUTIONAL: Limited Public Sector Capacity at Local Levels
SOCIAL: Limited Capacity at Community Level
INSTITUTIONAL: Protracted Procurement Process
INSTITUTIONAL: Poor Coordination with Other Projects
SOCIAL: Negative Impact on the Environment
SOCIAL: Failure to Respect Social Framework
SOCIAL: Creation of Dependency Syndrome
Source: own elaboration
Medium
Low
Medium
Low
Low
Low
Medium
Proxy to compare with SA
results
Benefits delay 2 years
Decrease in benefits (10%)
Benefits delay 2 years
Decrease in benefits (10%)
Increment in costs (10%)
Benefits delay 1 year
Increment in costs (20%)
EIRR (% )
NPV ($)
10.2%
14.4%
10.2%
14.4%
14.8%
13.3%
11.9%
2,263,003
2,921,962
2,263,003
2,921,962
3,337,880
3,187,967
2,516,580
35.
Fiscal  Impact.  In  the  short-term,  the  impact  of  the  project  on  the  Government budget  will  be
neutral  or  slightly  negative,  given  that  the  Government’s  contribution  to  project  costs  essentially
covers  taxes  and  duties  on  items  which  wouldn’t  have  been  purchased  without  the  project,  and
additional  operational  costs for  extension  services (IDA  in  targeted  municipalities).  In the  medium  to
long-term,  the  potential  fiscal  impact shall be  positive,  even  if  limited  in  size,  given:  (i)  Project
dimension with respect to country economy; and (ii) the recovery aspect of ARP.
111
Annex 1: Models for Financial Analysis
1.
Crop activity models
Maize_financial
Assumptions and parameters
Unit quantities
Unit prices
Investments
Labour unit cost
Output and input quantities
Outputs
Inputs
Family Labour
Financial Budget
Revenue
Investment costs
Costs
Performance indicators
Seed rate
Fertilizer NPK 12-24-12
Fertilizer Amonium sulfate
Pesticides
Ploughing
Manual Ploughing
Land preparation and planting
Fertilizer/pesticide application
Harvesting
Shelling/cleaning/Packing
Output price, farm gate
Seed, purchase price - improved
Seed, purchase price - recycled
Fertilizer NPK 12-24-12
Fertilizer Amonium sulfate
Pesticides
Sacks
Input costs (starter pack)
Manual labour
Animal draft power
Yield
Plot size
Seeds
Fertilizer NPK 12-24-12
Fertilizer Amonium sulfate
Pesticides
Sacks
Ploughing
Manual Ploughing
Land preparation and planting
Fertilizer/pesticide application
Harvesting
Shelling/cleaning/packing
Total production
Input costs (starter pack)
Seeds
Fertilizer NPK 12-24-12
Fertilizer Amonium sulfate
Pesticides
Sacks
Animal draft power
Family labour
Gross margin
Net margin (after labour costs)
Returns to family labour
Unit
Kg/ha
kg/ha
kg/ha
lt/ha
oxen p-day/ha
person-day/ha
person-day/ha
person-day/ha
person-day/ha
person-day/ha
AoA/Kg
AoA/Kg
AoA/Kg
AoA/Kg
AoA/Kg
AoA/l
AoA/unit
AoA
AoA/person day
AoA/oxen p-day
Kg/ha
ha
Kg
Kg
Kg
lt
units
person-day
person-day
person-day
person-day
person-day
person-day
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA/day
WoP
0
40
0
0
0
2
14
8
0
10
4
100
300
190
280
220
4,000
150
0
400
4,000
380
1
40
0
0
0
8
2
8
14
0
10
4
38,000
0
7,600
0
0
0
1,140
8,000
15,200
21,260.0
6,060.0
559.5
1
20
50
25
1
0
0
8
2
13
5
100
300
190
280
220
4,000
150
29,700
400
4,000
432
1
20
50
25
1
9
0
8
0
2
12
5
43,225
29,700
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,297
0
10,800
42,128
1,628
1,560.3
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
WP
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
532
665
665
665
665
665
665
665
665
665
665
665
665
665
665
665
665
665
665
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
20
50
25
1
11
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
20
50
25
1
13
0
8
0
2
12
5
53,200
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
66,500
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,596
0
10,800
22,104
11,304
818.7
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
6,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
1,995
0
10,800
35,005
24,205
1,296.5
112
Assumptions and parameters
Unit quantities
Unit prices
Investments
Labour unit cost
Output and input quantities
Outputs
Inputs
Family Labour
Financial Budget
Revenue
Investment costs
Costs
Performance indicators
Cassava_financial
Seed rate
Fertilizer NPK 12-24-12
Fertilizer Amonium sulfate
Pesticides
Ploughing
Manual Ploughing
Land preparation and planting
Fertilizer/pesticide application
Harvesting
Shelling/cleaning/Packing
Output price, farm gate
Seed, purchase price - improved
Seed, purchase price - recycled
Fertilizer NPK 12-24-12
Fertilizer Amonium sulfate
Pesticides
Sacks
Input costs (starter pack)
Manual labour
Animal draft power
Yield
Plot size
Seeds
Fertilizer NPK 12-24-12
Fertilizer Amonium sulfate
Pesticides
Sacks
Ploughing
Manual Ploughing
Land preparation and planting
Fertilizer/pesticide application
Harvesting
Shelling/cleaning/packing
Total production
Input costs (starter pack)
Seeds
Fertilizer NPK 12-24-12
Fertilizer Amonium sulfate
Pesticides
Sacks
Animal draft power
Family labour
Gross margin
Net margin (after labour costs)
Returns to family labour
Unit
Kg/ha
kg/ha
kg/ha
lt/ha
oxen p-day/ha
person-day/ha
person-day/ha
person-day/ha
person-day/ha
person-day/ha
AoA/Kg
AoA/Kg
AoA/Kg
AoA/Kg
AoA/Kg
AoA/l
AoA/unit
AoA
AoA/person day
AoA/oxen p-day
Kg/ha
ha
Kg
Kg
Kg
lt
units
person-day
person-day
person-day
person-day
person-day
person-day
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA/day
WoP
0
10,000
0
0
0
2
14
20
0
50
0
25
-
5
280
220
4,000
150
0
400
4,000
5,040
1
10,000
0
0
0
101
2
20
14
0
10
4
126,000
0
50,000
0
0
0
15,120
8,000
20,000
52,880
32,880
1,058
1
10,000
50
25
1
0
0
20
2
60
0
25
-
5
280
220
4,000
150
29,700
400
4,000
3,949
1
10,000
50
25
1
79
0
20
0
2
12
5
98,719
29,700
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
11,846
0
15,600
43,073
-2,228
1,104
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
WP
4,860
1
10,000
50
25
1
97
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
6,075
1
10,000
50
25
1
122
0
20
0
2
12
5
121,500
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
151,875
0.0
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
14,580
0
15,600
33,420
17,820
857
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
50,000
14,000
5,500
4,000
18,225
0
15,600
60,150
44,550
1,542
113
Assumptions and parameters
Unit quantities
Unit prices
Investments
Labour unit cost
Output and input quantities
Outputs
Inputs
Family Labour
Financial Budget
Revenue
Investment costs
Costs
Performance indicators
Beans_financial
Seed rate
Fertilizer NPK 12-24-12
Fertilizer Amonium sulfate
Pesticides
Ploughing
Manual Ploughing
Land preparation and planting
Fertilizer/pesticide application
Harvesting
Shelling/cleaning/Packing
Output price, farm gate
Seed, purchase price - improved
Seed, purchase price - recycled
Fertilizer NPK 12-24-12
Fertilizer Amonium sulfate
Pesticides
Sacks
Input costs (starter pack)
Manual labour
Animal draft power
Yield
Plot size
Seeds
Fertilizer NPK 12-24-12
Fertilizer Amonium sulfate
Pesticides
Sacks
Ploughing
Manual Ploughing
Land preparation and planting
Fertilizer/pesticide application
Harvesting
Shelling/cleaning/packing
Total production
Input costs (starter pack)
Seeds
Fertilizer NPK 12-24-12
Fertilizer Amonium sulfate
Pesticides
Sacks
Animal draft power
Family labour
Gross margin
Net margin (after labour costs)
Returns to family labour
Unit
Kg/ha
kg/ha
kg/ha
lt/ha
oxen p-day/ha
person-day/ha
person-day/ha
person-day/ha
person-day/ha
person-day/ha
AoA/Kg
AoA/Kg
AoA/Kg
AoA/Kg
AoA/Kg
AoA/l
AoA/unit
AoA
AoA/person day
AoA/oxen p-day
Kg/ha
ha
Kg
Kg
Kg
lt
units
person-day
person-day
person-day
person-day
person-day
person-day
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA/day
WoP
0
80
0
0
0
2
14
8
0
10
4
600
680
400
280
220
4,000
150
0
400
4,000
204
1
80
0
0
0
4
2
8
14
0
10
4
122,400
0
32,000
0
0
0
612
8,000
15,200
81,788
66,588
2,152
1
60
50
25
0
0
0
8
2
13
5
600
680
400
280
220
4,000
150
29,700
400
4,000
191
1
60
50
25
0
4
0
8
0
2
12
5
114,660
29,700
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
573
0
10,800
83,487
42,987
3,092
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
WP
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
235
1
60
50
25
0
5
0
8
0
2
12
5
294
294
294
294
294
294
294
294
294
294
294
294
294
294
294
294
294
294
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
60
50
25
0
6
0
8
0
2
12
5
141,120
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
176,400
0.0
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
706
0
10,800
80,114
69,314
2,967
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
40,800
14,000
5,500
0
882
0
10,800
115,218
104,418
4,267
114
2. Livestock activity models
Assumptions and parameters
Marketing
Labour
Labour unit cost
Feeding
Animal husbandry
Investments
Other costs
Other technical parameters
Stock (heads)
Off-take (heads)
Financial budget
Revenue
Starter pack
Investment costs
Operating Costs
Labour costs
Total costs
Livestock inventory
Goat keeping_financial
Selling price, adult
Selling price, kid
Family labour
Manual labour
Feed costs  (maize bran, sunflower cake, cotton seed cake)
Drugs (Ivomec, acaricide, dewormer, cocciodistas)
Veterinary costs
Housing
Animal purchase
Starter pack
Miscellaneous expenditure
Female replacement
Twinning
Kidding rate
Kids mortality
Juvenile mortality
Adults mortality
kids
juvenile
adults (female)
adults (males)
Total
Juvenile
adults (female)
Total
Sales (live animals)
Revenue
Starter pack
Housing
Investment costs
Feed
Veterinary costs
Drugs (Ivomec, acaricide, dewormer, cocciodistas)
Miscellaneous
Operating Costs
Hired labour
Family labour
Operating + Labour + Investments
Capital value
Changes in livestock inventory
Performance indicators
Gross margin
Net margin (after labour costs)
Returns to labour
Units
AoA/head
AoA/head
person days/yr
AoA/person day
AoA/head
AoA/head
% of gross revenue
AoA
AoA
AoA
% of gross revenue
%
%
n kids/doe/year
%
%
%
heads
heads
heads
heads
heads
heads
heads
heads
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA/day
WoP
0
4000
1500
24
400.0
112
176
15%
315
40300
0
4%
19%
40%
1.6
35%
20%
15%
2
2
10
1
8
4
3
7
16,800
16,800
0
0
0
931
2,520
2,291
672
6,414
0
9,600
16,014
43000
0
10,386
786
433
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
WP
12
5%
29700
20%
42%
1.6
35%
22%
14%
3
2
10
1
8
5
2
7
15,500
15,500
29,700
2,000
2,000
927
775
2,285
620
4,607
0
4,800
11,407
42400
-600
39,993
33,193
1,666
22%
42%
1.6
35%
20%
13%
9
2
9
1
12
6
2
8
15,500
15,500
0
0
0
1,394
775
2,609
620
5,398
0
4,800
10,198
38262
-4,138
5,964
1,164
249
25%
42%
1.6
30%
18%
12%
8
7
8
1
14
7
2
9
16,645
16,645
0
0
0
1,564
832
2,750
666
5,811
0
4,800
10,611
41661
3,399
14,234
9,434
593
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
11%
7
6
9
1
12
8
3
11
18,295
18,295
0
0
0
1,390
915
2,871
732
5,908
0
4,800
10,708
45019
3,358
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
10%
9
6
9
1
13
9
3
12
22,705
22,705
0
0
0
1,473
1,135
3,036
908
6,552
0
4,800
11,352
45407
387
15,745
16,540
10,945
656
11,740
689
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
9%
9
8
9
1
14
10
3
13
24,317
24,317
0
0
0
1,538
1,216
3,187
973
6,914
0
4,800
11,714
47925
2,518
19,921
15,121
830
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
9
8
10
1
13
11
3
14
25,938
25,938
0
0
0
1,510
1,297
3,343
1,038
7,188
0
4,800
11,988
51018
3,093
21,843
17,043
910
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
10
8
10
1
14
12
3
15
28,330
28,330
0
0
0
1,543
1,416
3,528
1,133
7,621
0
4,800
12,421
53528
2,511
23,219
18,419
967
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
11
8
11
1
14
13
3
16
30,544
30,544
0
0
0
1,609
1,527
3,723
1,222
8,081
0
4,800
12,881
56309
2,781
25,244
20,444
1,052
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
11
9
12
1
15
14
3
17
32,592
32,592
0
0
0
1,658
1,630
3,924
1,304
8,515
0
4,800
13,315
59524
3,215
27,291
22,491
1,137
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
12
9
12
1
15
15
4
19
34,827
34,827
0
0
0
1,716
1,741
4,137
1,393
8,988
0
4,800
13,788
62764
3,240
29,079
24,279
1,212
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
12
10
13
1
16
16
4
20
37,123
37,123
0
0
0
1,793
1,856
4,364
1,485
9,498
0
4,800
14,298
66128
3,364
30,989
26,189
1,291
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
13
10
14
1
17
17
4
21
39,396
39,396
0
0
0
1,877
1,970
4,601
1,576
10,024
0
4,800
14,824
69749
3,622
32,994
28,194
1,375
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
14
11
14
1
18
18
4
22
41,727
41,727
0
0
0
1,969
2,086
4,851
1,669
10,576
0
4,800
15,376
73562
3,812
34,963
30,163
1,457
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
14
12
15
1
19
19
5
24
44,122
44,122
0
0
0
2,075
2,206
5,116
1,765
11,161
0
4,800
15,961
77556
3,994
36,955
32,155
1,540
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
15
12
16
1
20
20
5
25
46,553
46,553
0
0
0
2,192
2,328
5,394
1,862
11,776
0
4,800
16,576
81779
4,223
39,000
34,200
1,625
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
16
13
17
1
21
21
5
26
49,033
49,033
0
0
0
2,321
2,452
5,688
1,961
12,422
0
4,800
17,222
86238
4,459
41,069
36,269
1,711
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
17
14
18
1
22
22
5
27
51,571
51,571
0
0
0
2,464
2,579
5,998
2,063
13,103
0
4,800
17,903
90934
4,695
43,163
38,363
1,798
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
18
14
19
1
23
23
6
29
54,165
54,165
0
0
0
2,620
2,708
6,325
2,167
13,820
0
4,800
18,620
95885
4,951
45,297
40,497
1,887
30%
45%
1.6
30%
15%
8%
19
15
20
1
25
24
6
30
56,817
56,817
0
0
0
2,791
2,841
6,669
2,273
14,574
0
4,800
19,374
101109
5,223
47,466
42,666
1,978
115
Free range poultry keeping_financial
WP
Assumptions and parameters
Marketing
Labour
Labour unit cost
Feeding
Animal husbandry
Investments
Other costs
Other technical parameters
Stock (heads)
Off-take (heads)
Financial budget
Revenue
Starter pack
Investment costs
Operating Costs
Labour costs
Total costs
Performance indicators
Selling price, hen
Selling price, rooster
Selling price, village chicken
Family labour
Manual labour
Feed Costs for Chicks (4 weeks)
Feed costs for Broilers (12 weeks)
Veterinary cost
One-time veterinary contribution
Housing
Starter pack
Animal purchase
Miscellaneous expenditure
Mortality of chicks
Mortality of broilers
Hatched chicks per hen per year
Chickens
Broilers
Hens
Rooster
Total
Hens (selling)
Rooster (selling)
Broilers
Total
Sales (live animals)
Revenue
Starter pack
Housing
One-time veterinary contribution
Net investment costs
Feed for chicks
Feed for broilers
Animal health care
Miscellaneous
Operating Costs
Hired labour
Family labour
Gross margin
Net margin (after labour costs)
Returns to labour
Units
AoA/head
AoA/head
AoA/head
person days/yr
AoA/person day
AoA/head
AoA/head
AoA/head
% of gross revenue
AoA
AoA
AoA
% of gross revenue
%
%
heads
heads
heads
heads
heads
heads
heads
heads
heads
heads
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA
AoA/day
1
750
1400
750
60
400.0
48
144
64
10%
473
29700
17800
10%
30%
10%
45
0
0
20
2
22
5
1
40
46
35,150
35,150
29,700
6,000
24,000
30,000
0
3,172
1,410
3,515
8,097
0
24,000
62,097
56,753
2,753
946
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
30%
10%
45
158
142
5
1
305
5
1
142
148
111,463
111,463
0
0
0
0
6,434
43,955
19,536
11,146
81,071
0
24,000
105,071
30,391
6,391
507
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
30%
10%
45
315
284
10
1
326
5
1
309
315
236,900
236,900
0
0
0
0
12,868
47,037
20,905
23,690
104,500
0
24,000
128,500
132,400
108,400
2,207
116
Annex 2: Economic Analysis
Total estimated net incremental economic benefits
Y1
412,173
Y2
765,047
Y3
1,064,409
Y4
1,064,409
Y5
1,064,409
Y6
1,064,409
Y7
1,064,409
Y8
1,064,409
Y9
1,064,409
Y10
1,064,409
Y11
1,064,409
Y12
1,064,409
Y13
1,064,409
Y14
1,064,409
Y15
1,064,409
Y16
1,064,409
Y17
1,064,409
Y18
1,064,409
Y19
1,064,409
Y20
1,064,409
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
Total incremental economic costs of the project
2,197,000
1,201,000
1,252,000
856,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
364,000
Benefits-Costs
-
1,784,827
-
435,953
-
187,591
208,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
700,409
EIRR
NPV ($)
Base case scenario
18.3%
4,159,180
Cost increments
Benefits increments
Benefits decrease
Benefits delay
+10%
14.8%
3,337,880
+20%
11.9%
2,516,580
+50%
5.1%
52,680
+10%
14.4%
5,396,398
+20%
26.1%
6,633,616
-10%
14.4%
2,921,962
-20%
10.6%
1,684,744
-
- 50%
-3.2%
2,026,910
1 year
13.3%
3,187,967
2 year
10.2%
2,263,003
Sensitivity Analysis
Year
Additional benefits
benefits +10%
benefits  +20%
benefits  -10%
benefits  -20%
benefits  -50%
Project costs
costs +10%
costs +20%
costs +50%
Net cash flow
base scenario
costs +10%
costs +20%
costs +50%
benefits +10%
benefits  +20%
benefits  -10%
benefits  -20%
benefits  -50%
benefits postipated 1 yr
benefits postipated 2 yrs
4.
Y1
Y2
Y3
Y4
Y5
Y6
Sensitivity analysis
$
Y8
Y9
Y7
Y10
Y11
Y12
Y13
Y14
Y15
Y16
Y17
Y18
Y19
Y20
412,173
453,391
494,608
370,956
329,739
206,087
765,047 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409 1,064,409
841,552 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850 1,170,850
918,056 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291 1,277,291
957,968
957,968
688,542
851,527
851,527
612,038
532,204
532,204
382,524
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
957,968
851,527
532,204
856,000
2,197,000 1,201,000 1,252,000
941,600
2,416,700 1,321,100 1,377,200
2,636,400 1,441,200 1,502,400 1,027,200
3,295,500 1,801,500 1,878,000 1,284,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
364,000
400,400
436,800
546,000
-435,953 -187,591
-556,053 -312,791
-676,153 -437,991
208,409
-1,784,827
122,809
-2,004,527
-2,224,227
37,209
-2,883,327 -1,036,453 -813,591 -219,591
-81,150
-359,448
314,850
-1,743,609
-282,944
25,291
421,291
-1,702,392
-512,458 -294,032
101,968
-1,826,044
-4,473
-588,962 -400,473
-1,867,261
-818,476 -719,796 -323,796
-1,990,913
208,409
-2,197,000
-788,827 -486,953
-90,953
-2,197,000 -1,201,000 -839,827
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
700,409
664,009
627,609
518,409
806,850
913,291
593,968
487,527
168,204
700,409
700,409
117
Appendix 11: Draft Project Implementation Manual
The draft of the PIM is in the process of preparation and will be ready before the start of
implementation but the outline is described below.
In  particular, 
1.
The Project Implementation Manual (PIM) describes the modalities and procedures to be used
for  implementation  of  the Agricultural  Recovery  Project (ARP).  The  Manual  provides  a  checklist  of
procedures  and  tasks  to  be  executed  during  routine  loan  administration  and  project  implementation
activities. 
requirements  regarding,  project
implementation,  loan  administration  and  flow  of  funds,  reporting,  accounting  and  participatory
implementation  procedures.  The  PIM  aims  to  provide  the  project  management  and  implementing
partners  with  procedural  guidance  to  implement  the  Project.  The  PIM  is  intended  to  be  a  functional
document  to  be  adapted  and  amended  as  necessary  to  incorporate  the  lessons  learned  from
implementation experience.
the  PIM  clarifies  procedures  and 
The  PIM  presents  a  general  description  of  the  project  planning  design,  project costs,  benefits
2.
and  sustainability, 
its  implementing  partners, organisational arrangement,  staffing,  and  their
responsibilities. The PIM will cover the implementation guidelines and procedures for implementation
of each project component and preparation of annual work plan & budget and procurement planning,
reporting, monitoring and evaluation and supervision.
3.
Preparation and submittal of the draft Project Implementation Manual (PIM) for IFAD review and
“No  Objection”  is  a  key  condition  for  the  project  to  enter-into-force.  While  the  Project  Coordination
Committee (PCC) will adopt the PIM substantially in the form approved by IFAD, it  does not replace
the definitive Project Documents. Where there are inconsistencies with any provision of the Financing
Agreement, the provision of the Agreement shall govern.
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
TABLE OF CONTENTS63
I.
II.
III.
IV.
INTRODUCTION
A. Purpose and Contents the PIM
B. Overall Approach to Project Implementation
C. ARP Summary
D. Country and rural development context
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
A. Project area and Target group
B. Development objective and impact indicators
C. Project Outcomes and Components
D. Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP
PROJECT COSTS, FINANCING, BENEFITS AND SUSTAINABILITY
A. Project costs
B. Project financing
C. Summary benefits and economic analysis
D. Sustainability
IMPLEMENTATION AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
(PLANNING, MONITORING & EVALUATION AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Background
Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation
Annual Work Planning and Budgeting
Knowledge Management
Supervision
63Draft PIM will be prepared and included as a separate document.
118
V.
VI.
F.
Risk identification and mitigation
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTING MODULE
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Purpose of Financial Management Manual
Roles and responsibilities of key actors in financial management of ARP
General Institutional Set-Up and Governing Regulations
Types of Accounts, Special Account and Project Accounts
IFAD Disbursement Procedures
Check List for Withdrawal Applications
Annual Financial Statements
Designated Account Reconciliation Statement
Project Completion
Financial management team responsibilities in procurement
Treasury management
Accounting software and chart of accounts
Financial reporting and management accounting
Audit arrangements (Internal and External)
Funds flow – including management of withdrawal applications
Other internal controls
PROCUREMENT MANAGEMENT
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
Purpose of Procurement Management Manual
General Conditions of Procurement
Procurement Procedures
Procurement Committees
Procurement Methods
Review of Procurement Decisions
Guidelines for Evaluation of Bids
Bid Evaluation Summary Checklist
Procurement Method: Goods and Work
Procurement Method: Services
Procurement through community
Review of Procurement Decisions
Grievance/complaint redressal system
VII. MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS…
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
Introduction
Approach
Measuring results
ARP Monitoring Indicators
Learning
Impact Measurement
Assessing RIMS Indicators
ARP Management Information System
Logical Framework Planning
Establishing Participatory MIS
Indicative List of Baseline Data for Scheme
ARP Logical Framework
VIII. RESULT-ORIENTED ANNUAL WORK PLAN & BUDGET
Introduction
A.
B. Model Format for AWP&B
C. Pointers for Preparation of AWP&B
D. AWP&B
E. Result-oriented AWP&B
F. Procurement Plan
G. Training Schedule
H. Staff Deployment
119
Appendix 12: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures Review Note
Major landscape characteristics and Issues – The Agricultural Recovery  Project (ARP) will
1.
intervene  in the  southern  provinces  of  Cunene  and  Huila;  two  of  the  provinces  most  affected  by
recurrent droughts during the recent El-Niño event. Although the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
is  a  natural  cycle,  climate  change  and  the  mismanagement  of  natural  resources,  is  progressively
causing  the  impacts  of  the  oscillation  to  intensify  and  to  increase  in  frequency.  Each  iteration
exacerbates Southern Africa's vulnerability to future disasters and depletes both the environment and
the  social  systems  that  depend  on it  (Response  Plan  for  the  El  Niño-Induced  Drought in  Southern
Africa, 2016). The affected agro-ecological zones in southern Angola are mainly arid, semi-arid and
sub-humid (see Figure1).
Angola's  climate  is  tropical,
2.
hot  and  humid,  with  a  longer  hot
and  wet  season  (September 
to
April)  and  a  shorter  cool  and  dry
season  (May  to  August).  Short  dry
spells,  usually  lasting  about  two
weeks,  are  common  during  the  hot
and wet  season.  The  mean
temperature  in  Angola  is  between
25ºC  and  33ºC  in  the  rainy  season
and between 18ºC and 22ºC during
the  dry  season.  The  project  target
zone  is  located  in  the  lower  rainfall
southern  region  where  the  main
livelihoods  are  centred  on  agricultural  systems  including  livestock,  maize,  sorghum,  millet  and
cassava (see Figure 2).
Figure 1: Agro-ecological zones of Angola, Source: FAO
2005
Figure 2. Livelihood zones of Angola, Source: FEWSNET
3.
Recurrent cycles  of droughts and floods  have affected the southern provinces of Angola  over
the  last  decade.  Consecutive  drought  years  have  stretched  household  coping  mechanisms  to  their
limits. Most rural communities have lost their seeds and food stocks and as a result their vulnerability,
to climate shocks has increased. The most recent El Niño drought (2015-2016) led to harvest failures
with anticipated crop losses of up to 40% in parts of the south. Approximately 1.25 million people are
currently  food insecure  most  of  these  are  located  in  southern  provinces  of  Benguela,  Cuando
Cubango, Cunene, Huila, Kwanza Sul, and Namibe.  Malnutrition has been exacerbated by the poor
harvest with increasing number of children below the age of five in need of treatment for severe and
acute  malnutrition.  An  increasing  number  of  infants  and  children  under  age  five  are  exposed  to
120
preventable  diseases  and  common  childhood  illnesses  such  as  malaria,  diarrhoea,  cholera  and
pneumonia. The drought and resultant  waterborne diseases have caused the death of an estimated
500,000 livestock. In Cunene province an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease restricted cattle sales
for over a year (Response Plan for the El Niño-Induced Drought in Southern Africa, 2016).
4.
The contingency planning (preparedness and response) led by the inter-sectorial National Civil
Protection  Commission  with  technical  support  from  the  UN  have  identified  the  key  drivers  of
vulnerability  that  include  inequality,  poor  nutrition  diversification,  high  illiteracy  rates in  rural  areas,
poor  quality  of  basic  services,  salinization  of  ground  water  and  limited  fresh  water  resources,
desertification  and  deforestation,  monoculture,  agro-pastoralist  production  systems  with  heavy
environmental effects on the natural resources, low purchasing power, illegal occupation of land in the
risk  zones,  weak  implementation  of  land  occupation  policies,  weak  implementation  of  disaster
prevention, contingency and preparedness policies/directives and weak research, data collection and
analysis and predictions of disasters and risks.
5.
The  current  La  Niña  event  is  compounding  the  adverse  impacts  of  the  El  Niño;  areas  most
effected by rainfall deficits during the El Niño are faced with a large surplus in La Niña years. Average
rainfall enhancement from February to April representing the peak deviation from the neutral average,
highlight that the south of Angola is at greatest risk from La Niña related climate shock (see Figure 3).
As with the drought, Cunene, is the most affected province with flooding along the riverine areas. This
coincides with crops coming towards the main harvest period, grain development enhances the risk of
lodging  (crops  falling  over).  Soil  saturation  and  flooding  can  induce  this  affect  and  increase  toxicity,
resulting  in  the  loss  of  crops.  Additionally,  heavy  rain  washes  away  feeder  roads  interrupts  market
access and reduces dispersal; results in reduced profitability and food security (Angola, ENSO Profile,
IFAD/WFP, 2016).
Figure 3. Average rainfall enhancement from February to April
6.
Potential  project’s  social,  environmental  and  climate  change  impacts  and  risks – The
ARP  is  primarily  focused  on  assistance  to  rural  populations  affected  by  recurrent  droughts  and
prolonged  dry  spells  for  the  recovery  of livelihoods  and  thus  reduce  their  vulnerability,  increase
resilience as well as productive and food insecurity risk management capacity. The project design has
been  informed  by  recent  assessments  undertaken  by  a  joint  UN  mission.  The  project  components
focus  on  restoration  of  the  productive  assets  at  household  and  community  levels  and  building  back
better the livelihoods of the affected communities and thus improving their climate risk management
capacity.  The  recovery  activities  are  likely  to  have  environmental  and  social  impacts.  While  climate
change is already  having  an impact on reaching  the  objectives of sustainable  livelihoods  due to the
exposure  and  sensitivity  to  climatic  events.  Therefore  resilience  to  climatic  shocks  needs  to
strengthened.The  potential  positive  impacts  of  the  ARP  include  improved  livelihoods  following  the
recovery  input  packages  and  capacity  building  to  strengthen  the  knowledge  base,  improve
productivity and resource use efficiency.
121
One  of  the  key  social  issues  to  be  addressed  is the  selection  of  beneficiaries,  which  are
7.
estimated at 7,000 households and the criteria that  will guide the process. The number of people in
need  exceeds  one  million,  which  requires  significant  resources.  Initial  estimates  were  USD  22.5  m
based  on  the  Response  Plan,  of  which  approx.  USD1.3  m  has  been  raised,  leaving  a  gap  of  over
USD  21m.  However  the  Post  Disaster  Needs  Assessment  (PDNA)  undertaken  in  2016  estimated
USD189  million  was  required  for  the  agriculture-livestock-fisheries  sector  to  cater  for  short, medium
and long term needs. These figures do not take into account the needs following the floods resulting
from the La-Nina event. The ARP will undoubtedly contribute to filling the resource gap. Ensuring that
the  most  vulnerable  can  be  identified  and targeted  will  be  critical  including  avoiding  duplication  of
efforts.  The  selection  will  have  to  be  informed  by  more  detailed  assessment  of  needs  within  target
communities.
8.
The ARP is one of several interventions for the significantly affected southern region. Multiple
interventions are likely to lead to diverse approaches and stretched capacity of the Extension services
to  support  the  smallholders  and  provide  timely  advice  and  support.    Coordination  of  the  different
actors supporting the recovery efforts will be essential to enable information flow and consistent key
messages  for  the  communities.  Where  necessary  the  existing  strategy  of  recruiting  community
facilitators  and  creating  partnerships  with  registered  NGOs  operating  in  target  areas  can  fill  some
human resource gaps in the short term to enable implementation to be expedited. Information flow is
part  of  the  early  warning  system  that  needs  to  be  put  in  place  or  strengthened  where  it  exists
particularly in Cunene where droughts have been followed by floods. The occurrence of El Niño and
La Nina events requires timely and informed preparedness and response systems and structures at
community level to drier and wetter years, respectively.
9.
The  diversified  income  sources  through  poultry  rearing, apiculture  and  aquaculture  exist  in
some communities in southern Angola. However, new technologies (improved bee hives), techniques
(soil  and  water  conservation)  and  provision  of  inputs  (seeds,  cuttings,  fertiliser  etc.)  will  require
capacity  building  to  ensure  improved  agricultural  practices,  effective  waste  management,  good
hygiene,  pest  management  and  safe  handling  of  any  agro-chemicals  are  part  of  the  routine.  The
capacity  building  will  minimise  adverse  impacts  on  community  health  and  the  environment  and  also
ensure communities are provided with timely support for their productive activities.
10.
The  timing  of  the  ARP  interventions  based  on  the  farming  season  in  the  context  of  livelihood
recovery is likely to result in further strain to the input supply system and lead to poor quality varieties
being  provided.  The  sourcing  of  inputs  such  as  certified  drought  tolerant  varieties,  cassava  cuttings
and  sweet  potato  planting  material  to  be  included  in  the  recovery  packages  for  the  targeted
communities has to be done in a timely manner. The systems for the supply of inputs in a sustainable
manner including fertiliser to ensure framers have access to quality products will entail establishment
of linkages with relevant agencies and private sector organizations.
11.
Environmental and social category – The environmental and social category for the ARP is B
as  some  of  the  activities  such  as  construction  and  maintenance  of  water  sources,  use  of  improved
inputs, aquaculture and provision of small livestock may result in localised negative impacts that can
be  managed  at  the  farm  level.  The  agricultural  activities  will  be  on  previously  cultivated  land  and
grazing  areas.  The  introduction  of  cassava  and  sweet  potato  will  be  limited  to  areas  that  are  agro-
ecologically suitable. The water supply points and other infrastructure installed for livestock will need
capacity  building  in  appropriate  site  management.  The  activities  to  minimise  the  adverse  impacts
include  good  waste  management  practices,  safe  handling  of  agro-chemicals,  improved  pest
management,  improved  storage  and  improved  soil  and  water  conservation  measures.  The  capacity
building activities will be delivered through Farmer and Agro-Pastoral Field Schools.
12.
Climate  risk  category – The  climate  risk  classification  for  ARP is  high.  The  southern  region
has  already  been  affected  by  the  recurrent  droughts  and  the  La  Nina  event  for  2016/2017  has
resulted in floods in some parts of the region. As the project objective is to support the recovery of the
local  communities,  potential  flood  prone  areas  could  be  mapped  to  identify  alternative  areas  to  be
cultivated  where  feasible.  In  addition  mapping  of  ground  water  resources  can  also  inform  the
development of sites particularly for the animal watering points and pastures. Early maturing varieties
that are more tolerant to water stress have already been identified for the cereals and root tubers that
will  be  disseminated.  The  Post-Disaster  Needs  Assessment  includes  a  thorough  analysis  of
122
vulnerability  to  droughts  and  the  VAM  Unit  of  WFP is  providing  support  in  further  vulnerability
analyses.
13.
Recommended features of project design and implementation – Though this is a recovery
phase  project,  a  resilience  building  perspective  should  be  maintained  to  improve  the  targeted
community  livelihoods  and  encourage  the  sustainable  use  and  management  of  ecosystems.  This
approach  is  also  advocated  for  by  the  Regional  Inter-Agency  Standing  Committee  (RIASCO)  that
drafted the Action Plan for the El-Nino Response.   One of the identified gaps of the committee is that
food  security  and  livelihood  support,  basic  services  and  small  infrastructure  development  should  be
up-scaled  with  significantly  increased  investment.  The  resilience  building  will  be  achieved  through
better  land- and  water-use  planning  to  reduce  risk  and  vulnerabilities  based  on  the  key  drivers
identified  under  section  1.  This  translates  into  integrated  environmental  and  natural  resource
management  approaches 
flood
management and appropriate management of fragile ecosystems.
incorporate  disaster  risk  reduction  such  as 
integrated 
that 
14.
Climate  sensitive  technologies  such  as  drought  tolerant  varieties,  water  harvesting  and
diversified  livelihoods  will  contribute  to  building  the  resilience  of  communities.  The  ARP  can  ensure
that  good  quality  drought  tolerant  varieties  are  included  in  the  packages  to  be  provided  to  the
smallholders. Experience from other regional relief programmes have shown that availability of stocks
from  better  than  average  farmers,  from  surrounding  areas,  from  grain  markets  and from  the  retail
market  and  seed  fairs  can  be  made  use  of  in  sourcing  quality  seeds.  In  addition,  purchase  of  well-
labelled seed of known varieties of reliable origin should be encouraged. A key lesson has been that
seed distribution programs should not be used to distribute new varieties of uncertain adaptation and
acceptance. Farmers’ choice should inform the inputs to be provided in order to increase chances of
recovery from the climate related shocks (Guidelines for Agriculture Relief Programmes in Zimbabwe,
2004).  The  input  supply  systems  will  need  to  be  developed  and  can  be  incorporated  in  the  seed
production  activities  to  promote  community  multiplication  areas  of  selected  varieties  or  commercial
multiplication.
15.
Poultry  rearing,  aquaculture,  horticulture  and  apiculture  activities  are  part  of  the  livelihoods
diversification and will require capacity building activities to enable the target communities attain the
benefits of the technologies that will be promoted. The Farmer Field Schools will include application of
fertiliser to early-planted and well-weeded crops as well as climate change adaptation measures. The
capacity building should be extended to cover waste management and also explore the possibility of
using some of the organic  waste for manure and promoting integrated crops and livestock systems.
The project design can ensure the capacity building that will accompany the distribution of packages
can promote conservation agriculture and suitable water harvesting and management techniques for
the  future  drier  years.  In  addition  for  the  horticulture  activities  that  will  be  located  along  the  riverine
areas should take cognisance of the need to maintain the embankments. These activities are usually
undertaken  by  women  who  cultivate  sweet  potatoes  while  men  cultivate  larger  areas  with  cereals
under rain-fed production systems.
16.
The  livestock  activities  focus  on  health  and  improved  husbandry  for  the  small  ruminants.
Consideration  should  be  given  to  appropriate  livestock  breeds  that  are  tolerant  to  heat  and  water
stress  conditions.  In  addition,  efforts  to  promote  improved  husbandry  should  include  reliable  water
and  feed  resources  and  limit  reliance  on  exotic  breeds.  The  cultural  context  is  also  important  to
consider  as the  agro-pastoral  groups  tend  to  value  livestock  as  household  wealth  and  therefore
numbers matter more than the health status of the livestock.
17.
As  part  of  the  strategy  to  mainstream  environmental  and  climate  risk management  in  specific
agricultural  sub-sectors,  ecological  centers  have  been  constructed  in  Namibe,  Cabinda,  Cuando
Cubango and Huambo Provinces. The center in Namibe can be used by the ARRP as a training base
for  the  smallholders  and  technicians  in  environmental  management  and  climate  change  adaptation
options  applying  the  concept  of  building  back  livelihoods  better  and  thus using  a  more  long-term
perspective of building resilience of the local communities in the drought prone areas.
18.
The criteria for the selection of the beneficiaries is yet to be fully defined. In this regard, lessons
from similar interventions show it is crucial to involve the local community in the selection process as
local transparency increases the chances of accurate targeting. In addition for the activities such as
123
poultry rearing and apiculture, experience in other regional interventions has shown that orphans, or
youth  from  households  that  have  lost  adult  decision  makers  can  have  improved  livelihoods  when
provided with training in new income earning opportunities such as small-scale enterprises.
Analysis of alternatives – The alternatives considered in the design were in the approach to
19.
rebuild  livelihoods  and  the  related  activities  to  be  included  that  initially  had  a  stronger  focus  on
resilience building. Given the severity of the impact of the recurrent droughts the needs are multiple
and resources limited. Focusing only on the provision of inputs without the required capacity building,
monitoring  and  support was  considered  unsustainable  though  it  could  potentially  reach  more
households.  The  prioritisation  of  the  activities  proposed  was  based  on  the  livelihoods  assessment
following IFAD's guidelines for disaster early recovery, with  a decision to streamline the intervention
with a focus on recovery, build on existing interventions and not to introduce completely new crops or
livelihood options in the areas.
20.
Though  resilience  is  not  being  emphasised,  the  ARP  activities  are  aligned  with  priorities  of
strengthening  resilience  of  agro-pastoralists  and  smallholders  adversely  affected  by  the  recurrent
droughts through strategic support to the diversification of food production, the provision of water and
input supplies, improved veterinarian services and the institutional support to the operationalization of
the  early  warning  system  and  the  Food  Security  Phase  Classification  (IPC)  information  system,
involving  agriculture,  health,  water  and  civil  protection.  The  PDNA  conducted  with  a  focus  on
resilience building in southern region with support of the UN, the EU and the World Bank is resulting
in  the  development  of  a  medium  to  long  term  Resilience  Building  Framework  and  Programme
focusing  on  these  outlined  priorities.  The  ARP  will  support  the  roll-out  of  the  Framework  to  the
targeted  areas.  The  process  to  develop  this  Framework  was  launched  in  April  2017.  It  includes  a
proposal to establish a resilience fund that communities can access when required.
Institutional  analysis – Most  of  the  emergency  and  recovery  related  efforts  are  coordinated
21.
from  the  Provincial  level  with  the  Civil  Protection  Agency  playing  a  central  role.  Pilot  Provincial
Strategies  for  Building  Resilience  of  vulnerable  communities  and  local  institutions  have  been
developed in the most affected provinces. These provincial government owned pilot strategies (2015-
2017) aim to support inter-sectorial coordination mechanisms for planning, implementation, monitoring
and  evaluation  as  well  as  joint  mapping  of  vulnerable  groups,  and  analysis  of  risks  (hazards,
vulnerabilities,  and  capacities);  improving  the  capacities  of  provincial  government  staff  to  guide  the
planning  and  implementation  of  integrated  resilience  building  activities  at  municipal  and  community
levels and; support enhanced information management. Various on-going initiatives providing support
for  income  generation,  sustainable  land  management,  disaster  risk  management,  animal  health
services  and  building  climate  resilience  among  vulnerable  communities  have  also  been  mapped  to
indicate areas of reach and available resources.
The  Ministry  for  Social  Assistance  and  Reintegration  undertakes  some  of  the  emergency
22.
interventions including distribution of food packages to vulnerable groups, particularly the aged. The
system for the identification of vulnerable groups and provision of social assistance is currently under
review with the aim of strengthening the social safety nets. The Ministry of Families and Promotion of
Women's  Affairs  has  a  unit  for  combatting  poverty  that  has  recently  established    a  monitoring  and
evaluation  system that  includes  a  database  of  families  requiring  assistance.  The  vulnerable  families
have  already  been  identified  in  Cunene  Province  and  the  exercise  is  expected  to  be  completed  in
other provinces over the next couple of years. Both Ministries make use of the Provincial teams and
therefore coordination is ensured to a certain extent.
23.
Regarding  the  disaster  risk  management,  a  National  Disaster  Loss  Database, ‘DesInventar’,
was launched by the CNPC in Angola in April 2016 to facilitate evidence-based policy decisions and
reporting internationally against the targets set in the Sendai Framework on DRR 2015-2030 and the
SDGs.  The  database  was  established  with  technical  support  of  UNISDR  facilitated  by  UNDP.
DesInventer  was  installed  in the UNISDR server  in Geneva, facilitating  data entry  in a single server
with maps, hazard list and indicators configured. DesInventar is expected to be validated and online
before a Risk Profiling Regional Workshop among the Lusophone countries planned in 2017.
24. Monitoring and Evaluation – The implementation period for the project is four years  with an
assessment envisaged after year two. Given the relatively short implementation consideration should
be given to monitoring primary impacts, e.g. whether the seed was planted, how much additional land
124
was  planted  and  how  much produce  was  harvested;  or  secondary  impacts,  such  as  farmers
understanding  varieties  they  received,  the  performance  of  the  different  varieties,  whether  seed  was
saved for the next planting season; the percentage of beneficiaries reporting satisfaction with quantity,
quality  and  variety  of  seed  received,  suitability  and  effectiveness  of  distribution  methods;  the
percentage  of  beneficiaries  cultivating  seeds  and  planting  materials  as  intended;  production  levels
and use of additional production derived from inputs package. For the income generating activities the
levels  of  income  being  generated  at  household  level  can  be  monitored  and  use  of  the  packages
received for this purpose. In addition some tools can be adopted from other on-going initiatives such
as the FAO implemented and Global Environment Facility financed rangeland project (RETESA) that
restores  pastures  and  also  provides  services  for  improved  animal  health.  Project  planning  and
tracking  can  benefit  from  the creation  of  a  calendar  of  activities,  which  will  need  to  be  linked,
ultimately, back to the farming calendar.
Further  information  required  to  complete  screening,  if  any – No  further  information  is
25.
required for screening as an in-depth assessment has already been undertaken by a multi-disciplinary
team  led  by  the  Government  and  supported  by  other  Development  Partners.  The  assessment
informed the design of the ARP.
Budgetary resources and schedule – No further budgetary requirements are envisaged given
26.
the  short  implementation  duration  of  the  project  and  the  initial  assessments  that  have  been
undertaken.
Record of consultations with beneficiaries, civil society, general public etc. – Most of the
27.
consultations with communities were undertaken during the post drought disaster needs assessment
undertaken  in  August  2016.  Further  consultations  were  undertaken  during  the  design  mission  in
March/April  2017  involving  potential  beneficiaries,  government  agencies  including  at  provincial  and
municipality levels. More in-depth consultations were also held with potential beneficiaries in the form
of  a  needs  assessment  for  profiling  the  households  as  part  of  the  targeting  approach  and  data
collection towards the establishment of a baseline.
125
Appendix 13: Farming Systems in the Project Area
Agro-ecological conditions
The project covers three provinces – Benguela, Cunene and Huela. The provinces fall within the arid
and semi-arid agro-ecological zone in Southern Angola. These provinces together with Namibe form
part of Angola’s Southern Livestock, Millet, and Sorghum Livelihood Zone64. The provinces are largely
characterized  by  savannah  grass  and  woodlands  with  deserts  in  the  adjoining  province  of  Namiba.
The production system is largely agro-pastoral  with livestock a major source of livelihood. The zone
has a unimodal rainfall pattern with an average precipitation of around 200-400 mm per annum. There
are two seasons, a rainy season which lasts from mid-October to March and a dry season from April
to  early  October.Average  annual  temperatures  are  variable  but  increasing  from  north  to  south.  The
topography  of  the  area  is  generally  flat  and  undulating.  Generally,  the  region  is  subject  to  recurrent
drought and flooding.
The region  has two major river basins, the Cunene and Cuvelai and the basin  of the rivers Curoca,
Giraul  and  Lucira,  in addition  to  many  rivers  and  streams  as  well  as  intermittent  rivers  in  Namibe
which supports some horticulture. Fishing  in these is seasonal and provides an additional source of
food,  nutrition  and  income.  The  area  is  sparsely  populated  with  a  population  density  at  around  five
persons per square kilometre (National Population Census-2000). Many of the farming population can
be  regarded  as  marginal  and  vulnerable  to  the  vagaries  of  the  rainfall  patterns.  These  conditions
result in highly variable grain production. Droughts lead to a lack of pasture and surface water, which
occasionally results in significant loss of livestock.
The  rural  areas  depend  entirely  on  the  consumption  of  firewood  and  charcoal  for  energy  and  in
Cunene only eleven percent of inhabitants have electricity whilst in Huila it is sixteen 16 percent, well
below  the  national  average.  Boreholes  are  the  chief  means  of  water  supply,  but  rivers  are  also  an
important  source  of  water  particularly  for  livestock.  In  Cunene  only  twenty  three  percent  of  the
population has access to water.
Socio-economic background
Benguela has a population of around 2.2 million people, 37% of which are located in the rural areas.
The population of Cunene is around 965,000 people with the majority being rural. Finally, Huila has a
population  of  around  2.5  million  people  with  69%  residing  in  the  rural  areas.  Agriculture,  including
livestock, plays a prominent role in the socio-economic livelihood of the population; the main source of
income.  However,  agriculture  is  mainly  rainfed,  subsistence  oriented  with  low  levels  of  productivity.
Some 80 percent of farmers are smallholders (planting an average of 1.5 ha per family). For the most
part  agriculture  is  not  mechanized,  and  farmers  do  not  use  animal  traction.  Relatively  low  levels  of
improved inputs are used by farmers. Typical farms in the project area are largely subsistence, with
low  and  declining  productivity  as  a  result  of  deteriorating  soil  fertility.  As  a  result  of  risks  of  drought
and  floods,  smallholders  are  risk averse  and,  without  intensifying  their  production  systems  are  not
likely  to  increase  production.  Their  focus  is  on  producing  enough  food  for  their  food-security  needs
whilst taking into account the risks of climate change. Even amongst those farm households that are
food-secure  a  broad  range  of  issues  constrain  productivity  and  their  livelihoods - limited  production
and marketing experience, lack of household resources to buy seeds and inputs, and limited skills to
engage in alternative off-farm occupations. In the absence of viable credit programmes and very few
smallholders has the cash needed to purchase even small amounts of the required inputs.
There  are two  main  factors,  which  determine  the  level  of  wealth  among  households.  These  are  the
number  of  livestock  owned  and  land  cultivated  per  household.  All  of  the  households  depend  on
market purchases of staple foods during the months of December to May, supplemented by milk and
meat especially during the rainy season65. Many areas in Cunene are maize and bean deficit and their
64 FEWSNET, Angola Livelihood Zones and Descriptions, November 2013
65 2016, PDNA Post Disaster Needs Assessment 2012-2016
126
markets  are  supplied  by  Huila  Province  (maize  and  beans)  as  well  as  Namibia  (maize)  across  the
border.
Commercial and traditional milk production is  vital for the  local communities as  a source of nutrition
and  income.  Livestock  sales are  the  most  important  source  of  cash  income  for  both  the  vulnerable
and  better-off  categories  of  farm  holdings.  The  former  group  obtains  income  from  the  sale  of  goats
and  pigs,  and  is  also  engaged  in  the  sale  of  charcoal  and  firewood.  Cattle  are  rarely  sold  unless  a
household  is  under  duress  or  the  cattle  are  in  extremely  poor  condition.  The  consumption  pattern
among  this  group  shows  a  reliance  on  staple  market  purchases  rather  than  subsistence  farming.
Better-off  farmers  produce  slightly  more  food  and  obtain  income  from  the  sale  of  milk  and  milk
products.  All  households  depend  on  market  purchases  of  staple  foods  during  the  months  of
December  to  May,  supplemented  by  milk  and  meat  especially  during  the  rainy  season.  Most  of  the
livestock  products  consumed  by  the  more  vulnerable  households  are  obtained  through  in-kind
payment  of  labour  for  herding  the  livestock  of  better-off  farm  households.  The  sale  of  livestock,
livestock products and local labor (herding) is possible because of the high demand amongst the rural
population  and  their  access  to  key  strategic  markets  (Virei,  Ondjiva,  Xangongo,  Cuangar  amongst
others) and across the border into Namibia. Physical access to these markets is relatively good due to
a fairly well distributed road network.
The main staple foods purchased by the poor from October to April are millet and sorghum. They also
rely  on  other  types  of  food  such  as  milk,  meat  and  vegetables.  The  more  vulnerable  smallholders
barter livestock (goats and sheep) for grain (millet and sorghum) during the period December to May,
and this is the period before the next harvest. Wild foods especially fruits are available in the months
of March to April and August to September.
Agricultural background
Despite  very  favourable  climatic  and  soil  conditions  in  Benguela,  the  agricultural  sector  is  poorly
developed  and  needs  much  further  technological  development  to  increase  production  and
productivity.  Agriculture  is  traditional  and  output  is  for  household  consumption  needs.  Some
occasional  surplus  gets  sold  at  local  markets.  The  same  applies  to  cattle  raising  as  veterinarian
support  and  knowledge  of  pasture  optimization  are  scarce.  All  these  factors  have  kept  productivity
low. In  Cunene  productivity  is  also  low  and  the  resultant  harvests  are  small.  Cereals are  the  main
crop,  with  a  predominance of  species  that  are  more  tolerant  to  drought  or  irregular  rainfall,  namely
millet (massango) and sorghum (massambala); these are more prominent in areas with lesser rainfall.
Maize and  bean  production are more viable in areas  with higher rainfall  or  where irrigation systems
exist. The produce is primarily for home consumption; any production surplus, if at all, is sold on the
informal markets to supplement family  income. Like all the provinces in the  zone, low productivity is
exacerbated  by  the  recurring  droughts.  The  rains  extend  over  the  period  mid-October  and  early
November up to the end of March. The dry season begins in April and extends up to early October.
Land  preparation  for  the  staple  cereal  crops  extends  over  the  period  June  to  August  followed  by
planting.
Crop production:
Dry farming is almost a marginal  activity, confined to limiting the small plots that surround dwellings
and is based on the cultivation of drought tolerant cereals, such as millet and sorghum. Maize is kept
for  the  heaviest  lands  (CESO,  2015). The  Zone  has been  characterised  as  millet  and  sorghum,  but
within the proposed project areas of Cunene and southern Huela, maize and millet are mainly grown.
Sorghum is the preferred crop in Namibe with a more severe desert like agro-ecology.  In general the
use  of  purchased  inputs  is  limited  and  yields  are,  consequently,  low.  Maize  and  vegetables  are
produced  for  household  consumption  with  the  latter  cultivated  along  the  main  rivers  and  valleys.
Normally local production of maize and millet provides staple food for up to half of the year, while in
the  second  half  of  the  year  consumption  needs  are  met  through  food  purchases.  Seasonal  river
fishing is also carried out by the local population to supplement their diet.
Livestock production:
127
In general, livestock rearing is one of the main activities and sources of income with cattle and small
ruminants  (goats  and  sheep)  accounting  for  more  than  half  of  the  Province's  total  production;  cattle
represents  44%  of  livestock  production.  However,  pigs  and  poultry  production is  significant  and
cannot  be  disregarded,  especially  at  a  household  level,  in  terms  of  production  for  self-consumption.
More  importantly,  pigs  and  poultry  are  mainly  owned  by  women,  hence  investing  in  them  can  be  a
gender improvement strategy.
Livestock  production  is  based  on  natural  pastures  and  although  grassland  capacity  varies  from  one
region  to  another  (depending  on  the  level  of  rainfall,  type  of  soil  and  vegetation. Cattle  is  the  most
important  livelihood  asset  but  goats,  sheep,  pigs  and  poultry  also play  an  important  part  in  the
household economy. Small stock, such as goats, pigs and chickens are kept mainly by small-holders
for  their  subsistence  farming.  The  sparse  population  combined  with  the  arid  conditions  and  sandy
soils  make  it  more  suitable  for  livestock  than  crop  production.  Given  the  high  rainfall  variability,
transhumance  pastoralism and  the  seasonal  migration  of  livestock  is  commonly  found  with  herds  of
livestock moving between the lowlands and adjacent mountain areas. The gentle relief of the project
area facilitates transhumant livestock movement following seasonally flooded areas such as the lower
parts of Cunene river. A succession of shallow lakes and ponds provides pasture for cattle in the dry
season.  The  permanent  Tchimporo  ponds  in Kuvelai  also  play  an  important  role  in  the  household
economy by providing fishing opportunities and reserve pasture during critical periods.
The  main  constraints  and  difficulties  encountered  by  the  small-scale  livestock  producers  are  water
supply,  the  absence  of  veterinary  services,  adequate  pasture  management  and  difficulties  in
commercializing livestock.
Poultry and pig production is the responsibility of women. In the case of poultry women look after the
birds, and the earnings from the sale of eggs and chickens are often their only source of cash income.
The  poultry  production  systems  are  characterized  by  small  flocks,  with  nil  or  minimal  inputs,  low
outputs and periodic devastation of the flocks by disease. Birds are owned by individual households
and are maintained under a scavenging system, with little or no inputs for housing, feeding or health
care. Typically the flocks are small in number with each flock containing birds from each age group,
with an average of 7-10 mature birds per household, consisting of 2-4 adult hens, a male bird and a
number of growers of various ages. Although the system of production is basic and low cost, it can be
economically efficient with minimal additions of inputs, access to water and improved management.
Scavenging pig  production is  also  found  in  the  project  area.  The  pigs  are  owned  by  subsistence
farmers  and  very  few  are  sold  in  local  markets.  The  traditional  system  of  pig  rearing  involves  free
range  scavenging  with  few  arrangements  to  provide  the  pigs  with  shelter. Some  pigs  receive
supplementary feed when available but this is generally of low nutritional quality such as maize stalks,
crop  bi-products  and  kitchen  waste.  The  local  breeds  are  indigenous,  adapted  to  the  local
environment. They are relatively small in size and their high mobility renders them best able to cope
with  the  local  conditions.  The  sows  breed  irregularly,  piglet  mortality  is  high,  and  the  growth  rate  is
low. In general there is no attempt to improve production by selective breeding or any other means. In
a few cases, however, piglets are purchased and are fattened when food is plentiful, for sale at a later
date. In some cases the pigs are kept in a kraal overnight or are tethered. In most cases the pigs are
not kept to provide meat for the household, nor as a source of cash income. The scavenging pigs are
viewed more as a savings account or insurance policy, and are sold only when extra cash is needed.
Goats are  also  of  high  importance  in  the  project  area  because  of  the  many  functions  they  provide:
serving as a reserve source of wealth whilst providing meat. Goats are not used for milk production.
They are more resilient than cattle to the dryland conditions of the area. Most farm households in the
area  own  a  number  of  goats.  Access  to  water  and  feed  is  vital  for  sustainable  production.  Although
the animals obtain some water from the natural moisture in their food, this is inadequate,  especially
during the dry season when feed sources are dry. If goats don’t have access to sufficient water, they
will eat less food and production will drop.
Three feeding systems can be found in the project area, depending on local conditions, the season,
the  types  of  foodstuff  available,  the  possibility  for  growing  and  storing  fodder,  and  the  resources
available for buying in feed.
128
1) Goats are left to scavenge to find their own food. This is done by browsing, grazing, or tethering the
animals. The quantity and quality of the feed sources available depend on rainfall and the condition of
the rangelands. Protein quality of the rangeland can be improved by introducing nutritious grasses or
legumes and leguminous fodder trees with protein rich leaves are a good source of feed.
2)  Goats  are  free-range  but  additional  food  is  provided.  The  goats  forage  free-range  for  part  of  the
time  but  are  brought  in  and  fed  the  main  part  of  their  food  ration.  Browsing  supplies  some  of  the
goats’ needs, but this is supplemented by manual feeding through a cut and carry system. This was
observed  in  parts  of  Huela  Province.  Feed  supplements  can  be  met  by  growing  cassava  or  sweet
potatoes  with  the  leaves  of  the  plants  used  as  feed.  Sweet  potato  vines  are  very  nutritious.  Crop
cuttings (maize, sorghum etc.) can also be used as feed as well as weeds.
3) Goats are completely fed manually: The goats are kept enclosed, and are fed a complete ration in
the enclosure. This system is not widely found in the southern provinces but is being practiced among
better  off  farm  households.  The  system  involves  cutting  and  carrying  hay  and  straw  supplemented
with concentrates.
Impact of drought and floods
As noted above, the main hazards are related to drought and flooding from the seasonal rivers. This
in turn results in the risk of high incidence of livestock disease, low food prices, coupled with drought
and dry spells during and after the main harvest around April. The common coping strategies among
the most vulnerable group of households include increased sale of labour and collection of wild foods,
increased sale of livestock and diversification of self-employment  options. The  better-off category  of
households  tend  to  increase  livestock  sales  and  relocate  to  higher  grounds  in  case  of  excessive
floods especially along the Angola and Namibia border.
As  a  result  of  the  drought  conditions  of  the  2011-2012  season,  crop  production  losses  were
particularly  high.  An  assessment  conducted  in  2012  by  the  Angolan  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Rural
Development and Fisheries estimated that 1.8 million people in the affected provinces in the south of
the country were exposed to food insecurity due to the drought. The sector’s contribution to national
GDP  also  fell  from  9.3  percent  in  2011  to  7.2  percent  in  2012. The  livestock  sub-sector  was
particularly affected by the drought resulting in a lack of adequate pasture and reduced availability of
water  affected  the  health  conditions  of  livestock  making  them  more  vulnerable  to  disease.
Transhumance  livestock  migrations  are  starting  earlier  and  lasting  longer  as  a  result  of  drought  in
order  to  provide  adequate  feed  and  water  for  livestock.  The  extended  migration  patterns  prevented
transhumants from ensuring their  livestock from being part of the national  vaccination campaigns of
2012 and 2013, increasing the risk of exposure to disease.
In  Huila,  total  damage  and  losses amounted  to  US$195  million  with  around  54  percent  of  the  loss
from  the  livestock  sub-sector.  Some  150,000  livestock  deaths  and  losses  in  milk  production  were
reported  over  the  drought  period.  Overall,  cereal  and  other  crop  losses  in  the  Province  were  also
substantial  (nearl  $88.2  million),  the  highest  cereal  losses  among  the  southern  provinces.  The
northern  part  of  Huela  is  a  key  area  supplying  cereal  surpluses  in  the  country.  In  the  province  of
Cunene, the crop production figures indicate that production did not decrease although the province
has been significantly affected by the drought. Overall damage and losses have been valued at $268
million,  the  highest  among  the  southern  provinces.  This  is  partly  made  up  from  the  number  of
livestock  deaths  of  around  240,000  (mainly  cattle)  as  well  as  milk  and  meat  production.  A  large
portion of food aid was directed to affected people in Cunene.
Four  consecutive  years  of  drought  has  deteriorated  the  livelihoods  of  agropastoral  communities  in
Cunene, Huila and Namibe. Since the reduced rainfall of the 2011-12 agricultural season, access to
water for human and livestock consumption has depleted, both in terms of surface and underground
water sources. As  a result  of scarce water and  poor  pasture conditions throughout  drought  affected
areas,  transhumance  or  the  long  migration  northwards  of  livestock  has  been  starting  months  earlier
than  is  customary,  between  1  to  6  months  depending  on  the  area  and  severity  of  drought,  and  has
involved longer distances. One assessment found that as early as 2013 cattle were walking nearly 80
km  between  pasture  and  water  every  two  days,  compared  to  30  km  in  a  typical  year  for  the  same
season.
129
The  lack  of  adequate  pasture  and  reduced  water  availability  has  worsened  the  body  conditions  of
livestock  and  eroded  the  ability  of  local  pastoralists  to  produce  milk  which  is  a  basic  staple  among
agro-pastoralists.
With respect to cropping, in 2015, yield losses were estimated at 75 percent and production losses at
52 million tons in the 3 provinces. The recent crop losses add to 3 - 4  years of production losses in
the  region,  eroding  the  ability  of  pastoralists  to  produce  cereals  and  sustain  their  livelihoods.  Since
many  households  sow  crops  for  consumption,  they  have  had  to  rely  more  on  markets for  cereal
purchases, bartering, and livestock sales several months earlier than usual. The drought and low crop
production  in  Huila  has  had  a  negative  impact  on  the  volume  of  staple  food  supplies  that  flow  to
Namibe and Cunene.
The prolonged drought has been progressively eroding the capacity of agro- pastoralist communities
to  cope  as  they  face  cyclical  hardships  and  environmental  degradation.  The  water  table  is  steadily
declining  and  the  short  and  irregular  rains  have  not  sufficiently  recharged  the  water  table.  The
quantity and quality of water continues to decrease, pastures and rangeland are unable to regenerate
sufficiently,  livestock  health  conditions  diminish  and  mortality  rates  are  on  the  increase,  and  the
capacity to cultivate crops is lost due to the lack of seeds and to the increasing degradation of soils.
Farm types
Two farm systems models can be found in the project area. In Cunene a typical holding is around 1.5
hectare  and  comprises  maize,  millet  and  beans      In  Huila  and  Benguela,  the area  under  maize  is
higher given the better resource endowment.  The farm type models represent two scenarios: dry and
normal year scenarios in the without project situation..
Farm type 1 -
subsistence in
drier areas
Unit
Maize
Cassava
Beans
Goat
keeping
Free
range
poultry
keeping
WoP
Farmland area
Livestock size
Farm Income
ha
herd
AOA
1.0
25,868
0.5
5,193
WoP
Farm type 2 -
smallholder in
wetter areas
Unit
Maize
Cassava
Beans
Goat
keeping
Free
range
poultry
keeping
Farmland area
Livestock size
Farm Income
ha
herd
AOA
0.9
0.3
0.3
23,281
20,022
29,103
0.5
5,193
Total
1.0
0.5
31,060.7
Total
1.5
0.5
77,599.4
A  standard  crop  based  technical  package  was  designed  for  the  with-project  scenario  with  the
following assumptions.
130
Farm
Type/
location
Crops
Area
(ha)
1.0
0.2
0.2
0.1
1.5
Maize/ millet
Beans
Cassava
Sweet potato
Fertiliser
(NPK)
Tools
Total
Cost per
unit ($)
Cost/ha ($)
T. Cost/ hh
Input
requirement
s 
(kg.  or
cuttings  per
ha)
25
60
10,000
20,000
2
3
0.012
0.006
50
180
120
120
25
50
50
36
24
12
50
10
182
The  intention  is  to  give  a  small  package  of  free  agricultural  inputs – fertiliser  and  seed – to  around
5,000  small  farm  households  with  an  average  holding  of  1.5  ha.  The  package  is  conceived  as  an
emergency one shot increase in food production. Under the above model, the pack comprises 25 kg
of  NPK  sufficient  for  0.25  ha  with  25  kg  of  maize  or  millet,  12  kg  beans,  2,000  cassava  and  1,000
sweet potato cuttings per farm household.  The package is based on open pollinated varieties (OPV)
which  can  be  saved  by farmers  for  further  use  without  the  need  for  annual  free  distribution  or
purchase of seed. This  was conceived as a  low cost, safety net option. The package is intended to
ensure that farmers obtain the production  potential  of improved seeds on a sustainable basis,  while
benefitting  from  the  fertiliser  response.  It  has  been  estimated  that  in  a  normal  rainfall  year,  this
technology  package  would  yield  around  550  kg  of  maize  per  ha.  Thus  beneficiary  farmers  would
produce an extra 100 kg maize on average. The yield of beans is expected to increase from 230 kg/
ha to over 320 kg/ ha as a result of the package.
The  package  recognises  the  importance  for  all  farmers  of  maximising  the  use  of  locally  available
fertility  sources.  This  means  promoting  through  the  FFS and  other  extension  approaches  the
cultivation  of  leguminous  crops  such  as  beans  in  combination  with  maize  or  millet  as  well  as  using
farm manures as composts, as these provide organic sources of nitrogen, enhance soil structure and
reduce  soil  erosion.  Implementing  nitrogen  rich  rotations  not  only  reduces  the  need  for  expensive
commercial fertiliser but also improves diets by adding protein and energy-rich foods such as beans. .
Intercropping  of  maize  and  beans  is  being  promoted  through  the  FFS.  However, the  soil  fertility
benefits of these intercrops is limited. Only small amounts of nitrogen are to the soil by intercropped
legumes. If planted at low populations and suffer from competition from the maize crop, little biomass
can be produced. Consequently, artificial fertiliser is necessary supplemented by the increased use of
composts and manures. However, the potential of the latter is likely to be limited in the dry conditions
of the project area.
The  focus  will  consequently  be  placed  on  the  following complementary  and  potentially  adoptable
options:
Increasing access to improved cereal seed and fertiliser technology; and
Diversifying  the  cropping  system  through  the  adoption  of  locally  suitable  combinations  with
grain legumes, as rotations as well as compost and manure.
Complementing  the  programme  is  the  FFS  based  extension  programme,  and  efforts  to
expand savings and credit as a longer term strategy to effect changes in the farming system.
The package has been costed at around $180 per household. The input requirements and sources of
supply  are  summarised  below.  The  volume  of  inputs  required  by  the  project  for  the  target level  of
5,000 hh are available through local suppliers.
Crop
Maize
Unit
Kilo
Quantity
125,000
Supply source
- Central Angola seed farms
- Purchased from Namibia
131



Beans
Kilo
300,000
Cassava
Cuttings
10.0 million
Sweet potato
Cuttings
5.0 million
- Central Angola seed farms
- Purchased from Namibia
- IIA Nambe (Agronomic Research
Institute)
IMA Tchivinguiro (Middle Agrarian
Institute)
IIA  Nambe  (Agronomic  Research
Institute)
IMA Tchivinguiro (Middle Agrarian
Institute)
132
Appendix 14: Drought Vulnerability Analysis
This appendix presents a summary of the drought vulnerability analysis undertaken during the
1.
Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA, 2016) in the three most affected drought provinces; the El-
Niño  report  for  Angola  produced  by  IFAD/WFP  and  the  climate  risk  analysis  for  the  Smallholder
Agriculture  Development  and  Commercialisation  Project  that  will  be  implemented  in  five  provinces.
The PDNA analysis was led by the World Food Program, while the Climate Risk vulnerability analysis
was undertaken by the Africa Climate and Development Initiative at the University of Cape Town.
2.
Drought occurrence and impacts 2012-2016 – El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) cycles
occurs  every  three  to  five  years  with  10  events  in  35  years  having  a  duration of  events of 9-12
months. La Niña cycles occur every two to seven years with seven events in 35 years lasting from 8
months - 2.5 yrs. The figure below (Fig. 1) illustrates the 35 year precipitation averages for months in
ENSO  and  neutral  years  in  Southern Angola  (ENSO  Profile).  Evidently  the  El-Niño  results  in  below
average  rainfall  leading  to  droughts  while  the  La-Nina  results  in  above  average  rainfall  leading  to
localised flooding.
Cuando Cubango : ENSO IMPACT BY MONTH
600
500
400
300
)
m
m
(
n
o
i
t
a
t
i
p
i
c
e
r
P
200
100
0
NINO
NINA
NEUTRAL WET SEASON
Figure 1: 35-year precipitation averages in Southern Angola
The  largest  threat  to  agriculture  production  systems  in  Angola  comes  from  prolonged  water
3.
stress  during  extended  drought  periods.  El  Niño  related  droughts  can  compound  already  stressed
conditions  in  southern  Angola.  The  variable  seasonal  spatial  distribution  of  dryness  experienced
during the last El-Nino events affected livelihood zones differently. The 2011/12 agricultural calendar
season  had  a  rainfall  deficit  of  more  than  60%  compared  to  normal  years  (MINAGRI)  especially
affecting  the  provinces  of  Bengo,  Kwanza-Sul,  Benguela,  Huila,  Namibe,  Cunene,  Moxico,  Bie,
Huambo  and  Zaire.  In  2012/13  drought  conditions  were  experienced  mainly  in  the  central  and
northern  provinces.  In  2013/14  rainfall  deficits  were  experienced  with  hotspots  reaching 80-100%
below average in the most affected southern provinces of Cunene, Huila and Namibe. However, the
severity was less than the previous year and Cunene reported some floods along the Cuvelai basin.
Severe and more widespread rainfall deficits continued in 2014/15 especially in the first phase of the
season  and  remained  until  end  of  April  2015.  As  a  result  the  start  of  the  agricultural  season  was
delayed leading to particularly unfavourable conditions for crop development. The Southern provinces
experienced  another  drought  in  2015/16  albeit  with  a  slight  improvement  compared  to  the  previous
season (PDNA).
133
The stresses on the natural resource base caused by the recurrent droughts is evident from the
4.
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), which measures the greenness of ground cover and
is used as a proxy to indicate the density and health of vegetation. The figures below (Figs 2-5) show
the  changes  in  NDVI  over  the  period  of  the  droughts  (PDNA).  Based  on  the  analysis  provided  the
reduction in the NDVI was more pronounced during the 2012, which marked the start of the El-Niño
compared  to  the  subsequent  years.  However,  the  prolonged  period  of  droughts  led  to  a  continued
degradation  of  the  vegetation  cover  as  the  period  for  re-establishment  was  shortened.  The  further
strain in subsequent  years is illustrated  by  the continued  decrease  in the  vegetation cover and  very
limited areas with visible increases. The changes in the NDVI are consistent with the severity of the
rainfall deficits summarised above.
Figure 2 NDVI 2012
Figure 3 NDVI 2013
Figure 4 NDVI 2014
Figure 5 NDVI 2015
Future  climate  projections  and  potential  impacts – Though  the ARP  is  a  short  to  medium
5.
term  intervention,  the  productivity  of  smallholders  in  the  longer  term  needs  to  be  taken  into
consideration in the context of building back better and supporting sustainable livelihoods particularly
as  ENSO  cycles  will  continue  to  impact  the  livelihoods  of  the  agriculture  dependent  populations.
134
Global climate models predict Angola will experience higher temperatures (1.2 to 3.2°C by the 2060s),
more  extreme  weather  events  such  as  droughts  and  floods,  an  expansion  of  arid and  semi-arid
regions, seasonal shifts in rainfall, increased wildfires, sea level rise, increased rainfall in the northern
parts of the country, changes in river flows and changes in sea and lake temperatures (NAPA, 2011).
It is anticipated that climate change will increase the severity of existing vulnerabilities.
6.
For the ARP target areas, the province of Huíla is predicted to experience an increase of ~1 °C
in mean temperature (Tmean) from ‘Baseline’ to ‘Near Term (NT) 2030’ including an increase of ~1°C
for  the  summer  months  of  December  (~22  to~23  °C),  January  (~21.5  to  ~22.5  °C),  and  February
(~21.5 to ~22.5 °C); see figures 6 and7 (Angola Climate Risk Analysis, ACDI, 2017).
Figure 6. Average monthly anomalies in Tmean Figure 7 Average monthly Tmean
7.
The  rainy  season  in  Huíla  begins  in  October  and  ends  in  April,  peaking  in  March.  Monthly
cumulative precipitation predict slight decreases in rain fall (by ~15 mm) from Historical (885 mm) to
NT 2030 (870 mm) time points and then increase to 930 mm by the year 2050 (see figures 8 and 9).
Figure 8. Anomalies in Mean Monthly Precipitation Figure 9. Average Mean Monthly Precipitation
The  temperature  changes  and  more  importantly  precipitation  changes  will  have  an  impact  on
8.
the productivity of the main crops in the ARP target area and those included in the recovery packages
for  the  potential  beneficiaries  (maize,  millet,  sorghum,  cassava  and  sweet  potato).  Crop  suitability
mapping  was  undertaken  for  the  main  crops  including  modelling  for  future  climate  scenarios.  Huila
province  was  included  in  the  study  as  one  of  the  provinces  where  the  Smallholder  Agriculture
Development and Commercialisation Project that will be implemented with IFAD financing. The results
of the analysis  are  presented below. These results can potentially  be  extrapolated to the other ARP
135
target areas for the analysis applicable to the southern part of the Huila, which is the drought prone
area.
9.
The  province  of  Huíla  and  others  in  the  south  are  broadly  unsuitable  for  cassava  production,
even with the effect of climate change. However, cassava is promoted as a more drought tolerant crop
and varieties also exist that are less affected by prolonged water stress periods. In the case of sweet
potato,  the  climate  change main  effect  is  to increase  the  suitability  apart  from  the  arid  areas,  which
may experience a small reduction in suitable area. With regards to maize, climate change is expected
to  result  in  minor  but  widespread  decreases  in  crop  suitability,  particularly  at  the  onset  of  the rainy
season  around  October.  In  the  semi-arid  and  arid  areas,  the  absolute  spatial  extent  of  areas  which
are  suitable  for  maize  production  are  predicted  to  decrease  considerably  as  a  result  of  climate
change.  These  areas  will  become  poorly  suited  to  the  crop  by  the  mid-century  2050  timepoint  due
increased  temperatures  during  the  growing  season,  as  well  as  delayed  onset  of  rainfall  in  the  early
growing  months  of  September  and  October.  In  addition,  a  secondary  effect  of  climate  change  on
maize  production  may include  an  effective  delay  or  shortening  of  growing  season,  where  rainfall
anomalies  suggest  that  the  onset  of  rainfall  is  likely  to  occur  later  in  the  year  than  in  the  baseline
scenario.  Climate  change  is  anticipated  to  increase  the  spatial  range  as  well as  the  average  crop
suitability  index score for  millet particularly  in  the months of September to January. This increase in
suitability is most likely attributable to increased average Tmean and Tmin during the months of the
active  growing  season  relative to  the  ‘baseline’  scenario.  The  main  effect  of  climate  change  in  the
case  of  low-altitude  sorghum  varieties,  is  to  increase  the  spatial  range  as  well  as  the  average  crop
suitability  index  score  in  certain  areas,  while  simultaneously  reducing  the  overall  spatial  extent  of
suitable areas, during the period from ‘baseline’ to ‘MC 2050’ timepoints.
10. With  the  high  drought  risk  in  Angola, investments  into  activities  such  as,  irrigation,  soil  and
water  conservation,  water  harvesting,  agroforestry  and  reforestation  are  highly  recommended  areas
for  development.  Interventions  such  as  these  result  in  increasing  the  financial  and  ecological
sustainability  of  agricultural  systems  in  the  long  term  (ENSO  Profile).  A  summary  of  potential
measures to help farmers cope with the increasing climate variability and the climatic events already
being faced is presented in the table below drawn from the Climate Risk Vulnerability Analysis Study.
136
Province
Summarised 
change effects
climate
Huíla
- Increased mean temperature, throughout the year.
- Increased average ‘minimum temperature’, throughout the year, particularly in the period ~May to August.
- Reduced average ‘monthly precipitation’ throughout the rainy season in the period ~September to April.
- Effective growing season will become increasingly delayed as a result of delayed onset of summer rainfall season.
- Negative impacts on virtually all crops as a result of increased temperatures and reduced precipitation, particularly in the low-lying southern
and western extents of the province.
Crop
Cassava
Sweet potato
Predicted  changes  in  crop
suitability  (from  Baseline  to
Mid-Century, 2050)
Baseline:  Mostly  poor,  except
for some marginal areas in the
north-west.
Future:  Negligible  change  in
total  suitable  area  and  crop
suitability index scores.
Baseline:  High  to  excellent  in
the  northern  and  western
uplands,  unsuitable  in  the  arid
lowlands and south.
Future:  Negative  change  in
total suitable area;
Negative 
suitability index scores.
change 
crop
in 
Effect and scale of impact
Opportunities
Adaptation options
largely
remains 
Huíla 
unsuitable  for  cassava,  except
for  the  northernmost  extent  of
the interior highlands.
is  a  small
The  net  effect 
decrease 
in  sweet  potato
production  potential  and  total
production  area.  Sweet  potato
will remain an important staple
crop,  however 
the  suitable
range is reduced by increasing
reduced
temperatures  and 
rainfall  in  the  southern  and
western extents.
Cassava  is  predicted  to  be
increased
tolerant 
to 
temperatures  and 
reduced
precipitation  in  a  small  area  of
Huíla.
Can  be  harvested  at  any  time
to  meet 
food
security needs.
short-term 
Promote  as  a  climate-resilient,
easily  grown  perennial  crop  in
the  northern  and  western
(particularly  as  an
interior 
alternative  or  complement  to
cassava).
Promotion of sweet potato as a
perennial 
starch-rich
alternative.
In 
low-lying  and  arid
the 
southern  areas,  promotion  of
increased  crop  diversification,
including  sweet  potato 
in
combination  with  cassava  and
drought-tolerant  cereals  (millet
or sorghum)
Promotion  of  improved  post-
harvest 
and
processing.
low-lying  and  arid
the 
In 
southern  areas,  promotion  of
increased  crop  diversification,
including  sweet  potato 
in
combination  with  cassava  and
drought-tolerant  cereals  (millet
or sorghum)
storage 
138
Maize
Baseline: 
Isolated  areas  of
high  to  excellent  suitability  for
all  varieties  of  maize  in  the
northern  and  western  uplands,
moderate to marginal suitability
in  the  centre.  Planting season
is 
–
limited 
November.
to  October
N/A
is  a 
The  net  effect  of  climate
in
change 
production  potential  and  total
production area for all varieties
of maize.
reduction 
of 
improved
Promotion 
drought-tolerant varieties.
Increase  access 
forecasts and early warnings.
Promotion  of  sorghum,  millet
as  climate-resilient  alternatives
to maize.
to  weather
Future:  Negative  change 
total suitable area;
Negative 
suitability index scores.
change 
in 
in
crop
Millet and Sorghum
to high  suitability 
Baseline:  Extensive  areas  of
good 
in
northern  and  western  interior.
Marginally  suitable  in  the  arid
southern region.
change 
Climate  change  results  in  a
small  positive 
in
production  potential,  and  a
simultaneous  negative  change
in  total  production  area,  for  all
varieties of millet and sorghum.
Large  potential  area  of  good
suitability,  noted  as  a  climate-
resilient alternative to maize.
Future:  Negative  change 
total suitable area;
in 
change 
Positive 
suitability index scores.
in
crop
139
Appendix 15: Contents of the Project Life File
A.
PRIOR DOCUMENTS
Country Strategic Note;
ARP Concept Note;
ARP Design Mission Aide Memoire;
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialisation Project in Cuanza Sul and Huila Provinces (SADCP-C&H);
IFAD Guidelines for Disaster Early Recovery;
Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standards; Second Edition;
Emergency Livestock Interventions in Crisis and Post-Crisis Situations.
B.
ARP PDR Appendices (as prepared by the Design Mission)
Appendix 1:
Country and Rural Context Background
Appendix 2:
Poverty, Targeting and Gender
Appendix 3:
Country Performance and Lessons Learned
Appendix 4:
Detailed Project Description
Appendix 5:
Institutional Aspects and Implementation Arrangements
Appendix 6:
Planning, M&E and Learning and Knowledge Management
Appendix 7:
Financial Management and Disbursement Arrangements
Appendix 8:
Procurement
Appendix 9:
ARP Costs and Financing
Appendix 10:
Economic and Financial Analysis
Appendix 11:
Draft Project Implementation Manual
Appendix 12:
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures Review Note
Appendix 13
Farming Systems in the Project Area
Appendix 14:
Drought Vulnerability Analysis
140







Appendix 15:      Contents of the Project Life File
C.
REFERENCE DOCUMENTS
Angola: Drought Office of the UN Resident Coordinator Situation Report No. 8 (as of 15 November 2016)
Droughts in Angola 2012–2016- Post Disaster Needs Assessment
Regional Humanitarian Appeal, June 2016, Southern African Development Community
Angola: Inquérito de Indicadores Múltiplos e de Saúde (IIMS) 2015-2016
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) of the Republic of Angola, November 2015
PLANO NACIONAL DIRECTOR DE IRRIGAÇÃO DE ANGOLA. Uma síntese dos estudos
PROJECÇÕES DA POPULAÇÃO DE ANGOLA 2015 – 2050, INSTITUTO NACIONAL DE ESTATÍSTICA, Dezembro de 2016
141







