Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ADB
ADP
Asian Development Bank
Annual Development Plan
AWPB
Annual Work Plan and Budget
BARI
BARC
BAU
BBS
BIDS
BRRI
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council
Bangladesh Agricultural University 
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics
Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies
Bangladesh Rice Research Institute
BUET
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology
BWBD
Bangladesh Water Development Board
CC
Climate Change
COSOP
Country Strategic Opportunities Paper
DA
DAE
DFID
DLS
DoF
DPP
EIRR
ERD
FAO
Designated Account
Department of Agricultural Extension
Department for International Development
Department of Livestock Services
Department of Fisheries
Development project pro
Economic Internal Rate of Return
Economic Relations Division
Food and Agriculture Organisation
FEDEC
Finance for Enterprise Development and Employment Creation 
FID
FIRR
FY
FYP
GDP
GoB
Financial Institutions Division (of Ministry of Finance)
Financial internal rate of return
Financial year
Five year plan
Gross Domestic Product
Government of Bangladesh
hh/HH
household
HIES
HILIP
IFAD
NGO
IT
Household Income and Expenditure Survey
Hoar Infrastructure and Livelihood Improvement Project
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Non-Governmental Organization
Information Technology
LGED
Local Government Engineering Department
ME
M&E
Microenterprise
Monitoring and Evaluation
MIDPCR
Market Infrastructure Development Project in Charland Regions
MFMSP
Micro Finance for Marginal and Small Farmers Project
MFTSP
Micro Finance and Technical Support Project
MFI
MIS
MoF
MoU
Microfinance Institution
Management Information System
Ministry of Finance
Memorandum of Understanding
MSME
Micro, small and medium enterprise
MTR
Mid-Term Review
NATP-2
National Agricultural Technology Project 2
p.a.
per annum
PACE
Promoting Agricultural Commercialization and Enterprises
PCR
PDR
Project Completion Report
Project Design Report
PKSF
Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation
PMU
PO
R&D
RMC
SoE
Project management Unit
Partner Organization
Research and development
Rural microcredit
Statement of Expenditure
SLGA
Subsidiary Loan and Grant Agreement
TA
Technical Assistance
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
VC
VCD
WA
WFP
Value chain
Value chain development
Withdrawal Application
World Food Programme
Executive Summary
1/25
An IFAD design mission[1] visited Bangladesh from 6 to 28 February 2019 to assist the Government of the People's Republic of
Bangladesh in designing the Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP)[2]. An earlier mission worked with the Palli Karma-
Sahayak Foundation (PKSF), Economic Relations Division (ERD) of Ministry of Finance (MoF), and other stakeholders to prepare the
concept note of the project, which was later agreed with PKSF and endorsed by ERD/MOF in September 2018.
IFAD experiences in Bangladesh have demonstrated that supporting small farmers to increase agricultural productivity and output has
positive effects on household income growth, poverty reduction, and food security. Similarly, supporting micro-entrepreneurs to start
and/or expand micro-enterprises generates income growth, improves food security, and reduces poverty. However, it has become
clear that fragmented investment in primary production and micro-enterprises, without meaningful integration in profitable value chains
connected with expanding markets, does not generate growth of the scale necessary to transform the rural economy and sustainably
eliminate poverty.
Limited experiences in Bangladesh, and well-documented experiences globally, indicate that successful small farmer and micro-
entrepreneur integration within commodity value chains with comparative advantage, market demand and growth potential can
sustainably reduce poverty and food insecurity, improve the competitiveness of the agricultural sector, generate employment
opportunities in the rural economy, and create broad economic multiplier effects that transform the rural sector. Such value chain
integration requires the development of mutually beneficial commercial linkages between small farmers/micro-entrepreneurs and
larger-scale consolidators such as private sector agribusiness. Participation of agribusinesses is fundamental to generate demand
and create markets that reliably absorb output from small farms and micro-enterprises; agribusinesses serve as engines of rural
transformation.
In light of the above, the project will support small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs (or their organisations) and agribusinesses to
improve their operations and integrate contractually within selected value chains. In this perspective, commodity selection is
fundamental. Commodities that respond to growing demand from domestic, regional and global markets, ensure nutritional benefits for
both producers and consumers, and can be aligned to comply with food quality and safety standards, will be prioritised under the
project. It should be noted that the robust macro-economic growth experienced by Bangladesh over the past decades have led to
sharp growth of the middle class. This has resulted in rapidly increasing demand for meat, vegetables, fruit, and milk products.
Quality and food safety concerns among these consumers is increasing, creating rising demand for certified high quality food.
Goal and objective. The project goal is to sustainably increase the income, food security and nutrition of marginal and small farmers
and micro-entrepreneurs across selected value chains. The development objective is the sustainable growth of selected rural
commodity value chains with comparative advantage, market demand, growth potential, and backward linkages to small farmers and
micro-entrepreneurs. Multiple output and outcome related data will be developed in order to measure RMTP's progress towards
attaining the goal and objective. The project is designed for a period of six years, 2020-2025.
Project area. The project has a national mandate and will invest throughout Bangladesh. Specific focus areas will be selected based
on poverty incidence, economic opportunity, implementability, and complementarity with ongoing investments in agricultural value
chain development.Two additional considerations will be taken into account: (i) avoiding investments in the same value chains and
same sub-districts already covered by other PKSF programmes (while seeking complementarities with World Bank-financed
Sustainable Enterprise Project); and (ii) focusing on areas where Partner Organisations (POs) have lending programmes and have
the capacity to implement value chain financing. A list of districts/sub-districts with high potential for the selected value chains is
presented in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).
Beneficiaries and benefits. The project's direct target groups consist of marginal and small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs. It
indirectly supports all value chain actors (input suppliers, traders, processors, advisory services). In terms of poverty, the project
targets the (i) poor, (ii) transitional poor, and (iii) enterprising poor. An estimated 445,000 households will be direct beneficiaries of the
project, of which 100,000 microenterprise borrowers, and 345,000 will benefit from value chain development activities. The benefits
include enhanced financial and social service delivery; improved technical capacities of livestock para professionals and para
extension service providers; food safety in the project area and beyond; better awareness of food safety and nutrition intake among
beneficiaries; improved animal health; and value chain development through improved market access, and development and
expansion of rural businesses.
Gender and youth. The Government, IFAD and PKSF place great importance on specifically supporting women to participate in the
mainstream of social and economic life, particularly poor women, women-headed households, and young women. The predominance
of women in microfinance programmes is well-established, and has improved women's access to finance, interaction with markets as
producers, sellers and consumers, and status as family decision makers. Based on the experiences of the IFAD financed Promoting
Agricultural Commercialization and Enterprises (PACE) project, it is expected that about 75% of micro-enterprise borrowers under
RMTP will be women. Bangladesh is considered to have a young population. According to ILO, the share of population between 15-
24 years is close to 20%, whilst the median age of the entire population is a little over 26 years old. Youth labour force participation is
low at 41%, while youth unemployment stands at 13%; however, of employed youth, some 20% are in irregular jobs. About 27% of
youth are neither in the labour force nor in education. The Government is committed to creating a positive environment for youth
empowerment. It has endorsed a National Youth Policy 2017 which promotes youth engagement in environment education and
protection, ICT growth, environment-friendly agriculture and industrialisation, good governance, sustainable development, and safe
food and commodity marketing.
Nutrition. The project will apply a nutrition lens to select value chains as well as project activities along value chains and micro-
enterprise interventions in ways that improve nutrition status of communities. Examples of nutrition sensitive value chain activities that
will be promoted are commodity-specific nutrition education, nutrition-sensitive extension, safe storage and introduction of food safety
standards. RMTP will establish partnerships with agencies active in nutrition awareness campaigns, including WFP, UNICEF, NGOs,
the on-going Enhancing Resources and Increasing Capacities of Poor Households towards Elimination of their Poverty (ENRICH) and
Ujjibito projects of PKSF, and the Bangladesh National Nutrition Council.
The project has three complementary components as follows:
2/25
Component 1: Value Chain Enhancement. This component will enable 445,000 microenterprises to sustainable expand their
activities through adoption of efficient production methods, compliance with internationally recognised food safety and
traceability standards, and strong market linkages. It will contribute to creating an enabling environment that promotes the
growth of micro and small enterprises, and strengthens their linkages with the agribusinesses and other value chain actors. It
has five sub-components: (i) organisation of producers; (ii) provision of technical and business services (including GGAP
compliance) to producers through private advisory services; (iii) integration of actors across selected value chains; (iv)
strengthening of downstream agribusinesses (including GGAP and HACCP compliance as required); and (v) policy dialogue
with Government.
Component 2: Financial Services. This component will provide sustainable financial services to micro-enterprises and to
growing/larger enterprises and agribusinesses. It has three sub-components: (i) provision of financial services to micro-
enterprises through partner organisations (microfinance institutions); (ii) provision of commercial finance to larger micro-
enterprises as well as small/medium agribusiness companies, through non-banking financial institutions (NBFIs); and (iii)
optimal utilisation of remittances through training to the family members of overseas workers.
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management. This component aims to strengthen PKSF and PO
capability as development organisations by leveraging trends in Information Communication Technology (ICT), financial
services, commercial platforms and new technologies, and to ensure that the project is managed satisfactorily. It has three
sub-components: (i) PKSF capacity building; (ii) POs capacity building; and (iii) project management (see organisation and
management section).
Project Management. RMTP will be managed by PKSF, an apex development organisation with an independent Board of Directors.
PKSF works through 200 licensed microfinance institutions (known as partner organisations or POs) which have a combined 9,500
branches across the country. Through this network, PKSF is currently providing inclusive finance and other services to 13 million poor
households. PKSF's aggregate assets amount to USD 707 million, including its active loan portfolio which currently stands at USD
178 million, with a recovery rate exceeding 99%. PKSF is supervised by the Financial Institutions Division of the Ministry of Finance.
PKSF will establish a Project Management Unit, integrated within its structure, for overall project management purposes. The PMU
will be headed by a Project Coordinator appointed from PKSF's pool of senior officials. PMU staff will consist of three officers
seconded from PKSF's core team and nineteen recruited from the market. The PMU will work with PKSF's Loan Operations Division
to implement the financial services programme through POs as per established processes and norms. This Division will assist with
the selection of qualified NBFIs for financing larger enterprises and agribusinesses. It will work with POs and selected service
providers for the implementation of the value chain component. PKSF’s support divisions such as Audit, Administration, Agriculture,
Human Resources, Accounts and Finance, Livestock, Research, Training, M&E, MIS and IT will provide relevant services to the
project.
IFAD has financed 4 projects implemented by PKSF, of which three are completed and one is ongoing. All projects financed have
been rated as highly successful. The projects are: (i) the USD 20 million Microfinance and Technical Support Project (MFTSP), which
covered 2003-10; (ii) the USD 22 million Microfinance for Marginal and Small Farmers Project (MMSFP), which covered 2005-11; (iii)
the USD 58 million Finance for Enterprise Development and Employment Creation Project (FEDEC) which covered 2008-14; and (iv)
the USD 93 million PACE which is currently ongoing.
The IFAD loan for RMTP will be passed on by MoF to PKSF in the form of: (i) a loan for the financial services component (component
2, with the exception of subcomponent 2.3); (ii) a grant for the value chain component (component 1); and, (iii) a grant for the
institutional strengthening and project management component (component 3). MoEWOE will directly receive grant funding from MoF
for implementing subcomponent 2.3.
Planning and M&E. The PMU/PKSF will be responsible for preparing the annual work plan and budget for RMTP, and for obtaining
approval from FID and IFAD. The plan will include activity plan along with targets and expenditure plan and should reflect overall
project targets and activities. IFAD supervision missions and mid-term review mission will offer opportunities for review of progress
and assessment of effectiveness of the project. An effective M&E system will be developed to measure indicators included in the log
frame. It will be part of a larger MIS system which will serve as an information and knowledge sharing platform. The M&E system will
be utilised as a management tool and will include assessment of progress and compliance, identification of constraints and proposed
remedial actions. All data will be disaggregated by gender, age, and geographical location.
Knowledge Management (KM) and Learning. The project's KM activities will support the effective flow of relevant information among
project staff, beneficiaries and other stakeholders. A comprehensive KM action plan will be developed in the early stages of
implementation. Output, outcome and impact data generated by the M&E system will inform case studies, briefs and reports. These
will be used for policy dialogue, peer-learning, and potential scaling-up. KM products will be communicated through multiple sources
including blogs, written publications, video and social media.
Sustainability and Exit Strategy. PKSF and its POs are institutionally and financially viable organizations that offer multiple loan
products to POs, and savings and loan products to four categories of borrowers respectively. ME loan is nearly half of POs’ loan
portfolio. Both PKSF and POs will continue to offer financial services beyond the project period. PKSF generates surplus every year
from its operations and will continue to raise funds and refinance its loan operations.
Economic and financial analysis: The Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) is 35%. The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR)
for the 20-years period is 30% with benefit cost ratio of 1.29. The project earns a Net Present Value (NPV) of USD 275 million for the
20-year period with 6.2% discount rate.
Various technologies, business services, production techniques, and marketing arrangements are expected to be adopted and
continued way beyond the project period. From the start, the project will promote commercial provision of business services.
Technologies and farm practices such as use of high quality compost, motorized deep placement of urea/DAP and compost/DAP
briquettes for aromatic rice will reduce urea use by 30%, contribute to reduction of greenhouse gasses by 30% and increasing yield by
15%. These practices coupled with the commercial approach for provision of services and inputs and the institutional arrangement of
the project will ensure a high likelihood for long-term sustainability and ensure safe exit of the project support
3/25
Financial management. PKSF has an effective FM system managed by a strong team of accountants and finance professionals. It
consistently applies the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) across its operations. Partner POs are registered and
supervised by the Micro Credit Regulatory Authority. POs are governed by General Bodies and Governing Bodies/Executive
Committees in order to ensure good governance and transparency. It is evident that there are significant improvements in PO
governance due to regular interventions of PKSF. There is an adequately staffed Internal Audit Unit (IAU) in PKSF. The IAU prepares
an annual plan for internal audit reviews within PKSF and POs. These audits mainly focus on compliance review and checking of
payment vouchers prior to issuing payments to suppliers/vendors. There may be room for the inclusion of risk review in the internal
audit process; this will be assessed during implementation. RMTP accounts will be audited annually by the private firm that audits
PKSF in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISA) and in compliance with IFAD's Handbook for Financial Reporting
and Auditing. The audited project financial statements together with the auditor’s opinion will be submitted to IFAD in English within 6
months of the end of the fiscal year. PKSF will open a Designated Account and an Operating Account for the purposes of the project.
MoEWOE will open a Designated Account for the administration of the grant proceeds.
Project financing / co-financing strategy and plan. The project financing plan is presented in table 3. It will be financed an IFAD loan of
USD 80.0 million, an IFAD grant of USD 1.0 million, PKSF contribution of USD 13.0 million, cofinancing of USD 8.3 million, private
sector contribution of USD 4.6 million, POs contribution of USD 82.2 million, NBFIs investment of USD 10.0 million, and beneficiary
equity of USD 0.9 million. Subject to approval by relevant authorities in Denmark, the Embassy of Denmark in Bangladesh is
intending to provide DKK 55 million (equivalent to approx. USD 8.3 million at prevailing exchange rates) for the project. The potential
Denmark funding would be administered by IFAD, and utilised to cofund Component 1 (Value Chain Development). The USD 1
million grant will be utilized to finance activities under subcomponent 2.3. The objective is to develop the skills of households receiving
remittances so that they can invest in micro-enterprises and improve their economic status in a sustainable manner.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
With a population of 168 million (May 2019), a land area of 130,170 km2, and a population density of 1,291 people per km2,
Bangladesh is one of the most densely populated countries in the world.
Political context. The Constitution of Bangladesh, adopted in 1972, establishes the country as a parliamentary republic.
Bangladesh has been politically relatively stable over the past decade. The 2018 general elections proceeded in an orderly
manner and resulted in a landslide victory for the Awami league. Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, leader of the Awami league,
presented the new cabinet early January 2019. However, underlying risk factors include selective application of the rule of law,
transparency concerns, and potential political conflict.
Macroeconomic context. Bangladesh's economic growth has been phenomenal, and the country has graduated to lower middle
income status. Real GDP growth averaged 6.3% p.a. over the past decade, and reached 7.3% in 2017, the highest in Asia. This
growth is driven by increasing private consumption, public spending, private investment flows, manufacturing exports (mainly
garments), agricultural growth and remittance inflows. Furthermore, at 27% the debt-to-GDP ratio is among the lowest in Asia.
However, inflation reached 5.8% in 2018, driven mainly by food-price inflation of 7.1% caused by supply shocks. Both the current
account deficit and fiscal deficit increased in 2018. Despite these weaknesses, the macroeconomic fundamentals are solid, and
GDP is projected to grow annually at an average of 7.7% over the next five years. With the right set of policy reforms, growth
could be even stronger.
According to the central bank (Bangladesh Bank, Annual Report FY2016), the sectoral composition of output continues to shift
from agriculture to services and industry. Services now accounts for 53.1% of GDP, industry for 31.5%, and agriculture for 15.4%.
However, 40.6% of the population is employed in agriculture. It is noted that the rural non-farm sector accounts for 36% of GDP.
By 2015, Bangladesh had made significant progress on the MDG targets, substantially reducing poverty and the poverty gap
ratio, reducing child malnourishment, increasing school enrollment, improving gender parity in education, reducing infant
mortality, and enhancing health care. However, much more needs to be done to achieve the SDGs by 2030, particularly in
reducing hunger and poverty, increasing employment opportunities, and creating decent jobs for women.
Poverty. Although Bangladesh has made impressive progress in tackling poverty over the past two decades, the incidence of
poverty remains significant. It is estimated that the national poverty rate declined from 49% in 2000 to 24.3% in 2016; during the
same period, the proportion living in extreme poverty fell from 34% to 13%. However, this means that some 41 million people still
live below the poverty line. Rural poverty halved over this period, from 52% to 26.4%, but remains higher than urban poverty
(18.9%).
Key drivers of rural poverty in Bangladesh include: (i) small farm sizes; (ii) landlessness; (iii) unemployment and under-
employment; (iv) insufficient productive infrastructure; (v) outdated technology; (vi) limited access to financial services; (vii) lack
of social services; (viii) weak local institutional capacity; and, (ix) climate change. Productive investment is needed in rural areas
to accelerate inclusive economic growth, create employment and decent work, and reduce poverty.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
Policies. Vision 2021 aims to transform Bangladesh into a middle-income country, eliminate food deficits and attain self-
sufficiency in food production. The Seventh Five Year Plan (2016-2020) focuses on: (i) economic growth and poverty reduction;
(ii) inclusiveness; and (iii) sustainable development resilient to climate change and natural disasters. Within this Plan, the
Government has set ambitious targets for poverty reduction (to 18.6%) and extreme poverty reduction (to 8.9%).
4/25
Agriculture policy. With respect to agriculture, the Plan aims to accelerate the transformation from semi-subsistence to
commercial agriculture through productivity gains, diversification, value addition and agro-processing. It supports diversification
into higher value-added activities and employment opportunities for surplus agriculture labourers into non-farm activities. It aims
to integrate environmental, climate and disaster risk reduction considerations into all activities. The National Agriculture Policy
encourages sustainable and profitable agriculture through new technologies, increased productivity, remunerative employment,
commercialisation, quality standards, agro-processing, nutrition-sensitive cropping, and women's empowerment.
Agricultural trade. While the volume of agricultural exports remained relatively stable over the past five years, significant export
increases have been observed for fisheries products. Food grains (rice and wheat), edible oil and oilseeds, milk and milk
products, spices, sugar and coconut oil were the main agricultural imports. The value of imported edible oil and oilseeds has
surged since 2011, while rice imports declined due to increasing domestic production.
Microfinance. Currently about 33 million clients are accessing microfinance (and related non-financial services) in Bangladesh,
offered by some 700 microfinance institutions (MFIs). These institutions include 3 large MFIs, around 50 medium sized MFIs, and
200 small and 450 very small MFIs. Bangladesh is often named the cradle of microfinance and the sector has been growing
steadily since its inception four decades ago. The correlation between growth of microfinance and poverty reduction in
Bangladesh is well-documented.
Access to microfinance. A recently published DFID funded study concludes that the demand for microenterprise loans is
increasing fast, with the outstanding loan balance doubling between 2011 and 2016. In 2016, the demand for microcredit
amounted to roughly USD 8.7 billion while the supply amounted to only USD 2.7 billion. Microenterprises are currently unable to
access commercial finance, with around 80% of microenterprises still largely depending on their own capital or microcredit to
finance their operations. The vast majority of microenterprises still consider access to finance as their main constraint for
sustained growth.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
Climate change. Bangladesh ranked second in the 2016 Climate Change Vulnerability Index, and it will likely suffer more from
climate change by 2025 than any other country. Rainfall during monsoon seasons is expected to increase by 10%-15% by 2030
and 27% by 2075; a rising sea level is expected to inundate 11% of the land area by 2050; 14% more of the country may become
extremely prone to floods by 2030; cyclones in the Bay of Bengal will occur more frequently due to increasing temperature; and
the peak intensity of cyclones may increase by 5%-10%. Coastal salinity problems will likely worsen as changing rain patterns
reduce the amount of dry season drainage water supply from upstream rivers. Overall, crop production might be reduced by 30%
by the end of the century; rice production could fall by 8%, and wheat production by 32% by 2050. These types of impacts make
adaptation a necessity, not only for farmers in terms of cropping choices, but also for other value chain actors and service
providers. Producers across rural areas are demonstrating signs of autonomous adaptation. In addition, the Government and
development partners have implemented a wide range of climate change adaptation projects, which have built knowledge and
capacity that RMTP can leverage.
Nutrition. Good nutrition is vital for economic and social development; undernutrition can lead to economic loss of 2%-16% of
GDP, and child malnutrition carries irreversible consequences in cognitive and physical development. Current levels of
malnutrition in Bangladesh are alarming. Child stunting (low height-for-age) is estimated at 36%, acute child undernutrition (low
weight-for-height) stands at 14%, and low birth weight affects 22% of new born babies. Micronutrient deficiencies (also known as
hidden hunger) remain a major challenge: 21% of children are vitamin A deficient, 45% are zinc deficient and 40% are iodine
deficient, while 50% of pregnant women are anemic (iron deficient).
Although household food security has improved in recent years, intra-household food distribution is uneven, and sacrifices are
mostly made by women and adolescent girls. At national level, 66% of women do not meet minimum dietary diversity standards;
this rises to 70% in rural areas. Only 28% of children meet the minimum dietary diversity requirement. Diets are overwhelmingly
dominated by rice consumption, with very low consumption of fruits, vegetables (where intake barely reaches half the minimum
requirement), pulses and livestock products. At the same time, there is a rapid increase in overweight and obesity, which affects
24% of women and is associated with increased consumption of trans-fats, ultra-processed foods and sugar-sweetened
beverages.
Climate change is expected to have detrimental consequences for food security and nutrition, reducing crop production as well
as micronutrient content of foods due to increased salinity. Despite improvements in gender equality, women still lag behind in
educational attainment and literacy, which coupled with high rates of early marriage and early pregnancies (24%) are major
factors affecting food security and nutrition.
Gender. Gender equality in Bangladesh has been improving over time, and the country is seen as making good progress on
various gender indicators. For example, gender parity has been achieved in primary and secondary education, and maternal
mortality is declining by 5.5% per year. The Global Gender Gap Index (WEF, 2017) ranks Bangladesh as the best performer in
South Asia, one of the best performers across all of Asia and the Pacific, and the 47th best performer globally of 144 countries
rated. However, significant gaps remain; women continue to face disadvantages in access to economic opportunities, social
services, political participation, and financial control. Rates of violence against women are alarming; UNWOMEN estimates that
two-thirds of married women have experienced some form of partner violence. The Gender Development Index (UNDP, 2017)
ranks the country in 136th position of 189 countries rated.
18.
19.
In rural areas, women play a large, vital and growing role in agriculture, nutrition, food security and a wide range of income-
generating activities. However, women have little participation in decision-making as their economic contributions are rarely
recognized by the family and society.
5/25
Youth. Bangladesh is considered to have a young population. According to ILO, the share of population between 15-24 years is
close to 20%, whilst the median age of the entire population is a little over 26 years old. Youth labour force participation is low at
41%, while youth unemployment stands at 13%; however, of employed youth, some 20% are in irregular jobs. About 27% of
youth are neither in the labour force nor in education.
20.
The Government is committed to creating a positive environment for youth empowerment. It has endorsed a National Youth
Policy 2017 which promotes youth engagement in environment education and protection, ICT growth, environment-friendly
agriculture and industrialisation, good governance, sustainable development, and safe food and commodity marketing.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
21.
22.
23.
24.
The poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition indicators outlined above confirm that: targeted productive investments are required
in rural areas to accelerate inclusive economic growth, reduce poverty sustainably and improve food security; and, such
investments need to increasingly focus on sectors and commodities with maximum positive impacts on nutrition.
IFAD experiences in Bangladesh have demonstrated that supporting small farmers to increase agricultural productivity and
output has positive effects on household income growth, poverty reduction, and food security. Similarly, supporting micro-
entrepreneurs to start and/or expand micro-enterprises generates income growth, improves food security, and reduces poverty.
However, it has become clear that fragmented investment in primary production and micro-enterprises, without meaningful
integration in profitable value chains connected with expanding markets, does not generate growth of the scale necessary to
transform the rural economy and sustainably eliminate poverty.
Limited experiences in Bangladesh, and well-documented experiences globally, indicate that successful small farmer and micro-
entrepreneur integration within commodity value chains with comparative advantage, market demand and growth potential can
sustainably reduce poverty and food insecurity, improve the competitiveness of the agricultural sector, generate employment
opportunities in the rural economy, and create broad economic multiplier effects that transform the rural sector. Such value chain
integration requires the development of mutually beneficial commercial linkages between small farmers/micro-entrepreneurs and
larger-scale consolidators such as private sector agribusiness. Participation of agribusinesses is fundamental to generate
demand and create markets that reliably absorb output from small farms and micro-enterprises; agribusinesses serve as engines
of rural transformation.
In light of the above, the project will support small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs (or their organisations) and agribusinesses to
improve their operations and integrate contractually within selected value chains. In this perspective, commodity selection is
fundamental. Commodities that respond to growing demand from domestic, regional and global markets, ensure nutritional
benefits for both producers and consumers, and can be aligned to comply with food quality and safety standards, will be
prioritised under the project. It should be noted that the robust macro-economic growth experienced by Bangladesh over the past
decades have led to sharp growth of the middle class. This has resulted in rapidly increasing demand for meat, vegetables, fruit,
and milk products. Quality and food safety concerns among these consumers is increasing, creating rising demand for certified
high quality food.
B. Lessons learned
25.
In Bangladesh, IFAD has financed 33 projects with a total value of USD 2.1 billion. The points below summarise key lessons
learned which are relevant for the project under review.
Microenterprise development. This has proved to be an effective instrument for rural poverty reduction and job creation.
However, demand for microenterprise finance far exceeds supply; substantial incremental investment is required. The high
cost of funds as well as regulatory constraints prevent microfinance institutions (MFIs) from expanding microenterprise lending
substantially. As a result, loan sizes for microenterprises average only USD 1,395, while the majority are not served at all.
Microenterprise employment. Under the ongoing Promoting Agricultural Commercialisation and Enterprises Project (PACE),
the Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF), an apex development financing organisation, has financed 604,566 cottage
microenterprises (far above the design target of 61.200), generating 1,399,032 full time jobs (2.31 jobs per microenterprise).
This demonstrates the positive employment effects of investing in microenterprises.
Missing middle. About 87% of enterprises are microenterprises, of which 58% are rural. Household microenterprises employ
on average 2.0 people, microenterprises 5.4 people, small enterprises 7.7 people, medium enterprises 99.4 and large
enterprises 660.4 people. There is a large gap in scale between small and medium enterprises. MFIs are not able to scale up
operations to serve larger enterprises, while financial institutions have not been able to scale down operations to reach smaller
enterprises. There is scope to involve smaller financial institutions, particularly non-banking financial institutions, to reach the
missing middle.
Service delivery. Project experiences have demonstrated the importance of combining financial and non-financial services to
maximise results and impact at microenterprise level. Non-financial services include advisory and business services, improved
technologies, value chain integration, and market promotion. Under previous PKSF projects, this combination of services had
positive effects on microenterprise turnover and income.
Food safety. Project experiences have demonstrated the importance of introducing systems for ensuring compliance with food
quality and safety standards. The Bangladesh Institute of Public Health indicated that 50% of food items tested between 2001-
2009 was adulterated (particularly pesticide residue), posing health risks for domestic consumers and preventing export.
Under PACE, introduction of standards on fisheries products has proved to be successful; this needs to be expanded to all
food products.
PKSF institutional capability. IFAD's strategy in working with PKSF has been to expand core PKSF programmes, and to
introduce innovations which PKSF then takes to scale using core resources as well as other partners' financing. This strategy
has proven to be very successful. The first project (MFTSP) supported PKSF to graduate from lending only to lending with
associated services; this is now practised across all PKSF operations. The second project (MFMSP) helped PKSF to enter
into agricultural lending; agriculture loans now constitute 12% of its portfolio. The third project (FEDEC) assisted PKSF to
introduce micro-enterprise lending and business clusters; micro-enterprises now account for 31% of its portfolio. The fourth
project (PACE, ongoing) is helping PKSF to upgrade agriculture lending towards a commercial approach, proving that small
farms and rural microenterprises are economically viable. The lesson is that PKSF is capable of growing institutionally on an
incremental basis.
6/25
Key principles for IFAD engagement
26.
The project has been conceptualised on the basis of the elements outlined below.
build on PKSF/PO successful microfinance programmes, but focus on selected sub-sectors and commodities that have
comparative advantage, market demand and growth potential;
combine financial and non-financial services to enable microenterprises to participate sustainably and effectively in high value
commodity supply chains;
facilitate direct linkages between microenterprises and agribusinesses to create market efficiencies;
develop micro-entrepreneur integration within commodity value chains to create broad economic multiplier effects that
transform the rural sector and reduce poverty;
apply a nutrition-sensitive approach to the selection of commodities to be promoted, to ensure better nutrition for producers
and consumers;
specifically target women through the selection of commodities/value chains in which women are heavily involved (poultry,
livestock, homestead production);
introduce compliance with food safety and quality standards at producer and processor levels, to ensure the supply of safe
food for producers and consumers;
leverage commercial finance through non-banking financial institutions for investment in larger enterprises and agribusinesses
to expand the market for micro-enterprise output;
strengthen the capability of PKSF and POs as development institutions by leveraging trends in financial services, commercial
platforms and new technologies.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
27.
28.
Project goal and objective. The project goal is to sustainably increase the income, food security and nutrition of marginal and
small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs across selected value chains. The development objective is the sustainable growth of
selected rural commodity value chains with comparative advantage, market demand, growth potential, and backward linkages to
small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs. Multiple output and outcome related data will be developed in order to measure RMTP's
progress towards attaining the goal and objective.
Project area. The project has a national mandate and will invest throughout Bangladesh. Specific focus areas will be selected
based on poverty incidence, economic opportunity, implementability, and complementarity with ongoing investments in
agricultural value chain development. The following procedure will be applied to select districts/sub-districts (upazilas) where
project activities will take place:
First, PKSF will identify districts/sub-districts that have: (i) already developed production clusters of the selected value chains;
and, (ii) the potential to develop production clusters of the selected value chains.
Second, PKSF will map the incidence of poverty in all districts/sub-districts of the country.
Third, PKSF will make a final selection of the target areas covering districts/sub-districts with existing/potential value chain
clusters and with greater incidence of poverty.
29.
Two additional considerations will be taken into account: (i) avoiding investments in the same value chains and same sub-
districts already covered by other PKSF programmes (while seeking complementarities with World Bank-financed Sustainable
Enterprise Project); and (ii) focusing on areas where Partner Organisations (POs) have lending programmes and have the
capacity to implement value chain financing. A list of districts/sub-districts with high potential for the selected value chains is
presented in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).
30.
Target groups. RMTP will directly target marginal and small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs engaged in producing or
processing field crops, horticulture, aquaculture and livestock. Within these groups, the project will focus on the ultra poor, the
transitional poor, and the enterprising poor. These are characterised below:
Ultra-poor (approx. 10% of beneficiaries): The ultra-poor are typically landless (or have up to 0.04 acres of land) and depend
on unskilled wage labour and seasonal migration. They have poor literacy and numeracy skills. They typically spend around
BDT 4,300 per year to purchase food items. The ultra-poor are involved in producing commodities such as poultry and small
ruminants. This group is directly targeted by PKSF's pro-poor lending programme (Buniad).
Transitional poor (approx. 27% of beneficiaries): The transitional poor typically possess between 0.5 and 1.49 acres of land,
including homestead land, and/or are involved in sharecropping and wage labour. On average, they spend BDT 5,600 per year
to purchase food items. They participate in crop, livestock and poultry value chains, and sometimes supply output to micro-
enterprises. The transitional poor have been able to gradually increase their asset base over the past 5-10 years by
diversifying their income base, and in some cases by receiving remittances. This group is targeted by PKSF’s household
income-generating activities lending programme (Jagoron) or seasonal agricultural lending programme (Sufolon).
Enterprising poor (approx. 63% of beneficiaries). The enterprising poor typically possess more than 1.5 acres of land, and
spend an average of BDT 7,500 per year to purchase food items. between 30 and 90 decimals of land (30% to 90% of an
acre). They operate micro-enterprises in crops/horticulture, aquaculture, livestock and poultry value chains, and supply output
to markets or larger enterprises. The enterprising poor are expanding land ownership, and in some cases receive remittances.
This group is targeted through PKSF’s Jagoron,Sufolon, and Agrosor (micro-enterprise) loan products.
7/25
31.
In addition, the project will indirectly target all other value chain actors, such as input suppliers, advisory service providers,
traders and processors.
32.
Microfinance groups will be the main entry point for value chain activities, although participation will also be open to micro-
entrepreneurs outside these groups. As per POs' regular practices, borrowers are included in microfinance groups for
administrative, transactional and organisational purposes. Microfinance groups typically consist of borrowers of all four loan
products. POs will make efforts to increase participation of Buniad borrowers in these groups.
33.
Targeting strategy. The project's targeting mechanisms are outlined below:
Geographical targeting: outlined in paragraph 28 above.
Procedural targeting: existing procedures will be applied for targeting under PKSF's four standard loan products. Standard
loan packages will correspond to the financial capacities of the ultra-poor, transitional poor and enterprising poor respectively.
Similar procedures will be established for the participation of non-banking financial institutions in lending to larger/ growing
enterprises and to agribusinesses.
Direct targeting: POs will identify and directly target microfinance groups that have the potential to upgrade production and
develop market linkages, and that have a higher proportion of ultra-poor borrowers.
Self-targeting: Micro-finance groups engaged in the selected value chains will have the option of forming into producers'
associations, with project support.
Empowering measures. Women are actively targeted as recipients of microfinance loans and PKSF financial literacy training.
34.
35.
36.
Gender. The Government, IFAD and PKSF place great importance on specifically supporting women to participate in the
mainstream of social and economic life, particularly poor women, women-headed households, and young women. Bangladesh
has made important progress in these areas through education, health, rural development and microfinance. The predominance
of women in microfinance programmes is well-established, and has improved women's access to finance, interaction with
markets as producers, sellers and consumers, and status as family decision makers. Based on PACE experiences, it is expected
that about 75% of micro-enterprise borrowers under RMTP will be women.
Under RMTP, women will be specifically targeted through: (i) selection of commodities/value chains in which women are heavily
involved (poultry, livestock, homestead production, high value horticulture); (ii) focus on activities in which women are
disproportionately involved (such as post-harvest and basic processing activities); (iii) customised skills training, business training
and financial literacy for both enterprise operation and command over household expenditure; (iv) nutrition training and focused
awareness communication; (v) access to financial services; (vi) training to PKSK and POs on creating an enabling environment
for women's participation. All planning and monitoring indicators will be gender-disaggregated, while the assessment of value
chain activities will include indicators to assess gender impact. Efforts will be made during implementation to introduce tools such
as 'Gender Action Learning System' (GALS) within PKSF.
Youth. Rural youth (both women and men) in Bangladesh today are generally better educated than previous generations, and
are in a better position to adopt new technology, acquire management skills, manage larger enterprises, and cope with business
risks. Drawing on experiences from PACE, and given country demographics, it is foreseen that youth will be automatically
targeted in multiple project activities. The project will proactively seek to encourage and include rural youth in its activities by: (i)
providing micro-enterprise loans based on specific business proposals to young people; (ii) offering customised business
management training; (iii) develop youth as master GGAP trainers and/or local service providers (such as paravets, lead farmers,
and technology promoters); and (iv) organize the youth to receive advanced technologies in production, basic processing, value
addition, and land-based fish farming. Youth-disaggregated data will be included in the project's M&E system.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
37.
The project has three inter-linked components: (i) value chain enhancement; (ii) financial services; and (iii) institutional
strengthening and project management. The main investment components (1 and 2) reflect the strategy of combining financial
and non-financial services to achieve maximum impact for micro-enterprises, while the third component institutionally
strengthens PKSF and POs.
Component 1: Value Chain Development
38.
This component will enable 445,000 microenterprises to sustainably expand their activities through adoption of efficient
production methods, compliance with internationally recognised food safety and traceability standards, and strong market
linkages. It will contribute to creating an enabling environment that promotes the growth of micro and small enterprises, and
strengthens their linkages with the agribusinesses and other value chain actors. It has five sub-components: (i) organisation of
producers; (ii) provision of technical and business services (including GGAP compliance) to producers through private advisory
services; (iii) integration of actors across selected value chains; (iv) strengthening of downstream agribusinesses (including
GGAP and HACCP compliance as required); and (v) policy dialogue with Government.
39.
The microfinance groups supported by POs are the main entry point for investments under component 1 (Figure 1). Based on the
principles of self-selection, cohesive microfinance groups can request additional support and become informal producers' groups
under sub-component 1.1. These groups will receive technical and business services to increase productivity and ensure
compliance with GGAP and HACCP (where required) under sub-component 1.2. Value chain integration support will connect
microenterprises to agribusinesses and markets under sub-component 1.3. Agribusinesses will be supported to adopt new
technologies, comply with HACCP (where required) and expand their market linkages under sub-component 1.4. The relevant
policy environment, and any needed reforms, will be covered by sub-component 1.5.
8/25
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
Sub-component 1.1: Organization. Where there is demand, the project will utilize the existing microfinance groups of PKSF POs
and organize producers into informal groups. These groups will serve as the main platforms for: (i) provision of training and
services to farmers and micro-enterprises; (ii) aggregation of output for marketing purposes; and, (iii) establishing linkages with
market actors. Linkages will be established with informal/formal private sector businesses[3] and their associations, service
providers, and other stakeholders.
Producers' groups will systematically receive a training package, organised by participating POs either directly or through
contracted service providers. This will include financial literacy, social issues, women's rights, environmental challenges, and
climate change impacts and mitigation. In addition, hands-on training will be provided on business management and contract
farming. Refresher training will be provided based on regular review of PA performance.
Nutrition awareness and related social and behavioral change communication (SSBC) messaging will also be provided to
producers' groups in order to enhance knowledge of the elements of a healthy diet. This will encourage and assist rural
households to make choices on how to spend incremental incomes in ways that improve diets and nutrition. Reinforcing
household messaging with publicity campaigns at community/market level regarding nutritious foods (and related processed
foods) is expected to increase demand for these foods.
PKSF will generate a long-list of agribusinesses that may be interested in buying agriculture, aquaculture and livestock produce.
POs will cluster producers' groups to enable them to meet the quantities and quality required by partner agribusinesses. The size
and proximity of clusters will be influenced by availability of public and private advisory services. Groups will be supported by
POs to enter into contractual arrangements with interested agribusinesses.
Figure 2
Sub-component 1.2: Technical and business services. The project will support micro-enterprises to better engage in selected
value chains. Key services will include: privatised advisory services to optimize production; preparation of business models and
plans; support to microenterprises for GGAP compliance; support to agribusinesses for HACCP compliance; assistance to source
financing; and development of contract management arrangements.
Private Advisory Services: A pool of highly knowledgeable and skilled local service providers such paravets, trainers, and certified
local agricultural technicians will be gradually developed to provide privatised technical and business services. PKSF will develop
a pre-qualification system for developing this pool of private advisors. It will issue periodic calls for interest inviting qualified
persons to apply. Candidates will be evaluated according to educational background, technical knowledge and experience; ability
to specifically target women microentrepreneurs and the youth will also be assessed.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
PKSF/POs will organise generic and advanced training for pre-qualified advisors in commodity-specific crop, livestock, and
aquaculture management. For cropping, specific attention will be devoted to the selection, application and safe handling of
pesticides. For livestock, training will cover para-veterinarian activities such as vaccinations and health care. For aquaculture,
training will focus on environmentally-sustainable production practices and fish health care. All advisory services will comply with
food safety protocols and standards for crops, fresh vegetables, livestock and aquaculture products.
9/25
Training modules will be prepared for each commodity value chain. To the extent possible, existing materials developed by PKSF
and POs will be updated, and new modules developed if needed. If required, PKSF will engage a qualified third party to assist
develop training materials. Upon completion, relevant expertise will be engaged to validate all training material to ensure the
highest quality possible. Accreditation of pre-qualified advisors will be issued upon passing a final examination. It is envisaged
that the majority of private advisors will be young (ie between 22 and 35 years of age).
POs will draw from the pool of accredited private advisors to meet value chain actors’ requests for services, ideally on cluster
basis. The provision of advisory services will be cost-shared by the project over three years on declining basis (80% in the first
year of operation; 50% in the second year; 30% in the third year). A transparent pricing system to establish the cost of private
advisory services will be developed.
GGAP. To address the increasing concern about food safety in Bangladesh, the project will assist to introduce Global Good
Agriculture Practices (GGAP) and the GGAP Chain of Custody Standard (Traceability) for groups of small farmers and clusters of
microenterprises involved in production of crops, livestock and aquaculture. Support will also be provided to enterprises involved
in produce handling/transport, feed manufacturing, and hatcheries to obtain GGAP if required.
PKSF will engage a recognized and accredited organization (international or national) to develop group food safety protocols for
selected commodities. These will be coordinated with the work of the Bangladesh Food Safety Network organized by FAO, as
well as the relevant activities of other development partners. This organization will train the private advisors to become GGAP
Master Trainers to train small farmers and micro-enterprises to introduce the relevant protocols. PKSF will also engage with an
different national institution accredited to undertake annual audit and certification of small farmers and microenterprises.
HACCP. Support will be provided to enterprises engaged in crop/meat/fish processing to obtain Hazard Analysis Critical Control
Point (HACCP) certification. The project will engage national HACCP experts to guide processors on obtaining HACCP
certification; if national experts are not available, training will be organized to develop this expertise. The training will cover the
Codex Alimentarius Commission's Good Manufacturing Practices and preliminary steps to full HACCP. Subsequently, PKSF will
engage an in-country company to support enterprises to undertake the necessary steps to obtain HACCP certification, as well as
an in-country certification authority for audit and certification. Halal standards will also be introduced where required by the
market.
Through mass media, the project will raise public awareness on the benefits to be derived from GGAP and HACCP compliance
for domestic consumers, producers, processors and exporters. If required, the project will contract an advertising company to roll
out the campaign.
Technology. Working through private advisors, the project will promote appropriate modern technologies in the selected value
chains, such as deep placement of urea; vertical production systems for aquaculture; driers for vegetables and fruits; drip and
micro irrigation; and modern rice mills. Financing is allocated for feasibility studies, training, technical assistance and, in
appropriate situations, machinery and equipment.
Sub-component 1.3: Value chain integration: The project will focus on a number of sub-sectors and commodities that have
comparative advantage, market demand and growth potential; that are produced by small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs; that
are aggregated in geographical clusters to ensure economies of scale and the possibility of private sector linkages; and that have
potential to improve food and nutrition security for both producers and consumers. The value chains the project support fall into
three broad categories:
Crops/horticulture/legumes: (i) high value cereal crops (e.g. aromatic and fine rice); (ii) high value fruits and vegetables
(including dark green leafy vegetables); and (iii) pulses (e.g. lentils, mung bean, chickpeas), beans, and seeds; (iv) related
trading and processing.
Livestock: (i) dairy production; (ii) red meat (e.g. cattle, goats, sheep, and buffalo); (iii) poultry (including water birds and
turkey) and eggs; (iv) related trading and processing.
Aquaculture: (i) technology-based aquaculture (e.g. mud crab, carp and tilapia, crayfish and high value local species,
particularly small fish); (ii) related trading and processing.
Within these broad categories, over time the project will assist POs to select other commodities that have high value and growing
demand, and that are nutrition sensitive. Additional factors, such as environmental considerations and food safety, will also be
strengthened.
Value chain governance. Where needed, the project will assist to establish commodity-level multi-stakeholder platforms (value
chain committees) bringing together microenterprise groups, agribusinesses, input suppliers, transporters, researchers, public
advisory services, private advisors and end market representatives. These platforms will promote linkages among buyers,
producers and service providers as well as contract farming and similar mechanisms. They will liaise with line ministries to ensure
cooperation among value chain actors and Government.
Value chain subprojects. The project will support PKSF to undertake countrywide value chain analyses for selected commodities
to identify entry points for implementation. On this basis, PKSF will issue requests for proposals (RFPs) from POs to develop and
implement value chain subprojects. Experiences from FEDEC and PACE show that such subprojects are a flexible, effective and
scalable method to implement value chain development. With the final package of interventions being decided after a value chain
study, activities can be targeted to directly address local value chain bottlenecks. Under FEDEC and PACE, tailormade value
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
chain activities are brought to a given local context. Some initial value chain activities introduced by FEDEC have already been
scaled-up by PACE to new regions.
10/25
Each subproject will consist of an integrated package of activities including: selection of interested downstream agribusinesses
interested to purchase the specific commodity from producers; selection of producers and/or their organisations; demonstrations
and training for producers; development of linkages (or contractual arrangements) among producers and agribusinesses;
technology transfer for producers and processors; provision of advisory services from privatised advisors and/or supply chain
managers; integration with other value chain actors; mechanisms to share market information; technical assistance; exchange
visits; and related activities. A typical subproject would link 3,200 producers to 7 downstream agribusinesses, and is expected to
cost an average of USD 100,000. The selection process for subprojects would be competitive; criteria would include the scale of
impact, financial viability, environmental sustainability, compliance with food safety standards; poverty targeting, gender focus
and nutrition benefits. POs whose proposals are selected for financing would be supported with qualified value chain facilitators
to manage and monitor subproject implementation. The detailed criteria and procedures for the competitive selection of value
chain subprojects are contained in the PIM (Annex 8).
Nutrition sensitive value chains: It is expected that 30%-50% of subprojects will be selected based on their nutritional potential
combined with business potential. Development of these subprojects will follow IFAD's guidance note on nutrition-sensitive value
chain approaches. As a first step, an analysis of the nutritional situation will be undertaken to obtain a better understanding of the
major nutritional challenges in the project areas, and to outline the nutrition potential of various commodities. Commodities that
can address nutritional problems while also having potential for market growth will be prioritized. A study that has been recently
conducted by the Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT, Appendix III) outlines how such analysis can be carried out and identifies
nutrition opportunities in cropping, aquaculture and livestock. Context- and commodity-specific studies will then be carried out to
identify challenges and opportunities in developing the relevant value chains, followed by stakeholder consultations and definition
of specific investments. These studies may best be commissioned at the PKSF or PO level, to take advantage of a consolidated
analysis that can cut across locations or commodities. Nutrition-sensitive value chain activities will include the use of nutrition-
sensitive inputs, nutrition-sensitive extension and communication, safe storage and food safety.
Recognising that improved incomes do not automatically lead to better nutrition outcomes, the project will hire a nutrition
specialist to assist the POs with the design, implementation and monitoring of nutrition-sensitive value chain investments and
social behavior change communication. The specialist will work with PO staff to develop appropriate training courses and
materials to raise awareness and understanding of nutrition issues, and so ensure that nutrition-sensitive subprojects are
designed and implemented well. In order to take advantage of existing knowledge and expertise on nutrition in the country, RMTP
will pursue partnerships with relevant UN organizations, NGOs, PKSF projects like ENRICH and Ujjibito, and the Bangladesh
National Nutrition Council.
Sub-component 1.4 Enterprise strengthening: The project will provide specialised consultancy support to downstream
agribusinesses in: (i) food safety standards and traceability; (ii) introduction of new products like dried fruit, fruit juice, etc.; (iii)
market entry studies for both domestic and export markets; (iv) trial shipments for domestic and export markets as required; (v)
product branding including geographical indication, accompanied with GGAP, including GGAP labelling; and (vi) operational
business planning for small downstream agribusinesses with potential for rapid growth.
Agribusinesses supported under component 2.2 and promising producers' groups will be the main beneficiaries of enterprise
strengthening services. PKSF will cooperate with non-banking financial institutions to identify agribusinesses in need of such
services. A rapid assessment shall identify qualified third parties to be contracted by PKSF for the provision of the services.
The project will generally not provide direct subsidies for the business operations of farmers, microenterprises or agribusinesses.
However, PKSF will develop a scale for provision of targeted subsidies to training recipients and downstream enterprises to
catalyse the introduction of new technologies, specific services and products, and contract farming arrangements.
Sub-component 1.5: Policy dialogue. Supported by the IFAD Country Office, PKSF will undertake policy dialogue with concerned
Government institutions on key topics relevant for the project. Possible topics may include: reviewing regulations governing PO
loan portfolio structure; the revision of outdated sectoral policies; increasing micro-enterprise loan ceilings to enable introduction
of new technologies; revisiting regulations governing the livestock sub-sector; allowing establishment of commercial hatcheries
for mud crablets; establishing an ISO 17025 accredited laboratory for analysis of residue of pesticide and heavy metal; and other
issues in financial services and selected sectors. Key policy outputs are: relevant sector policies reviewed and adjusted where
appropriate; regulations governing PO loan structure reviewed and adjusted where appropriate; and relevant livestock sector
policies reviewed and adjusted where appropriate. IFAD will also follow the process of UN reform and the role of the Resident
Coordinator in refining policy engagement.
65.
PKSF will undertake the following steps for successful policy dialogue: (i) identify the policy issue in consultation with relevant
stakeholders and experts; (ii) prepare an evidence-based policy paper with assistance from independent experts; (iii) organize
awareness building activities to share the analysis and recommendations; (iv) propose policy changes to relevant authorities; and
(v) ensure continuous follow-up of the policy recommendations.
Component 2: Financial Services
66.
This component will provide sustainable financial services to micro-enterprises and to growing/larger enterprises and
agribusinesses. It has three sub-components: (i) provision of financial services to micro-enterprises through partner organisations
(microfinance institutions); (ii) provision of commercial finance to larger micro-enterprises as well as small/medium agribusiness
companies, through non-banking financial institutions (NBFIs); and (iii) optimal utilisation of remittances through training to the
family members of overseas workers.
67.
Sub-component 2.1: Financial services through POs: As mentioned earlier, PKSF offers four loan products through POs: (i)
Buniad (ultra-poor loans); (ii) Jagoron (household income-generating loans); (iii) Sufolon (seasonal agricultural loans); and (iv)
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
Agrosor (microenterprise loans). Demand for micro-enterprise loans across the country is very high, and growing faster than the
other three loan products. Interest rates to final borrowers typically range from 22% to 25%.
11/25
The project will provide substantial resources to PKSF to expand its microenterprise lending programmes through POs. These
resources will be utilised exclusively for financing the selected commodities/value chains. It is estimated that an additional
100,000 microenterprises will be financed, with an average loan size of BDT 120,000. Since lending resources will revolve at PO
level, it is envisaged that these new borrowers will receive several cycles of loans.
PKSF will apply its existing business model, standard operating procedures, and lending terms and conditions to administer these
resources. It will lend to POs for lending to small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs. Similarly, POs will apply their standard
operating procedures and lending terms and conditions. Repayments from borrowers to POs will be revolved for similar
investments for the duration of the project. PKSF and POs are expected to adjust the terms and conditions for microenterprise
loans from time to time in line with market conditions, weighted average cost of funding, and approval by their managements and
governing bodies. PKSF will continue its existing loan approval, supervision and monitoring processes for PO lending
programmes, and make adjustments over time as necessary. As practiced by all previous and ongoing PKSF projects financed
by IFAD, PKSF will monitor increases in the outstanding loan portfolio from PKSF to POs to measure the utilization of the
project's lending resources, and will report accordingly.
Microenterprise borrowers within the value chain subprojects will receive loans in line with the existing practices of the respective
POs. Leasing (hire-purchase) will be encouraged for investments in power tillers, tractors, mechanical/motorized rice planters,
solar-powered drip/micro irrigation systems, automatic poultry slaughter houses, and other relevant activities.
Subcomponent 2.2: Commercial finance. The objective of this sub-component is to develop a new channel of financing for larger
microenterprises and small/medium agribusiness companies (the 'missing middle') which are currently neither clients of
microfinance institutions nor commercial banks. This financing will be administered by licensed non-banking financial institutions
(NBFIs), with interest rates to final borrowers typically ranging between 9% and 18%. NBFIs currently lend to small enterprises
(in one case offering special loan products for women entrepreneurs), but their agribusiness portfolios are limited due to financial
constraints.
The project will provide resources through PKSF to selected licensed NBFIs for this purpose. This would substantially expand the
market for the output produced by small farmers and micro-enterprises, which are the primary target groups of the project, and
improve their integration within the selected value chains. Larger agribusinesses will be encouraged to also enter into contract
farming arrangements with producers' groups and micro-enterprises, obtaining NBFI financing where required, with project
support in the form of technical assistance, technology transfer, and organisation of producers.
NBFIs will be a new type of PO for PKSF. RMTP is the first project through which PKSF will engage with POs that are not
registered under the Microfinance Act, but rather are licensed by Bangladesh Bank under the Financial Institutions Act (1993).
PKSF regulations have recently been adjusted to allow working with NBFIs.
The selection of NBFIs under the project will be competitive, based on an approved assessment process. PKSF will issue a
request for EOI from NBFIs interested to participate in the project. On this basis, a number of NBFIs will be invited to submit
proposals. In addition to standard financial criteria, NBFI selection criteria would include their interest to venture into this sector
leveraging their experience in other sectors, their willingness to lend to downstream value chain actors, their proposed lending
terms and conditions, and the amount of cost-sharing from their own resources. PKSF will enter into an agreement with each
selected NBFI which outlines the terms and conditions of project financing, and the parameters governing how the funds will be
utilised. This process may be repeated periodically during implementation.
NBFIs will assess the profitability, cash flow, reputation and credit history of entities applying for loans. Entities who are financed
by NBFIs will be supported by the project (under component 1) to enter into relationships with microenterprises and producers'
groups. The possibility of financing larger enterprises and agribusinesses also through a state-owned bank, such as
Karmasangsthan Bank, may be explored.
Participating NBFIs will finance agribusiness investments in capital equipment (on debt or hire-purchase basis) for relevant value
chain activities. Repayments will be revolved into new loans for the duration of the project implementation period and beyond.
Agribusiness selection criteria would include their commitment to enter into commercial relationships with targeted micro-
enterprises.
Sub-component 2.3. Utilisation of remittances. Millions of Bangladeshis live and work outside the country and send home an
estimated USD 20 billion annually in the form of remittances. These remittances are used for consumption, house improvements
and in some cases the purchase of land. Remittance receivers often do not invest these funds in sustainable economic activities
due to lack of skills, and fall back into poverty when the expatriate worker returns home.
A small in-loan grant will be provided to the Ministry of Expatriates' Welfare and Overseas Employment (MoEWOE), which is
mandated to handle non-resident Bangladeshi (NRB) affairs, for the promotion of diaspora investment and optimal utilisation of
remittances under the project. The objective would be to develop the skills of households receiving remittances so that they can
invest a portion of the remittances received into micro-enterprises, and sustainably improve their economic status. The MoEWOE
would identify remittance-receiving households in the project areas, and link them to project component 1.2 for the provision of
business and technical training to expatriate family members (mainly women and the youth). They would also be linked to sub-
component 2.1 for the provision of microfinance where required.
79.
Most remittance-receiving families are headed by women, and have underemployed youth. This sub-component will provide an
important contribution to women's economic empowerment any youth employment in the project areas. Piloted methodologies
will subsequently be scaled up across rural areas of Bangladesh.
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
This component aims to strengthen PKSF and PO capability as development organisations by leveraging trends in ICT, financial
services, commercial platforms and new technologies, and to ensure that the project is managed satisfactorily. It has three sub-
components: (i) PKSF capacity building; (ii) POs capacity building; and (iii) project management (see organisation and
management section).
12/25
In leveraging ICT solutions, the project will collaborate with and build upon the knowledge generated by the IFAD grant-funded
ongoing research by the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP). The aim of this grant is to overcome the persistent digital
divide between women and men in the mobile money market in Bangladesh. CGAP supports the introduction of new smart phone
apps to POs, as the penetration of smart phones in rural areas is increasing. Together with financial literacy training, the grant
expects to improve the role of women in financial decision making.
Sub-component 3.1 PKSF capacity building. Over time, PKSF has introduced numerous software modules covering financial
management, human resources management, PO management, and mobile financial service systems for POs. Through the
provision of technical assistance and training, the project will assist PKSF to gradually and carefully integrate additional ICT-
based solutions into its operations. The ICT solutions proposed below will be subject to feasibility studies and pilot phases, and
the availability of local service providers will be assessed, before they are introduced.
Distributed digital ledger technology (transparency engine). A recent technical assessment commissioned by IFAD investigated
the opportunities, risks and alignment of partners, and found the introduction of distributed digital ledger technology within PKSF
to be feasible. The project will support PKSF to create an information management and sharing platform built on distributed
ledger blockchain technology to ensure improved management of records and greater transparency in fund management. This
will allow borrowers, producers, associations, organisations, public entities, POs and PKSF to track sources of funding and to
better monitor the detailed credit history of clients. Over time, this will translate into lower interest rates for proven credit-worthy
borrowers and will facilitate their integration into the national banking system. Other financial institutions may eventually be invited
to use the platform as an input for loan appraisal decision making. ICT applications for blockchain use will also be developed.
PKSF will contract a qualified fintech service provider to develop the platform, related applications, a user guide and training
materials, and to train potential users. Other options, such as using blockchain application for commodity traceability, will be
assessed during implementation.
E-commerce platform. The project will upgrade PKSF's e-commerce platform for rural products and integrated business services,
which was established under PACE. It will leverage technology to connect rural producers (women, small farmers and micro-
entrepreneurs) with new sets of customers, creating a parallel marketplace. POs will be assisted to connect borrowers to the
platform and orient them on transactional methods – business to business (B2B) and business to consumer (B2C). The option of
technical cooperation with Alibaba/Ant Financial in upgrading this platform will be assessed.
Crowd-funding (fraternity funding) platform. Crowd-funding, which enables entrepreneurs to raise funding from multiple
individuals/investors, including migrant remitters, is now the second-largest financier of enterprises globally (after venture capital).
Subject to a positive assessment by a feasibility study, the project will support PKSF to create a crowd-funding platform and
associated marketing campaign. Two approaches will be promoted – initially the lending-based, peer to peer (P2P) model; and
eventually the equity-based model (such as the 'Bangladesh Angels' model, a pioneering angel investment network. The platform
owner (PKSF) will provide financial due diligence and legal/contractual services as it links investors to micro-enterprises and
agribusinesses. Interested entrepreneurs will be trained to prepare and disclose the financial information required. Technical
assistance on regulatory aspects will be provided to relevant authorities.
Microenterprise ICT. PKSF will develop an ICT platform and a mobile phone application for the sharing of advisory services
related to selected value chains (as well as household health and nutrition information). Users will be able to download illustrated
training modules. The platform will include an expert panel to respond to queries of producers' groups.
Subcomponent 3.3: PO Institutional Strengthening. The project will provide capacity building for POs in: (i) IT systems; (ii) value
chain management, integration, technology and contract intermediation; (iii) nutrition-sensitive value chain design and
implementation; and, (iv) new product development where required.
E. Theory of Change
88.
Millions of small farmers and microentrepreneurs in Bangladesh are unable to transition from subsistence production to
commercialised operations due to a range of factors: low productivity, outdated technologies, lack of differentiated produce, poor
quality of output, limited processing to add value, inadequate advisory services, insufficient access to financial services, absence
of structured markets, and competition from neighbouring countries. Moreover, unsafe application of pesticides and antibiotics, as
well as unhygienic transportation and distribution systems, raise serious consumer concerns about food safety. On the other
hand, medium and larger agribusinesses are interested in sourcing reliable and quality produce from small farmers and micro-
entrepreneurs. However, insufficient financial resources, an unorganized production base, and irregular supply of unreliable
quality prevent them from meeting the market demand. The project aims to address these constraints and foster win-win
commercial linkages between small farmers/micro-entrepreneurs and agribusinesses.
89.
The project will offer small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs access to improved production technologies, financial services and
market linkages. Producers will be organised and equipped with the necessary skills to comply with food safety standards. This
will allow producers to increase the quantity and quality of output, while upgraded market linkages will reduce market volatility
and ensure higher financial returns. It will also increase the availability of high quality produce available for agribusinesses, which
will be supported through commercial finance from NBFIs and technical assistance. In summary, the project will create synergy
among producers and agribusinesses, enabling sustained income growth and employment creation.
90.
While market demand will be the primary selection criterion for value chains, the project will promote several impact pathways to
improve food security and nutrition of small farmers. For food crops with nutrition improvement potential, food and nutrition
security will be improved through: (i) increased production of nutritious foods that meet dietary gaps; (ii) reduced post-harvest
loss and waste; (iii) increased consumption of these foods from own production; or (iv) increased consumption from local markets
due to the increased availability, affordability, quality and safety of these foods. For cash crops, improvements to food and
nutrition security will be generated by increased incomes and purchasing power. Nutrition campaigns and training on behavior
change communication will raise nutrition awareness and create demand for healthier food.
13/25
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
91.
92.
Alignment with SDGs. The project aims to assist the Government to address major elements of those Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) that fall within IFAD's comparative advantage. In particular, it will tackle SDG 1 (end poverty in all its forms
everywhere), SDG 2 (zero hunger), SDG 3 (ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages), SDG 5 (gender
equity), SDG 8 (promote inclusive and sustainable economic growth, employment and decent work for all), SDG 9 (industry,
innovation, infrastructure), and SDG 12 (responsible consumption and production).
Alignment with national policy. The project's rationale is guided by the Government's Seventh Five Year Plan, which covers
2015/16 to 2019/20. In particular, it addresses two of the Plan's key themes: (i) GDP growth acceleration, employment generation
and rapid poverty reduction; and, (ii) inclusion with a view to empower every citizen to participate in and benefit from the
development process. It is aligned with Bangladesh' renewed commitment on nutrition, shown through the re-establishment of
the Bangladesh National Nutrition Council (BNNC) and the recent approval of the Second Bangladesh National Plan of Action for
Nutrition (NPAN2) 2016-2025. In addition, it is in line with the Agricultural and Rural Credit Policy and Programme 2018-2019 of
the central bank.
93.
Alignment with IFAD policy. The project rationale is anchored in IFAD's mandate of rural transformation, its Strategic
Framework 2016-2025, and the specific COSOP strategic objectives (SOs) of economic and social empowerment of
disadvantaged groups (SO1), as well as their market access improvement and integration into profitable value chains (SO2).
Alignment with IFAD policies is further detailed in Table 1.
Table 1: Alignment with IFAD Policies
Targeting
policy
The project includes marginal and small farmers and microentrepreneurs in selected value chains in rural
areas. It will cover the ultra-poor, the transitional poor and the enterprising poor.
Gender equality and
empowerment policy
Women, especially young women, are at the centre of the project: more than 50% of value chain
participants will be women; about 75% of microenterprise loans will be disbursed to women borrowers;
and a proportional number of women will receive training on production techniques and business
management. Women will be the main participants in nutrition, social and environmental campaigns, and
agents of change at community level. Women's social and economic roles will be greatly enhanced. The
M&E system will generate gender sensitive data.
Mainstreaming
nutrition
The project promotes nutrition-sensitive value chains. Most of the commodities selected for value chain
development are likely to improve diets and nutrition of both producers and consumers. Good nutrition
practices in rural households will be promoted through campaigns and training; this will cover
consumption of nutritious foods from own production and promotion of healthy diets. RMTP will partner
with other projects in the country that promote food security and nutrition, as well as primary health care
and sanitation. The logframe has indicators to measure progress in nutrition security.
Rural youth
Young men and women are at the core of the project: educated youth will be trained as service providers
in all three sectors, and as master trainers in GGAP implementation; young microentrepreneurs will
receive larger loans to expand businesses and create wage employment; younger generations of the rural
population who are investing in agribusiness will be targeted for quick transfer of technologies.
Rural finance policy
PKSF is a renowned apex development finance institution that lends to more than 200 NGO-MFIs (partner
organizations). The project will expand PKSF’s portfolio of microenterprise loans to POs, which in turn will
lend to an additional 100,000 microenterprises. All participating POs are financially viable organizations
that will continue to offer financial services to microenterprises and other borrowers beyond the project
period. Finally, the project will engage in policy dialogue on rural finance issues.
IFAD environment and
climate change
strategy
The project promotes commercially viable solutions to specific environmental issues faced within the
selected value chains through appropriate technologies and proper production and processing practices.
Impact of climate change will be taken into consideration in the analysis of country-wide value chains,
promotion of business and livelihoods, and implementation of value chain subprojects.
Knowledge
management
The project has applied new guidance on best practices for logframes and results hierarchies, and will
have a dedicated M&E system as well as significant budget resources for knowledge management related
activities.
14/25
94.
95.
Partnerships. RMTP will actively seek partnerships with RBAs, development partners and the private sector. In particular, the
project builds on research generated by WFP and FAO on nutrition, as both institutions have developed a substantial knowledge
base in this area. Synergies will be developed with FAO's food safety, livelihoods, marketing and extension activities.
Complementarity with other development initiatives will be ensured through the annual Bangladesh Development Forum, which
provides a platform for policy, investment coordination, and partnership fostering, and also through the relevant Local
Consultative Groups (Government and development partners). RMTP will furthermore explore partnerships with: (i) the private
sector, including FinTechs; (ii) agencies leading on GGAP and HACCP; and (iii) relevant organisations operating in the fields of
rural enterprise development, financial services and new technologies; and (iv) relevant line ministries.
During implementation, there shall be substantial cooperation and learning between RMTP and other IFAD-financed projects,
particularly PACE. Agricultural value chain investments under PACE could receive additional support from RMTP when the
business case is convincing; the same applies for the PACE e-platform developed with Korean supplementary funding. For
extension services and productivity improvement, RMTP will seek partnerships with SACP and NATP2 (both implemented by
MoA). In due course, synergies with youth vocational training under PROVATi³ may be explored. Finally, practical experiences
from the IFAD-funded HILIP-CALIP project will be utilised during implementation. This project was able to establish effective
linkages at local level between the project, relevant Government departments such as DLS and DAE, as well as the Bangladesh
Forest Research Institute and World Fish.
96.
For nutrition, RMTP will collaborate with PKSF’s ENRICH and Ujjibito projects. Both projects work with ultra-poor families on food
security, nutrition, health care and income generating activities. At the PO level, synergies will be sought with other health and
nutrition programmes.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
97.
The total project cost amounts to USD 200 million over a six-year implementation period. All costs are estimated based on
currently prevailing prices in Bangladesh. Project costs by component are presented in Table 2.
Table 2: Project Cost Summary (USD '000)
IFAD
IFAD
Grant
Co-
Financiers
PKSF
all
Private
sector,
NBFIs &
Pos.
Beneficiaries
Total
Total
Component
Amount % Amount % Amount
% Amount % Amount % Amount
% Amount %
A. Value Chain
Development
Organization
363
5
Technical and
Business
service
Value chain
sub-project
implementation
Enterprise
strengthening
2 071
20
10 862
72
500
60
Policy Dialogue
600
Subtotal
14 397
60
41
B. Financial
Services
Micro-Finance
through PO
Commercial
Finance
48 215
36
10 000
50
Subtotal
58 215
38
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 016 13
498
2 307 22
691
4 243 28
334 40
400 40
0
0
0
8 300 24
1 189
0
0
0
0
0
0
10 756
0
10 756
7
7
0
0
0
3
8
0
7
5 808 76
4 646 44
5 808
4 647
5 808
0
0
0
10 454 30
0
0
76 405 56
10 000 50
86 405 56
0
877
0
8
7 685
100
10 592
100
0
0
7 685
100
0
0
877
0
0
3
5 481
100
7 685
35 216
100
100
0
0
0
0 135 377
100
0
20 000
100
0 155 377
100
C. Capacity
Building of
Remittance
Earners
D. Institutional
Strengthening
and Project
management
PKSF's
Capacity
Building
POs Capacity
Building
Project
Management
Subtotal
Total
0
0
1 000 100
15/25
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 000
100
1 961 100
335
86
5 092
84
7 388
80 000
88
40
0
0
0
0
1 000
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
8 300
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
55 14
964 16
1 019 12
0
0
1 961
100
0
0
0
0
0
0
390
100
6 055
100
8 407
100
100
12 964
7
96 859 48
877
0 200 000
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
98.
The project financing plan is presented in Table 3. It will be financed an IFAD loan of USD 80.0 million, an IFAD grant of USD
1.0 million, PKSF contribution of USD 13.0 million, cofinancing of USD 8.3 million, private sector contribution of USD 4.6 million,
POs contribution of USD 82.2 million, NBFIs investment of USD 10.0 million, and beneficiary equity of USD 0.9 million. A total of
USD 300.000 has been identified as IFAD climate finance. 
Table 3: Project Financing Plan
(US$ '000)
Local '000
Foreign
Local
Total
Percent
Foreign
Local
Total
Percent
IFAD
IFAD Grant
PKSF
Co-Financiers
Private Sector
POs
NBFI
Beneficiaries
 PKSF-Tax
Total
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
132
79 868
80 000
40.0
11 124
6 708 877
6 720 001
40.0
1 000
12 039
8 300
4 646
82 213
10 000
877
925
1 000
12 039
8 300
4 646
82 213
10 000
877
925
0.5
6.0
4.1
2.3
41.1
5.0
0.4
0.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
84 000
84 000
1 011 243
1 011 243
697 199
697 199
390 269
390 269
0.5
6.0
4.1
2.3
6 905 898
6 905 898
41.1
840 000
840 000
73 664
73 664
5.0
0.4
11 124
16 788 876 16 800 000 100.0
132
199 868
200 000
100.0
11 124 16 788 876 16 800 000
100.0
c. Disbursement
99.
Disbursement Profile
100.
RMTP´s withdrawal of funds and its use of loan proceeds are governed by the IFAD’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (LDH) and
Financing Agreement between IFAD and the Bangladesh Government. Applicable procedures of disbursement, financial
reporting and maintenance of appropriate project records will be described in details in a Letter to the Borrower subsequently
after signing the Financing Agreement between IFAD and the Bangladesh Government.
101.
After the Financing Agreement for RMTP enters into force, PKSF will sign a subsidiary Loan and Grant agreement in which the
Government of Bangladesh will on-lend a portion from the proceeds of the Loan as a subsidiary loan to PKSF. The remaining
portion of the loan will be provided in the form of a Grant to PKSF and for the Components of: Value Chain Enhancement and
Institutional Strengthening/Project Management.
102.
An online guided overview of IFAD financial management practices and procedures is available for project staff[1]. Project staff is
encouraged to avail this training to ensure an efficient disbursement and an appropriate fiduciary control.
103.
Three standard disbursement procedures are available for RMTP withdrawal of financing:
1.  Advance withdrawal
2.  Direct payment
3.  Reimbursement
104.
Advance withdrawal
16/25
105.
This modality is used to advance and/or replenish funds to a bank account as designated by the borrower. The Fund places a
limit on the amount to be advanced and/or replenished. Relevant details on the modality – which is project specific – are to be
agreed between the borrower and the Fund, and be detailed in the LTB.
106.
The ceiling amount will be a reasonable limit, sufficient enough to cover average projected eligible expenditures of RMTP for a
period of six months. The ceiling amount may be set depending on the level of expenditures as to be incurred based on (i) the
approved AWPB; and (ii) the project’s specific reporting of actual and projected expenditures foreseen within that AWPB period.
The Fund will ascertain and certify clearance of the figure to be advanced, which may vary during the implementation of the
project, depending on the projected expenditure requirements.
107.
Should it be found necessary to revisit the ceiling figure considered a reasonable limit at any time during project implementation,
this shall be subject to prior agreement between the borrower and the Fund, with communication by IFAD to the borrower
through modification of the LTB.
108.
The advance withdrawal is foreseen to be the principal method to be used for the disbursement of RMTP. The main conditions
precedent to withdrawal the initial advance from the Loan to the Designated Account (DA) of the Project are: (i) evidence that the
DA has been opened; (ii) authenticated specimen signatures of each authorised person that will operate the DA; and (iii)
sufficient evidence of the authority of the persons who will sign the withdrawal applications on behalf of the PKSF. The Project
Coordinator (PC) will ensure a proper cash flow from the Loan Account to the DA to ensure the implementation of the project is
not hindered. RMTP will use the IFAD Client Portal (ICP) for the submission of withdrawal applications.
109.
Subject to the recommendation of the first IFAD supervision mission, the project is expected to enter into the Straight Through
Processing (STP) to justify advances and seek replenishments. This facility was incorporated in the last stage of PACE.
110.
Supporting documentation and records of the expenditures claimed under the STP facility should be maintained and be readily
available for review by IFAD's supervision missions or any other review team assigned by IFAD and external auditors. The PMU
will be responsible to ensure the SOEs are elaborated in accordance with IFAD requirements.
111.
Direct payments
112.
This modality is used for eligible project expenditures to be paid directly by IFAD as per the request of the PMU, generally for
large contracts, to suppliers, contractors, consultants or third parties, as authorized by the borrower.
113.
This procedure is generally suitable for payment of large civil works, consultant fees (when these are of substantial), importation
of goods for which a letter of credit is not practical, and when exchange rate control regulations are present in the country. The
minimum value threshold for direct payments is specified in the LTB.
114.
Under this procedure, RMTP requests the fund to pay the supplier directly on its behalf from the loan account in IFAD. RMTP
must indicate in the WA the date on which payment becomes due to the supplier. The WA will need to be accompanied by a
signed copy of the contract and relevant supporting documents evidencing the eligibility of the expenditure.
115.
Reimbursement
116.
This is applicable when eligible project expenditures, reimbursable under the financing, have been pre-financed by the project or
incurred (that is, the suppliers of goods, works, consulting or other services has already been paid by the project from its own
funds). This reimbursement procedure is generally suitable for payment of: (i) local currency costs; (ii) petty cash or small
purchases; (iii) small civil works payments; and (iv) the borrower’s provision of financial resources to the project when, for
example, requests for advance replenishment to the designated account have not been submitted promptly, thus enabling the
project to continue uninterrupted implementation.
117.
Usually, IFAD will reimburse the project in the currency of payment as affected by the borrower. Nevertheless, the borrower may
request reimbursement to be made in the currency of the Financing Agreement. However, the amount to be paid will be
determined by the Fund, using the rate of exchange determined by IFAD Treasury. This methodology is used as a safeguarding
principle.
118.
Requests for reimbursement are to be submitted to the Fund within ninety calendar days from the date of payment by the project.
Should special circumstances prevail for the loan, these will be described in the agreed-on, project-specific LTB.
119.
Flow of Funds.
120.
RMTP shall maintain and operate two Designated Accounts (DAs) denominated in US dollars in the Bank of Bangladesh open
under the SAFE modality, to receive the loan and grant proceeds. The DAs are administered following imprest arrangements, in
which an initial amount of the loan and grant is advanced and then replenished periodically based on justified expenditures. The
maximum advances provided by IFAD to the DAs are established as an Authorized Allocation (AA) in the LTB.
121.
An additional DA in US dollars shall be maintained by the Ministry of Expatriates' Welfare and Overseas Employment
(MoEWOE) following the same arrangements to receive funds for the Sub-component 2.3. Optimal utilisation of remittances.
122.
RMTP shall maintain two Project Accounts (PA) in Bangladesh Taka (BDT) in a commercial bank for day-to-day project
management operations and activities. One Project Account for the loan proceeds and the other one for the grant proceeds. An
additional Project Account following the same arrangements shall be maintained by MoEWOE.
17/25
123.
Transfers to POs, NBFIs and VC development projects will be transferred from the Project Accounts in local currency following
similar imprest arrangements for quarterly replenishment.
124.
Transfers for Component 2: Financial Services to the POs and NBFIs from the PAs of RMTP will be governed by specific
contracts in which quarterly financial reporting will be established.
125.
Transfers for Component 1: Value Chain Enhancement to the POs will be governed by Approved sub-projects under imprest
arrangements for disbursement.
126.
Both funds will be disbursed to a specific bank account in the POs and NBFIs, but two different account ledgers in each case will
be maintained.
127.
Specific details for enabling further transfer of advance resources are described in the LDH. Towards project completion, the
Fund initiates procedures and takes steps to ensure recovery of advances provided.
128.
PKSF contribution
129.
PKSF counterpart to RMTP is for the Subcomponent 2.1 Financial Services through Partner Organizations (POs) and taxes
and duties.
130.
PKSF contribution will be incorporated in the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) cycle for all PO’s and NBFIs and will be
consolidated and reported by the PMU level.
131.
Non-Banking Financing Institutions and Partner Organizations contribution
132.
The PMU will establish appropriate procedures with POs and NBFIs to ensure that the matching contribution of its part is done in
a timely manner.
133.
Private sector contribution
134.
The private sector contribution will be contingent upon the production and market linkages that are facilitated by the POs. No
cash contribution to the project is foreseen by the private sector. Their contributions represent an estimate in the form of training
to beneficiaries, advisory services, etc. The PMU will ensure that the private sector contribution is accounted and tracked
properly to ensure its reporting by the PMU level.
135.
Beneficiaries contribution
136.
Beneficiary contributions for RMTP are in kind. The PMU will ensure that this counterpart is tracked and quantified at fair market
value. The PMU will ensure that the beneficiaries’ contribution is accounted and tracked properly to ensure its reporting by the
PMU level.
18/25
137.
[1]https://www.ifad.org/web/knowledge/publication/asset/39631355
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
138.
Beneficiaries and benefits: The project will directly benefit an estimated 445,000 households, including small farmers, micro-
entrepreneurs and other value chain participants (input suppliers, traders, service providers). Of these, 100,000 households will
receive several rounds of microfinance as well as value chain services, while 345,000 households will receive value chain
services. Considering an average household size of 4.5, the project will benefit 2 million people within a period of six years.
139.
The project will generate multiple social, nutritional, financial, economic and institutional benefits. A preliminary financial analysis
indicates that all selected value chains are financially viable. Aromatic rice, representing high value cereals, has Return on
Investment (ROI) of 51%; banana representing fruits 30%; potato representing vegetables 38%; technology-based aquaculture
67%; dairy 20%; red meat 40%; poultry meat 29%; and poultry eggs 37%.
140.
RMTP will generate significant positive effects on rural household incomes, food security and nutrition. Other benefits include
improved advisory services; better food safety; improved animal health (dairy, beef cattle, poultry and fisheries); improved market
access, and growth of rural businesses. RMTP will also generate employment opportunities for women and men, particularly the
youth through their involvement of the value chain activities and related backward and forward linkages.
141.
Economic and financial analysis: The Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) is 35%. The net benefit flow was discounted at
10%, which is the current average interest rate, to ascertain the break-even point of the project cash flows. The Economic
Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) for the 20-years period is 30% with benefit cost ratio of 1.29. The project earns a Net Present
Value (NPV) of USD 275 million for the 20-year period with 6.2% discount rate.
142.
Sensitivity analyses were carried out to assess whether the project is economically robust in light of potential risks in terms of
increased cost of production of enterprise, decreased benefits or delay in realising benefits. These three risk factors represent
most of the potential adverse climatic conditions (heavy rains, floods, cyclones) and market failures. Both cost increase by 10%
and 20% and benefit decrease by 10% and 20% yield EIRRs that are higher than the opportunity cost of capital and therefore
indicate that the enterprise models are indeed robust. However, the production models show the highest drop of EIRR in the
scenario of 20% benefits decrease and one-year delay in generating benefits. As such, PKSF will have to closely monitor the
timeframes and quantities of benefit-generation during implementation.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
143.
PKSF’s POs are institutionally and financially viable organizations that offer multiple loan and savings products. Analysis of PO
financial statement suggest that the POs are financially sustainable and well positioned to continue offering financial services
beyond the project period.
19/25
144.
The underlying business relations to be fostered between producers markets are key to the sustainability of the project. It is
expected that the various technologies, business services, production techniques, and marketing linkages will be adopted and
sustained beyond the project period. Introduction of GGAP and HACCP across commodity value chains will allow for improved
health and sustainable agricultural practices. Likewise, introduction of bio agents for pest control through adoption of IPM and
introduction of new crop varieties tolerant to climate change, pest pressure, increased nutritional values and high productivity will
also contribute to sustainable agriculture and food security. Promotion of high quality compost, motorized deep placement of
urea/DAP and compost/DAP briquettes for aromatic rice will reduce urea use by 30%, contribute to reduction of greenhouse
gasses by 30% and increase yields by 15%. Increased use of compost for all crops will contribute to restoring organic matter in
the soil. The use of compost will improve water quality infiltration to the aquifer, increase soil water holding capacity, reduce soil
temperature, reduce the negative effect of wind on soil moisture, improve soil fertility and increase carbon sequestration.
145.
Introduction of new breeds of livestock/poultry, both exotic types and natural by selection, improved feeding and watering and
health service will contribute to sustainability. Introduction of on-land recycling aquaculture systems will reduce pressure on the
natural resource. Selection of brooders for both fish and crustaceans will increase productivity for the same quantity inputs.
Training of farm enterprises, introduction of GGAP, and business linkages to secure markets will increasingly make
microenterprises attractive clients for financial institutions. Combined with commercial approaches for provision of services, and
institutional strengthening, will ensure a high likelihood of long-term sustainability.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
146.
The Integrated Risk Framework (IRF) is included in annex 9 and the fiduciary risks are provided in detail below. Identified risks
are addressed in the project design through mitigation measures.  The overall risk profile is medium and the combined impact of
individual risks is medium as well.
Impact
Likelihood
Risk
Assessment
Mitigation Measures
Organization and Staffing
Adequate FM staff in PMU and POs/NBFIs.
Low capacity of the FM POs/NBFIs FM staff.
Medium
Medium
Medium
Budgeting
AWPB process suffers delays and
inconsistencies that affect the monitoring and
implementation of activities.
Medium
Low
Medium
RMTP will reinforce its FM capacity
through hiring adequate FM staff at
PMU level.
Periodic trainings will enhance the
capacity of the POs and NBFIs FM
staff.
Budgets will be developed by each
implementing agency using the
agreed work planning templates and
as defined in the Financial
Management Manual.
The project cost tables will serve as
a reference for the preparation of
AWPBs.
The PMU will need to provide their
own annual work plan supporting
budgets. These will be used to
develop the cash flow of the project.
Funds flow and disbursement arrangements
20/25
Possible delays in the submission of financial
reports to the PMU by PO’s.
High
Low
High
Internal Controls
Adequacy of internal controls for the type of
activities to be carried out by the project
Medium
Low
Low
Accounting             
RMTP will apply the International Financial
Reporting Standards (IFRS).
PO’s: There are inconsistency in regard to the
basis of accounting applied by the PO’s.
Some PO applies accrual basis of accounting
for whole organisation and some are not.
Medium
Medium
Medium
Exchange rate fluctuation
Medium
Medium
Medium
Financial Reporting and Monitoring
The PMU will ensure that the fund
flow of the project (from PMU to PO)
is managed under imprest
arrangements. An adequate
threshold will be established for POs
for a quarterly replenishment to their
bank accounts. The reporting line
will be established under the
premise of no delays in the
implementation of activities. The FM
staff of the PMU will carry out review
of the PO’s to guarantee the quality
of the financial reporting.
In this regard each PMU FM staff will
visit to one PO periodically, thus
most of the POs will be visited once
in a year by PMU FM staff.
RMTP will follow the Finance
Manual of PKSF.
An addendum will be prepared to
specify matters related to RMTP.
RMTP will apply IFRS.
The accounting will be carried out on
a comprehensive and standardized
FM system at the PMU level, which
will consolidate the reports provided
by the PO.
If Possible, to minimize the impact of
foreign exchange fluctuation IFAD
will provide the loan in USD. The
implementation will take place in
BDT.
21/25
Low
Low
Low
IFAD funded projects implemented by PKSF
produce Financial Reports consistently.
The financial reporting is not seen as a tool
for decision making. The lack of appropriate
financial information reduces its utility for
monitoring implementation of activities.
Internal Audit
The internal audit function is well developed
in PKSF. However, the diversity of project
warrants close monitoring through effective
internal audit.
Low
Low
Low
External Audit
RMTP audit performed by a chartered
accountant’s firm
PO audit by chartered accountants’ firm: The
quality of audits needs to improve further.
Medium
Medium
Medium
RMTP will follows IFRS.
RTMP will prepare annual financial
statements and semiannual interim
financial statements.
The PMU FM staff will conduct
periodic visits to the POs to perform
spot verifications to the SoE’s
submitted by Pos and NBFIs to
confirm with Books of Accounts,
compliance and cost efficiency etc.
Monitoring will be strengthen to
verify the eligibility of expenditure
incurred by POs.
PKSF internal audit unit would carry
out the complete review of financial
activities (including those of the
POs) at least once per year. A copy
of the internal audit plan and audit
report shall be submitted to the IFAD
for each audit period.
By the second year, a detailed
compliance & risk review will be
carried out by the Internal audit unit
of PKSF following the international
practices.
RMTP’s annual financial statements
will be continued to be audited by an
independent Chartered Accountancy
firm in accordance with International
Standards on Auditing (ISA) and
IFAD Handbook for Financial
Reporting and Auditing.
This is also in alignment with what is
practiced for PACE
The ToRs for the auditors will be in
accordance with IFAD Handbook for
Financial Reporting and Auditing.
Similar arrangement will be
incorporated for the PO external
audits.
Overall Project Fiduciary Risk
Medium
I. Environment and Social category
147.
The environmental and social category for the project is B. The potential negative impacts are those linked to micro-enterprises
and larger agribusinesses, and are small and site-specific. The primary environmental risk relates to the cumulative/aggregated
impact of various micro-enterprises and small agribusinesses in a cluster, thereby posing a considerable risk in terms of waste
streams and pollution. This risk can however be managed using mitigation measures already identified and accessible to
implementers and target groups. The project will integrate activities to proactively address these issues, such as introduction of
climate-smart technologies and environmentally sustainable practices (balanced fertilizer use, integrated pest management, etc.).
Social risks are minimal, with project interventions aimed at the inclusion of women and the youth in value chains. An
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed for the project.
J. Climate Risk classification
22/25
148.
The climate risk category for this project is rated as Moderate, based on the proposed selection of value chains and target areas.
Although the project area is highly vulnerable to the impact of climate change, the project will be well-positioned to leverage
several ongoing climate change-related initiatives in the area. Given the high number of studies already carried out in
Bangladesh, a basic climate risk analysis has been carried out for the value chains to be supported as part of the ESMF. The
ESMF incorporates and refers to an inventory of proven measures to adapt to climate change and reduce greenhouse gas
emissions that can be promoted. This may include the introduction of flood and drought tolerant varieties, mechanisation enabling
cultivation on ridges, aquaculture in the valleys and land-based vertical recycling production systems for mud crab. Emission
reduction interventions will be especially important for the meat (beef, poultry and goat), dairy and rice value chains.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
149.
RMTP will be managed by PKSF, an apex development organisation with an independent Board of Directors. PKSF works
through 200 licensed microfinance institutions (known as partner organisations or POs) which have a combined 9,500 branches
across the country. Through this network, PKSF is currently providing inclusive finance and other services to 13 million poor
households. PKSF's aggregate assets amount to USD 707 million, including its active loan portfolio which currently stands at
USD 178 million, with a recovery rate exceeding 99%. PKSF is supervised by the Financial Institutions Division of the Ministry of
Finance.
150.
IFAD has financed 4 projects implemented by PKSF, of which three are completed and one is ongoing. All projects financed have
been rated as highly successful. The projects are: (i) the USD 20 million Microfinance and Technical Support Project (MFTSP)
which covered 2003-10; (ii) the USD 22 million Microfinance for Marginal and Small Farmers Project which covered 2005-11; (iii)
the USD 58 million Finance for Enterprise Development and Employment Creation Project (FEDEC) which covered 2008-14; and
(iv) the USD 93 million PACE which is currently ongoing.
151.
The IFAD loan for RMTP will be passed on by MoF to PKSF in the form of: (i) a loan for the financial services component
(component 2, with the exception of subcomponent 2.3); (ii) a grant for the value chain component (component 1); and, (iii) a
grant for the institutional strengthening and project management component (component 3). MoEWOE will directly receive grant
funding from MoF for implementing subcomponent 2.3.
152.
The project will be outside the Annual Development Plan (ADP) and therefore does not require any Development Project Pro-
forma (DPP). PKSF will sign a Subsidiary Loan and Grant Agreement (SLGA) with MoF to receive loan and grants and to
implement the project activities as per the final project design report. The resources under the financial services component will
be onlent through individual Subsidiary Financing Agreements. The MoF will review and clear AWPBs before submission to IFAD
for concurrence. To monitor performance and progress towards objectives, IFAD will undertake annual supervision missions.
153.
The management of value chain development activities has evolved under PACE and other two IFAD-funded projects, and a
number of similar projects implemented by PKSF. The PDR and PIM (Annex 8) further explain the management system,
emphasis and various new activities incorporated in the value chain component. The management system will be further
strengthened by capacity building of PKSF and POs.
154.
Under PACE and other similar projects, PKSF strengthened it capability to manage value chain development activities. The PIM
will further articulate the RMTP management system. PKSF will: (i) continue to review and evaluate value chain subproject
proposals through its Value Chain Evaluation Committee; (ii) organise and fund the capacity building of its own staff as well as
that of POs and value chain actors; (iii) identify potential value chains to invest in and outsource commodity/sub-sector/market
studies; (iv) provide clear guidance to POs on preparation and management of value chain subprojects; (v) contribute to the
preparation of value chain proposals by POs by providing guidance and sharing relevant sector and marketing studies; (vi) share
experiences with other value chain development operations and rationalize common activities; (vii) engage in policy advocacy for
necessary changes in rules, laws, and standards; and, (viii) identify suitable technical assistance providers or individual experts
to provide capacity building to PKSF staff, POs, and value chain actors and associations.
155.
POs will: (i) undertake or outsource an initial mapping of key actors in each selected value chain (producers, service providers,
input suppliers, traders) as well as marketing channels and relevant associations; (ii) prepare proposals for value chain
subprojects; (iii) provide and manage microenterprise credit and other financial products for producers and entrepreneurs; (iv)
guide the upgrading of the selected value chains; (v) ensure the availability and linkages of qualified providers of services to value
chain actors; (vi) advise producers on input supply and market access; (vii) ensure that all services to producers are supplied by
the private sector (where feasible) on commercial basis; and, (vii) monitor, evaluate and report on progress, and analyze issues
and lessons.
156.
For the purposes of the project, PKSF will establish a Project Management Unit, integrated within its structure, for overall project
management purposes. The PMU will be headed by a Project Coordinator appointed from PKSF's pool of senior officials. PMU
staff will consist of three officers seconded from PKSF's core team and nineteen recruited from the market. The PMU will work
with PKSF's Loan Operations Division to implement the financial services programme through POs as per established processes
and norms. This Division will assist with the selection of qualified NBFIs for financing larger enterprises and agribusinesses. It will
work with POs and selected service providers for the implementation of the value chain component. PKSF’s support divisions
such as Audit, Administration, Agriculture, Human Resources, Accounts and Finance, Livestock, Research, Training, M&E, MIS
and IT will provide relevant services to the project. The TORs of all project staff will include attention to nutrition and gender-
sensitive value chains.
23/25
157.
RMTP will continue to invest in PKSF skills development through training on topics such as business management, financial
analysis, value chain analysis, project management, M&E system design, & IT project management. This will be supported by
technical assistance and exchange visits, both in-country and overseas.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
1.  Financial management (FM). The inherent FM risk for RMTP is considered to be medium due to the diversified and
decentralised set of activities involving multiple POs and NBFIs. This assessment takes into account the overall environment
surrounding FM, the existing emphasis on improving FM practices, and the experience gained by PKSF within IFAD’s
portfolio.
2.  PKSF has an effective FM system managed by a strong team of accountants and finance professionals. It consistently applies
the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) across its operations. Partner POs are registered and supervised by
the Micro Credit Regulatory Authority. POs are governed by General Bodies and Governing Bodies/Executive Committees in
order to ensure good governance and transparency. It is evident that there are significant improvements in PO governance
due to regular interventions of PKSF.
3.  Some POs and NBFIs apply the accrual basis of accounting, while others utilise the cash basis. During implementation, it is
expected that all POs and NBFIs gradually move to an accrual-based system for the preparation of financial reports. POs are
audited annually by independent audit firms appointed by PKSF. These audits cover only microfinance operations. For RMTP,
it is agreed that the same independent auditors will also audit value chain activities.
4.  The internal control arrangements for RMTP will consider: (i) appointment of qualified personnel with clear responsibilities and
adequate segregation of duties; (b) establishment of an adequate financial records management system which has a complete
audit trail; (c) set up of physical safeguards; (d) independent checks, with procedures subject to random independent reviews.
5.  There is an adequately staffed Internal Audit Unit (IAU) in PKSF. The IAU prepares an annual plan for internal audit reviews
within PKSF and POs. These audits mainly focus on compliance review and checking of payment vouchers prior to issuing
payments to suppliers/vendors. There may be room for the inclusion of risk review in the internal audit process; this will be
assessed during implementation.
6.  RMTP accounts will be audited annually by the private firm that audits PKSF in accordance with International Standards on
Auditing (ISA) and in compliance with IFAD's Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing. The audited project financial
statements together with the auditor’s opinion will be submitted to IFAD in English within 6 months of the end of the fiscal
year.
7.  Procurement. PKSF has effective governance and internal control mechanisms for procurement and contract management. It
has experience in handling procurement under IFAD financing. Procurement managed by POs is moderately satisfactory, with
continuous follow up by PKSF.
8.  Procurement under the project will be undertaken in accordance with IFAD's Procurement Guidelines and Procurement
Handbook. Specific procurement arrangements, procedures and thresholds will be elaborated in the PIM, aligned with PKSF
procurement policies as applicable. Controls will be ensured, and risk mitigation measures will be strengthened. Procurement
under RMTP will be undertaken by the Administration Department of PKSF, which currently manages all procurement for the
organisation. All project-related procurement by POs will also be undertaken in accordance with IFAD guidelines. PKSF will
assist POs to develop/upgrade their procurement policies and processes as required.
9.  Governance. PKSF was established in 1990 by the Government. Unlike Government agencies, it is an independent
organization which operates according to its memorandum and articles of association and rules and regulations introduced by
its Governing Body. It has a three-tier governance system: a General Body (currently 15 members); a Governing Body (7
members) chaired by a Chairperson; and Management headed by the Managing Director (CEO). The Chairperson is
appointed by the Government, while the Managing Director is recruited by the Governing Body through a competitive process.
10.  Over the years, PKSF has established management systems for programmes, finance, human resources and other elements.
These systems are perceived to be transparent by partners such as IFAD, WB, ADB, DFID, SDC and EU. PKSF has also
helped POs to develop good management and control systems. Indeed, PKSF is able to attract substantial development
funding due to its reputation of good governance, transparent management, and successful operations.
158.
Governance. PKSF was established in 1990 by the Government. Unlike Government agencies, it is an independent organization
which operates according to its memorandum and articles of association and rules and regulations introduced by its Governing
Body. It has a three-tier governance system: a General Body (currently 15 members); a Governing Body (7 members) chaired by
a Chairperson; and Management headed by the Managing Director (CEO). The Chairperson is appointed by the Government,
while the Managing Director is recruited by the Governing Body through a competitive process.
159.
Over the years, PKSF has established management systems for programmes, finance, human resources and other elements.
These systems are perceived to be transparent by partners such as IFAD, WB, ADB, DFID, SDC and EU. PKSF has also helped
POs to develop good management and control systems. Indeed, PKSF is able to attract substantial development funding due to
its reputation of good governance, transparent management, and successful operations.
160.
Good governance under RMTP aims to ensure transparency, accountability in use of resources, and participation of stakeholders
in design and delivery of services. This encompasses all aspects of project management: project activities; annual planning;
institutional arrangements; implementation procedures; financial management and procurement; internal and external audit;
supervision and compliance; and M&E. Key aspects of good governance that have been identified and considered during RMTP
design are as follows:
24/25
inclusive targeting of microentrepreneurs, small/marginal farmers, women, youth, and disadvantaged households;
participation of all stakeholders in design and execution;
transparent selection of POs for microfinance and value chain development; supervision and M&E of POs;
compliant FM, accounting, procurement and recruitment systems; rigorous internal and external audit;
intensive IFAD supervision and compliance control, including spot checks by regular supervision missions, review of
FM and procurement, and technical audits if needed;
regular outcome surveys that provide information on how well project outputs are being delivered, in terms of both
coverage and quality;
reporting of results to Government and other stakeholders, with key information and reports published as part of
knowledge management.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
161.
Planning and M&E: The PMU/PKSF will be responsible for preparing the annual work plan and budget for RMTP, and for
obtaining approval from FID and IFAD. The plan will include activity plan along with targets and expenditure plan and should
reflect overall project targets and activities. IFAD supervision missions and mid-term review mission will offer opportunities for
review of progress and assessment of effectiveness of the project.
162.
Monitoring and evaluation: An effective M&E system will be developed to measure indicators included in the log frame. It will be
part of a larger MIS system which will serve as an information and knowledge sharing platform. The M&E system will be utilised
as a management tool and will include assessment of progress and compliance, identification of constraints and proposed
remedial actions. All data will be disaggregated by gender, age, and geographical location. Participatory M&E including
qualitative surveys will be undertaken on a regular basis. A baseline survey will be undertaken at start up, and outcome surveys
will be carried annually. The key production and financial indicators of small farmers and microenterprises will be monitored
annually to assess the emerging results of the project.
163.
Knowledge Management and Learning: The project's KM activities will support the effective flow of relevant information among
project staff, beneficiaries and other stakeholders. A comprehensive KM action plan will be developed in the early stages of
implementation. Output, outcome and impact data generated by the M&E system will inform case studies, briefs and reports.
These will be used for policy dialogue, peer-learning, and potential scaling-up. KM products will be communicated through
multiple sources including blogs, written publications, video and social media.
164.
Website: The project will have a website to share reports, impact studies, case studies, training materials, videos and application
technologies. It will discourage printing of reports and other documents. POs will be encouraged to follow the same, and
communications with beneficiaries will be via mobile phones.
b. Innovation and scaling up
165.
RMTP will undertake a number of innovative activities: (i) introduction of HACCP and GGAP; (ii) channeling of funds through
NBFIs; and (iii) introducing distributed digital ledger technology (blockchain), crowdfunding and e-commerce.
M. Implementation plans
a. Implementation readiness and start-up plans.
166.
Start-up readiness: PKSF has established systems, policies, procedures and skilled managers and staff. The project will not
require revision of existing policies or procedures. Similarly, the methodology for value chain activities has been developed under
PACE and will be strengthened and applied under RMTP. PKSF and POs will be ready to commence implementation upon
signature of the Financing Agreement.
167.
Start-up activities: PKSF will perform the following start up activities: (i) second key PKSF officials to the project ahead of time;
(ii) recruit project staff ahead of project start up to jump-start project activities and provide time for training of new staff members;
(iii) invite POs to submit proposals in the very early stages of implementation; (iv) organize the start up workshop involving all
potential POs to explain the project, particularly Component 1; (v) complete the feasibility studies on crowdfunding and
blockchain ahead of start up; (vi) complete procurement procedures for the carrying out of the baseline survey, and launch the
survey as soon as project funds are available.
b. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
168.
IFAD will conduct regular supervision and implementation support missions as per standard procedures. These missions will
review project performance, progress towards achievement of objectives, and compliance with fiduciary requirements.
Footnotes
25/25
1]/       The design team consisted of Mr Dewan A. H. Alamgir (team leader), Mr Jens Kristensen (agribusiness specialist), Mr Anura
Herath (economist), Mr James Garrett (nutrition specialist), Mr Prasun Kumar Das (agricultural finance / secretary general, APRACA),
Ms Krajai Chowdhury (gender and targeting specialist), and Mr Mahmud Hossain (financial management specialist). It was supported
by Mr Michael Hamp (lead regional technical specialist, rural finance, markets and enterprises), Ms Sherina Tabassum (country
programme officer), Ms Christa Ketting (programme officer), Mr Alvaro Fernandez (finance officer), Mr Nabil Rahaman
(implementation support specialist) and Mr Omer Zafar (country director).
[2]/           Formerly called the Rural Enterprise Transformation Project (RETP).
[3]/          A broad definition of 'private sector' is applied under RMTP. This includes farmers, producers' groups, informal/formal
microenterprises, service providers, input suppliers, traders, business associations, informal and formal businesses, processors,
transporters, domestic marketers, and exporters.
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Logical Framework
1/6
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outreach 
Direct beneficiaries receiving project services
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported
by the project
implementing partners' records
and project records
annually
PMU
Females
Males
Young
111250
222500
111250
222500
10
10
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Households
180000
445000
implementing partners' records
and project records
annually
PMU
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of
households members
implementing partners' records
and project records
annually
PMU
Household
members
810000 2002500
Project Goal 
To increase the income, food security and nutrition
of farmers across selected value chains.
70% of project supported households increase
income by >30%.
Households.
30
70
Beneficiaries reporting improved food quality in their
diet.
People.
15
30
surveys of households,
qualitative assessment of
participating HH and quantitative
assessment of micro-
enterprises.
at baseline,
mid-term
and
completion.
PMU
surveys of households,
qualitative (PRA) assessment of
participating HHs and
quantitative assessment
(profitability analysis) of micro-
enterprises
PMU
at baseline,
mid-term
and
completion.
• Economy
maintains or
increases growth
rates • Terms of
trade for rural
communities shall
not deteriorate •
Price inflation for
staple food remains
below 10% • Rural
and peri-urban
infrastructure
available
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Development Objective 
The sustainable growth of selected rural commodity
value chains with comparative advantage, market
demand, growth potential, and backward linkages to
small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs.
Name
2/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production impact surveys of households,
Households
75000
150000
% increase in sales of microenterprises in the value
chains
% increase in sales
15
30
% increase in profit of microenterprises in the value
chains
% increase in.profit.
10
20
qualitative (PRA) assessment of
participating HHs and
quantitative assessment
(profitability analysis) of micro-
enterprises
-Quantitative assessment of
production, sales, and
profitability of randomly selected
sample of microenterprises.
-Quantitative assessment of
production, sales, and
profitability of randomly selected
sample of microenterprises.
PMU
at baseline,
mid- term
and
completion
Year to
year
PMU
Year to
year
PMU
• Government
maintains favorite
policies for small
businesses •
Government
continues to support
micro-finance
programs and NGO
activities • Absence
of political unrest
that could adversely
affects business and
economic growth
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
3/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outcome 
1. Beneficiaries adopt improved productions
methods and establish sustainable market linkages.
1.2.2 Households reporting adoption of
new/improved inputs, technologies or practices
Households
200000
400000
2.2.3 Rural producers’ organizations engaged in
formal partnerships/agreements or contracts with
public or private entities
Number of POs
500
1500
impact surveys of households,
qualitative (PRA) assessment of
participating HHs and
quantitative assessment
(profitability analysis) of micro-
enterprises
impact surveys of households,
qualitative (PRA) assessment of
participating HHs and
quantitative assessment
(profitability analysis) of micro-
enterprises
PMU
at baseline,
mid- term
and
completion
PMU
at baseline,
mid- term
and
completion
Output 
1.1. Organization.
2.1.4 Supported rural producers that are members of
a rural producers' organization
implementing partners' records
and project records.
quarterly
PMU
Females
Males
111250
222500
111250
222500
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to
improve their nutrition
implementing partners' records
and project records.
quarterly
PMU
• PKSF and POs
successfully
establish
collaborative
business
arrangements
between enterprises
and mainstream
businesses • Private
business companies
are interested in
sourcing products
from micro-
enterprises and
willing to engage in
partnership in the
selected value
chains • POs
establish separate
non-financial
services units and
enhance capacity to
manage value chain
projects PKSF and
POs successful
identify technologies
and products for
small producers
within value chain
subprojects and
outside
Beneficiaries are
willing to participate
in producer groups.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
4/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Households
222500
445000
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
1.2. Technical and business services.
Training days provided to farmers on GLOBAL GAP
and HACCP.
implementing partners' records
and project records
quarterly
PMU
Days
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities
or business management
implementing partners' records
and project records.
quarterly
PMU
Females
Males
Young
100
2000
1875
500
5500
3750
Output 
1.3 Value chain integration.
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or
technologies
implementing partners' records
and project records
quarterly
PMU
Women trained in
crop
40000
80000
Men trained in crop
40000
80000
Men trained in
livestock
Women trained in
livestock
Men trained in
fishery
Women trained in
fishery
20000
40000
20000
40000
3000
6000
3000
6000
Output 
1.4 Enterprise Strengthening.
2.1.1 Rural enterprises accessing business
development services
implementing partners' records
and project records
quarterly
PMU
Rural enterprises
300
550
• Targeted
beneficiaries are
motivated to provide
extension services.
• PKSF enhance
overall capacity to
manage value chain
projects, supervise
POs in these areas
• PKSF and PO
have disposition
over adequate
human resources to
implement these
activities.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
5/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
1.5 Policy dialogue.
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products
completed
implementing partners' records
and project records
Number
1
2
Outcome 
2. Enterprises have access to sustainable financial
services.
1.2.5 Households reporting using rural financial
services
Households
50000
100000
impact surveys of households,
qualitative (PRA) assessment of
participating HHs and
quantitative assessment
(profitability analysis) of micro-
enterprises
PMU
mid-term
and
completion
PMU
at baseline,
mid- term
and
completion
Output 
2.1. Sustainable financial services offered through
Partner Organizations.
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial
services
implementing partners's records
and project records
quarterly
PMU
Men in rural areas
accessing financial
services - credit
Women in rural
areas accessing
financial services -
credit
Total persons
accessing financial
services - credit
15000
25000
35000
75000
100000
100000
-identified topics
remain relevant
throughout the
project period.
• POs/NBFIs remain
institutionally and
financially viable
and offer
competitive loan
products • No
regulatory
constrains or
policies are
developed inflicting
upon financial
service delivery
• POs are financially
sustainable and
able to reach out to
the targeted
beneficiaries. • POs
have human
resources to reach
out to targeted
beneficiaries. •
Continued demand
from beneficiaries to
borrow from POs.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
6/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
2.2. Commercial finance.
Enterprises supported by non-bank financial
institutions
implementing partners' records
and project records
quarterly
PMU
enterprises
300
550
Output 
2.3 Utilisation of remittances.
Number families of overseas workers trained on
capacity building.
implementing partners' records
and project records.
quarterly
PMU -
MoEWOE
Households
2000
4500
Output 
3.3 Partner organizations institutional strengthening.
1.1.6 Financial service providers supported in
delivering outreach strategies, financial products and
services to rural areas
implementing partners' records
and project records
PMU
mid-term
and
completion
Service providers
15
25
• Presence of non-
bank financial
institutions in project
area. • Non-bank
financial institutions
have the human
resources to monitor
the outstanding loan
amount. -
Beneficiaries remain
interested in
borrowing from non-
bank financial
institutions.
-No changes in the
policy environment
for remittances. -No
external events
affecting the number
of overseas
workers.
POs are interested
in receiving support
on the proposed
topics.
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Challenges
Rudimentary production 
methods.
Little aggregation of 
production due to absence 
of producer organizations.
l
e
v
e
l
r
e
d
o
h
l
l
l
a
m
s
&
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
o
r
P
l
e
v
e
l
e
s
i
r
p
r
e
t
n
E
l
e
v
e
l
t
e
k
r
a
M
No finance for working 
capital.
Limited compliance to 
food safety standards.
Inadequate dietary 
practices cause 
malnutrition.
Unstable supply of high 
quality produce.
Smaller enterprises/ 
Agribusinesses have 
limited access to finance
Inadequate technologies 
present to attain growth.
Opportunities
Huge market demand for 
certified food. 
Scope to improve market 
supply by improving 
production methods.
There is 
market 
demand, yet 
strategic 
enabling 
conditions for 
sustainable 
market 
growth are 
absent.
Scope to 
improve food 
safety 
standards and 
improve 
dietary 
challenges 
through the 
food system. 
RMTP 
Interventions
1. Financial products 
for producers 
working in selected 
VCs through. 
2. Formation of 
producer 
associations. 
3. Enhanced 
productions 
methods. 
4. Market linkages 
and value chain 
advisory services.
5. Policy 
engagement. 
6. Agribusinesses 
financed by NBFI’s.
7. Business 
development 
services.
8. Nutrition 
interventions at 
household level. 
9. Assistance on food 
safety standards. 
Outcomes
Development 
objective
Core indicators
Sustainable growth 
of selected rural 
commodity value 
chains with 
comparative 
advantage, 
nutrition potential, 
market demand, 
growth potential 
and backward 
linkages to small 
farmers and micro-
entrepreneurs.
Higher incomes due 
to higher selling 
prices.
More efficient 
production methods 
adopted and more 
efficient aggregation 
of produce to 
establish sustainable 
market linkages.
Agribusinesses are 
better placed to 
make sustainable 
market linkages due 
to access to financial 
services. 
Increased availability 
of high quality 
produce both for 
auto consumption as 
well as  on local 
markets. 
Output indicators.
1. Supported rural producers 
that are member of rural 
producer organizations.
2. Households provided with 
targeted support to improve 
their nutrition. 
3. Persons trained in 
production practices and/or 
technologies.
2. Number of persons in rural 
areas accessing financial 
services.
3. Number of rural producers’ 
organizations supported.
4. FSPs supported  in 
delivering outreach strategies, 
products and services.
5. Number of policy-relevant 
knowledge products 
completed.
6. Rural enterprises accessing 
business development 
services .
Outcome indicators.
1. Persons reporting an 
increase in production. 
2. Persons reporting using 
rural financial services.
3. Supported rural enterprises 
reporting an increase in profit.
4. Rural producers’ 
organizations engaged in 
formal. 
partnerships/agreements or 
contracts with public or 
private entities.
5. Households reporting 
adoption of inputs, 
technologies or practices. 
6. % of women reporting 
improved food quality in their 
diet.
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables 
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Introduction and Assumption 
1.
Appendix 3 describes the  parameters used to formulate the project costs, and presents summary 
and detailed cost tables and financing plan. The project cost is derived using COSTAB programme on the 
basis of the following assumptions. Box below shows the rates. 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
 (f)
(g)
The unit cost of all the project activities including the programme management cost and 
salaries was estimated in close consultation with the PKSF staff on the basis of the rates that 
are used in on-going operations of PKSF;  
All costs are based on 2019 prices;  
The current inflation rate of 5.5% and the current exchange rate of BTK 84 for 1 US $ 
(Bangladesh Bank, 2019) were used. 
Prices are inclusive of all taxes, i.e. including custom duties and Value Added Tax (VAT). 
The tax rates retained are similar to those used for the on-going projects of PKSF. Base 
costs for goods and services purchased locally are derived from local sales prices (market 
prices), including all taxes as they are real costs for the project. 
Project period is for 6 years starting from 2020. The project year one has the cost for many 
initial preparatory activities which would facilitate implementation of other project activities. 
Taxes apply to all expenditure categories except for the credit line, Salaries and Allowances, 
Grants, and Training and Workshops. All taxes and duties will be paid by PKSF and 
accounted for as PKSF counterpart contribution in COSTAB in addition to the identified 
counter-part finding from PKSF. 
Physical and Price Contingencies are used to accommodate changes in quantities, unit 
costs and/or methods of implementation of the project. They are expressed as a percentage 
of base costs. The physical contingency of 3% for value chain development and 
implementation activities was used, and 0% for credit line and salaries were used. Price 
contingencies are intended for facing up to the effects of inflation and devaluation of the 
exchange rate in terms of the US dollar (USD). They are computed by COSTAB based on 
the rates assumed for the inflation at national and international levels. 
(h)
Expenditure and Disbursement Accounts are in line with the IFAD standardization of 
expenditures categories based on circular IC/FOD/02/2013. 
31 
Project Costs 
The total project cost is USD 200 million over a six-year implementation period ( 
2.
Table 2 summarises the project component cost distributed by the financier. The first component, 
Value chain development takes 17% of the total project cost; second component, the Financial services, 
78%; and fourth component, institutional strengthening and project management, 4.2%. 
3.
Table  2).  IFAD  Loan  will  finance  USD  80  million  (40%)  of  the  total  project  cost,  IFAD  Grant  will 
provide  USD  1  million;  PKSF  will  provide  USD  12  million  (6%);  co-financiers  will  contribute  USD  8.3 
million  (4%);  and  POs  will  provide  USD  82.2  million  (41%)  for  the  financial  services  activities;  Non-
Banking Financial Institutions contribute USD 10 million (5%);  the private sector will contribute with USD 
4.6  million  (2.3%),  the  beneficiaries’  equity  would  be  USD  0.9  million  (0.4%).  PKSF  will  also  bear  tax, 
amounting to USD 0.925 million. 
Table 1: Financing plan of the Project Budget 
32 
Up toUp toProjectNegotiationStart202020212022202320242025Inflation (in %'s) Most Annual rates Local 5.55.55.55.55.55.55.55.5Foreign 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Compounded rates Local 5.55.58.514.520.827.534.642.0Foreign 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Zero Annual rates Local 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Foreign 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Compounded rates Local 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Foreign 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Exchange rates (Local/Foreign) Most Rates actually used 84.084.084.084.084.084.084.084.0Constant purchasing parity rates 84.088.796.2101.5107.1113.0119.3125.9% deviation 0.0-5.2-12.6-17.2-21.6-25.7-29.6-33.3Zero Rates actually used 84.084.084.084.084.084.084.084.0Constant purchasing parity rates 84.084.084.084.084.084.084.084.0% deviation 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.0 
4.
Table 2 summarises the project component cost distributed by the financier. The first component, 
Value chain development takes 17% of the total project cost; second component, the Financial services, 
78%; and fourth component, institutional strengthening and project management, 4.2%. 
Table 2: Project Cost: Components by Financiers (USD 1000) 
33 
Financing Plan(US$ '000)(Local '000)ForeignLocalTotalPercentForeignLocalTotalPercent IFAD 13279,86880,00040.011,1246,708,8776,720,00140.0 IFAD Grant -1,0001,0000.5-84,00084,0000.5 PKSF -12,03912,0396.0-1,011,2431,011,2436.0 Co-Financiers -8,3008,3004.1-697,199697,1994.1 Private Sector -4,6464,6462.3-390,269390,2692.3 POs -82,21382,21341.1-6,905,8986,905,89841.1 NBFI -10,00010,0005.0-840,000840,0005.0 Beneficiaries -8778770.4-73,66473,6640.4 PKSF-Tax -9259250.5-77,72577,7250.5Total 132199,868200,000100.011,12416,788,87616,800,000100.0IFADIFAD GrantPKSFCo-FinanciersPrivate SectorPOsNBFIBeneficiariesPKSF-TaxTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Value Chain Development Organization 3634.7--3925.11,01613.2--5,80875.6----1051.47,6853.8Technical and Business service 2,07119.6----2,30721.84,64643.9----8778.36916.510,5925.3Value chain sub-project implementation 10,86271.9----4,24328.1----------15,1057.6Enterprise strengthening 50060.0----33440.0----------8340.4Policy Dialogue 60060.0----40040.0----------1,0000.5Subtotal 14,39740.9--3921.18,30023.64,64613.25,80816.5--8772.57962.335,21617.6B. Financial Services Micro-Finance through PO 48,21535.6--10,7567.9----76,40556.4------135,37767.7Commercial Finance 10,00050.0----------10,00050.0----20,00010.0Subtotal 58,21537.5--10,7566.9----76,40549.210,0006.4----155,37777.7C. Capacity Building of Remittance Earners --1,000100.0--------------1,0000.5D. Institutional Strengthening and Project ManagementPKSF's Capacity Building 1,961100.0--------------0-1,9611.0POs Capacity Building 33585.9--------------5514.13900.2Project Management 5,09284.1--89014.7----------741.26,0553.0Subtotal 7,38887.9--89010.6----------1291.58,4074.2Total PROJECT COSTS 80,00040.01,0000.512,0396.08,3004.14,6462.382,21341.110,0005.08770.49250.5200,000100.0 
5.
The total project cost is disbursed under  ten expenditure categories (Table 3). The credit line has 
two  sub-categories  to  segregate  the  IFAD  loan  financing  resources  downloading  to  PKSF  partner 
organizations (POs) and Non-Banking Financing Institutions (NBFIs).  
Table 3: Project Cost: Expenditure Categories by Financiers (USD 1000) 
34 
IFADIFAD GrantPKSFCo-FinanciersPrivate SectorPOsNBFIBeneficiariesPKSF-TaxTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment Costs A. Credit PKSF's ME Loan through POs 48,21535.6--10,7567.9----76,40556.4------135,37767.7PKSF's ME Loan through NBFIs 10,00050.0----------10,00050.0----20,00010.0Subtotal 58,21537.5--10,7566.9----76,40549.210,0006.4----155,37777.7B. Equipment & Materials 9096.0--------------44.093-C. Management fees /a ------664100.0----------6640.3D. Grants & subsidies 10,75074.91,0007.0--2,59918.1----------14,3497.2E. Operating Cost 3018.4--57116.01,14432.12346.6----87724.643812.33,5661.8F. Salaries & allowances 3,97592.6--3197.4------------4,2932.1G. Technical assistance 1,13639.1----44415.31,01234.9------31010.72,9021.5H. Studies & workshops 1,47977.7--251.340021.0----------1,9031.0I. Training 3,98423.8--3682.23,04818.23,40120.45,80834.8----1030.616,7128.4J. Vehicles 7050.0--------------7050.01400.1Total PROJECT COSTS 80,00040.01,0000.512,0396.08,3004.14,6462.382,21341.110,0005.08770.49250.5200,000100.0 
6.
Table  4  presents  the  project  cost  by  components  and  by  expenditure  categories  and  Table  5 
outlines  the  component  cost  distribution  by  the  years.  Most  of  the  project  funds,  particularly  the  funds 
allocated  in  the  Financial  Service  component,  have  been  allocated  during  the  fist  three  years.  These 
would be provided to PKSF in the 1st three years of the project for lending to POs and NFBIs and the later 
institutions would on-lend these funds through their loan products to end borrowers. 
35 
Table 4: Project Cost Expenditure Accounts by Components - Base Costs (USD 1000) 
Table 5: Project Components Cost by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (USD 1000) 
Project financing / co-financing strategy and plan 
The project will be financed by an IFAD loan; IFAD grant of USD 1 million; PKSF funds; DANIDA as 
7.
a  co-financier;  the  private  sector  who  are  involved  in  processing,  aggregation  and  marketing  of  VC 
commodities;  POs;  NBFIs,  and  the  beneficiaries  (Table  1).  Three  fourth  of  the  IFAD  loan  funds  will  be 
made available on highly concessionary terms and the balance on the blend terms. PKSF funds will flow 
through POs under its prevailing on-lending terms to POs. DANIDA Grants will finance several activities of 
the Value Chain Development Component (1st component) of the project. The private sectors’ funds will 
be contingent upon  the production  and market linkages that are facilitated by POs. POs and NBFIs  will 
use  their  standard  on-lending  procedures  to  provide  the  funds  expected.  Most  of  the  beneficiary 
contribution would be in terms of their own non-financial resources. PKSF will also make funds available 
to pay all taxes against relevant project expenditure. 
Table 6 presents the project cost distributed by the expenditure categories by the project year. It is 
8.
noted that the project cost in most of the expenditure categories is front loaded with view that the project 
development activities would be completed the 4th year of the project.  
36 
Value Chain DevelopmentCapacityInstitutional StrengtheningTechnicalBuildingand Project managementandValue chainFinancial ServicesofPKSF'sPOsPhysicalBusinesssub-projectEnterprisePolicyMicro-FinanceCommercialRemittanceCapacityCapacityProjectContingenciesOrganizationserviceimplementationstrengtheningDialoguethrough POFinanceEarnersBuildingBuildingManagementTotal%Amount I. Investment Costs A. Credit PKSF's ME Loan through POs -----135,377-----135,377--PKSF's ME Loan through NBFIs ------20,000----20,000--Subtotal -----135,37720,000----155,377--B. Equipment & Materials ----------84843.03C. Management fees /a --664--------664--D. Grants & subsidies --11,017----1,000---12,017--E. Operating Cost -1,520887-------7623,1691.959F. Salaries & allowances ----------4,2934,293--G. Technical assistance 151,394-810-----357-2,5763.077H. Studies & workshops 24-101-1,000-----7671,8910.24I. Training 6,2875,511------1,67319-13,4913.3439J. Vehicles ----------1261263.04Total BASELINE COSTS 6,3268,42512,6698101,000135,37720,0001,0001,6733766,031193,6880.3585Physical Contingencies 2242531624----50116585--Price Contingencies Inflation Local 1,1341,9142,420-----2383185,728--Foreign --------------Subtotal Inflation 1,1341,9142,420-----2383185,728--Devaluation --------------Subtotal Price Contingencies 1,1341,9142,420-----2383185,7281.8104Total PROJECT COSTS 7,68510,59215,1058341,000135,37720,0001,0001,9613906,055200,0000.3689  Taxes 105252-------55744873.316Foreign Exchange --------132--1322.94Totals Including Contingencies202020212022202320242025TotalA. Value Chain Development Organization 1,3442,3382,1101,419474-7,685Technical and Business service 2252,9483,3032,5001,617-10,592Value chain sub-project implementation 1873,4906,8754,13720820815,105Enterprise strengthening 010515309--834Policy Dialogue 150450250150--1,000Subtotal 1,9069,23613,0528,5162,29820835,216B. Financial Services Micro-Finance through PO 103,23316,07216,072---135,377Commercial Finance 10,00010,000----20,000Subtotal 113,23326,07216,072---155,377C. Capacity Building of Remittance Earners 333333333---1,000D. Institutional Strengthening and Project management PKSF's Capacity Building 5505967121022-1,961POs Capacity Building -15192184--390Project Management 1,1929461,0669949469116,055Subtotal 1,7421,5571,9691,2809489118,407Total PROJECT COSTS 117,21537,19831,4269,7963,2471,119200,000 
Table 6: Project Expenditure Accounts by Year – Base Cost (USD 1000) 
The  distribution  of  price  and  physical  contingencies,  showing  proportion  of  the  project  base  cost 
9.
distributed by expenditure categories are summarised in Table 7.  
Table 7: Project cost by base cost and allowances for two contingencies (USD 1000) 
10.
with 
  Detailed tables  with project targets,  unit costs and base costs are presented  below. These tables 
sheets.
presented 
Tables 
details 
excel 
other 
Cost 
are 
the 
all 
in 
37 
Base CostForeign Exchange202020212022202320242025Total%Amount I. Investment Costs A. Credit PKSF's ME Loan through POs 103,23316,07216,072---135,377--PKSF's ME Loan through NBFIs 10,00010,000----20,000--Subtotal 113,23326,07216,072---155,377--B. Equipment & Materials 84-----84--C. Management fees /a -133133133133133664--D. Grants & subsidies 3332,9725,6313,082--12,017--E. Operating Cost 2561,3889442062061703,169--F. Salaries & allowances 7167167167167167164,293--G. Technical assistance 138631,17951111-2,576--H. Studies & workshops 3625624692981001001,891--I. Training 1,8323,1753,9223,0631,499-13,4911.0129J. Vehicles 126-----126--Total BASELINE COSTS 116,95435,88029,0648,0082,6641,119193,6880.1129Physical Contingencies 7717118510745-5850.74Price Contingencies Inflation Local 1841,1472,1781,681538-5,728--Foreign ---------Subtotal Inflation 1841,1472,1781,681538-5,728--Devaluation ---------Subtotal Price Contingencies 1841,1472,1781,681538-5,728--Total PROJECT COSTS 117,21537,19831,4269,7963,2471,119200,0000.1132  Taxes 106193152342-487--Foreign Exchange --6666--132--PhysicalCont.PlusBase CostPhysical ContingenciesPrice ContingenciesTotal Incl. Cont.Base CostsPriceLocalLocalLocalLocal+ PriceCont. onFor.(Excl.Duties &For.(Excl.Duties &For.(Excl.Duties &For.(Excl.Duties &Cont. onPhysicalExch.Taxes)TaxesTotalExch.Taxes)TaxesTotalExch.Taxes)TaxesTotalExch.Taxes)TaxesTotalBase CostsCont. I. Investment Costs A. Credit PKSF's ME Loan through POs -135,377-135,377---------135,377-135,377135,377-PKSF's ME Loan through NBFIs -20,000-20,000---------20,000-20,00020,000-Subtotal -155,377-155,377---------155,377-155,377155,377-B. Equipment & Materials -80384-203-707-90493913C. Management fees /a -664-664---------664-664664-D. Grants & subsidies -12,017-12,017-----2,332-2,332-14,349-14,34914,349-E. Operating Cost -3,169-3,169-59-59-338-338-3,566-3,5663,49769F. Salaries & allowances -4,293-4,293---------4,293-4,2934,293-G. Technical assistance -2,3112652,576-69877-21137249-2,5923102,9022,81885H. Studies & workshops -1,891-1,891-4-4-9-9-1,903-1,9031,8994I. Training 12913,2778513,49144314439-2,769132,78213216,47710316,71216,187525J. Vehicles -6363126-224-5511-70701401364Total 129193,142417193,688456714585-5,672565,728132199,381487200,000199,311689 
Detailed Cost Tables 
38 
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project Table 1. Value Chain Development Detailed Costs Unit CostUnit CostQuantities(Local(US$Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total'000)'000)202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs A. Organization 1. Start-up Training Information & Orientation on financial literacy for MC & PO members /a Nb Persons30,70045,60032,100---108,4001.20.014527826614---1,967Training on Nutrition, climate, environmental and social issues /b Nb Persons50,000100,000100,000100,00034,000-384,0000.80.015611,1851,2511,320474-4,791Prepare information sheet and dicussion notes for village meetings /c Number200-----200250.29872-----72TOT on financial literacy for PO trainers by POs Nb Batches100100----20050.0678----15Training on business management for ME and PA members /d Nb Batches52172108---332800.95258204135---397Developing and revising training module by PKSF Number2-----25005.95214-----14Subtotal 1,2402,2232,0001,320474-7,2562. Training on Nutrition Information campaign for nutrition education Lump sum-111--2Development of training material for nutrition training /e Lump sum-12---3Allocation of funds to undertake apecial studies at PO level Lump sum1212----25TOT on Nutrition Sensitive Value Chain Lump sum3,7503,7503,7503,750--15,00020.02492929292--368Subtotal 1041069493--3973. Training on Climate Issues and Environment /f Training on contract farming and exchange visits for PA members Nb Batches-152510--50400.476-9167--31Subtotal 1,3442,3382,1101,419474-7,685B. Technical and Business Service 1. General Basic Training /g Generic technological and management training on Horticulture Nb Batches2501,0001,0001,500250-4,00020.02473031509-126Generic technological and management training on Fisheries Nb Batches2501,0001,0001,500250-4,00020.02473031509-126Generic technological and management training on Poultry Nb Batches2501,0001,0001,500250-4,00020.02473031509-126Generic technological and management training on livestock (Fattening and Dairy) Nb Batches2501,0001,0001,500250-4,00020.02473031509-126Subtotal 2811912519835-5052. Subject Specific Advanced Training Advanced technological and management training on Horticulture /h Nb Persons--5001,0001,000-2,500120.143--94198209-501Advanced technological and management training on Fisheries Nb Persons--5501,0001,000-2,550120.143--103198209-510Advanced technological and management training on Poultry Nb Persons--2,0004,0002,000-8,000120.143--375792418-1,585Advanced technological and management training on Livestock Nb Persons--1,1002,0001,000-4,100120.143--206396209-811Subtotal --7791,5841,045-3,4083. GLOBAL GAP & HACCP Protocol /i Contracts with certification authorities for developing training modules Lump sum140370391---902Training of Master Trainer & Protocol Development /j Sessions5152520--659.50.1131243--10Training of PA or Groups /k Nb Batches1,2002,6003,0001,200--8,0000.60.00710232812--73Audit / certification /l Nb Batches-1,3002,6004,0001,300-9,2000.650.008-13264315-97Training of farmers on GAP /m Nb Batches-200450400300-1,3501001.19-296704660522-2,182Subtotal 1517041,153718537-3,2634. Training of Special Advisory service Generic training material Number3-----3500.5952-----2Generic training Number510155--3520.0240000--1Specialised training material Number10105---2550.06110---2Specialised training Number510155--3520.0240000--1Printing material Number5,00010,0005,000---20,0000.01111---3Privatised advisory services Lump sum-993469---1,462Cost Sharing of Advisors /n Lump sum42137181---359Subtotal 451,1326520--1,8305. Piloting of technologies in horticulture, livestock, fisheries and others /o Number-993594---1,587Subtotal 2252,9483,3032,5001,617-10,592C. Value chain sub-project implementation 1. Value chain analysis by PKSF /p Number4-----42,00023.81112-----1122. Value chain investment and implementation /q Value chain packages /r Number-255530--1107,05483.976-2,5365,8893,390--11,816Investment in innovative new VCs Number-222--616,800200-483510538--1,532Value chain facilitators Lump sum-262267---530Value chain Implementation:IFAD Direct Cost /s Lump sum757575757575450Value chain Implementation:IFAD Indirect Cost /t Lump sum-133133133133133664Marketing and Enterprise Visibility Fares Lump sum-111--2Subtotal 753,4906,8754,13720820814,993Subtotal 1873,4906,8754,13720820815,105D. Enterprise strengthening /u Specialized Agribusiness Consultant providing TA to POs & undertaking studies Lump sum010515309--834E. Policy dialogue Policy dialogue on identified areas Lump sum150450250150--1,000Total 1,9069,23613,0528,5162,29820835,216 _________________________________\a Information and orientation meeting on financial literacy of POs' microfinance and PA members\b Training would be provided to Organization Leaders (harmonized with other projects), and no money is allocated\c Prepare information sheet and dicussion notes for village meetings on financial literacy for beneficiary by POs\d Training on business management (fours areas of business management, record keeping, profitability and cash flow analysis) for ME and PA members\e Nutrition training material will be provided to NGOs, POs etc\f Awareness building on climate, environmental, nutrition and social issues for PA members (harmonized with other projects) through other on-going training\g MEs operating in VC will be provided with timely & quality advisory services to increase productivity and ensure delivery of certified produce to agribusinesses\h On partial payment by trainees who would eventually provide a fee based extension service\i Development of GLOBAL GAP & HACCP Protocol (horticulture, Fisheries and livestock). The 3 activities below in combination will make the protocol\j Each Master Trainer will be trained twice\k Groups (sessions) of 25 each\l Groups (sessions) of 25 each\m Master Trainers will provide training to farmers on a fee paid by the farmers\n The project will pay the advisors on a decreasing scale of 80% (Yr 1); 50%; 20% and 0%.\o Sectors that are relevant to individual VC can also be supported\p The analyses will include horticulture, fisheries and livestock VCs. The VC proposal will also include VC Flat Form and methodologies for sharing information\q Cost component of one VC package: linking farmers to 7 downstream enterprises wanting to buy the produce from 28,700 agro enterprises averaging 4100 agro enterprise per downstream enterprise.\r Av cost/downstream Enterprise VC formation (USD 8000/VC); demos (USD 2000/VC); FE to FE visits (USD 500/VC); Lead Firm training visits (USD 1500/VC); support to PA (USD 1000/VC); Value Chain Facilitators - 4/PO for 3 years(USD 1200/one)\s Cost of managing DANIDA funds, financed by DANIDA and an operating cost to IFAD. Cost for the 6th year is to assess the impact of DANIDA interventions, which would be a part of overall project impact assessment. \t Management fee paid to IFAD by DANIDA (8% of the total DANIDA Funds spread over last 5 years).\u Public good required to initiate and operate VC related production and marketing activities, para-extension staff will also be trained for providing advice 
39 
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project Table 2. Financial Services Detailed Costs Base Cost (Local '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs A. Line of credit for PKSF's ME loan program /a 1. Line of credit for PKSF's loan program: IFAD Resources /b Lump sum1,350,0291,350,0291,350,029---4,050,08716,07216,07216,072---48,2152. Line of credit for PKSF's loan program:PKSF Resources Lump sum903,523-----903,52310,756-----10,7563. Line of credit for PKSF's loan program: POs Resources /c Lump sum6,418,057-----6,418,05776,405-----76,405Subtotal 8,671,6091,350,0291,350,029---11,371,667103,23316,07216,072---135,377B. Line of credit to PKSF for ME loan through NBFIs Lump sum840,000840,000----1,680,00010,00010,000----20,000Total 9,511,6092,190,0291,350,029---13,051,667113,23326,07216,072---155,377 _________________________________\a PKSF will provide credit to POs for on-lending to end Borrowers\b PKSF will provide credit to POs for on-lending to end Borrowers\c POs will contribute with their own resourcesRural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project Table 3. Remittances Management Detailed Costs Base Cost (Local '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs A. Remittances - Project Implementation Lump sum28,00028,00028,000---84,000333333333---1,000Total 28,00028,00028,000---84,000333333333---1,000 
40 
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project Table 4. Institutional Strengthening and Project management Detailed Costs Unit CostQuantities(LocalUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total'000)(US$ '000)202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs A. PKSF's Capacity Building 1. PKSF's capacity building through ICT based solutions Development of block chain platform, e-commerce & crowd funding platform Lump sum550581613---1,7442. PKSF HR (Staff) Development (training, exchange visits) Business management and financial analysis Number-101515--40250.298-466--16Value chain analysis and VCD subproject design - training Lump sum-10----10250.298-4----4Project design and management Number--55--10500.595--44--8M and E system design and management Number-5----5500.595-4----4ICT based platforms: Overview and management Number-5510--20250.298-224--8Development project management Number--1010--20500.595--88--16Financial services and institutions Number--5105-20200.238--232-7ICT based Realtime MIS Lump sum-55---10250.298-22---4Exchange visits (VCD) /a Lump sum--2020--403003.571--7676--152Subtotal -15991022-217Subtotal 5505967121022-1,961B. POs capacity building 1. Value chain integration and contract intermediation Lump sum-1----11,00011.905-15----152. Other training - Nutrient Sensitive, M&E etc. Lump sum--8---83. New financial product development Lump sum--11--215,000178.571--184184--368Subtotal -15192184--390C. Project management 1. Office Facilities - Procurement SUV: 4-Wheel Vehicle for Field Visits Number10,000-----10,00010.012140-----140Laptops Number18-----181001.1925-----25Printers Number2-----2500.5951-----1Photocopy machine Number1-----15005.9527-----7Office furniture Number17-----17500.59512-----12Cellphones Number18-----18500.59513-----13Training and recording equipment Number1-----12,50029.76235-----35Subtotal 234-----2342. Operating expenses - Salaries & Allowances Project Co-ordinator Lump sum11111164,72556.25565656565656338Deputy project Co-ordinator (Technical) Lump sum11111164,46053.095535353535353319Deputy project Co-ordinator (Financial Service) Lump sum11111164,46053.095535353535353319Sectoral Specialist (Livestock) Lump sum11111163,26038.81393939393939233Sectoral Specialist (Horticulture) Lump sum11111163,26038.81393939393939233Sectoral Specialist (Fisheries) Lump sum11111163,26038.81393939393939233ICT Specialist Lump sum11111163,26038.81393939393939233Financial Analyst Lump sum11111163,26038.81393939393939233Procurement Specialist Lump sum11111162,73032.5333333333333195Communication, Publication & Knowledge Management Specialist Lump sum11111162,53030.119303030303030181Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist Lump sum11111162,73032.5333333333333195Nutrition Specialist Lump sum11111162,73032.5333333333333195Value Chain Project Manager Lump sum666666362,33027.738166166166166166166999Assistant Manager (Accounts) Lump sum222222121,82021.667434343434343260Computer Operator cum MIS Officer Lump sum11111161,04012.38112121212121274Driver Lump sum11111167809.28699999956Subtotal 7167167167167167164,2933. Operating expenses - Other Monitoring and Travel Lump sum3636363636-179Overhead - Office Rent, electricity /b Lump sum959595959595571Start-up workshop Lump sum12-----12Subtotal 143131131131131957624. M &E, studies and dissemination Studies (baseline, Mid-term and end-project impact studies) Lump sum100100100100100100600Sector impact studies Lump sum--119---119Results sharing (websites, seminars/workshops, video production etc.) /c Lump sum---48--48Subtotal 100100219148100100767Subtotal 1,1929461,0669949469116,055Total 1,7421,5571,9691,2809489118,407 \a Overseas training in countries including Thailand, Philippines, and India\b Office rent, electricity, fuel, repair and maintenance, meeting costs\c Production of hard copies of all documentation is discouraged and electronic filing and dissemination will instead be applied. 
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
ANNEX 4 
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project (RMTP): DRAFT 
INTRODUCTION AND METHODOLOGY 
1. 
1.
The design mission of RMTP carried out the Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) to  asses the 
financial  and  economic  viabilities  of  the  investments  RMTP.  The  project  targets  to  reach  400,000 
households within 6-year period as direct beneficiaries with credit and non-credit support to increase the 
productivity and quality of crops and livestock, and establishing micro-enterprises (MEs). The project will 
engage with commodities from four broad National Value Chains: (i) high value cereal, fruit and vegetable 
crops; (ii) pond and tank aquaculture; (iii) livestock cattle (milk and beef), buffalo (milk and beef), goat and 
sheep  and  (iv)  poultry  including  egg  and  meat  of  chickens, turkeys, geese and  ducks. These  four  were 
subdivided  into  seven  more  specific  VC  to  facilitate  the  EFA.  A  total  of  24  enterprise  models  that 
represent the VC operations were analysed to assess the financial and economic viability of these VCs. 
2.
Methodology  and  Approach  of  EFA:  The  representative  farm  models  and  likely  value  chain 
operation unit models were developed based on information collected during the field visits of the design 
team through direct observation, focus group meetings with producers and the staff of POs visited and the 
PKSF staff, and information extracted from various publications of the POs.1 Other sources of information 
include  Bangladesh  Bank,  World  Bank  Commodity  Forecast,  UNDP2,  IFAD3  and  Bangladesh  Bureau  of 
Statistics. The main types of data that were used for the FEA include (i) crop and enterprise budgets for 
farm  models;  (ii)  market  prices;  (iii)  capital  and  working  capital  expenditure  of  processing  facilities;  (iv) 
cost of machineries; (v) international prices for computing parity prices of exportable commodities; and (v) 
cost of application of GGAP and HACCP standards. 
3.
  A total of 24 enterprises (crops, livestock and non-agriculture small enterprises), representing the 
seven VCs, were analysed using the partial budgeting approach to assess their financial viability and the 
demand for credit. Incremental benefits were estimated based on expected physical outputs during the 6-
year implementation period of the project and potential incremental benefits that would realise during the 
balance  14-year  period  of  post-implementation  project  life.  The  enterprises  that  were  analysed  include 
three  types  of  rice  including  aromatic  rice,  vegetables  (6  type  of  vegetable),  potatoes,  bananas,  mung 
beans,  fish,  fingerlings  production,  dairy  milk,  beef  fattening,  poultry  eggs  and  broiler,  food  processing 
(dairy milk cooling and storage), and handloom and basket weaving representing non-agriculture micro-
enterprises.  
4.
Attribution: The EFA methodology needs to identify a clear linkage between the beneficiaries and 
one  or  more  project  interventions  to  elicit  benefits  and  corresponding  costs.  RMTP  mainly  has  a  value 
chain  focus.  The  beneficiaries’  investments  are  assisted  by  collateral  free  loans.  In  order  to  create  an 
appetite to credit financing and making investment in the agriculture sector, the project would facilitate an 
array of activities. The EFA recognises these as the contributory factors to create  incremental costs and 
benefits of the enterprises that were selected for the analysis. These activities include: 
(a)
  Undertaking areas-vise VC studies to identify appropriate and competitive products to be 
linked with in-bound and out-bound markets; 
1 The references include: (i) Society for Social Service (2017), “Dairy Value Chain - Income Augmentation and Employment 
Generation Through Dairy Cattle Rearing in the Char Areas”, PACE Project. (ii) Society for Development Initiative, (October 2018), 
Annual Report. (iii) POMIS-1 Report (2019), Mohila Bohumukhi Shikkha Kendra (MBSK), Balubari, Dinajpur. (iv) Society for 
Development Initiative, (Jan 2019), Ghorakanda Safe Vegetable Production Association, Winter Vegetable Production – Tomato, 
Cabbage, Cauliflower, Bottle Gourd production data. (v) Mohila Bohumukhi Shikkha Kendra (MBSK), Annual Report, 2017-2018, 
Balubari, Dinajpur-5200. 
2 Power and Participation Research Center and UNDP, (2016), “Politics, Governance and Middle Income Aspirations: Realities and 
Challenges – An Empirical Study.  
3 Arslan, A. and Higgins, D. (2019) [Draft]. Impact assessment report: Coastal Climate Resilience Infrastructure Project (CCRIP), 
People's Republic of Bangladesh. IFAD: Rome, Italy 
1 
(b)
  Establishing  multiple  platforms  consisting  of  farming  enterprises,  agro-business,  input 
suppliers,  advisory  services  and  PO’s  value  chain  facilitators  to  create  linkages  among 
the stakeholders so that interest is developed for increasing production; 
(c)
  Raising  public  awareness  of  the  benefits  derived  from  GGAP  and  HACCP  for domestic 
consumers, producers, processors and exporters, through mass media; 
(d)
  Fine-tuning  farming  practices  according  to  the  market  demand;  provide  technology;  in 
support  of  interested  entrepreneurs,  help  obtaining  GGAP  with  Chain  of  Custody 
Standard (Traceability) and HACCP certifications with cost sharing methods between the 
project and the beneficiaries; 
(e)
  Firming  a  pool  of  skilled  local  service  providers  such  paravets,  trainers,  certified  local 
agricultural  technicians  and  pay-based  advisory  service  providers  for  each  sector  to 
provide the technical and business services to beneficiaries; 
(f)
  Assisting preparing or updating all required training material as demanded; and 
(g)
  Promoting appropriate modern technologies in the selected value chains, such as vertical 
production  systems  for  aquaculture;  driers  for  vegetables  and  fruits;  drip  and  micro 
irrigation etc; 
These  assistances  would  be  available  to  any  beneficiary  and  along  with  this  package  and 
5.
determined by the capital cost demand, micro-credit will be provided with IFAD and counterpart funds. 
PROJECT COST, BENEFICIARIES AND ASSUMPTIONS 
2. 
6.
The estimated cost of the RMTP, generated from COSTAB, was used as the project cost. DANIDA 
grant financed some activities of the first componenet. An  allowance for the  continues overhead cost of 
PKSF,  which  is  assumed  to  be  50%  of  the  project  management  cost  of  the  6th  year  of  the  project  has 
been included from year 7 (2026) onwards. 
7.
Table  1  shows  the  distribution  of  445,000  direct  beneficiaries  of  RMTP  by  the  enterprises.  Three 
parameters determined the yearly distribution of them: (i) spread of the project development budget which 
results  in  making  the  contact  with  the  beneficiaries;  (ii)  the  adoption  rate  of  the  technologies;  and  (iii) 
realization of the premium price for GGAP certified products through VC linkages. 
Table 1: Total and cumulative distribution of beneficiary households in VC enterprise receiving full benefits 
2 
Notes: GAP – GGAP is adopted in “with project” situation; No P-price – premium price for GAPP certified product has not been 
realized due to inadequate VC linkages or not realizing the expected product quality. 
8.
The  basis  of  segregating  the  total  number  of  beneficiaries  of  400,000  into  these  enterprises  was 
the  distribution  of  loan  recipients  in  these  sectors  in  the  lending  programme  of  PKSF  with  their  partner 
organizations  for  the  period  of  2017  to  2018.  The  distribution  of  the  development  budget  of  the  project 
cost  is  the  following:  8%  is  for  the  1st  year;  26%,  32%,  and  34%  for  the  2nd,  3rd,  and  the  4th  year 
respectively. It is assumed that all beneficiaries have been reached at the end of the 4th year. The project 
budget  for  the  balance  period  is  mostly  for  follow-up,  monitoring  and  programme  management  which 
would hardly impact on reaching beneficiaries. It is also assumed that all production costs and benefits of 
the  project  beneficiaries  would  start  in  the  2nd  year  of  the  project  once  the  micro-financing  Partner 
Organizations (POs) of PKSF have prepared VC proposals and made contacts with the beneficiaries.  
The adoption rate varies with the enterprise. The typical rates applied are:  1st project year – 50%, 
9.
meaning  only  50%  of  the  beneficiaries  reached  by  the  project  in  this  year  would  apply  all  production 
technologies; 2nd year – 60%; 3rd year – 60%; 4th year – 90%; 5th year – 90% and 6th year – 100%. The 
focus  group  discussions  that  the  design  team  had  with  the  members  of  the  existing  Producers 
Associations (PAs) during the field visits gave indications to derive the adoption rates. 
10.
  The EFA was based on the following general assumptions: 
(a)
  The current enterprise budgets that were elicited through field discussions held with the 
producers represented the “without project - WOP” scenarios. The existing technologies 
and the prevailing prices of inputs and outputs were used to derive the WOP enterprise 
budgets. The respective WP situations were constructed using conservative estimates of 
potential changes to the costs and benefits of the models on the advice of the Agricultural 
Value Chain expert of the design team. 
(b)
  All benefits were estimated using 2019 prices. The incremental costs and benefits of the 
project supported enterprises will continue for a 20-year period which include the 6-year 
project implementation period. 
(c)
  For  all  activities  which  used  labour,  a  financial  rural  daily  wage  rate  of  BDT  420  per 
person-day for unskilled labour and BDT 588 per person-day for skill labour who work in 
technology  demanded  enterprises  (large  fish  tanks,  milk  cooling  plants  etc)  were  used. 
These are the prevailing rates in the project area. The same wage rate was used to value 
3 
Yr 2020Yr 2021Yr 2022Yr 2023Yr 2024Yr 2025Yr 2026Aman RiceGAP, No P-price11,9494781,8642,2943,65610,75411,94911,949Boro RiceGAP, No P-price11,9494783,1073,8244,06311,94911,94911,949Aromatic RiceFrom Boro To Aroma.11,9494781,8642,2943,65610,75411,94911,949PotatoGAP, No P-price7,1702871,1181,3771,7065,0195,7367,170BananaGAP, No P-price14,3394591,8642,2943,90011,47112,90514,339Aman RiceGAP, With P-price40,6281,6256,3387,80012,43236,56540,62840,628Boro RiceGAP, With P-price11,9494781,8642,2943,65610,75411,94911,949Aromatic RiceGAP, With P-price23,8999563,7284,5897,31321,50923,89923,899Vegetables (6 veg)GAP, With P-price11,9494781,8642,2943,65610,75411,94911,949Mung BeansGAP, With P-price11,4714591,7902,2023,51010,32411,47111,471PotatoGAP, With P-price11,9494781,8642,2943,65610,75411,94911,949BananaGAP, With P-price21,9878793,4304,2216,72819,78821,98721,987Fish pondsImproved practices10,0004001,5601,9203,0609,00010,00010,000Large Fish pondsGAP, With P-price3,9321576137551,2033,5383,9323,932Poultry - EggsBetter feeds23,8257623,0973,8124,86014,29519,06023,825Poultry - BroilerBetter feeds22,4208973,4984,3056,86020,17822,42022,420Beef fattening: bullFaster fattening22,6209053,5294,3436,92220,35822,62022,620Dairy Milk [1]Better Feeds/Breed91,0696,55723,67829,14230,96391,06991,06991,069Poultry - BroilerGAP, With P-price22,6209053,5294,3436,92220,35822,62022,620Banana+Potato: DripGAP, With P-price47,7973,82412,42715,29516,25147,79747,79747,797Micro-Enterprises:Milk Collection CentreWith GAP Standard20016526468200200200Hand Loom MEWomen ME5,3354271,3871,7071,8145,3355,3355,335Basket weavingWomen ME3,7953049871,2141,2903,7953,7953,795Fingerling production5 ponds in 5 ha20016526468200200200Total445,00022,70285,104104,743138,217406,520437,368445,000Enterprises representing the VCsTotal Bene.HHTechnology adopted & market linkagesCumulative Distribution of Beneficiaries of RMTP estimated with the adoption rate 
household family labour too because of the availability of wage labour opportunities in the 
project areas. 
(d)
(e)
  Full  production  of  the  crops,  livestock,  and  fisheries  models  have  been  valued.  It  is 
possible  that  a  part  of  the  production  is  domestically  consumed,  and  it  is  in  fact 
encouraged by the project to do so to provide enhanced nutrition to the family members. 
This portion is also however valued at the same farm-gate price to reflect the full financial 
and economic value of the production models. 
  The capital cost and 50% of the working capital of the 1st year of each enterprise model is 
provided  as  credit  using  the  project-initiated  credit  lines.  The  annual  interest  rate  of  the 
POs existing financial products, which is 22% on average, is used to derive the credit re-
financing flows.   
(f)
It is also assumed that the project beneficiaries have appetite for credit and application of 
new  technologies,  which  would  be  enhanced  through  the  awareness  programmes  and 
training interventions of the project. 
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
3. 
Enterprise Budgets and Demand for Credit 
  The enterprise budgets that were used for the EFA analysis are summarised in Table 2. The net 
11.
benefits and return on investment (ROI: net return divided by total cost) of all the models have increased 
in  the WP  case.  The  ROI  was  estimated  using  the  present  value  of  total  cost  and  the  present  value  of 
total net return for a 20-year period with a discounted rate of 10% for dairy cattle, milk collection centers, 
handloom, basket weaving and fingerling production. It should be noted that the increased income from 
all  crop  models  are  obtained  not  with  substantial  increase  in  labour  use  which  is  beneficial  for  the 
farmers.  
to 
owing 
  The 
is  adopted  – 
incremental 
the 
of 
financial 
12.
benefits 
agricultural 
enterprise  models  would  be 
realised  in  two  stages:  (i)  yield 
adopting 
increase 
technologies  and  GGAP  would  be 
expected in the same year that the 
technology 
for 
example  50%  of  the  rice  growers 
who  would  be  reached  by  the 
project in the 2nd year would adopt 
the  technology  and  secure  the 
incremental yield in the same year. 
This  WOP  to  WP  increase  for 
three  types  of  rice  varieties  is 
shown  in  the  bar-chart  and  it  is 
assumed that this benefit increase 
would  last  for  three  years  before 
the  farmers  graduate  to  the  next 
step  with  the  premium  price;  and 
(ii)  price  increase  as  a  premium 
price  for  the  beneficiaries,  which 
would  take about 3-years  due to the time required to mature VC related market linkages. This required 
two  types  of  models  for  one  enterprise:  one  model  reflecting  only  the  yield  increase  for  WP  scenario 
(labeled as GAP, No P-price [single effect] models in Table 1), and the second model reflecting both yield 
and price increase with the premium price (labeled as GAP, With P-price [double effect] models in Table 
1). The business maturity period to get the premium prices realised is assumed as three years (see the 
bar chart above). 
Table 2: Budgets of all enterprise models representing the VCs used for the EFA of RMTP 
4 
  As  such,  it  is  assumed  that  one  group  of  beneficiaries  practicing  an  enterprise  that  would  get 
13.
increased  yield  in  the  same  year  of  adoption  together  with  the  premium  price  advantages  three  years 
after,  and  another  group  of  the  same  enterprise  would  get  only  the  yield  advantage  through  out  the 
project  period  and  beyond.  The  enterprise  models  with  “single  effect”  and  “double  effect”  are  listed  in 
Table  2.  These  differences  are  modeled  in  the  EFA. All  the  enterprises  listed  in  Table  1  are  financially 
viable to receive project support and credit. For all crop models, including annual crops, the NPV at the 
project  level  (10%  DR  &  20-years)  was  estimated  and  presented  in  Table  2  above  (details  in  the  EFA 
excel sheets). 
  Discount rate for the financial analysis: There are two options to choose from: (i) PKSF average 
14.
lending rate since they function as the vehicle for IFAD to provide credit to the beneficiaries; and (ii) the 
current average lending rates in the financial markets of Bangladesh, which is 10%. The latter was used 
as the financial  discount rate. PKSF  and  its Partner  Organizers (POs) apply  an average  interest rate of 
22% and it varies upto 24%. This is to cover the overhead cost of these institutions.  These rates do not 
reflect the financial market returns of the country. IFAD is interacting with the mainstream institutions, and 
in this case the project is using the PKSF as a vehicle to deliver loans to the IFAD target groups. Given 
this scenario, it prudent to use the mainstream bank rates as the DR for financial analysis. 
  Credit  delivery:  There  are  four  types  of  loans  among  the  financial  products  of  PKSF:  (i)  Buriad, 
15.
targeting at very poor with land plots less than 30 decimal (250 decimal = 1 ha) for seasonal crops and 
rice  cultivation;  (ii)  Sufolon,  targeting  at  enterprising  poor  having  larger  land  plots  and  livestock;  (iii) 
Jagaron  is  a  larger  loan  targeted  at  beneficiaries  with  several  enterprises  including  livestock;  and  (iv) 
Agressor loan is targeting at micro-entrepreneurs who also have few agricultural activities. There will be 
demand  for  all  four  types  of  loans.  The  farm  model  analysis  shows  potential  demand  for  each  type  of 
loans. 
Farm Models 
  Several typical farm models were developed to assess the income increase that the beneficiaries 
16.
would expect with the interventions of the project and the demand for credit (technical details of the farm 
models are presented in Annex 3). The farm models represent typical cropping calendars that prevail in 
the project area. Farm Model 1, with production and financial indicators presented in Table 3, is based on 
the  following  cropping  calendar.  Boro  rice  would  also  be  cultivated  on  a  separate  block  of  land  in  the 
5 
Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)ROIProduction (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benef.(USD)ROIAman RiceGAP, No P-price1 ha3,85012715016%4,1304235143%1,438462Boro RiceGAP, No P-price1 ha4,55012717716%5,0503931829%1,006550Aromatic RiceFrom Boro To1 ha5,75014233627%2,92513962051%2,031828PotatoGAP, No P-price1 ha16,50019034921%18,0007559138%1,6411,133BananaGAP, No P-price1 ha15,06012023912%22,5007877230%3,5772,116Aman RiceGAP, With P-price1 ha4,1303933741%4,1304240548%670501Boro RiceGAP, With P-price1 ha5,0503917791%5,05039759102%715411Aromatic RiceGAP, With P-price1 ha2,92513970862%3,360601,03090%2,249703Vegetables (6 veg)GAP, With P-price1 ha8,146365993156%8,9573831,440189%3,1991,130Mung BeansGAP, With P-price1 ha2801710261%3802015065%346196PotatoGAP, With P-price1 ha16,50019140826%19,500561,14282%4,5591,004BananaGAP, With P-price1 ha22,5007898941%22,500781,23748%2,1702,116Fish pondsImproved practice30 decimal2101026164%3001538567%888537Large Fish pondsGAP, With P-price1 ha (total)2,5001005,388206%4,10025011,089209%40,7574,686Poultry - EggsBetter feeds300 birds19,20010063029%30,2401501,19737%3,6242,874Poultry - BroilerBetter feeds150 birds180206113%2702018229%862578Beef fattening: bullFaster fattening1 per Yr175206812%2452024840%1,290564Dairy Milk [1]Better Feeds/Breed1 Cow1,440151,42319%2,880602,39820%2,3981,400Poultry - BroilerGAP, With P-price150 birds180206113%2702523333%1,227650Banana+Potato: DripGAP, With P-price7 ha93816,64941%1,00835,73582%5,1022,030Micro-Enterprises:Milk Collection CentreGAP Standard500 kg/day182,50030024,88327%24,8836,725Hand Loom MEWomen ME300 Lungy30088936%88972Basket weavingWomen ME200 Basket20048630%48669Fingerling production5 ponds in 5 ha9,600700125,01323%125,01339,584Model TypeUnit of ProductionWith Project (WP)Enterprises representing the VCsWithout Project (WOP)Demand for Loan: 22% An. Int. (USD)Incre. NPV at project level (USD/ha)[2]GAP: Global Good Agricultural Practices; P-Price: Premium price with Value chain linkages; ROI: Return on Investment; [1] Dairy milk: net benefit is in NPV (10% DR); Milk collection: building with GGAP standards; All ME s are new and the WOP benefits is assumed as the opportunity cost of labour involved. Net benefits are in NPV (10% DR) and IRR for 20 years. Drip - Drip Irrigation. [2] Incremental (Wp-WOP) NPV /ha is presented for the cash flows started in 2nd Yr. The rest is in EFA excel sheets. 
same farm. The land size of this farm model is smaller than the typical farm size and also this represent 
beneficiaries who belong to “very poor” category. This farm model represents “single effect” model where 
only the increased yield advantage has been realised. 
Rice and vegetable cultivation use Global Good Agricultural Practices, i.e. low chemical-based inputs and 
more of organic based inputs, no insecticides and pesticides, and mechanized (hired machinery) land 
preparation and harvesting of paddy in “WP” production scenario. Better feed formulae and 
management practices represent WP scenario. There would be a more productive family labour 
(women) re-arrangement in the model. Wage labour that was practiced in the WOP case, has been used 
for basket weaving. This shift is more domestic-friendlier since women remain at home with some 
income generating work instead of venturing into wage labour.  
6 
JanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDecCauliflowerOkra Beans Maize CauliflowerOkra Beans Maize  
17.
  Table 3 shows that the WP net benefits have increased and the elevated average daily per capita 
income is close to the average per capita rural income level of BTK 190 per day.4 Wage labour income, 
although  reduced  in  WP  case,  forms  an  important  part  of  the  family  income.  Women  in  the  family 
contribute to the income by earnings baskets weaving. This model could demand Buriad type of loans of 
about  BTK  13,000  per  year. These  are  very  short-term  loans  and  usually  repayment  is  done  bi-weekly. 
With nutritional education provided by the project, it is expected that about 300 eggs would be consumed 
at home. However, these also valued and added to the benefit flow. 
4 Source for rural income: Arslan, A. and Higgins, D. 2019. Impact assessment report: Coastal Climate Resilience Infrastructure 
Project (CCRIP), People's Republic of Bangladesh. IFAD: Rome, Italy 
7 
Table 3: Farm model 1 – Representing beneficiaries who would demand Buriad type of credit 
  Table 4 demonstrates a typical farm with crops,  two types of livestock activities,  fish ponds and a 
18.
non-farm activity as  income sources.  The cropping calendar  is similar to the  one presented above. The 
farm model  is  financially  beneficial  and  earns  an  annual  income  which  is  higher  than  the  average  rural 
income. The credit demand is above one thousand BTK and represent Sufolon type seasonal loans. 
Table 4: Farm model 2 – Representing beneficiaries who would demand Sufolon type of credit 
Table 5 and 6 shows representative farm models demanding Jagoron type loans and moderately poor 
beneficiaries. The relevant cropping system is presented below.  
8 
Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Effective Farm (ha)0.392Boro RiceGAP, No P-price0.261,18333461,313108337Vegetables (6 veg)GAP, No P-price0.1321,075481311,1825119059149Poultry - EggsBetter feeds150 Birds9,6005031515,12075598283Basket weavingWomen ME972972Wage Income: Family1,800900Total Income2,2922,743149Average daily per capita income (USD)1.401.67Average daily per capita income & demand for the Loan (BTK)11714012,531Farm Model 1: Poorest [BUNIDA]Model TypeLand Allocation (ha)Without Project (WOP)With Project (WP)Increase in net farm income ($/Yr)Demand for Loans (USD)Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Effective Farm (ha)0.928Vegetables (6 veg): 1stGAP, With P-price0.2642,150962622,365101380118298Mung BeansGAP, With P-price0.264744271005401352PotatoGAP, With P-price0.46,600761407,80022457317401Large Fish pondsImproved practice0.11228011603459281,242639525Poultry - BroilerBetter feeds300 birds3604012254050465343Hand Loom ME1,7781,778Total Income1,1544,3621,276Average daily per capita income (USD)0.702.66Average daily per capita income & demand for the Loan (BTK)59223107,276With Project (WP)Increase in net farm income ($/Yr)Demand for Loans (USD)Farm Model 2: Seasonal Loan [SUFOLON]Model TypeLand Allocation (ha)Without Project (WOP) 
19.
  Table 6 has almost the same system but without rice. 
Table 5: Farm model 3 with Aromatic Rice– Beneficiaries who would demand Jagoron type of credit 
9 
JanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDecBanana for one yearPotato/VegAman RiceFallowRice>Aromatic Rice Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Effective Farm (ha)0.732Aman RiceGAP, With P-price0.282686782688114100Aromatic RiceGAP, With P-price0.2585281426721220664141BananaGAP, With P-price0.24,500161984,5001624750423Vegetables (6 veg)GAP, With P-price0.1321,075481311,1825119059149Poultry - EggsBetter feeds300 birds19,20010063030,2401501,1975672,874Dairy MilkBetter Feeds/Breed2 Cows1,440151,4235,7601204,7973,3732,800Total Income2,5916,7186,487Average daily per capita income (USD)1.584.09Average daily per capita income & demand for the Loan (BTK)133344545,195Increase in net farm income ($/Yr)Farm Model 3 - Micro-Credit, Moderately Poor [JAGORON]Model TypeLand Allocation (ha)Without Project (WOP)With Project (WP)Demand for Loans (USD) 
Table 6: Farm model 4 with many livestock- beneficiaries who would demand Jagoron type of credit 
20.
  Both  farm  models  generate  substantial  income  with  project  interventions  and  also  represent 
“double  effect”  advantage.  Livestock  forms  an  important  element  in  the  farming  system.  The  GGAP 
technology  in  all  farming  activities  and  limited  mechanization  in  paddy  farming  would  be  anticipated. 
Poultry farming would be similar to what is practiced in Model 1. Dairy cattle farming will have improved 
feeding  with  both  improved  varieties  of  grasses,  concentrates,  mineral,  and  adequate  water.  Artificial 
Insemination (AI) would be practiced to get better cress breeds. The milk yield would be increased from 9 
liters per day to 12 liters per day with the improved practices and management. With VC linkages, there 
would be assured market for milk, but a premium price cannot be expected for milk since there is no fat-
rate based selling at the farm-gate. Similar to eggs, it is anticipated that the domestic milk consumption 
will slightly increase. However, the volume consumed has also been valued in the EFA. The loans are co-
lateral free, with monthly repayment arrangements. 
21.
  Table  7  represents  a  typical  micro-entrepreneur  model  with  larger  scale  drip-irrigation  banana 
cultivation and fingerling production. The demand for credit, which is of Agrosor type, is high and it could 
be made available by Non-Banking Financing Institutions. The ME generates adequate cash flow to repay 
the loan (details  in  EFA excel sheets). About  5 non-skilled labourers  would  be employed full time in the 
ME.  The  irrigation  is  done  using  gravity  systems  in  WOP  scenarios.  This  system  has  resulted  in  many 
diseases and fugus growth which lead plat death and low yield. The sprinkler irrigation systems which is 
based  on  low  cost  sprinklers  and  a  tube  well,  would  prevent  such  yield  losses.  The  beneficiaries  are 
willing to adopt the system  with  the availability  of financing as credit. Technical  details are presented in 
Annex 3. 
Table 7: Farm model 5 with Micro-enterprise beneficiaries who would demand Agrosor type of credit 
10 
Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Effective Farm (ha)0.932BananaGAP, With P-price0.437,65048969,00031495399846Vegetables (6 veg)GAP, With P-price0.1321,075481311,1825119059149PotatoGAP, With P-price0.46,600761407,80022457317401Dairy MilkBetter Feeds/Breed2 Cows2,880302,84611,5202409,5936,7472,800Beef fattening: bullFaster fattening2 bulls35040136490404973611,128Total Income3,34911,2325,325Average daily per capita income (USD)2.046.84Average daily per capita income & demand for the Loan (BTK)171575447,575Farm Model 4 - Micro-Credit, Moderately Poor [JAGORON]Model TypeLand Allocation (ha)Without Project (WOP)With Project (WP)Demand for Loans (USD)Increase in net farm income ($/Yr)Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Banana+Potato: DripGAP, With P-price793816,6491,00835,73519,0862,030Average daily per capita income (USD)10.1421.76Average daily per capita income (Tka)8521,829170,622Fingerling production9,600700125,01339,584Average daily per capita income (USD)76.11Average daily per capita income & demand for the Loan (BTK)6,3973,327,036ME Model 5: Micro Enterprise [AGROSOR]Model TypeLand Allocation (ha)Without Project (WOP)With Project (WP)Increase in net farm income ($/Yr)Demand for Loans (USD) 
22.
  Table 8 and 9 represent the possible changes in land sizes of crops and type of crops respectively. 
The total farm size will remain the same in both cases. In the first case, the land size under potato would 
be increased with the support of the project and the increased land extent will come from a reduction in 
the extent of vegetable farming and mung bean cultivation. This change would result in a notable increase 
in the farm income. 
  Table 9 represents the changes in crops as a result of the project support. Mung bean cultivation, in 
23.
this  representative  farm  model  would  be  replaced  with  banana  which  will  yield  better  net  return.  This 
model too will provide a substantial incremental net revenue. 
11 
Table 8: Farm model 6 with beneficiaries who would demand Sufolon type of credit and change land sizes of 
crops  
Table 9: Farm model 7 with beneficiaries who would demand Sufolon type of credit and change the crops  
Credit demand 
  The 24 enterprises listed in Table 2 were aggregated into 7 VCs as shown in Table 10 to present 
24.
the  total  demand  from  credit  by  the  value  chain.  Same  Tables  shows  the  land  extent  that  would  be 
developed under each VC. The analysis estimated the credit demand for each enterprise and aggregated 
for  each  VC  listed  in  Table  10.  The  amount  of  credit  demanded  was  based  on  (i)  total  requirement  of 
capital expenditure and working capital of the  enterprise models; and (ii) 50% of the cost of labour. It is 
assumed that the balance  50%  of labour comes from the family labour pool. On the basis of these two 
assumptions, the total potential demand for different type of credit would be USD 285 million during the 6-
year project period. The project with IFAD and co-financiers would provide USD 155 million and normally 
the reflows would also be available to meet the full credit demand. With one round of reflows, the project 
will be able to meet the estimated total credit demand during the project period. 
Table 10: Group of enterprises, beneficiary households engaged credit estimated demand 
Type of VC 
Cereal 
Fruits and Vegetable 
Pulses 
Aquaculture 
Livestock 
Crops / Enterprise Included 
HH 
Land (ha) 
Production 
Units 
112,323 
23,373 
All Rice including aromatic rice 
Vegetables, potatoes and 
banana 
Mung Beans 
Fish ponds, fingerling and spawn 
Dairy, Beef fattening, poultry 
(eggs & broiler) 
115,191 
11,471 
14,132 
182,553 
35,800 
1,514 
2,240 
Loans 
13,286 
68,137 
297 
10,839 
Food processing 
Milk collection, cooling & selling 
200 
Non-agric MES 
Hand looms, Basket weaving 
Total 
9,130 
445,000 
60,687 
12 
153,331 
190,470 
200 
9,130 
164,901 
1,345 
646 
285,022 
Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Effective Farm (ha)0.9280.928Vegetables (6 veg): 1stGAP, With P-price0.2640.1322,150962621,18251190-72149Mung BeansGAP, With P-price0.2640.1327442750320-726PotatoGAP, With P-price0.40.6646,6007616312,94837758595666Large Fish pondsImproved practice0.1120.11228011603459281,242639525Poultry - BroilerBetter feeds300 birds450 birds36040122810605454231,949Hand Loom ME1,7781,778Total Income1,1784,5333,3553,316Average daily per capita income (USD)0.722.76Average daily per capita income & demand for the Loan (BTK)60232282,016Farm Model 6: Seasonal Loan [SUFOLON], changing land sizesModel TypeWOP: Land Use (ha)Demand for Loans (USD)Increase in net farm income ($/Yr)WP: Land use (ha)Without Project (WOP)With Project (WP)Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)Effective Farm (ha)0.928Vegetables (6 veg): 1stGAP, With P-price0.2640.2642,150962622,365101380118298Mung BeansGAP, With P-price0.264PotatoGAP, With P-price0.40.46,600761407,80022457317401Large Fish pondsImproved practice0.1120.11228011603459281,242639525Poultry - BroilerBetter feeds300 birds300 birds36040122540504653430BananaGAP, With P-price0.49,00048969,00031495399846Total Income1,2233,0391,8162,071Average daily per capita income (USD)0.741.85Average daily per capita income & demand for the Loan (BTK)63156152,640Demand for Loans (USD)Farm Model 7: Seasonal Loan [SUFOLON], changing cropping patternModel TypeWOP: Land Use (ha)WP: Land use (ha)Without Project (WOP)With Project (WP)Increase in net farm income ($/Yr) 
Production increase in enterprises 
  The project direct beneficiaries would be expected to increase their production with technical and 
25.
financial assistance as credit. The EFA estimated the annual production levels of VC commodities at full 
development. There would be 75 million mt of rice available per year for all type of rice, 6% increase from 
the  base;  538  million  mt  for  vegetables  (potato,  all  vegetables,  and  mung  beans),  17%  increase;  683 
million mt for fruits (banana), 3% increase; 254 million liters for milk, 79% increase; 5.5 million mt for beef, 
40%  increase;  504  thousand  eggs,  58%  increase;  10.3  million  mt  for  poultry,  50%  increase;  and  2.3 
million mt for fish, 59% increase (Table 11). 
Table 11: Increase in production of commodities at full development 
VC Commodity 
Rice (all types) 
Vegetable (Potato, all veg, mung bean) 
Fruits (Banana) 
Milk 
Meat (Beef) 
Eggs 
Poultry 
Fish 
Total Production at Full 
Development (Mt/Yr) 
75,187 
Total Production: WOP 
(Mt/Yr) 
71,093 
% increase WP 
6% 
538,225 
683,977 
254,572 
5,542 
504,326 
10,345 
2,285 
458,072 
662,640 
141,886 
3,958 
320,207 
6,896 
1,437 
17% 
3% 
79% 
40% 
58% 
50% 
59% 
Impact on Family Income and poverty reduction 
  The net enterprise income that is expected at the full development stage of the project, in 2024-25, 
26.
would  vary  from  USD  2,743  per  year  per  household  for  the  poorest  category;  USD  4,362  for  emerging 
farmers;  USD  6,718  for  moderately  poor;  and  USD  11,232  for  micro-entrepreneurs  as  demonstrated  in 
the farm models. In comparison to average rural income of USD 3,712 (Source: op.cit) in the project area, 
the  expected  income  of  the  RMTP  beneficiaries  would  be  substantially  higher.  As  such  the  project  will 
have a positive impact on poverty reduction. 
Impact on Employment 
  The project has a net gain of employment for 9,266 persons, or 2 million man-days per year. Some 
27.
crops  use  less  labour  due  to  partial  mechanization  and  others  are  using  more  due  to  adopting  good 
agricultural practices based on organic measures etc. It is expected that changing the cropping practices, 
type  of  crops  and  land  extents  etc,  the  losses  in  labour  use  would  be  balanced.  Table  12  summarises 
changes in labour use and employment at full development. 
13 
Table 12: Increase in employment due to changes in farming systems at full development 
Overall Financial Analysis 
  The  cashflows  of  all  the  enterprise  models  populated  with  appropriate  targets  over  the  project 
28.
period were aggregated to compute the total gross benefit flow of the project. The total cost is comprised 
of (i) the RMTP project cost, based on 2019 prices, net of the provision for loans; and (ii) the incremental 
cost of all enterprise. The incremental benefits of all enterprise models provided the benefit flow. The EFA 
excel sheets presents the  details. The Financial Internal Rate of Return  (FIRR)  is 35%. The net benefit 
flow was discounted at 10%, which is the current average interest rate, to ascertain the break-even point 
of  the  project  cash  flows. At  the  9th  year  (2028),  the  project  will  be  able  to  breakeven  the  total  project 
investment and the beneficiaries’ investment during the project period and start generating a positive net 
benefit flow. 
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
4. 
  The economic analysis was carried out by adjusting the cost and benefits flows that were used in 
29.
the financial analysis of the project to reflect economic values. In addition to the assumptions made in the 
financial analysis, the following assumptions were used in the economic analysis. 
(a)
  The  economic  investment  cost  is  based  on  the  project  cost  net  of  financing  for  loans 
during  the  6-year  implementation  period  generated  by  COSTAB  programme,  which 
deducts  the  amounts  payable  for  taxes  and  provisions  for  price  contingencies  from  the 
financial  costs  and  applies  the  shadow  exchange  rate  to  convert  the  cost  portion  in 
foreign  exchange  into  local  currency.  The  funds  provided  to  PKSF  under  the  micro-
financing has not been included. Both taxes and credit funds are transfer payments which 
are excluded from the economic analysis. 
14 
Aman Rice2,58112742327,793108,404-219,389-997Boro Rice3,10712739394,565121,166-273,399-1,243Aromatic Rice2,390142139339,360332,190-7,170-33Potato1,43419075272,444107,544-164,900-750Banana2,86812078344,139223,690-120,449-547Aman Rice8,1263942316,895341,27124,377111Boro Rice2,390393993,20493,20400Aromatic Rice4,78013960664,380286,783-377,597-1,716Vegetables (6 veg)1,577365383575,108604,78429,676135Mung Beans1,514172025,74230,2844,54321Potato2,39019156456,462133,832-322,631-1,467Banana4,3977878342,992342,99200Fish ponds1,600101516,00024,0008,00036Large Fish ponds44010025044,034110,08566,051300Poultry - Eggs16,6771001501,667,7452,501,617833,8723,790Poultry - Broiler15,6942020313,879313,87900Beef fattening: bull22,6202020452,398452,39800Dairy Milk [1]75,72015601,135,7934,543,1733,407,38015,488Poultry - Broiler22,6202025452,398565,498113,100514Banana+Potato: Drip23,134141703,269,5781,619,366-1,650,211-7,501Micro-Enterprises:Milk Collection Centre20018536536,96073,00036,040164Hand Loom ME5,335120150640,200800,250160,050728Basket weaving3,7951414053,130531,300478,1702,174Fingerling production20030036560,00073,00013,00059Total00012,295,19914,333,7112,038,5129,266Enterprises representing the VCsArea (ha)WOP (md/ha)WP (md/ha)WOP: Tot Labour (md)WP: Tot Labour (md)Labour: Loss or Gain (md)Labour: Loss or Gain (Persons) 
(b)
  The following procedure was used to convert all prices of farm and livestock production to 
economic prices:  
 using border prices, import parity prices were estimated to value tradable goods 
(i)
(all paddy and all fertilisers), the computation is presented in the EFA excel sheets;  
(ii)
for all non-tradable goods, standard conversion factor (SCF) of 0.84 was used to 
adjust the prices – the market distortion includes some degree of protection and over-
valuation  of  BTK  in  terms  of  the  dollar  –  the  SCF  was  computed  taking  the  ratio 
between  Exchange  Rate  (ER)5  and  Estimated  Shadow  Exchange  Rate  (SER)6 
[SCF=ER/SER]; EFA excel sheets presents details; and  
  overhead cost of PKSF, which is 50% of that of the final year of the project, and it 
(iii)
is needed to continue to provide some VC focused service to the enterprises. 
(c)
  Shadow  wage  rate  factor  is  assumed  at  0.84  to  account  some  out-migration,  seasonal 
labour shortages, and peri-urban labour demand. Labour is idle during some period of the 
year indicating full employment point has not reached. 
(d)
  The  economic  discount  rate  of  6.2%,  which  is  the  Opportunity  Cost  of  Capital 
representing the Average Annual Deposit Rate (Bangladesh Bank, Dec 2018, IFS 2019, 
M01 EcoIndicators). 
  After making the required adjustments to the cash flows of the financial analysis on the basis of the 
30.
above assumptions, the economic analysis for the RMTP was carried out. The Economic Internal Rate of 
Return  (EIRR)  for  the  20-years  period  is  30%  with  benefit  cost  ratio  of  1.31  (The  EIRR  for  this  is  29%, 
indicating that the project can withstand the loss of land to that degree. 
5 Exchange Rate (ER) Feb 2019 [Bangladesh Bank, https:// www.bangladeshbank. org.bd/econdata/exchangerate.php] 
6 Source: Bangladesh Bank Quartely, https://www.bangladeshbank.org.bd/econdata/exchangerate.php 
15 
  Table 13). The project earns a Net Present Value (NPV) of USD 291 million for the 20-year period 
31.
with 6.2% discount rate. 
  Sensitivity analyses were carried out to assess whether the project is economically viable to face 
32.
possible risks of increasing the cost of production of enterprise, decreasing their benefits, one-year delay 
in realising project benefits, and possible loss of land for cultivation. These risk factors represent most of 
the potential adverse climatic conditions (heavy rains, floods and cyclones etc) and market failures. It has 
been estimated that there are crop production losses due to drought which varies from 6% per annum to 
15% per annum.7 The scenario of 10% and 20% benefit loss address these risk factors.  
  The results of the sensitivity analyses are presented in The EIRR for this is 29%, indicating that the 
33.
project can withstand the loss of land to that degree. 
7 https://www.climateemergencyinstitute.com/uploads/M__Drought_in_Bangladesh_and_its_adaptive_measures.pdf 
16 
34.
  Table 13. Both cost increase by 10% and 20% and benefit decrease by 10% and 20% yield EIRR 
that are higher than the opportunity cost  of capital  and therefore indicate that the enterprise models are 
quite stable to face risky scenarios. However, the production models show the highest drop of EIRR in the 
scenario of 20% benefits decrease and one-year delay in getting benefits. As such the PKSF will have to 
closely  monitor  any  changes  to  the  facilitative  factors  and  continue  to  provide  services  to  maintain  the 
productivity  levels  that  are  currently  being  achieved  without  incurring  any  delays  for  the  benefits  to  be 
realised.  In  order  to  take  possible  climatic  effect  on  land  degradation,  a  scenario  of  30%  of  all  land 
cultivated with project assistance becoming un-cultivable was also assumed as a scenario. The EIRR for 
this is 29%, indicating that the project can withstand the loss of land to that degree. 
17 
Table 13: Results of the Economic Analysis 
Sensitivity Analyses 
Base Case 
All cost increase by 10% 
All cost increase by 20% 
All benefits decrease by 10% 
All benefits decrease by 20% 
Cost increase by 10% and benefits decrease by 10% 
1 year delay in getting benefits 
30% of Land under crop would become un-usable due to 
climatic effect 
EIRR 
30% 
22% 
14% 
21% 
11% 
13% 
16% 
29% 
B/C Ratio 
1.31 
1.19 
1.09 
1.18 
1.05 
1.07 
1.26 
NPV (USD mn) 
291  
197  
103  
168  
45  
74  
172  
NPV (BDT mn) 
24,477 
16,580 
8,684 
14,133 
3,789 
6,236 
14,448 
1.29 
267  
22,466 
35.
  Qualitative benefits These include enhanced financial and social service delivery capacities of the 
Partner  Organizations  of  PKSF  to  their  members;  improved  technical  capacities  of  livestock  para 
professionals and para extension service providers; food safety in the project area; better awareness of 
food  safety  and  nutrition  intake  among  beneficiaries;  improved  animal  health  (dairy,  beef  cattle,  poultry 
and  fisheries);  and  value  chain  (VC)  development  through  improved  market  access,  and  development 
and  expansion  of rural   businesses. RMTP  will  also  generate employment opportunities for  women and 
men,  particularly  the  youth  through  their  involvement  of  the  value  chain  activities  and  related  backward 
and forward linkages. 
  The  EFA  excel  sheets,  both  for  financial  and  economic  values,  provide  the  detail  tables  listed 
36.
below. 
18 
List of tablesDescriptionTradable!A1Analysis of parity pricesPrices!A1Prices of all inputs and outputsEFAStructure_Degn!A1Foundation for the EFA modeling and distribution of beneficiaries: Design FormulationEFAStructure_Apprs!A1Foundation for the EFA modeling and distribution of beneficiaries: Appraisal FormulationBeneficiary!A1Distribution of RMTP beneficiaries on the basis of micro-finance beneficiaries of PKSF, 2017-2018SubProjects!A1Aggregated cash flows of all enterprisesFmModels!A1Farm Models and summary analysesAmanVC!A1Crop Budgets - Aman rice, production increase with adopting technologies (WP), no premium priceAmanSVC!A1Crop Budgets - Aman rice, production increase with adopting technologies (WP) and premium priceBoroVC!A1Crop Budgets - Boro rice, production increase with adopting technologies (WP), no premium priceBoroSVC!A1Crop Budgets - Boro rice, production increase with adopting technologies (WP) and premium priceAromaticRiceVC!A1Crop Budgets - Aromatic rice, production increase with adopting technologies (WP), no premium priceAromaticRiceSVC!A1Crop Budgets - Aromatic rice, production increase with adopting technologies (WP) and premium priceMungbeanVC!A1Crop Budgets - Mungbean, production increase with adopting technologies (WP), no premium pricePotatoVC!A1Crop Budgets - Potato, production increase with adopting technologies (WP), no premium pricePotatoSVC!A1Crop Budgets - Potato, production increase with adopting technologies (WP) and premium priceBananaVC!A1Crop Budgets - Banana, production increase with adopting technologies (WP), no premium priceBananaGGAP!A1Crop Budgets - Banana, production increase with adopting technologies (WP) and premium priceFishPond!A1Enterprise Budgets - Fish PondsImprovedFishFarm!A1Enterprise Budgets - Improved Large Fish PondsEgg!A1Enterprise Budgets - EggsBroilersVC!A1Enterprise Budgets - BroilerBroilersSVC!A1Enterprise Budgets - Broiler with GGAP and premium priceBeef!A1Enterprise Budgets - BeefCowMilk!A1Enterprise Budgets - Dairy CowMilkCollect!A1Enterprise Budgets - Milk CollectionHandLoom!A1Enterprise Budgets - HandloomBasket!A1Enterprise Budgets - BasketFingerLingBreed!A1Enterprise Budgets - Fingerling productionVegWOP!A1Crop Budgets - Vegetable production increase with adopting technologies (WP), no premium priceVegWPGGAP!A1Crop Budgets - Vegetable production increase with adopting technologies (WP) and premium priceDripBanana!A1Crop Budgets - banana with drip irrigation, production increase with adopting technologies (WP), no premium priceEAYRB_Apprais!A1Project costArk1'!A1Cropping calendar 
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 5:  Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note   
I. 
Major landscape characteristics and Issues 
A. 
Socio-cultural context 
1.  Poverty  and  trends  in  rural  areas.  Bangladesh is a country  with  a population  of about 153 
million  living  in  an  area  of  147,500  square  kilometers  (or  1,252  persons  per  square  kilometer). 
This makes Bangladesh one of the most densely populated countries in the world. Bangladesh has 
progressed  to  lower  middle-income  country  status  with  high—but  declining—rates  of  poverty 
among its 153 million people. The proportion of the population living under $1.25 a day fell from 
49% to 32% between 2000 and 2010 effectively lifting 16 million people out of poverty. Sustained 
economic growth was fundamental to this reduction: Bangladesh real GDP growth averaged 6.3% 
over the last decade. In 2017, GDP growth was 7.3%.  
2.  About  80%  of  the  population  lives  in  rural  areas.  The  rural  population  is  mainly  engaged  in 
agriculture and or agricultural related activities - 41% of the population is active in the agricultural 
sector1.  Currently,  the  largest  share  of  public  expenditure  for  agriculture  goes  to  price  support, 
income subsidization and input subsidies. Approximately 65% of the rural population is landless or 
functionally  landless  (owning  less  than  0.2  hectares  of  land).  Land  ownership  is  considered  an 
enabling  factor  for  poverty  alleviation  in  rural  Bangladesh;  Longitudinal  research  shows  that 
graduation from poverty happened more often when families had disposition over land.  
3. Over the last two decades rural communities have gradually moved from subsistence farming to 
commercial  farming.  This  allows  even  people  with  very  little  means  to  respond  to  market 
opportunities.  Smallholders  are  adopting  new  agricultural  and  information  technologies  and 
management practices. Financial services, mainly savings and credit, have dramatically improved 
due  to  microfinance  although  micro-insurance  service  is  yet  to  make  any  meaningful  inroad.  In 
addition,  a  number  of  trends  can  be  observed  in  rural  agricultural  sectors  that  are  relevant  to 
RMTP:  (i)  younger  and  educated  groups  are  slowly  investing  in  agriculture,  (ii)  larger  private 
companies  are  appearing  in  agro-processing,  (iii)  urban  consumers  are  demanding  quality 
products, (iv) agricultural extension services are more and more privatized as are the seed sector 
and irrigation are almost fully privatized. Improved rural roads and cell phone services, facilitates 
the sales of commodities.  
4.  Rahman  (2011)  studied  10,483  households  across  the  RMTP  target  districts  of  Satkhira  and 
Khulna Districts and found that among the extreme poor, 74% were Muslim, 25% are Hindus, and 
1 per cent are Christian, Buddhist or adhere to another religion. Overall, 9 per cent of the extreme 
poor  population  are  classified  as  religious-ethnic  minorities.  In  other  words,  their  representation 
among the extreme poor significantly outstrips their percentage of the total population. 
5.  Education.  Bangladesh  has  made  noteworthy  gains  in  education.  According  to  UNESCO,  the 
literacy rate in the country is 72.9% in 2017 (75.7% for male and 70% for female). Literacy rates 
are particularly high among the lower age quantiles of the population with 92.9% (91.5% for male 
and  94.3%  for  female)  of  people  between  15-24%  being  literate.  A  2010  paper  on  education  in 
rural  Bangladesh  however,  describes  that  1)  a  wide  range  of  primary  education  options  are 
available in rural Bangladesh, ranging from public schools to NGO organized initiatives and that 2) 
the  quality  of  education  generally  is  of  lower  quality  in  rural  areas  than  in  urban  areas.  High 
literacy rates strongly correlate with high financial literacy rates and financial well-being. For RMTP 
this  could  potentially  translate  in  higher  payback  rates,  increased  savings  and  lower  portfolio  at 
risk.  
6.  Indigenous  peoples.  Around  45  indigenous  communities  are  present  in  Bangladesh  most  of 
them  living  in  the  Chittagong  Hill  Tracts,  greater  Mymensingh,  greater  Rajshahi,  greater  Sylhet, 
Patuakhali and  Barguna.  They are  generally disadvantaged in the social and cultural spheres and 
studies suggest that extreme poverty is more prevalent among indigenous communities. IFAD has 
been  supporting  indigenous  communities  in  Bangladesh  since  2007  through  the  Indigenous 
Peoples Facility.  
1 Gautam and Faruqee (2016) Dynamics of Rural Growth in Bangladesh: Sustaining Poverty Reduction. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/24544/9781464808760.pdf?sequence=2  
7. Nutrition. Despite significant economic growth, current levels of malnutrition in Bangladesh are 
alarming. Child  stunting is estimated at  36%,  acute child undernutrition stands at 14%, and low 
birth  weight  affects  22%  of  babies.  Micronutrient  deficiencies  remain  a  challenge,  with  21%  of 
children being vitamin A deficient, 45% of children being deficient and 40% iodine deficient. 66% 
of women nationally do not meet minimum  while in rural areas  70% of women and only 28% of 
children meet the required minimum dietary diversity. Food safety remains an issue.  Reasons for 
malnutrition in rural areas include the (i) food insecurity and (ii) inadequate dietary practices.  At 
the same  time, there has  been a rapid  increase  in overweight and obesity. This is mostly due  to 
the increased consumption of trans-fats, ultra-processed foods and sugar sweetened beverages. 
8.  Food  safety.  Food  safety  is  a  serious  concern  in  Bangladesh,  with  inappropriate  use  of 
pesticides and ripening chemicals being some of the main problems facing the agricultural sector. 
The Bangladesh Institute of Public Health indicated that 50% of food items tested between 2001-
2009 was adulterated (particularly pesticide residue), posing health risks for domestic consumers 
and preventing export. Introduction of food safety standards such as GlobalGAP has been pursued 
over recent years, however this effort needs to be integrated into a wider effort. Beyond regulatory 
interventions,  market  demands  for  safe  food  do  not  reach  the  majority  of  smallholder  farmers2.  
Recently, FAO has set up the Food Safety Network3 to improve food safety in Bangladesh, aimed at 
introducing  improved  guidelines  and  training  of  farmers,  consumer  awareness,  inspection  and 
enforcement. 
9.  Gender.  Gender  equality  is  a  prominent  issue  in  Bangladeshi  public  debate  and  it  is  a  major 
objective of the 7th  five-year plan. Gender equality  in Bangladesh  has been  improving  over time. 
Education  levels  increased,  maternal  mortality  is  declining  by  5.5%  per  year  and  Bangladesh  is 
one  of  the  best  performing  countries  in  the  Gender  Gap  Index  (WEF,  2017).  However,  gender 
inequalities remain apparent, especially  in rural  Bangladesh. Women are  responsible to carry out 
the  household  activities  and  are  the  prime  care  takers  for  the  elderly  and  children.  Dowry  is 
practiced  throughout the country,  yet  there  is an  increasing  public awareness about the negative 
impact of Dowry and under aged marriages.  According to UN women, violence against women is a 
common practice in family level as well as community level (UNDP, 2017). 
10.  Women  play  a  vital  role  in  agriculture,  nutrition,  food  security  and  a  wide  range  of  income-
generating  activities.  Production  activities  largely  undertaken  by  women  include  post-harvest 
activities,  processing  and  preservation  of  crops.  Women  are  also  involved  in  seed  preservation, 
cattle  fattening  and  milking  production.  Relative  to  men,  women  are  more  often  involved  in 
homestead agricultural activities like vegetable production, poultry and goat rearing. Women are to 
a larger extent involved in production for home consumption rather than for commercial purposes. 
Men are more engaged in field-based agriculture and larger-scale, higher value business activities 
further from the home. Social and cultural norms still imped women from selling goods on markets 
or to participate in economic activities outside of the homestead. Yet, there is a positive trend and 
women  seem  to  –slowly  but  steadily-  gain  access  to  market  places.  Being  the  cradle  of 
microfinance,  microloans  are  widely  accessible  to  women.  Many  MFIs  specifically  target  women 
and around 95% of MF loan recipients are female. The majority of women are members of savings 
groups.  When  receiving  a  loan  from  a  PKSF  partner  organization,  both  men  and  women  receive 
PKSFs  standard  financial  literacy  training.  During  this  training,  beneficiaries  also  discuss  gender 
equality and equitably financial relations.  
11.  Women are involved in a wide range of income generating activities. Preferably, women work 
on  homestead  agricultural  activities  such  as  small-scale  vegetable  production,  poultry  and 
livestock. In addition, they are involved in minor income generating activities such as sewing and 
handicrafts.  The  table  below  gives  an  overview  of  the  different  value  chains  and  their  gender 
impact. Finally, an empowerment matrix provides an overview of  different empowering measures 
included in the design document.  
2 BoP Innovation Center (2015). The impact of food standards on inclusive growth in agriculture: the case of Bangladesh 
3 See http://www.fao.org/in-action/food-safety-bangladesh/en/  
Value chain 
Fruit and vegetable 
gardens.  
Beef. 
Poultry. 
Goat. 
Aquaculture. 
Non-agricultural 
activities in 
homestead. 
Gender aspects 
-Gender-sensitive when cultivation takes place on homestead 
gardens or very near to households. 
-Men usually sale cultivation on nearby markets. Women report to 
receive earnings of their sales from men.  
-Women look after cattle present at the homestead. They fatten 
cattle when needed.  
-Women state that they feel free to seek the assistance of veterinary 
services when needed.  
-Women are trained on beef fattening practices.  
-Women look after poultry at the homestead.  
-Poultry is collected at farm gate.  
-Women look after goats when present at the homestead.  
-Goats are collected at farm gate. 
- Generally less female involvement as ponds are usually not near to 
the family home. 
-Anecdotal evidence suggest that women are to a larger extent 
involved in aquaculture in the Southern provinces as ponds are closer 
to the homestead.      
-Non-agricultural IGA activities in the homestead include sewing and 
knitting.   
Empowerment topics. 
Interventions 
Women’s control over 
productive assets and  economic 
empowerment. 
Partner Organisations 
  All trainings for PKSF and PO staff 
on value chain processes and 
inclusive enterprise management will 
include topics on ensuring an 
enabling and equitable environment 
for women’s participation in such 
processes.  
  Target gender sensitive value chains 
and promote the role of women in 
male-dominated value chains. 
  Actively target women in vocational 
training programs. 
  Any assets created through the project 
(insurances, animals, sheds, business 
contracts with buyers, etc), will be in 
the name of women when they are the 
sole managers of the asset, or else 
jointly owned by women. 
PKSF 
 
Incorporate gender, poverty and 
youth issues in value chain mapping 
and analyses. 
  Design value chain projects to ensure 
that young women are specifically 
targeted as value chain actors. 
  Ensure that selected value chains 
respond to a broader strategy for 
livelihood adaptation and 
diversification 
  All value chain studies will address 
gender based constraints to women’s 
participation at all levels within the 
commodity based chain.  
  The project will ensure that the 
evolving design of the components 
will reflect the gender priorities 
identified in the studies. 
  Take up lessons learned from the 
CGAP study on women and 
technology and incorporate them in 
the different mobile platforms. 
  The selection process of value chains 
will include activities that have a 
higher rate of women’s participation 
and will address gender based 
constraints that women.  
  Actively target women with the loans 
provided by NBFI’s. 
  Continue the mentorship programme 
for female employees at PKSF for 
women. 
Women’s decision making at 
household level. 
  Develop public-private shared 
 
understanding of values, and 
complementary expertise, to create 
gender-responsive strategy.  
Strengthening women’s agency 
(decision-making power) 
accompanied by work to change 
attitudes at community and higher 
  Actively undertake activities to 
promote improved labour standards 
and working conditions for women in 
the value chain. 
  Explore opportunities with enterprises 
to develop gender-responsive, pro-
poor strategies. 
  Ensure that efforts will be made in 
terms of structuring these capacity 
building events to suit the availability 
of the women members in terms of 
timings, venues and child care 
facilities  
 
levels by incorporating this as topics 
in the multiple trainings offered. 
Skill trainings and vocational 
trainings will include both women 
and men of the households taking 
loans. 
Promotion of women leaders in MF 
groups and producer associations.  
  Build/strengthen the social capital 
 
and negotiation skills of poor people 
in general, and women and young 
people in particular, to enable them to 
participate effectively in value chain 
relationships. 
 
Promote access to new technologies 
and new markets. 
  Adopt low cost technology to reduce 
drudgery and improve quality and 
production in all stages of crop 
production and post harvesting 
  Monitoring and evaluation will be 
 
carried out on the basis of gender and 
household poverty disaggregated 
data.  
Sub-project reports reflect gender 
issues. The final project reports 
systematically identify gender gaps 
and gender-related project successes  
  Baseline and impact surveys will 
  Ensure that all information is 
gathered and presented disaggregated 
by sex. 
include empowerment indicators to 
be measured. This will allow the 
project to track the progress on 
inclusion of women and other 
marginalized households overall.  
Pilot initiatives will be assessed 
according to gender impact so that 
lessons learnt can be used in 
subsequent project activities.  
 
Reducing workloads, and 
achieve an equitable workload 
balance between women and 
men 
Gender mainstreaming within 
the M&E 
12. Youth. With the median of the entire population being a bit over 26 years old and 20% of the 
population between 15-24 years old, Bangladesh  is considered to have a young population.  Over 
the next couple of decades this median will slowly raise to 30 years while it is expected that 60% 
of  the  population  is  between  15-24  years  old4  in  2020.  Youth  unemployment  stands  at  10.3%, 
which is slightly lower than the average global unemployment rate of 12%. However, according to 
the ILO, 20.1% of the population is confined to irregular employment. Constrains faced by youth, 
especially  in  rural  areas  are  (i)  lack  of  technical  education,  (ii)  lack  of  skills  and  training,  (iii) 
limited  access  to  finance  (Hossain,  2010).  Often,  youngster  leave  school  before  obtaining 
secondary  education.  Despite  the  fact  that  youth  who  leave  high  school  prematurely  are  literate 
and  have  basic  mathematic  skills,  it  increases  chances  to  long-term  social  exclusion.  There  is  a 
variety of reasons why the youth decides to drop out of a school including, the need to support the 
family income, uninterested and affordability. Marriage is the most important reason why women 
drop out of secondary school.  
13.  With 34.5%, the agricultural sector, either directly or indirectly, remains the most important 
employer  in  Bangladesh  providing  employment  of  youth.  Services  provide  32.9%  of  employment 
and  industry  30.6%.  Proportionally,  more  women  than  men  are  employed  by  the  agricultural 
factors. Of the youth, 54% is an employee, 0.5% is an employer, 31.7% is an own-account worker 
and 11% is unpaid family worker. Written  contracts  are  not the norm in  Bangladesh with around 
30% of the youth in rural areas having penciled down their engagement5.  
14.  A  large  portion  of  the  youth  of  Bangladesh  still  moves  abroad  for  employment  and  sends 
home  remittances.  In  2015,  the  country  received  $15  billion  from  remittances  and  migration  is 
4 See: https://population.un.org/wpp/Graphs/Probabilistic/POP/0-24/  
5 See: https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@dgreports/@dcomm/documents/publication/wcms_245517.pdf  
higher among the middling poor than the rich and the poorest poor. Migration is a men’s business 
and  female  migration  is  reserved  for  divorcees,  widows  and  abounded  women.  Studies  suggest 
that  migration  is  not  the  preferred  option  for  youth,  they  often  chose  this  path  when  other 
economic opportunities have been exhausted. A  challenge for remittance  senders is finding long-
term productive investment opportunities. (Rashid and Sidker, 2016). 
The  project's  direct  target  groups  consist  of  marginal  &  small  farmers  and  micro-entrepreneurs 
and  within  the  direct  target  groups,  preference  is  given  to  women,  the  youth  and  the  poorer 
segments. The project will indirectly support all value chain actors such as input suppliers, traders, 
processors,  advisory  services.  Consequently,  the  project  will  have  a  positive  impact  on  the  ultra-
poor for whom more jobs get available along the value chains. Building on research from the World 
Food Programme, the Bangladeshi rural poor can be roughly identified in three segment: the ultra-
poor,  enterprising  farmers  and  emerging  farmers.  The  ultra-poor  are  also  targeted  through  pro-
poor  loans  as  well  as  other  IFAD  interventions  such  as  PROVATi³,  HILIP-CALIP  and  CCRIP.  The 
Enterprising  poor,  Emerging  famers  and  Micro-entrepreneurs  will  be  targeted  by  PKSF  loan 
programme  as  well  as  VC  activities.  The  table  below  provides  a  general  description  of  their 
characteristics based on WFP livelihood maps6 and the 2010 household expenditure survey7. 
Target group. 
Ultra-poor. 
-27% of rural poor. 
-Beneficiaries  of  buniad  loans  under 
RMTP. 
Transitional poor. 
-58% of rural poor. 
-Beneficiaries 
loans 
of 
agricultural  loans,  Jagaron  loans  and 
VC activities under RTMP. 
pro-poor 
Enterprising poor. 
- 15% of rural poor. 
-Beneficiaries  of  agricultural  loans  and 
Jagaron loans, Aggressor loans and VC 
activities under RTMP 
literate/  poor 
General characteristics. 
-Illiterate  or  poorly 
numeracy.  
-Average family size: 3.96 
-Poor financial management skills 
-Undeveloped business skills. 
-Involved in unskilled labour. 
-Live in cabins. 
-Own mobile phone. 
-Average  expenditure  on  major  food 
crops: 4287. 
-Literate/ numerate. 
-Average family size: 4.61 
-Rudimentary 
skills. 
-Involved in unskilled and skilled labor. 
-Majority  lives  in  cabins  or  family 
housing. 
-Own mobile phone. 
-Average  expenditure  on  major  food 
crops: 5616. 
financial  management 
-Literate/ numerate. 
-Average family size: 5.36 
-Rudimentary  financial  management  & 
business skills.  
-Affiliated  with  POs 
programmes and sometimes ME loans 
-Live  in  family  housing  and  25%  in 
brick structures. 
-Own  mobile  phone  and  sometimes 
solar panel/motorbike. 
-Average  expenditure  on  major  food 
crops: 7526. 
through  MF 
as 
Financial characteristics.  
-Seasonal  migration 
seen 
expandable livelihoods strategy.  
-Depend on wage labour including cash 
for work schemes. 
-Little savings.  
-No land – 0.49 acres 
-0-4 chicken. 
-Average number of earners: 1.29. 
-Average income: 5843 
-Sharecroppers  or  owning  0.5-1.49 
acres land. 
-0-4 cows owned/ shared,  
-0-2 goats. 
-1-4 fruit trees. 
-Homestead gardens.  
-Some 
receive 
international or domestic. 
-Average number of earners: 1.26 
-Average income: 9696.50 
remittances  either 
-Owning more than 1.50 acres of land. 
-4-8 cows owned/ shared, 
-4-8 goats. 
-1-6 fruit trees -multiple varieties. 
-Homestead gardens.  
-Expanding  land ownership. 
-Some 
receive 
international or domestic. 
-Average number of earners: 1.29 
-Average income: 16172.50 
remittances  either 
Ultra-poor:  The  Ultra-poor  are  landless  or  have  up  to  0.49  acre  of  land  and  hold  few  assets.  For 
income  generation,  they  depend  on  wage  labour  and  share  copping.  Often  they  migrate  out  to 
rural areas in other parts  of the country in search of income or depart for urban areas.  Although 
they  are  90%  food  secure,  a  food  crises  can  occur  when  incomes  stagnate.  The  ultra-poor  have 
limited  literacy  and  numeracy  skills,  live  in  cabins  and  have  little  savings.  They  are  targeted 
through  PKSFs  pro-poor  loan  programme  (Buniad)  and  as  suppliers  under  RMTPs  value  chain 
activities. Their average annual income is BDT 5843 and average expenditure on major food crops 
is 4287. 
6 See: https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/livelihoods_of_char_and_river_basin_communities_2016.pdf  
7 See: http://203.112.218.65:8008/WebTestApplication/userfiles/Image/LatestReports/HIES-10.pdf  
Transitional poor: Possess between 50-1.49 acres of land including homestead and/or are involved 
in  sharecropping  as  well  as  wage  labour.  Generally,  they  are  food  secure,  though  this  group 
occasionally  could  face  a  food  crisis  due  to  e.g.  a  climate  related  shock.  Enterprising  poor  are 
literate and numerate, live in cabins and have some livestock and chicken. Enterprising poor were 
able to  increase their  asset  base  over the  last  couple  of  year,  by  migration  and  diversifying  their 
income base. They are targeted through PKSF’s income generating activities programme (Jagaron) 
or agricultural (Sufolon) programme as well as suppliers under RTMPs VC activities. Their average 
annual income is BDT 9693 and average expenditure on major food crops is 5616.   
Enterprising poor: This group has land holdings between 50-2.49 acres and a small herd of cattle 
&  poultry.  Depending  on  their  agro-ecological  zone,  they  are  involved  in  rice  or  crop  production. 
Enterprising  poor  are  food  secure  and,  just  as  the  transitional  poor,  literate  and  numerate.  They 
live  in  cabins  and  in  some  cases  in  fixed  structures.  Many  of  the  enterprising  poor  farmers  have 
been  able  to  expand  their  asset  base  over  the  last  couple  of  years  by  increasing  their  land 
holdings.  This  groups  is  targeted  through  PKSFs  agricultural  programme  as  well  as  Jagaron, 
Sufolon  and  Agressor  loan  products.  Their  average  annual  income  is  BDT  16172  and  average 
expenditure on major food crops is 7526. 
Using  existing  procedural  guidelines,  financial  services  are  provided  to  micro-enterprises  and  to 
growing/larger enterprises and agribusinesses. Based on a typology from the DFID funded study: 
Diagnostic  of  Micro-enterprise  lending  (ME)  lending  by  MFIs  in  Bangladesh,  the  table  below  (i) 
describes  different  types  of  enterprises  and  (ii)  how  they  relate  to  PKSF  loan  products  and  NBFI 
lending products. 
B.  Natural resources  
15.   Bangladesh  is  predominantly  a  riverine,  deltaic  country,  with  around  80%  of  its  surface 
classifying  as  floodplains  and  having  an  extensive  coastal  area,  jointly  forming  the  Bangladesh 
Plain. Part of the world’s largest delta, the country has been formed over centuries from sediments 
deposited  by  the  Ganges,  Brahmaputra  and  Meghna  (GMB)  river  system,  which  converge  on  the 
Bengal Basin. There are only a few non-plain areas in the country, notably the Chittagong Hills in 
the southeast and the highlands in the northwest. Bangladesh's alluvial soils are highly fertile, but 
vulnerable to floods as well. Flooding is highly common phenomenon in Bangladesh, and in many 
ways society has adjusted to these natural dynamics. Nevertheless, floods still present a major risk 
to  human  lives  and  economic  activity.  The  1998  flood  inundated  about  75%  of  the  country 
including Dhaka, made 30 million people homeless and killed over a thousand people. Other major 
natural hazards in Bangladesh include cyclones and tornadoes, equally presenting a major risk to 
human lives and the economy. 
16.   Water. During the annual monsoon period, the rivers of Bangladesh flow at  some 140,000 
m3/s,  while  during  the  dry  period  this  only  amounts  to  7,000  m3/s.  More  than  60  %  of  the  net 
arable  land,  some  91,000  km²,  is  cultivated  in  the  rainy  season  despite  the  possibility  of  severe 
flooding, and nearly 40 % of the land is cultivated during the dry winter months.  Water resources 
management  interventions  have  therefore  aimed  at  both  providing  flood  protection  and  drainage 
during the rainy season, and irrigation facilities for the expansion of winter cultivation. Major water 
control projects have been implemented by the government to provide irrigation and flood control. 
In addition, thousands of tube wells and electric pumps are used for local irrigation. 
17.  Forestry.  Bangladesh  has  three  categories  of  forests  based  on  topographic  conditions:  (i) 
hill forests, moist tropical evergreen and semi-evergreen forests comprising more than half of the 
country’s  total  forest  resources  and  carrying  high  ecological  importance;  (ii)  Plain  Sal  Forests, 
Tropical Moist Deciduous forests that have been reduced to only scattered and degraded patches; 
and  (iii)  Littoral  Mangrove  Forests,  of  which  the  Sundarbans  area  is  the  most  prominent  (see 
below).  Bangladesh  has  a  network  of  Social  Forestry  projects  that  involves  communities  with  a 
legally  binding  benefit  sharing  mechanism.  The  region  also  features  significant  coastal 
afforestation programs.  
21.   Fish resources. Fisheries resources, both brackish and freshwater, in the coastal areas are 
remarkable.  Bangladesh  has  the  highest  per  capita  consumption  of  fish-based  animal  protein  on 
the  planet.  The  National  Fisheries  Policy  (NFP),  Inland  Capture  Fisheries  Strategy  (ICFS)  and 
National Shrimp Policy (NSP) (GoB, 2014)8 were heavily drawing from the open capture fisheries in 
the region. The  Jashore  District is famous for breeding  freshwater  fish and catering to the entire 
country with fish fingerlings. The introduction of aquaculture in coastal areas has had very serious 
ecological  effect.  Vast  areas  previously  used  for  crop  agriculture  have  been  transformed  into 
intentional, perennially waterlogged landscapes to boost shrimp farming. Shrimp is a major export 
commodity  however  the  sector  is  losing  international  market.  Shrimp  exports  fell  for  a  fourth 
consecutive year in 2017-18 in the face of persistent weak demand in the international market for 
the  locally  farmed  shrimp.  The  business  community  as  well  as  the  small  farmers  are  therefore 
trying  to  diverse  the  aquatic  production  system  by  introducing  white  fish  and,  more  importantly, 
mud-crab.  Mud-crab  is  one  of  RMTP’s  potential  value  chains.  Meanwhile,  studies  have  shown 
through  life  cycle  analysis  that  intensification  of  aquaculture  can  actually  reduce  environmental 
impact, for instance by producing different spices of fish in same pond utilizing feed better, thereby 
creating less waste9. The RMTP interventions will aim to promote such practices as well as RAS and 
other technologies to reverse the environmental degradation trend in these areas.   
16.   Sundarbans and protected areas. A particularly important area for natural resources and 
conservation  is  the  Sundarbans  area,  a  mangrove  area  of  about  10.000  km2  spanning  both 
Bangladesh  and  India.    The  whole  Sundarbans  area  is  intersected  by  an  intricate  network  of 
interconnecting  waterways,  of  which  the  larger  channels  are  often  a  mile  or  more  in  width.  The 
Sundarbans  –  a  Ramsar  site  and  UNESCO  World  Heritage  Site  –  includes  three  Protected  Areas 
(PAs)  (wildlife  sanctuaries):  Sundarbans  South,  Sundarbans  East  and  Sundarbans  West.  The 
wildlife sanctuaries are  managed by BFD’s Wildlife and Nature Conservation Circle (WNCC) under 
the Protected Area Rules (GoB, 2017). An integrated management plan for the entire SRF provides 
the overall guiding principles for management. The Sundarbans Reserve Forest (SRF), the wildlife 
sanctuaries and the ECA are managed through collaborative management or co-management – a 
shared  governance  system  that  involves  the  community  as  environmental  stewards  sharing  the 
management responsibilities with the BFD and DoE.  
19.   Throughout the country, Ecologically Critical Areas (ECA) are identified and controlled under 
the Department of Environment (DoE). The ECAs are managed under the ECAs Rules (GoB, 2016) 
promulgated under Bangladesh Environmental Conservation Act (BECA) (GoB, 2010).10. 
20.   Wildlife.  Bangladesh  was  once  home  to  a  large  number  of  species  that  have  currently 
reduced to a much smaller number primarily concentrated in the Sundarbans and Chittagong Hills. 
Species  include  the  Bengal  Tiger,  Asian  Elephant,  Gibbon  and  Asian  Black  Bear.  Bangladesh  is  a 
priority country of the Global Tiger Action Plan; therefore, the Sundarbans as the home of Bengal 
Tiger attracts added global attention. The BFD has a Tiger Action Plan (GoB, 2009).11 Bangladesh’s 
8 GoB, 2014. Bangladesh National Shrimp Policy, Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock. 
9 See https://www.stockholmresilience.org/research/research-news/2018-03-05-get-it-right-on-fish-intensity-get-it-right-for-
aquaculture.html  
10 GoB, 2016. Ecologically Critical Area (ECAs) Rules, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
GoB, 2010. Bangladesh Environmental Conservation Act Revised, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change. 
11 GoB, 2009. Bangladesh Tiger Action Plan, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change. 
only  Marine  Protected  Area,  the  Swatch  of  No  Ground  (SoNG),  is  a  continuum  of  the  protected 
area network ecologically linked to the Sundarbans. 
their  cumulative  and  aggregated 
23.   The  role  of  microenterprises  and  their  service  providers.  While  the  large  majority  of 
microenterprises  to  be  supported  under  RMTP  have  minimal  impact  on  the  environment 
impact  may  be  significant.  Clusters  of 
individually, 
microenterprises  in  a  particular  value  chain  may  lead  to  local  accumulation  of  waste  and  cause 
pollution. Microenterprises are subject to national legislation on environmental management (e.g. 
the  Environmental  Conservation  Rule  1997),  but  enforcement  is  often  problematic  and  therefore 
compliance  levels  typically  very  low.  Service  providers,  both  financial  and  technical,  can  and  are 
expected  to  play  a  role  in  ensuring  the  micro-enterprises  they  invest  in  have  the  right  micro-
enterprises, by means of screening and capacity building. 
C. 
Climate 
24.   Current climate. Bangladesh falls under monsoon influenced tropical climate area with an 
average  annual  rainfall  of  2,700  mm,  over  85%  of  which  falls  during  June  and  October.  Average 
day  time  temperature  varies  between  23  to  27˚C,  while  the  average  night  time  temperature 
ranges between 18 and 22˚C. While winters are generally dry and mild, summer months are wet 
and moist, the relative humidity is generally over 85% during monsoon season. During late April 
and  mid-November,  the  sea  surface  temperature  often  rises  above  a  threshold  of  about  27˚C, 
which  creates  an  ideal  climatic  condition  to  form  tropical  low  and  depressions.  Sometimes,  such 
tropical weather fronts give rise to the formation of cyclones and super cyclones.  
25.   Natural  hazards.  Bangladesh  as  a  whole  is  highly  prone  to  natural  hazards  including 
cyclones,  storm  surges,  floods,  landslides,  earthquakes,  tsunamis,  sea-level  rise  and  increasing 
saltwater intrusion.  On an average, one major cyclone hits Bangladesh in every three years. It is 
believed that the  shallow  continental shelf, the  high tidal range and the inverted funnel  shape  of 
the  Bay  play  significant  roles  to  ‘guide’  tropical  cyclones  towards  the  low-lying  delta.  Although 
cyclone-related human deaths have been reduced significantly due to improved warnings and pre-
hazard preparedness programmes, cyclones in the past have killed many coastal Bangladeshis. 
26.  Climate  change  trends  and  predictions.  The  climate  in  Bangladesh  is  changing. 
Temperatures  have  increased  by  about  0.3  –  0.5°C  between  1960  and  2010.  Although  the  total 
average rainfall does not  show any discernible change, the micro-structure of monsoon has been 
exhibiting  a  number  of  important  changes.  For  example,  the  rainfall  is  exhibiting  a  bi-modal 
distribution over monsoon, the first peak coming a lot earlier than expected (shifted from middle of 
July to early June). There are increasing numbers of extreme rainfall episodes during the monsoon 
with  prolonged  rainless  days  in  between,  while  the  late-October  rain  (Kaitani)  has  almost 
disappeared. For some districts in particular, it has been observed that rainfall in the pre-monsoon 
and winter season had a decreasing trend whereas it had an increasing trend during monsoon and 
post-monsoon seasons12. 
II.  Potential project’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and risks 
A.  Key potential impacts 
27. The project’s expected benefits include 
(a)  Increased income of targeted small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs; 
(b)  Increased food security of targeted small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs; 
(c)  Improved  nutrition  status  of  targeted  small  farmers  and  micro-entrepreneurs  through 
amongst others 
bio-fortified  new  varieties  with  increased  level  of  micro  nutrition,  vitamins, 
and proteins; 
(d)   Increase  resource  use  efficiency  and  re-use  including  through  adoption  of  drip 
irrigation,  System  of  Rice  Intensification, 
Recirculation  Aquaculture  Systems,  Water 
treatment for reuse in processing 
12 Rahman et al. (2009) Trend Analysis of Climate Change and Investigation on Its Probable Impacts on Rice Production at 
Satkhira, Bangladesh.  
(e)  Increased  use  of  renewable  energy  through 
cold storage, processing facilities, driers, irrigation pumps; 
Solar  energy  for  operating  milk  coolers, 
(f)   Reduced  emissions  or  emission  intensity  through  precision  placement  of  slow  release 
fertilizer 
briquettes, higher livestock productivity  
(g)  Reduced  vulnerability  to  climate  change  through  new  crop  varieties,  heat  tolerant 
livestock breeds, improved fish breed 
28. The project’s main potential negative impacts prior to mitigation measures include: 
(a)  Increase  in  waste  streams  and  pollution  from  small-scale  agriculture  and  micro-
entrepreneurs; 
(b)  Increased competition for natural resources, e.g. fresh water resources; 
(c)  Loss  of  natural  vegetation  and  habitat  due  to  expansion  of  land-based  micro-
enterprises. 
29.  The  draft  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework  (ESMF)  contains  a  longer  list  of 
potential impacts. 
B. 
Climate change and adaptation 
30. Bangladesh is consistently ranked in the top list of countries impacted by the effects of climate 
change.  
31.  Climate  change  impacts  in  the  project  area.  Key  climate  change  impacts  for  the  project 
area are linked to sea level rise contributing to increasing floods and increasing intrusion of saline 
seawater.  Subject  to  various  climate  change  scenarios,  sea  level  rise  is  expected  to  inundate 
120,000 km2 by 2050; 14% more of the country may become extremely prone to floods by 2030. 
Coastal  salinity  problems  will  likely  worsen  as  changing  rain  patterns  reduce  the  amount  of  dry 
season water supply from upstream river sources.  
32.  Increasing  salinity  and  mean  temperatures  have  generally  negative  effects  on  agriculture. 
Overall, crop production might be reduced by 30% by the end of the century; rice production could 
fall  by  8%,  and  wheat  production  by  32%  by  2050.  Winter  crop  production  would  be  seriously 
hampered  due  to  a  warmer  and  drier  environment  during  non-monsoon  seasons,  while  moisture 
stress might force farmers to reduce the area under irrigated rice cultivation. 
33.  Climate  change  adaptation.  The  concrete  impacts  of  climate  change  already  caused  a 
considerable amount of autonomous adaptation amongst farmers in the target districts, involving 
changes  to  livelihood  assets  and  income  generating  activities13.    It  has  also  prompted  many 
climate change related strategies and projects to be implemented in the project area, which offer 
opportunities for leverage and partnership to RMTP. Most relevant strategies and projects include: 
the  Bangladesh  Climate  Change  Strategy  and  Action  Plan  (2009)14,  the  National  Adaptation 
Programme of Action (2009)15,  
III.  Environmental and social category 
34.  The  preliminary  Environmental  and  Social  categorization  for  this  project  is  B.  The  potential 
negative  impacts  of  this  project  are  those  linked  to  small  and  medium  agribusinesses  and  other 
micro-enterprises  and  are  small  and  site-specific.  The  primary  environmental  risk  relates  to 
cumulative / aggregated impact of various small agribusinesses and micro-enterprises in a cluster, 
thereby posing a considerable risk in terms of waste streams and pollution. This risk can however 
be managed using mitigation measures already identified and accessible to project implementers 
and beneficiaries. The project will integrate activities to proactively address these issues, such as 
the  introduction  of  climate-smart  technologies  and  environmentally  sustainable  practices  such  as 
balanced fertilizer use and integrated pest management, composting, briquettes from compost and 
chemical fertilizer. Social risks are minimal, with project interventions aimed at better inclusion of 
13 University of Leeds (2016) Autonomous adaptation to riverine flooding in Satkhira District, Bangladesh: insights for 
transformation.  
14 See https://www.iucn.org/downloads/bangladesh_climate_change_strategy_and_action_plan_2009.pdf  
15 See https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/ban02.pdf  
youth  and  women  in  value  chains.  A  draft  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework 
(ESMF) has been developed and will be finalized prior to implementation. 
IV.  Climate risk category 
35. The Climate risk category for this project is rated as  Moderate, based on the selected value 
chains and areas to be supported under the project. Although the project area is highly vulnerable 
to  the  impact  of  climate  change,  the  project  will  be  well-positioned  to  leverage  several  ongoing 
climate change-related initiatives in the area. Given the high number of studies already carried out 
in  Bangladesh,  a  basic  climate  risk  analysis  has  been  carried  out  for  the  value  chains  to  be 
supported as part of the ESMF and much focus has been put on the previous experience of PKSF in 
the World Bank funded Climate Change project. The ESMF incorporates and refers to an inventory 
of  proven  measures  to  both  adapt  to  climate  change  and  reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions  that 
can  be  promoted.  This  includes  the  introduction  of  flood  and  drought  tolerant  varieties, 
mechanisation  enabling  cultivation  on  ridges,  aquaculture  in  the  valleys  and  land-based  vertical 
recycling  production  systems  for  mud  crab.  Emission  reduction  interventions  are  especially 
important for the meat (beef, poultry and goat), dairy and rice value chains. 
V. 
Recommended features of project design and implementation 
A. 
Environment and social mitigation measures 
36. Environmental and social risk management measures to be deployed under RMTP comprise the 
following: 
37.  Firstly,  the  project  will  need  to  deploy  screening  and  due  diligence  tools  to  select  those 
(portfolios  of)  companies  that  have  limited  environmental  and  social  risk  and  are  incompliance 
with  the  law  and  regulations  (including  regulations  and  limitations  on  protected  areas).  For 
component  1,  this  would  be  done  through  the  screening  procedure  already  established  for  other 
projects (e.g. the Sustainable Enterprise Project (SEP), World Bank-funded and also implemented 
by  PKSF16).  In  component  2,  this  should  be  part  of  the  evaluation  criteria  of  various  EOIs  to  be 
issued,  and/or  integrated  in  the  due  diligence  following  the  EOI  phase.  Environmental  and  social 
selection criteria need to be realistic, fit to the context of operation, and inclusive. This may create 
potential trade-offs in the selection process, however certain gaps identified during due diligence in 
terms  of  environmental  and  social  performance  can  be  addressed  through  provision  of  technical 
services once selected. 
38.  Secondly,  the  project  component  structure  enables  the  project  to  ensure  environmental  and 
social  sustainability  of  investments  through  the  provision  of  non-financial  services  for  producers 
(component 1.2) and enterprise strengthening in component 2.2. Under sub-component 1.2, PKSF 
will organize trainings in crop/livestock/aquaculture  management. For cropping, specific attention 
will be devoted to the selection, application and safe handling of pesticides. For livestock, training 
will  cover  para-veterinarian  activities  such  as  routine  vaccinations  and  health  care  in  a  safe 
manner.  For  aquaculture,  training  will  focus  on  environmentally-sustainable  production  practices 
and fish health care.  
39.  The  project  will  seek  to  align  with  existing  national  and  international  standards  and 
certification  systems,  such  as  GlobalGAP,  building  on  existing  work  by  the  FAO  Food  Safety 
Network17.  RMTP  will  engage  accredited  certifying  organizations  to  develop  group  protocols  for 
livestock,  aquaculture  and  crops.  These  organizations  will  train  the  technical  advisors  as  well  as 
focal  farmers/micro-entrepreneurs  to  introduce  protocols  and  will  organize  the  eventual 
certification of PAs. The technical advisors will assist PAs to comply with the standards introduced. 
A  similar  process  will  be  applied  for  HACCP,  in  cases  where  field-level  HACCP  compliance  is 
required.  Halal  standards  will  also  be  introduced  where  required  by  the  market.  For  cattle, 
electronic chipping will be introduced to ensure traceability. 
40.  There  are  a  number  of  projects  which  RMTP  will  leverage  in  terms  of  knowledge  and  best 
practices on environmental and social risk management, including: 
16 See Project Information Document for SEP: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/636751500364935990/pdf/ITM00184-P163250-07-18-2017-1500364933222.pdf  
17 See http://www.fao.org/in-action/food-safety-bangladesh/en/  
(a)  The  World  Bank-funded  Sustainable  Enterprise  Project  (SEP),  also  implemented  by 
PKSF  and  integrating  several  measures  for  ensuring  sustainability  such  as  screening 
tools and ‘green portfolio’ monitoring. 
(b)  The World Bank-funded Bangladesh Sustainable Coastal and Marine Fisheries Project, in 
particular for the fisheries and aquaculture aspects of the project. 
B. 
Climate change mitigation measures 
41.  Bangladesh  has  a  low  per-capita  contribution  to  greenhouse  gas  emissions  (some  0.5 
MT/capita).  The  country’s  INDC18  (2015)  aims  at  a  15%  reduction  in  greenhouse  gas  emissions 
compared to Business As Usual by 2030, and has limited specificity in terms of reducing emissions 
from agriculture.  
42.  The  project  will  however  engage  in  several  value  chains  with  significant  potential  for 
greenhouse  gas  reduction,  including  beef,  poultry,  dairy,  goats  and  rice.  The  aim  for  these  value 
chains should be to reduce the carbon intensity of each value chain, for instance by increasing the 
milk  production  of  each  cow,  thereby  lowering  the  emissions  per  litre  of  milk  (dairy  products) 
produced rather than reducing absolute emissions from each value chain per se.  
41.  For  dairy  in  particular,  a  study  by  FAO  has  shown  that  low-emission  dairy  development  can 
provide improved productivity  while reducing emission  intensity  by  17%.  Strategies to reach this 
goal include (i) improving the quality and availability of feed resources; (ii) strategic feeding and 
supplementation  to  address  seasonality  constraints;  (iii)  improved  herd  management;  and  (iv) 
improving animal breed. 
42. Rice production is another major global source of greenhouse gasses, particularly methane19. 
The  use  of  Alternate  Wetting  and  Drying  (AWD)  and  System of Rice Intensification  (SRI)  in  rice 
production  can  reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions  by  half  through  avoiding  anaerobic 
decomposition of organic matter, while at the same time reducing water use by 30%. This system 
however requires a higher level of water control. Another strategy for greenhouse gas reduction is 
the adoption of Deep Placement of Urea, a technique to apply fertilizer at greater soil depth (7-10 
cm). This also reduces the amount of fertilizer needed by 30%, at the same time increases yield 
by  15-20%  and  reduces  emission  by  30%.  Introduction  of  GGAP  will  reduce  overall  use  of  input 
reducing cost and often increase productivity at the same time.  
43. The ESMF includes an inventory of such practices for the different project value chains. These 
include  in  particular  the  ‘no  regret’  or  common-sense  interventions  that  reduce  emissions  while 
improving profitability of micro-enterprises. 
C. 
Incentives for good practices 
44.  As  mentioned  above,  incentives  for  good  practices  (environmentally  and  socially  sustainable, 
increasing  resilience  to  climate  change  and  reducing  greenhouse  gas  emissions)  in  the  RMTP 
project need to be based on market mechanisms. Some good practices may be directly financially 
interesting for target agribusinesses and micro-entrepreneurs, where the role of the project will be 
primarily that of awareness raising and training through technical service provision. 
45. In other instances, financial benefits may be more long-term or indirect. For instance in terms 
of  food  safety,  initial  incentives  are  in  the  form  of  saving  input  and  optimize  their  use  bringing 
instant  benefits.  However,  premium  price  for  GGAP  might  take  some  promotion  of  differentiation 
between  safe  and  non-safe  food  with  associated  price  differences.  Finally,  the  project  may  apply 
screening  to  select  certain  business  already  deploying  good  practices,  or  those  committing  to 
implementing such practices.  
D. 
Participatory processes 
46.  Consultations  during  the  design  process  with  target  small-scale  agribusinesses  and 
microenterprise  owners  clearly  showed  that  if  knowledge  and  technology  are  available  the 
18 Intended Nationally Determined Contributions, see 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Bangladesh%20First/INDC_2015_of_Bangladesh.pdf  
19 See http://ghgmitigation.irri.org/our-work/bangladesh and https://ccafs.cgiar.org/fr/blog/mitigation-co-benefits-increased-
water-and-nutrient-efficiency-irrigated-rice-bangladesh#.XBzka1xKg2w  
readiness to adopt environmentally sound practices is high. The biggest barriers and opportunities 
that  these  target  entrepreneurs  face  in  adopting  environmentally  sound  technologies  and  fair 
labour  practices,  are  the  lack  of  knowledge  and  technologies.  Field  visits  confirmed  that  when 
advisory services were paid by farming enterprises the adoption rate was close to 100%, indicating 
that  there  is  a  viable  business  case  for  commercial  knowledge  and  technologies  services. 
Introduction of pay based advisory service appears to be effective and can be introduces by cost 
sharing the advisors for a few years.   
47.  The  project  itself  will  deliver  services  to  targeted  entrepreneurs  and  producers’  associations. 
The services to be delivered will be based on  consultations, but feedback mechanisms should  be 
built  into  the  project  that  will  allow  the  project  management  unit  to  monitor  if  the  services 
delivered respond to the needs of the targeted people, and how the topics and content of training 
can  be  adjusted  to  match  the  evolving  context.  This  kind  of  adaptive  management  of  service 
delivery needs to be facilitated by a well-functioning monitoring and evaluation system. Finally, the 
project  will  implement  a  grievance  redress  mechanism  as  part  of  its  Environmental  and  Social 
Management Framework.  
VI.  Analysis of alternatives 
50. The choice of value chains to invest in is one of the most important alternatives to consider in 
the process. Each value chain has its own characteristics in terms of environmental and social risks 
and opportunities, ranging from the type and intensity of waste streams associated with a certain 
enterprise,  to  the  accessibility  of  each  value  chain  for  starting  entrepreneurs.  To  the  extent 
possible,  a  “green  portfolio”  of  value  chains  will  be  selected  having  a  higher  level  of  control  and 
precision,  contribute  to  an  environmentally  sustainable  economy  and  that  are  often  also  more 
attractive to youth.  
51. Another alternative is the choice of target area. Generally, Bangladesh is relatively vulnerable 
to climate change due to  the proximity to the ocean, thereby running the risk of salinization and 
flooding.  Such  risks  are  however  predominant  across  Bangladesh  and  such  areas  cannot  be 
avoided. At higher level of detail, geographic targeting of production clusters will be evaluated for 
environmental and social risks in that specific area. 
52. In a no-project scenario, the potential negative impacts may still occur as the micro-enterprise 
sector  develops  albeit  at  a  slower  pace  and  PKSF  and  partner  organizations  would  not  be  in  the 
same position to deliver technical services to guide the growth of this sector.  
VII.  Institutional analysis 
A. 
Institutional framework 
53.  RMTP  will  be  managed  and  implemented  primarily  by  PKSF.  PKSF  was  established  by  the 
Government  of  Bangladesh  and  is  one  of  the  primary  vehicles  for  facilitating  sustainable 
development  in  the  country,  working  together  with  their  partner  organizations.  Jointly,  these 
organizations  have  also  built  up  a  long  track  record  of  working  with  international  development 
partners  on  similar  projects,  incorporating  the  environmental,  social  and  climate  requirements 
brought along.  
54. PKSF itself has developed substantial internal capacity on various cross-cutting themes linking 
to  the  SDGs  and  has  developed  a  range  of  policies  and  strategies  covering  environmental  and 
social management, discrimination, sexual harassment and others20. In terms of staffing, PKSF has 
established  various  units  for  cross-cutting  items  including  social  advocacy,  environment  and 
climate  change.  Whereas  PKSF  will  be  responsible  to  monitor  overall  implementation  and  setting 
in  terms  of  environmental  and  social  performance, 
the  standards 
implementation is very much dependent on the capacity of partner organizations. During selection 
on  Participating  Partner  Organisations,  and  NBFIs  in  particular,  will  undergo  an  analysis  of  their 
capacity and identify capacity building needs. 
implementation 
for 
20 See http://pksf-bd.org/web/?page_id=3515  
55. RMTP will not integrate all cross-cutting issues into the internal capacity of the implementing 
organizations, but rather to leverage the expertise and capacity of partners to deliver the intended 
outcomes.  This  could  for  instance  include  the  FAO  Food  safety  network,  a  collaboration  of 
international  and  national  development  partners  with  significant  experience  on  the  topic  of 
promoting  food  safety.  Also,  the  project  will  capitalize  on  the  learnings  of  other  projects 
implemented by PKSF or partners organizations around for example  nutrition and empowerment. 
The same will hold true for climate change related topics for each of the selected value chains. 
B. 
Capacity building 
56.  The  design  of  RMTP  includes  various  elements  of  capacity  building  related  to  environmental 
and social performance, through technical services components 1.2 and 2.2. The capacity building 
will  also  address  the  capacity  of  POs  to  implement  the  project  in  compliance  with  the  policies  of 
PKSF,  as  well  as  the  potential  to  use  the  technological  innovations  proposed  (such  as  blockchain 
technology, crowdfunding  and IT) to enhance  environmental and social performance.  Specifically, 
RMTP will attract a competent nutrition expert who is able to execute a thorough nutrition analysis 
and target value chains that are able to address this situation.  
VIII. Monitoring and Evaluation 
57. A strong M&E system will be integral part of RMTP and indicators relating to environmental and 
social  performance  have  been  developed.  The  project  Management  Information  System  will  be 
used  as  a  vehicle  to  integrate  such  indicators.  This  will  start  with  indicators  for  which  data  is 
readily available, such as gender and youth-disaggregation in portfolio monitoring. Periodic reviews 
of  such  data  would  look  at  performance  of  certain  value  chains  against  climatic  data,  to  be 
obtained from external sources such as the Meteorological services. 
58.  Beyond  basic  data,  the  M&E  system  will  also  allow  the  project  to  collect  additional  data  on 
environmental and social performance. This  will for instance include the ‘green portfolio’ indicator 
that  is  has  being  developed  for  the  SEP  project  implemented  by  PKSF,  or  further  expanding  this 
indicator to be tailored to each of the value chains to be targeted under RMTP.  
59.  Apart  from  monitoring  the  investment  portfolio,  the  M&E  system  will  also  provide  PCU 
information on the effectiveness and efficiency of technical services being delivered.  
IX.  Budgetary resources and schedule 
61.  Budgetary  resources  to  implement  the  SECAP  related  aspects  of  RMTP  are  included  in  the 
project design document and cost tables.  
XI.  Record of consultations 
62. A list of people consulted is available in the project life file. 
Answers to guiding questions and explanations: Climate Change 
Is the project area subject 
to extreme climatic 
events, such as flooding, 
drought, tropical storms 
or heat waves?  
Do climate scenarios for 
the project area foresee 
changes in temperature, 
rainfall or extreme 
weather that will 
adversely affect the 
project impact, 
sustainability or cost over 
its lifetime?  
Yes 
 
No 
 
Additional explanations for “yes” response 
Bangladesh as a whole is prone to natural hazards 
including cyclones, storm surges, floods, landslides, 
earthquakes, tsunamis, sea-level rise and 
increasing saltwater intrusion. 
Bangladesh is expected to see continued 
temperature increases in line with global warming 
effects. Although the total average rainfall does not 
show any discernable change, intra-seasonal 
changes are predicted. For example, increasing 
numbers of extreme rainfall episodes during the 
monsoon with prolonged rainless days in between. 
Would the project make 
investments in low-lying 
coastal areas/zones 
exposed to tropical 
storms?  
Would the project make 
investments in glacial 
areas and mountains 
zones?  
Would the project 
promote agricultural 
activity in marginal and/or 
highly degraded areas 
that have increased 
sensitivity to climatic 
events (such as on 
hillsides, deforested 
slopes or floodplains)?  
Is the project located in 
areas where rural 
development projects 
have experienced 
significant weather-
related losses and 
damages in the past?  
Would the project 
develop/install 
infrastructure in areas 
with a track record of 
extreme weather events?  
Is the project target group 
entirely dependent on 
natural resources (such as 
seasonal crops, rainfed 
agricultural plots, 
migratory fish stocks) that 
have been affected by in 
the last decade by climate 
trends or specific climatic 
events?  
Would climate variability 
likely affect agricultural 
productivity 
(crops/livestock/fisheries), 
access to markets and/or 
the associated incidence 
of pests and diseases for 
the project target groups?  
Would weather-related 
risks or climatic extremes 
likely adversely impact 
upon key stages of 
identified value chains in 
the project (from 
production to markets)?  
Is the project investing in 
climate-sensitive 
livelihoods that are 
diversified?  
Is the project investing in 
infrastructure that is 
exposed to infrequent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A large part of the RMTP target landscape is 
composed of freshwater and coastal floodplains. 
The flooding pattern is however part of the normal 
situation in these areas, and people have developed 
mechanisms to deal with such events. 
Yes, particularly in the coastal areas in Bangladesh, 
achievements of development projects – fully or in 
part – always run the risk of being washed away 
because of natural calamities. There have been 
instances that major development interventions 
such as coastal embankments had given in to 
natural hazards.  
RMTP will not embark on building any major 
physical infrastructures. However, the crab 
hatcheries will be located in areas sensitive to 
extreme weather in tandem with other agricultural 
production systems and rural enterprises. 
Yes, the majority of value chains selected will be 
affected by climatic variability. 
Yes, as part of the RMTP target area falls in the 
climate and natural disaster-prone regions. 
RMTP will be promoting a diverse range of 
agricultural and aquaculture value chains that may 
be climate-sensitive. 
In part of the target RMTP areas, any project 
investment, including infrastructures, will be 
 
exposed to extreme weather events. 
The RMTP concept already recognizes the climate 
and extreme weather-related threats and has 
incorporated climate-sensitive approaches in 
selecting technological inputs. 
Yes. The RMTP will work on capacity building 
programs, including climate risk management. The 
partner organization – PKSF – has an excellent 
track record of implementing climate change 
mitigation and adaptation projects. 
Yes. The RMTP will target policy dialogues on 
various issues.it is expected that climate related 
policy issues will be also included to better 
safeguard the investments. 
 
The RMTP concept has been cognizant of the fact 
that climate variability and extreme weather 
situations that may affect the production systems 
may be of common occurrence. Therefore, the 
project will focus on climate-smart technologies. 
Though the answer is affirmative, RMTP can build 
on climate risk analyses done by other 
development partners and the GoB, as well as a set 
of tools and procedures already developed in PKSF 
to manage climate risks. 
extreme weather events?  
Does the project have the 
potential to become more 
resilient through the 
adoption of green 
technologies at a 
reasonable cost?  
Does the project 
intervention have 
opportunities to 
strengthen indigenous 
climate risk management 
capabilities?  
Does the project have 
opportunities to integrate 
climate resilience aspects 
through policy dialogue to 
improve agricultural 
sector strategies and 
policies?  
Does the project have 
potential to integrate 
climate resilience 
measures without 
extensive additional costs 
(e.g. improved building 
codes, capacity-building, 
or including climate risk 
issues in policy 
processes)?  
Based on the information 
available would the 
project benefit from a 
more thorough climate 
risk and vulnerability 
analysis to identify the 
most vulnerable rural 
population, improve 
targeting and identify 
additional complementary 
investment actions to 
manage climate risks?  
 
 
 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Contents 
Abbreviations and acronyms .......................................................................................... 18 
1.  Introduction ............................................................................................................ 19 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
Background ..............................................................................................................19 
Project Description ....................................................................................................19 
Purpose of this ESMF .................................................................................................19 
About this ESMF ........................................................................................................20 
2.  Project Components ................................................................................................ 20 
3.  Institutional and Legal Framework ......................................................................... 20 
4.  PKSF’s Environmental and Social Management Approachs ...................................... 21 
4.1 
Policies and procedures ..............................................................................................21 
4.2  Organizational capacity ..............................................................................................22 
4.3  Ongoing developments and mainstreaming ...................................................................22 
5.  Environmental and Social Management in RMTP ..................................................... 23 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
Principles..................................................................................................................23 
Potential Impacts and related Mitigation Measures .........................................................23 
Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation ....................................................................25 
Processes and procedures ..........................................................................................26 
5.5  Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning ............................................................................26 
5.6 
5.7 
5.8 
Consultation .............................................................................................................27 
Grievance Redress Mechanism ....................................................................................27 
Costs of implementing the ESMF .................................................................................28 
6.  Innovation .............................................................................................................. 28 
6.1  Microenterprise Sustainability Scoring ..........................................................................28 
6.2 
Categorization and Management at Cluster level ...........................................................29 
7.  Other References and Learning ............................................................................... 29 
Annex 1: PKSF Environmental Assessment and Monitoring Flow Chart .......................... 30 
Annex 2: PKSF Exclusion List (environmental issues) .................................................... 31 
Annex 3: PKSF Exclusion List (social Issues) ................................................................. 32 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Initial Environmental Examination 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
  Microfinance Institution 
  Management Information System 
Ministry of Finance 
Memorandum of Understanding 
Microfinance Regulatory Authority 
Environment, Health and Safety 
Environmental Management Plan 
Food and Agriculture Organisation 
Government of Bangladesh 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
AWPB         Annual Work Plan and Budget 
EHS 
EMP 
FAO 
GoB 
IFAD 
IT              Information Technology  
IEE 
M&E 
MFI 
MIS 
MoEWOE  Ministry of Expatriates' Welfare and Overseas Employment 
MoF 
MoU 
MRA 
MSME        Micro, small and medium enterprise 
MTR 
NGO 
PACE          Promoting Agricultural Commercialization and Enterprises 
PCR 
PDR           Project Design Report 
PKSF 
PMU          Project management Unit 
PO             Partner Organization 
PY 
R&D           Research and development  
RIMS 
SEP 
SMF 
TA 
Results and Impact Management System 
Sustainable Enterprise Project 
Social Management Framework 
Technical Assistance 
Mid-Term Review 
Non–Governmental Organisation 
Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation 
Project Completion Report  
Project Year 
1.  Introduction 
Background 
1.1 
The Government of Bangladesh (GoB) and the International Fund for Agricultural Development 
(IFAD) are jointly developing a new project aimed at investing in rural microenterprises, the Rural 
Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP). As part of the final design stage of this project, a 
set of documents is produced to assist and guide the implementation of this project. 
IFAD has over recent years enhanced its approach to environmental, social and climate risk 
management in the project it invests in. One of the key instruments to manage environmental and 
social risks in projects is the Environmental and Social Management Framework, which is the 
subject of this document. 
Project Description  
1.2 
The Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) will be a six-year project running from 
2020 to 2025, with a total cost of USD 190M of which USD 81M funded by IFAD and targeting the 
entire country of Bangladesh. The GoB Ministry of Finance is the Executing Agency of the Project, 
whereas the Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF, ‘Rural Employment Support Foundation’) will 
be the implementing agency for the project except for subcomponent 2.3 concerning remittances, 
which will be implemented by the Ministry of Expatriates' Welfare and Overseas Employment 
(MoEWOE).  
The project goal is to increase the income and nutrition of farmers across selected value chains.. 
The project's development objective is the sustainable growth of selected rural commodity value 
chains. The central strategy of the project is to work in production clusters of in three broad 
agricultural sectors or in areas with potential for creation of agri-business clusters. PKSF has 
identified several hundred such clusters of small-scale production of horticulture, pond fisheries 
and poultry & livestock. Details on the project components and activities are presented below. 
Purpose of this ESMF 
1.3 
IFAD has over the last years updated its approach to environmental, social and climate risk 
management. Building on IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management (ENRM, 2011) 
Policy that stresses project designs present opportunities to improve systematic integration and 
scaling up of environmental and natural resource management, IFAD’s Social Environmental and 
Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP, 2017)21 describe how to better mainstream 
environmental, social and climate change considerations into the project cycle, going beyond 
“doing no harm” to maximize development gains. The SECAP are of a similar nature to safeguards 
procedures in other organizations. 
In line with IFAD policy, a SECAP review note was prepared for RMTP at concept note stage, which 
identified RMTP as a Category B project in terms of environmental and social risks. The potential 
negative impacts are those linked to micro-enterprises and small to medium agribusinesses and 
are small and site-specific. The primary environmental risk relates to the cumulative/aggregated 
impact of various micro-enterprises and small agribusinesses in a cluster, thereby posing a 
considerable risk in terms of waste streams and pollution. This risk can however be managed using 
mitigation measures already identified and accessible to implementers and target groups. 
RMTP is a nationwide project with a high number of subprojects of which the location has not yet 
been decided. The large majority will most likely fall in Category C, whereas only a few activities 
may be classified as Category B and thereby requiring Environmental and Social Management 
Plans. Based on these characteristics, an Environmental and Social Management Framework is the 
best instrument to guide implementation of the project and manage the environmental and social 
risks and opportunities. Climate considerations, both in terms of adaptation as well as mitigation, 
have been integrated into this framework. 
IFAD recognizes that GoB has its own systems for delivering safeguards and ensuring 
environmental and social sustainability of projects. Furthermore, it recognizes that using those 
systems and actively supporting them enhances development impacts in the longer term and 
reduces transaction costs. This ESMF therefore builds as much as possible on existing policies, 
procedures and in-country capacity, both within GoB line ministries and agencies, as well as within 
PKSF as a government-mandated institution. In addition, IFAD seeks to align its approach with 
other international financial institutions including the World Bank. 
21 See https://www.ifad.org/en/secap  
About this ESMF  
1.4 
The preparation of this ESMF has been guided by IFAD’s policies and SECAP as well as 
Bangladesh’s legal, policy and regulatory framework for environmental and social management. 
The first draft of this ESMF was prepared in March – April 2019 through collection and review of 
primary and secondary baseline data, consultations with key stakeholders and project area 
communities, site visits to partner organizations and their field activities, and report writing. It 
should be noted that, as a Category B project with relatively smaller risks compared to Category A 
projects, this ESMF is more focused on broad risks and opportunities management strategies and 
capacity building efforts aimed at lifting the environmental and sustainability level of large groups 
of micro-entrepreneurs. None of the sub-projects in this project will require a formal 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and only very few projects may require a formal 
Environmental and Social Management Plan to be developed; these procedures are therefore not 
the primary topic of this ESMF.   
This ESMF is based on the Project Design Report (PDR) dated April 2019. Although the PDR is still 
being reviewed and finalized and component descriptions may change, the types of interventions 
and overall project target area are likely to remain the same. Should there be any significant 
changes in the PDR, these would need to be reflected in an updated ESMF. The ESMF will be 
disclosed on the PKSF website and various elements of it, primarily the procedures and forms used 
in screening and monitoring of subprojects, will be disclosed in Bangla at the local level through 
PKSF’s partner organizations. 
2.  Project Components 
The RMTP comprises the following components: 
Component 1: Value Chain Enhancement. This component will enable rural producers to 
sustainably expand their practices through (i) the promotion of private extension services, (ii) the 
promotion of food safety standards (iii) adoption of efficient production methods and (iv) support 
with market linkages. In addition, activities under this component contribute to an enabling 
environment that promotes the growth of micro, small and medium enterprises. 
Component 2: Financial Services. This component will offer financial services to beneficiaries 
and micro enterprises allowing for the sustainable growth of their practices. PKSF’s Partner 
Organizations target beneficiaries through their conventional loan programme under this 
component. In addition, RMTP finances small enterprises and agribusinesses through non-bank 
financial institutions. 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management. This component 3 will 
strengthen the capability of PKSF and POs to capitalize on emerging trends in financial services, 
commercial platforms and new technologies. Through the provision of technical assistance and 
training, the project will build PKSF and POs capacity by gradually and carefully integrating ICT-
based solutions and other innovations into their operations. 
Full details on the project design can be found in the Project Design Report. It should be noted 
that this ESMF is focused on the activities carried out by PKSF and their Partner Organizations.  
3.  Institutional and Legal Framework 
This project in particular, and the microfinance and microenterprise development space in 
Bangladesh in general, are situated in a multi-level institutional framework. The main RMTP 
implementing body, PKSF, is an apex body implementing their programme of work through a 
network of more than 270 Partner Organizations (POs). These POs are registered microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) and/or NGOs (referred to here as NGO-MFIs) who all have their own target 
geographies across Bangladesh, as well as their own specialties in terms of value chain 
development.  
PKSF is a government-mandated organization registered as a not-for-profit company with 
interactions with government at various levels. At governance level, the PKSF Governing Body 
comprises 7 members of which 3, including the Chairman, are nominated by the GoB.  At strategic 
and programmatic level, PKSF interacts and collaborates with various Government line ministries 
and agencies. 
PKSF has its own set of policies and procedures22, of which some are effective across the entire 
PKSF portfolio, and some are only effective for certain projects according to the specificities of that 
project and/or donor requirements. These policies and procedures are cascaded onto the Partner 
22 See http://pksf-bd.org/web/?page_id=3515  
Organizations who in turn also have their own policies and procedures and, in most cases, also 
work with various funding institutions.  
Within PKSF and its partner organizations, two major workstreams can be distinguished. The first 
and primary workstream is its core microfinance and loan portfolio comprising Agrosor 
(Microenterprise), Jagoran (microcredit for moderately poor), Sufalon (seasonal agricultural loan) 
and Buniad (loan for the very poor) programmes. A second workstream is a diverse set of 
projects, special programmes and capacity building activities that mostly target specific groups of 
producers or value chain actors. While the core finance activities have a much larger outreach, 
many of PKSF and Partner Organizations’ clients are reached through the various programmes and 
projects as well. From a management perspective, many projects in the workstream seek to test 
approaches and tools that are, if found successful, to be mainstreamed across the two 
workstreams. 
An important government agency in the institutional framework is the Microfinance Regulatory 
Authority (MRA). The MRA is the central body to certify, monitor and supervise the operations of 
NGO-MFIs, created through the Microfinance Regulatory Authority Act of 2006. MRA has 
established a set of rules and regularly issues circulars, some of which touch on social issues but 
not broader Environment, Social and Governance (ESG) requirements. Non-Banking Financial 
Institutions, targeted in RMTP, are regulated by the Bangladesh Bank. 
These institutions are active members of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) and have 
participated in the drafting of the National Financial Inclusion Strategy for Bangladesh. An 
important ongoing development in this regard is the establishment of a Credit Information Bureau 
for the microfinance sector, which is ongoing. These developments are highly relevant to the social 
risk management aspect of RMTP, particularly on client protection. 
Outside the financial system, various Government agencies play a role in the institutional 
framework. Partner Organizations often work together with local government and extension 
departments on technical assistance projects, or for instance on government-controlled services 
such as artificial insemination for livestock.  
Important knowledge partners in the country include the Bangladesh Agricultural Research 
Institute, Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council, Bangladesh Agricultural University, 
Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies, Bangladesh Rice Research Institute, International 
Centre for Climate Change and Development amongst others. Furthermore, there are international 
knowledge partners with presence in Bangladesh including the FAO. 
On sexual exploitation and harassment in particular, it should be noted that the Bangladesh 
Supreme Court has issued a decree with directions to all workplaces to prevent sexual 
harassment. PKSF and its Partner Organizations have taken steps to implement the directions as 
given by the Supreme Court. 
4.  PKSF’s Environmental and Social Management Approach 
Policies and procedures 
4.1 
PKSF has a comprehensive set of policies and procedures in place to govern its operations23. The 
most important in the light of this ESMF include: 
  PKSF Lending policy and procedures. The lending policy outlines the conditions for 
lending to Partner Organizations and sets the requirements for the core programmes / 
financial products. These include, for some products but not all, the requirement of 
“environmentally friendly income generating activity”.  
  PKSF Statement of non-discriminatory practices. Statement (policy) explaining that 
PKSF does not allow any discrimination against any employee or project participants for 
employment because of race, color, national or ethnic origin, age, religion, disability, sex, 
sexual orientation, gender identity and expression. 
  PKSF Environmental Management Framework (2012). This EMF outlines the key 
principles basic processes for environmental management. This includes a mandatory 
Environmental Screening and, if significant potential negative impacts are identified, a 
subsequent Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) leading to an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP). A screening checklist is annexed in the EMF. 
  PKSF Social Management Framework (2012). This SMF includes a screening 
procedure for potential negative social impact issues. It also includes guidelines for using 
23 All documents can be found at http://pksf-bd.org/web/?page_id=3515  
public and private land and a tribal peoples plan, as well as guidance for integrating social 
and gender issues into all projects.  
  Policy and Strategy for Protecting Women Employees from Possible Sexual 
Harassment. This policy is particularly aimed at PKSF employees and details the actions 
to be considered sexual harassment, as well as the awareness raising and preventive 
actions to be taken in the organization. 
Apart from the organization-wide policies and procedures, certain projects have developed policies 
and procedures relevant to this ESMF: 
  Sustainable Enterprise Project (SEP) Environmental Management Framework and 
Social Management Framework24. These two documents are developed especially to 
govern the implementation of the SEP in compliance with the World Bank’s safeguards 
policies (as applicable prior to the enforcement of the revised version in 2018). In addition 
to the two frameworks, the SEP is developing Protocols for use in the core microfinance 
programmes, written in Bangla and aimed at operational use by Partner Organization staff. 
There are currently Protocols for Livestock Waste Management, Safe Banana Cultivation, 
Safe Mango, Loom and Shoe Factories. 
  Promoting Agricultural Commercialization and Enterprises (PACE). Under PACE, an 
Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) manual for Microenterprise has been developed. 
This EHS manual has subsequently been discussed at a policy dialogue with relevant 
government, NGO and private sector stakeholders25. The EHS manual is a comprehensive 
document written in English. Following feedback received by various stakeholders, parts of 
the EHS may be captured in separate, user-oriented documents written in Bangla. 
Organizational capacity 
4.2 
PKSF employs professionals across the organization with widely varying backgrounds, including 
finance, agronomy, and environmental science. The organization therefore has significant in-house 
capacity on environmental and social subject matters. Partner Organizations similarly comprise 
staff of various educational and technical backgrounds. The challenge however, as in any financing 
organization, is to equip the client-facing officers (of PKSF and the Partner Organizations) with 
solid top-level knowledge of key environmental and social issues thereby knowing what the key 
environmental and social issues are in their work in general, and for individual value chains in 
particular. With that knowledge, client-facing officers should be able to identify issues concerning 
their client and establish what is a material issue, and what is not. Material issues can then be 
followed up on with the assistance of technical experts, internal or external to the organization, 
where needed. The policies and procedures listed above are a tool for client-facing officers, and 
their line managers, to do so. 
In terms of organization set-up, PKSF has established a dedicated unit for Environment and 
Climate Change. Some projects (particularly those funded by the World Bank) have dedicated 
environmental and/or social safeguards managers, whereas others have only focal points assigned. 
Similarly, some projects require Partner Organizations to assign focal points for environmental and 
social safeguards. This is a practice that should be mainstreamed within PKSF as part of the 
update of the PKSF corporate-level Environment and Social Management Frameworks. 
Ongoing developments and mainstreaming 
4.3 
As mentioned in section 4.2, PKSF is currently engaged in a number of activities relating to 
environmental and social management. The tools being developed under SEP (particularly 
commodity-specific protocols) and the EHS manual being developed under PACE will soon be 
tested in the respective projects. With RMTP coming online in 2020, this presents a good learning 
opportunity and eventual adoption of successful practices. Moreover, the organization as a whole is 
in continuous development and as a part of that regularly updating their policies and procedures. 
In light of this, and considering the benefits of having a single, integrated approach on 
environmental and social management across the organization, PKSF is planning to update their 
corporate level Environmental Management Framework and Social Management Framework (both 
dated 2012) with the lessons learned and new elements.  
RMTP can play an enabling role in this mainstreaming effort, by pro-actively testing and 
implementing new measures, and financing consultancies and workshops where needed. For the 
time being, this current document will serve as the ESMF for RMTP. During the update process of 
the PKSF corporate level EMF / SMF, IFAD can be an active participant and review the final version 
24 Available at http://projects.worldbank.org/P163250/?lang=en&tab=documents&subTab=projectDocuments 
25 http://pksf-bd.org/web/?p=7167 
with a view of adopting these documents as the active ESMF for RMTP once final and approved by 
other relevant stakeholders.  
5.  Environmental and Social Management in RMTP 
5.1 
The RMTP Environmental and Social Management Approach is based on the following principles: 
Principles 
 
 
 
 
 
To ensure compliance with SECAP and thereby the applicable laws, regulations and policies 
of GoB as well as those of IFAD; 
To use, as much as possible, existing policies and procedures from inside the implementing 
organisations (PKSF and Partner Organizations) in an effort to support mainstreaming; 
To acknowledge that the nature of ensuring environmental and social sustainability of 
microenterprises is that of continuous improvement; 
To address all activities under the project, from capacity building to core microfinance; 
To address improvements in policies, procedures, staff capacity in an integrated and 
coherent matter. 
The RMTP furthermore supports PKSF’s principles of environmental management: 
 
 
 
 
Projects and programs when funded for implementation will be subject to an 
environmental screening and initial environmental examination (IEE) in order to prevent 
execution of sub- projects with significant long-term negative environmental impacts and 
also to plan and implement mitigation measures for less significant environmental impacts, 
PKSF will ensure due diligence to the related government regulations (ordinance, acts, 
rules etc.) related to environment  
Partner Organizations will be responsible for obtaining and ensuring clearance required 
from local government agencies as necessary, 
PKSF will promote environmental sound design of value chain activities and environmental 
capacity building of Partner Organizations and community. 
  Climate resilient considerations will be integrated in designing relevant projects. 
5.2 
The project’s expected benefits include 
Potential Impacts and related Mitigation Measures 
 
 
 
 
 
Increased income of targeted small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs; 
Increased food security of targeted small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs; 
Improved nutrition status of targeted small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs through 
amongst others bio-fortified new varieties with increased level of micro nutrition, vitamins, 
and proteins; 
Increase resource use efficiency and re-use including through, System of Rice 
Intensification, Recirculation Aquaculture Systems, Water treatment for reuse in 
processing 
Increased use of renewable energy through solar energy for operating milk coolers, cold 
storage, processing facilities, driers, irrigation pumps; 
  Reduced emissions or emission intensity through precision placement of slow release 
fertilizer briquettes, higher livestock productivity  
  Reduced vulnerability to climate change through new crop varieties, heat tolerant livestock 
breeds, improved fish breed. 
 
The project’s main potential negative impacts prior to mitigation measures include: 
Increase in waste streams and pollution from small-scale agriculture and micro-
entrepreneurs; 
Increased competition for natural resources, e.g. fresh water resources; 
Loss of natural vegetation and habitat due to expansion of land-based micro-enterprises. 
 
 
The following table includes a longer list of potential negative impacts and associated mitigation 
measures, compiled from PKSF internal documents as well as external guidance and best 
practices.  
Risk 
Agricultural production 
Mitigation measures  
Increased 
agricultural waste 
streams leading to 
environmental 
pollution 
Increased 
competition over 
natural resources 
Monoculture and 
loss of 
biodiversity 
Pest infestation 
Encourage construction of pits for livestock manure  
Encourage and establish new business models for manure composting and 
sales, potentially by establishing and initially subsidizing central 
composting points  
Promote water re-use and recycling  
Improve dairy productivity to reduce greenhouse gas emission intensity  
Promote bio-gas production with slurry management technology 
Promote improved feed management for reducing GHG emissions from 
livestock 
Produce and use organic compost 
Promote adoption of drip irrigation or other precision irrigation techniques 
such as porous pipes. 
Promote rain water harvesting systems  
Promote solar systems 
Promote System of Rice Intensification 
Encourage the use of local/indigenous varieties 
Promote crop rotation  
Protect forests and wetlands that are critical habitats for endangered 
species 
Prohibit introduction of exotic species 
Promote Integrated pest management (IPM); 
Promote use of varieties tolerant to pest infestation; 
Promote crop diversification; 
Promote use of pheromone trap; 
General environmental issues 
Deforestation 
Land degradation 
and soil erosion 
Declining soil 
health 
Soil salinization 
Depletion of 
groundwater level 
Discourage cutting of mature trees.  
Promote use of buffer zones along rivers.  
Include plantation programs in cluster development  
Promote agroforestry  
Limit free ranging of livestock 
Encourage earth/soil collection from existing borrow pits 
Encourage grass planting or (temporary) fencing to regenerate vegetation  
Encourage tree plantation on slopes  
Addition of organic matter like animal manure 
Incorporation of residues of leguminous crops into the soil 
Encourage crop diversification  
Promote balanced fertilizer application; 
Promote use of bio-fertilizer or organic fertilizers; 
Promote conservation agriculture, mulching with straw, hyacinth, etc.; 
(CCM & CCA) 
Encourage plantation of leguminous varieties for nitrogen fixation; 
Increase irrigation efficiency and water productivity; 
Discourage drainage to intrusion of saline water; 
Flushing soil with pre-monsoon rain water; 
Promote extensive shrimp-rice farming system; 
Use of organic fertilizer; 
Promote drip irrigation  
Promote water-efficient irrigation techniques  
Promote crops with low water consumption 
Promote rainwater harvesting  
Promote water re-use  
Livestock management 
Animal welfare 
Disease outbreak 
Train business clusters on cleaning of poultry and goat/pig rearing hut and 
shed 
Increase awareness on how to control odour, insects and mosquito 
breeding around the poultry and goat/pig rearing farm 
Promote biosafety measures such as restricted access and washing 
facilities 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
Contamination of 
drinking water 
Maintain safe distance between latrine and water sources 
Maintain safe distance between livestock sheds and kitchen 
Promote hygienic practices 
Promote regular testing of water sources 
Take corrective action when water contamination established 
Occupational Health and Safety 
Health risk to 
workers 
Promote safe work through Standard Operating Procedures, training and 
awareness raising 
Encourage and enforce the use of PPE 
Supporting first-aid box and to provide minimal level of training; 
Adequate transport facility to allow a patient into the hospital; 
Enlisting the names and numbers of village doctors in nearby community 
places/shops;   
Encourage regular workplace cleaning 
Apart from the mitigation measures to prevent and minimize negative impacts, RMTP includes a 
high number of activities aimed at amplifying positive impacts. These include: 
  Training and certification of farmers on GlobalGAP. The project will assist 
groups/clusters of enterprise involved in primary production of crops, livestock and 
aquaculture to adopt Global Good Agriculture Practices (GGAP). The project will support 
enterprises involved in produce handling/transport, feed manufacturing, and hatchery to 
obtain GGAP if required. 
  Training of entrepreneurs on HACCP. Support will be provided to enterprises engaged 
in crop/meat/fish processing to obtain Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) 
certification.  
Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation 
5.3 
Bangladesh is consistently ranked in the top list of countries impacted by the effects of climate 
change. Key climate change impacts for the project area are linked to sea level rise contributing to 
increasing floods and increasing intrusion of saline seawater in addition to flash flood, riverine 
floods, cyclone, tidal surge, drought etc. All climate-induced phenomena have significant effects on 
agriculture, with increasing salinity and mean temperatures having generally negative effects. 
Overall, crop production might be reduced by 30% by the end of the century; rice production could 
fall by 8%, and wheat production by 32% by 2050. Winter crop production would be seriously 
hampered due to a warmer and drier environment during non-monsoon seasons, while moisture 
stress might force farmers to reduce the area under irrigated rice cultivation. At the same time, 
climate change may offer opportunities in terms of new or expanding areas of suitability for 
particular crops. 
PKSF and RMTP can be a facilitator of action on both adaptation and mitigation. It should be noted 
that the project does not include specific climate change labelled funds that can be passed on to 
recipients in concessional form. The project will therefore focus on double-win or triple-win 
investments (good for the enterprise, good for reducing vulnerability to climate change, good for 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions). Some adaptation and mitigation activities will thereby fall 
outside of the scope of RMTP, such as the building of larger infrastructure of a public nature for 
flood protection or reducing cattle herd sizes by offering financial incentives. RMTP will implement 
the lessons learned from the Climate Change Project implemented by PKSF and funded by 
Bangladesh Climate Change Resilience Fund (BCCRF) in this regard. It will also integrate the 
measures agreed in the Bangladesh communication to the UNFCCC through the Nationally 
Determined Contribution (NDC)26. 
The following table includes an overview of the major value chains to be supported under RMTP, 
their vulnerability to climate change / need for climate change adaptation, the potential to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions in this chain and associated measures for both adaptation and 
mitigation. This table can be further supplemented with known and tested measures as the project 
is being implemented. References to external sources are included as footnotes. 
Value Chain 
Potential to 
reduce GHG 
emissions 
Potential 
adaptation 
measures 
Potential Mitigation 
Measures 
Vulnerability 
to Climate 
Change 
Primary risk 
factors  
Livestock 
Poultry and 
eggs 
Red Meat 
Medium 
Heat stress 
Medium 
Heat stress 
Medium 
Medium 
Promote water 
harvesting, water 
use efficiency, re-
use, safe disposal 
Improve livestock 
waste management 
Encourage zero-grazing 
Reduce emission 
26 See https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/NDCStaging/Pages/Party.aspx?party=BGD 
Dairy 
Medium 
Heat stress 
High 
Low to Medium 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Crops / horticulture 
High value 
cereal 
Medium to high 
Floods and 
droughts 
High  
Floods and 
droughts, 
salinity 
Medium 
Floods and 
droughts 
High 
Water 
temperature 
Salinity 
Floods 
Droughts 
High value 
fruits and 
vegetables 
Pulses 
Aquaculture 
Technology-
based 
aquaculture 
(e.g. mud 
crab, carp 
and tilapia, 
crayfish) 28 
intensity through 
increased productivity 
per animal 
Supplementation of 
diet with urea and 
molasses, feeding a 
balanced feed ration, 
fodder cultivation and 
udder health 
management27 
Discourage 
deforestation 
Promote IPM 
Promote Conservation 
Agriculture 
Discourage burning 
Avoid flood prone 
areas 
Use safe heights 
for construction of 
stalls and other 
infrastructure 
Promote precision 
irrigation (drip, 
sprinkler) 
Promote IPM 
Promote 
Conservation 
Agriculture 
Promote SRI (for 
rice) 
Improved water 
quality 
management 
practices 
Improved waste 
management 
Reduce energy use 
(fuel efficiency, lights) 
Reduced use of energy-
intensive feedstuff 
(e.g. shift to locally 
sourced oilseeds)  
Processes and procedures 
5.4 
The following will apply to RMTP with regards to the processes and procedures to be used to 
ensure environmental and social sustainability of project investments: 
 
 
The project will make use of the existing PKSF procedure for screening project using the 
Environmental and Social Screening Forms, and for those projects that have significant 
environmental risks, the Initial Environmental Examination Form.  
The screening process will include analyzing proposed projects against the environmental 
and social exclusion lists annexed to this ESMF (Annex 2 and Annex 3). 
  RMTP will make use of processes developed by other projects once they are tested and 
 
 
found to be successful. This particularly concerns the Protocols being developed under SEP 
and the EHS Manual developed under PACE.  
The project will assign environmental and social management focal points in each of its 
Partner Organizations, tasked with ensuring that PKSF policies and procedures are 
adequately implemented and monitored 
PKSF will organize regular training sessions on emerging environmental and social 
management issues, to be attended by the Partner Organizations’ environmental and 
social management focal points.  
The general process flow for environmental and social screening, assessment, monitoring and 
management is contained in Annex 1. In addition to the above, the project will pilot innovations 
relating to environmental and social management. These are discussed in section 6. 
5.5  Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 
PKSF applies a thorough monitoring and evaluation approach, aimed at both the Partner 
Organizations as well as directly at the clients of those Partner Organizations. The monitoring and 
27 Reference FAO Options for low emission development in the Bangladesh dairy sector 
http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6822e.pdf 
28 Reference FAO Impacts of climate change on fisheries and aquaculture  
http://www.fao.org/3/i9705en/i9705en.pdf 
evaluation of the measures stipulated in this ESMF will be integrated in those procedures, as 
follows: 
 
PKSF / PMU will monitor the environmental and social risks and mitigation measures 
identified through the different procedures and forms used in the organization 
PKSF / PMU will regularly review and synthesize data from these sources to identify most 
important issues as well as emerging themes 
PKSF / PMU will integrate environmental and social sustainability issues into its regular 
reporting to IFAD. 
 
 
The outcomes of these monitoring and evaluation practices should be integrated into the regular 
learning and training programmes of PKSF, picking up the emerging themes from the monitoring 
data and inviting experts to provide insights on best practices as well as new technologies. Some 
of the Partner Organizations have Training of Trainer methodologies in place to ensure that 
knowledge flows from senior levels to junior levels, which is particularly relevant in the light of 
high staff turnover at many of the partner organizations. This approach will be promoted among 
other Partner Organizations as well. 
Finally, environmental and social management performance can be integrated into the Client 
Satisfaction Survey that PKSF regularly carries out. These can include simple questions to gauge 
the adequacy and effectiveness of policies and procedures put in place. 
Consultation 
5.6 
Consultation is an essential part of the project cycle. Understanding the views from various 
stakeholders is critical for confirming relevance of proposed interventions, for effectiveness and 
efficiency of proposed approaches and for impact and sustainability of the intended positive 
changes.  
The RMTP has been designed in close consultation with a wide group of stakeholders, the details of 
which can be found in the PDR. PKSF has integrated consultation requirements during project 
implementation into its participatory processes, including the environmental screening process. 
These requirements are also integrated into the various forms and checklists that are being used 
by PKSF and its partner organizations. Finally, PKSF carries out monitoring of projects to, amongst 
others, ensure that proper consultation has been carried out. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
5.7 
A grievance redress mechanism is a process for receiving, evaluating and addressing project-
related concerns of, and complaints by, project affected communities or persons. IFAD’s Grievance 
Redress Mechanism allows affected complainants to have their concerns resolved in a fair and 
timely manner through an independent process.  
IFAD’s Grievance Redress Mechanism requires: (i) working proactively with the affected parties to 
resolve complaints; (ii) ensuring that the complaints procedure is responsive and operates 
effectively; and (iii) maintaining records of all complaints and their resolutions.  
The principles of a good grievance redress mechanism are: 
  A mechanism scaled to risk and adverse impact on affected communities 
  Designed to take into account culturally appropriate ways of handling community concerns 
  A clear and understandable mechanism that is accessible to all segments of the affected 
communities at no cost 
Transparency and accountability to all stakeholders  
 
  A mechanism that prevents retribution and does not impede access to other remedies  
The key steps for grievance management are 
 
Publicizing grievance management procedures so that the mechanism is accessible to 
everyone; 
  Receiving (i.e. collecting, recording and registering) and keeping track of grievances; 
  Reviewing and investigating grievances to assess the nature of the grievance, its severity 
and legitimacy; 
  Developing resolution options commensurate with the nature of grievances and preparing 
and communicating a clear response, and closing out cases when agreement with the 
complainants is reached  
  Monitoring grievances through tracking to ascertain effectiveness, adapting the mechanism 
to correct inefficiencies, using the results of monitoring for feedback and lessons learned. 
PKSF has established its own grievance redress system, which will be used for the implementation 
of RMTP.  
Figure 1 Visual of the PKSF Grievance Redress Mechanism. Details can be found in the PKSF Social 
Management Framework 
Furthermore, project stakeholders may use IFAD’s Complaint Procedures that can be found at 
https://www.ifad.org/en/accountability-and-complaints-procedures  
Costs of implementing the ESMF 
5.8 
The costs of implementing this ESMF primarily comprise staff time (both of PKSF as well as Partner 
Organizations), as well as costs of training of farmers. These costs have been readily integrated 
into the PKSF cost tables and will subsequently be integrated into the Annual Work Plan and 
Budgets (AWPB). Additionally, producers and entrepreneurs will have costs in terms of 
implementing some of the interventions needed to reduce risks or impact. Some of these costs will 
be subsidized through the project and are budget in the general project budget lines, others will 
come from the loans that these entrepreneurs take with PKSF its partner organizations. 
6.  Innovation 
Under RMTP, a set of innovations in environmental and social management will be pursued as 
listed below. 
6.1  Microenterprise Sustainability Scoring  
Recognizing that existing procedures are rather compliance-oriented, PKSF will experiment with a 
scoring method for the environmental and social sustainability of microenterprises that is aimed at 
both the entrepreneur self, as well as the responsible loan officer.  
This system will comprise a traffic light system (red, yellow, green). The responsible loan officer 
will need to classify the microenterprise based on a set of general indicators and a set of value 
chain specific indicators. In case the microenterprise is in the red category, essential actions need 
to be undertaken prior to (further) financing. In case the microenterprise is in the yellow category, 
actions need to be taken during financing which if not implemented may result in ineligibility for 
any follow-on loan. 
Microenterprise Sustainability Scoring – template example in italics 
Enterprise Name and type 
Current Status 
Key Issue(s) 
Improvement Milestones 
Name, Poultry Farm 
Yellow 
Chicken litter dumped into adjacent stream posing risk to health 
Find alternative method for waste 
management 
Sep 2019 
A Sustainability Scoring Guide will need to be developed for this purpose, clearly explaining the 
key environmental and social sustainability issues in each of the value chains. This will need to 
include specific possible circumstances that qualify as green, yellow or red, as well as the possible 
improvement measures. These should be drawn from the Protocols currently being developed 
under SEP. 
Once the Sustainability Scoring approach is implemented at sufficient scale, it will also generate an 
interesting data set that can be integrated into the project’s monitoring and evaluation system. A 
portfolio level indicator can then not only indicate the current composition of the portfolio in terms 
of environmental and social performance, but also more detailed diagnostics such as in which 
value chains environmental and social sustainability is a major concern. 
Categorization and Management at Cluster level 
6.2 
In the current practice of PKSF, Environmental and Social categorization of projects is done at 
either Partner Organization level or individual producer level. Recognizing that this approach 
carries a risk of not adequately managing the cumulative / aggregate impact of production 
clusters, PKSF will explore an alternative categorization and risks management approach centered 
at the cluster level. In this manner, a cluster such as one for livestock can be evaluated in its 
integrity and measures identified that are not easily implementable at the individual producer level 
but can be implemented at cluster level.  
7.  Other References and Learning 
Over the past decade or two, significant efforts have been made globally to improve environmental 
and social sustainability of microfinance operations. These serve as a resource to PKSF in for 
instance the updating of their corporate policies and procedures. The most relevant are listed 
here: 
  The SMART Campaign29. The SMART Campaign is primarily aimed at integrating 
Client Protection Principles into the microfinance across the globe. The Client 
Protection Principles include (i) appropriate product design and delivery, (ii) prevention 
of over-indebtedness, (iii) transparency, (iv) responsible pricing, (v) fair and respectful 
treatment of clients, (vi) privacy of client data, and (vii) mechanisms for complaint 
resolution. 30 
  The Social Performance Taskforce31. The SPTF is a membership organization 
working on standards and good practices in social performance management for 
inclusive finance. 
  FMO ESG Toolkit32. The Dutch Development Bank FMO has developed a MFI-oriented 
toolkit for management of environment, social and governance issues. It includes a 
training tool as well as other guides. 
29 See http://smartcampaign.org  
30 See http://smartcampaign.org/storage/documents/20110916_SC_Principles_Guidance_Draft_Final.pdf for a 
full list 
31 See https://sptf.info/  
32 See https://www.fmo.nl/esg-toolkit 
Annex 1: PKSF Environmental Assessment and Monitoring Flow Chart 
Annex 2: PKSF Exclusion List (environmental issues) 
If the screening identifies significant environmental impacts like possibility of drainage congestion 
in the adjacent areas due to the new embankment or uses of excessive agrochemicals or shrimp 
farming encroaching the mangrove area, the subprojects will not be recommended for financing 
under Project.  
The proposed sub project in the environmentally sensitive areas or proposed subproject with 
significant and long-term environmental impacts will not be recommended. Approval will not be 
given to the beneficiary who will deals with unauthorized and excessive pesticides, toxic chemicals, 
polythene, narcotics or any unlawful/environmentally unacceptable interventions. The following 
activities will not be supported under project: 
Example 
Any 
activities in 
Sundarban 
is Banned.  
Sl 
# 
1 
2 
Intervention/ 
Attributes/  
Protected 
areas/Archaeological 
Historical Sites declared 
by the Government of 
Bangladesh 
Natural habitat and 
sensitive ecosystem 
3 
Use of pesticides  
4 
Road construction 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Extraction of Natural 
Resource 
Extensive Shrimp 
Firming 
Dams/Embankment 
 Supply of contaminated 
water 
Unsanitary disposal of 
solid waste and waste 
water 
Brief Description 
Activities within or adjacent to the protected areas or 
archaeological historical sites identified by DoE or other 
Government agencies 
(Attach a list of protected areas & archaeological 
historical sites) 
Activities that may adversely affect the natural habitat 
with sensitive ecosystems like natural 
pond/beel/baor/haor etc with important aquatic life 
Use of excessive pesticides in agricultural land, tree 
plantation, large scale nursery.  
Construction, reconstruction and extension of regional, 
national road and highway involving major 
concrete/cement concrete/reinforced cement concrete/ 
concrete block 
Activities supporting commercial logging in forested areas 
or involving the use of unsustainably harvested timber or 
fuel-wood or significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats 
Sub-projects involving threats to mangrove forest and 
coastal environment 
Construction/reconstruction of dam/embankment 
involving major concrete/cement concrete/reinforced 
cement concrete /concrete blocks 
Tube-wells with Arsenic contamination (higher than 
national standard (0.05 mg/l)  
base below the 10 years flood level 
water supply schemes with high probability of bacterial 
contamination 
New or significant expansion of disposal facilities with 
negative health impacts to nearby water sources or 
population 
10  Major loss of agricultural 
land 
Construction/reconstruction of road/drain, canal/pond 
excavation with major loss of agriculture land and use of 
concrete cement/ reinforced concrete cement 
11  Land filling 
Sub-projects that will impact major destruction of top soil 
of agricultural land and land filling by industrial, 
household and commercial waste 
Annex 3: PKSF Exclusion List (social Issues) 
Involuntary Resettlement:  Do the proposed project activities: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Require  private  land  which  is  to  be  acquired  by  using  the  Bangladesh 
Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable Property Ordinance, 1982? 
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No 
Require private land which is not available on voluntary contribution?  
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No 
Affect any private homesteads (vita with houses & other assets)? 
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No 
Require land that is not available on ‘contribution against compensation’ 
or other means not acceptable to the landowners? 
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No 
5.  Make persons/households using public lands destitute? 
Affect  mosques,  temples,  graveyards,  cremation  grounds,  and  other 
places/objects that are of religious and cultural significance? 
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No 
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No 
Affect livelihood of vulnerable persons based on the required land? 
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No 
Significantly  restrict  access  to  common  property  resources  and 
livelihood activities of groups and communities? 
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Tribal Peoples:  Do the proposed activity/adaptation measures, including physical / construction 
activities: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Threaten cultural/traditional way of life of tribal peoples? 
Require  tribal  lands  that  are  to  be  acquired  by  using  the  Bangladesh 
Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable Property Ordinance, 1982  
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No 
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No 
Severely  restrict  access  to  common  property  resources  (forests,  water 
bodies, etc) and livelihood activities? 
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No 
Affect  places/objects  of  cultural  and  religious  significance  (places  of 
worship, ancestral burial grounds, etc.) 
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No 
“Yes”  answer  to  any  of  the  questions  under  Involuntary  Resettlement  and  Tribal 
Peoples  will  make  the  proposed  sub-project  ineligible  for  financing  under  a  project  of 
PKSF. 
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 6:  First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Bangladesh
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project
First 18 Months Annual Work Plan and the Budget (AWPB)
Component 1: Value Chain Development
Sub-Component 1.1: Organization
Activity No.
A 1
Sub Act A 1.1.1
Sub Act A 1.1.2
Sub Act A 1.1.3
Sub Act A 1.1.4
Sub Act A 1.1.5
Sub Act A 1.1.6
A 1
Sub Act A 1.2.1
Sub Act A 1.2.2
Sub Act A 1.2.3
Sub Act A 1.2.4
A 1
Sub Act A 1.3.1
1. Start-up Training
Activities
Information & Orientation on financial literacy for MC & PO members
Training on Nutrition, climate, environmental and social issues
Prepare information sheet and discussion notes for village meetings
TOT on financial literacy for PO trainers by POs
Training on business management for ME and PA members
Developing and revising training module by PKSF
Subtotal
2. Training on Nutrition
Information campaign for nutrition education
Development of training material for nutrition training
Allocation of funds to undertake special studies at PO level
TOT on Nutrition Sensitive Value Chain
Subtotal
3. Training on Climate Issues and Environment
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD Exp. 
Category
Unit
Design Total 
Budget (USD
Design Total 
Targets
Q 1
Q 2
Q 3
Q 4
Q 5
Q 6
18 Months Plan Period: Jan 2020 - June 2021
Planned 
Total Units 
(18 
months)
Unit 
Price 
(USD)
Total 
Budget 
(USD)
Financiers
IFAD/CF 
(USD
Other 
(USD)
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TA
Nb Persons
Nb Persons
Number
Nb Batches
Nb Batches
Number
1,428,571
3,657,143
59,524
11,905
285,714
5,952
100,000
384,000
200
200
300
1
TRAINING
TA
STUDIES
TRAINING
Lump sum
Lump sum
Lump sum
Lump sum
1,786
2,381
23,810
357,143
50,000
100,000
200
150
125
1
14
10
298
60
952
5,952
700,000
1,000,000
59,600
9,000
119,000
5,952
1,893,552
595
1,190
17,857
133,929
153,571
0
0
0
0
119,000
5,952
124,952
595
1,190
0
0
1,786
700,000
1,000,000
59,600
9,000
0
0
1,768,600
0
0
17,857
133,929
151,786
Training on contract farming and exchange visits for PA members
PKSF
TRAINING
Nb Batches
23,810
50
10
476
4,760
4,760
0
Total for Sub-Component 1.1: Organization
5,857,738
2,051,883
131,498
1,920,386
Bangladesh
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project
First 18 Months Annual Work Plan and the Budget (AWPB)
Component 1: Value Chain Development
Sub-Component 1.2: Technical and Business Service
1. General Basic Training /g
Activities
Generic technological and management training on Horticulture
Generic technological and management training on Fisheries
Generic technological and management training on Poultry
Generic technological and management training on livestock
Subtotal
2. Subject Specific Advanced Training
Advanced technological and management training on Horticulture
Advanced technological and management training on Fisheries
Advanced technological and management training on Poultry
Advanced technological and management training on Livestock
Subtotal
3. GLOBAL GAP & HACCP Protocol /i
Activity No.
A 2
Sub Act A 2.1.1
Sub Act A 2.1.2
Sub Act A 2.1.3
Sub Act A 2.1.4
A 2
Sub Act A 2.2.1
Sub Act A 2.2.2
Sub Act A 2.2.3
Sub Act A 2.2.4
A 2
Sub Act A 2.3.1
Sub Act A 2.3.2
Sub Act A 2.3.3
Sub Act A 2.3.4
Sub Act A 2.3.5
A 2
Sub Act A 2.4.1
Sub Act A 2.4.2
Sub Act A 2.4.3
Sub Act A 2.4.4
Sub Act A 2.4.5
Sub Act A 2.4.6
Contracts with certification authorities for developing training modules PKSF
PKSF
Training of Master Trainer & Protocol Development
PKSF
Training of PA or Groups
PKSF
Audit / certification
PKSF
Training of farmers on GAP
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TA
TRAINING
Lump sum
Sessions
Nb Batches
Nb Batches
Nb Batches
600,000
7,351
67,064
72,653
1,488,095
Subtotal
4. Training of Special Advisory service
Generic training material
Generic training
Specialised training material
Specialised training
Printing material
Cost Sharing of Advisors
A 2
Subtotal
5. Piloting of technologies in horticulture, livestock, fisheries and others
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
OPERATIONS
OPERATIONS
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Lump sum
1,786
833
1,488
833
2,381
106,119
TA
Number
1,372,750
4,000
4,000
4,000
4,000
2,500
2,500
8,000
4,000
0
65
9,389
9,389
1,250
3
35
25
35
20,000
0
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD Exp. 
Category
Unit
Design Total 
Budget (USD
Design Total 
Targets
Q 1
Q 2
Q 3
Q 4
Q 5
Q 6
18 Months Plan Period: Jan 2020 - June 2021
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
Nb Batches
Nb Batches
Nb Batches
Nb Batches
95,238
95,238
95,238
95,238
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
Nb Persons
Nb Persons
Nb Persons
Nb Persons
357
357
1,143
571
Planned 
Total Units 
(18 
months)
Unit 
Price 
(USD)
Total 
Budget 
(USD)
Financiers
IFAD/CF 
(USD)
Other 
(USD)
750
750
750
750
1,250
1,250
1,250
1,250
0
20
2,683
671
75
3
35
25
25
10,000
24
24
24
24
143
143
143
143
113
7
8
1,190
595
24
60
24
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
72,000
17,857
17,857
71,429
35,714
142,857
300,000
1,413
18,778
5,364
89,250
414,804
1,785
840
1,500
600
1,190
57,476
63,392
228,792
0
0
0
0
0
1,786
1,786
7,143
3,571
14,286
300,000
1,413
18,778
5,364
89,250
414804
1,785
840
1,500
600
1,190
57,476
63,392
57,198
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
72,000
16,071
16,071
64,286
32,143
128,571
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
171,594
Total for Sub-Component 1.2: Technical and Business Service
4,104,735
921,844
549,679
372,165
Bangladesh
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project
First 18 Months Annual Work Plan and the Budget (AWPB)
Component 1: Value Chain Development
Sub-Component 1.3; 1.4 and 1.5
Activity No.
Activities
A 3. Value chain sub-project implementation
Sub Act A 3.1
1. Value chain analysis by PKSF
2. Value chain investment and implementation
Sub Act A 3.2.1
Sub Act A 3.2.2
Sub Act A 3.2.3
Value chain packages
Investment in innovative new VCs
Marketing and Enterprise Visibility Fares
Subtotal
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD Exp. 
Category
Unit
Design Total 
Budget (USD
Design Total 
Targets
Q 1
Q 2
Q 3
Q 4
Q 5
Q 6
18 Months Plan Period: Jan 2020 - June 2021
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
STUDIES
Number
95,238
GRANTS
GRANTS
GRANTS
Number
Number
Lump sum
8,397,619
1,200,000
1,429
9,694,286
4
100
6
0
A 4. Enterprise strengthening
Sub Act A 4.1
Specialized Agribusiness Consultant providing TA to POs & undertaking studiesPO
TA
Lump sum
1,000,000
A 5. Policy dialogue
Sub Act A 5.1
Policy dialogue on identified areas
PKSF
STUDIES
Lump sum
600,000
Total for Sub-Component 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4: VC Sub-project implementation, Enterprise strengthening, Policy
20,988,571
Planned 
Total Units 
(18 
months)
Unit 
Price 
(USD)
Total 
Budget 
(USD)
Financiers
IFAD/CF 
(USD
Other 
(USD)
4
60
23,810
95,240
95,240
83,976
5,038,560
5,038,560
5,133,800
5,133,800
300,000
300,000
150,000
150,000
5,583,800 5,583,800
0
0
0
0
Bangladesh
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project
First 18 Months Annual Work Plan and the Budget (AWPB)
Component 2: Financial Services
Activity No.
Activities
B 1. Line of credit for PKSF's ME loan programme
Sub Act B.1.1
Sub Act B.1.2
Sub Act B.1.3
Subtotal
1. Line of credit for PKSF's loan program: IFAD Resources
2. Line of credit for PKSF's loan program:PKSF Resources
3. Line of credit for PKSF's loan program: POs Resources
B.2  Line of credit to PKSF for ME loan through NBFIs
Total for the Component
Component 3: Remittances Management
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD Exp. 
Category
Unit
Design Total 
Budget (USD
Design Total 
Targets
Q 1
Q 2
Q 3
Q 4
Q 5
Q 6
Total 
Units
Unit Price 
(USD)
Total Budget 
(USD)
IFAD (USD
Other (USD)
18 Months Plan Period: Jan 2020 - June 2021
Financiers
PKSF
PKSF
PO
Credit
Credit
Credit
Lump sum
Lump sum
Lump sum
46,373,714
10,756,226
73,127,667
130,257,607
PKSF
Credit
Lump sum
20,000,000
23,186,857
10,756,226
73,127,667
107,070,750
23,186,857
23,186,857
10,756,226
73,127,667
83,883,893
15,000,000
122,070,750
7,500,000
30,686,857
7,500,000
91,383,893
C.1 Remittances - Project Implementation
PKSF
Grant
Lump sum
1,000,000
500,000
500,000
Bangladesh
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project
First 18 Months Annual Work Plan and the Budget (AWPB)
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Project management
Activity No.
Activities
D 1 Sub Component 4.1: PKSF's Capacity Building
1. PKSF's capacity building through ICT based solutions
Implementing 
Agency
IFAD Exp. 
Category
Unit
Design Total 
Budget (USD
Design Total 
Targets
Q 1
Q 2
Q 3
Q 4
Q 5
Q 6
18 Months Plan Period: Jan 2020 - June 2021
Planned 
Total Units 
(18 months)
Unit Price 
(USD)
Planned 
Total 
Budget 
(USD)
Financiers
IFAD (USD
Other 
(USD)
Sub Act D 1.1
Development of block chain platform, e-commerce & crowd funding platform
PKSF
TRAINING
Lump sum
1,400,000
D 1
Sub Act D.1.2.1
Sub Act D.1.2.2
Sub Act D.1.2.3
Sub Act D.1.2.4
Sub Act D.1.2.5
Sub Act D.1.2.6
Sub Act D.1.2.7
Sub Act D.1.2.8
Sub Act D.1.2.9
2. PKSF HR (Staff) Development (training, exchange visits)
Business management and financial analysis
Value chain analysis and VCD subproject design - training
Project design and management
M and E system design and management
ICT based platforms: Overview and management
Development project management
Financial services and institutions
ICT based Realtime MIS
Exchange visits (VCD) /a
Subtotal
D 2 Sub Component 4.2: POs capacity building
Sub Act D 2.1
Sub Act D 2.2
Sub Act D 2.3
1. Value chain integration and contract intermediation
2. Other training - Nutrient Sensitive, M&E etc.
3. New financial product development
Subtotal
D 3 Sub Component 4.3: Project management
1. Office Facilities - Procurement
SUV: 4-Wheel Vehicle for Field Visits
Laptops
Printers
Photocopy machine
Office furniture
Cellphones
Training and recording equipment
Subtotal
2. Operating expenses - Salaries & Allowances
Project Co-ordinator
Deputy project Co-ordinator (Technical)
Deputy project Co-ordinator (Financial Service)
Sectoral Specialist (Livestock)
Sectoral Specialist (Horticulture)
Sectoral Specialist (Fisheries)
ICT Specialist
Financial Analyst
Procurement Specialist
Communication, Publication & Knowledge Management Specialist
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist
Nutrition Specialist
Value Chain Project Manager
Assistant Manager (Accounts)
Computer Operator cum MIS Officer
Driver
Subtotal
3. Operating expenses - Other
Monitoring and Travel
Overhead - Office Rent, electricity /b
Start-up workshop
Subtotal
4. M &E, studies and dissemination
Sub Act D 3. 1.1
Sub Act D 3. 1.2
Sub Act D 3. 1.3
Sub Act D 3. 1.4
Sub Act D 3. 1.5
Sub Act D 3. 1.6
Sub Act D 3. 1.7
D 3
Sub Act D 3.2.1
Sub Act D 3.2.2
Sub Act D 3.2.3
Sub Act D 3.2.4
Sub Act D 3.2.5
Sub Act D 3.2.6
Sub Act D 3.2.7
Sub Act D 3.2.8
Sub Act D 3.2.9
Sub Act D 3.2.10
Sub Act D 3.2.11
Sub Act D 3.2.12
Sub Act D 3.2.13
Sub Act D 3.2.14
Sub Act D 3.2.15
Sub Act D 3.2.16
D 3
Sub Act D 3.3.1
Sub Act D 3.3.2
Sub Act D 3.3.3
D 3
Sub Act D 3.4.1
Sub Act D 3.4.2
Sub Act D 3.4.3
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PO
PO
PO
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
TRAINING
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Lump sum
TRAINING
TRAINING
TA
Lump sum
Lump sum
Lump sum
VEHICLES
Eqip
Eqip
Eqip
Eqip
Eqip
Eqip
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
SALARIES
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Operations
Operations
Operations
Lump sum
Lump sum
Lump sum
40
10
10
5
20
20
20
10
40
1
1
18
2
1
17
18
1
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
36
12
6
6
11,905
2,976
5,952
2,976
5,952
11,905
4,762
2,976
142,857
1,592,262
11,905
5,952
357,143
375,000
119,048
21,429
1,190
5,952
10,119
10,714
29,762
198,214
337,500
318,571
318,571
232,857
232,857
232,857
232,857
232,857
195,000
180,714
195,000
195,000
998,571
260,000
74,286
55,714
4,293,214
178,571
571,429
11,905
761,905
600,000
119,048
47,619
766,667
Studies (baseline, Mid-term and end-project impact studies)
Sector impact studies
Results sharing (websites, seminars/workshops, video production etc.) /c
PKSF
PKSF
PKSF
STUDIES
STUDIES
STUDIES
Lump sum
Lump sum
Lump sum
Subtotal
D 3 Sub Component 4.3: Project management
10
10
5
5
5
298
298
595
298
298
466,900
466,900
10,000
10,000
0
5,000
5,000
0
0
5,000
0
35,000
10,000
10,000
0
5,000
5,000
0
0
5,000
0
35,000
1
11,905
11,905
11,905
11,905
11,905
1
18
2
1
17
18
1
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
9
3
1.5
1.5
10,000
1,190
595
5,952
595
595
29,762
56,250
53,095
53,095
38,810
38,810
38,810
38,810
38,810
32,500
30,119
32,500
32,500
27,738
21,667
12,381
9,286
10,000
21,420
1,190
5,952
10,115
10,710
29,762
89,149
84,375
79,643
79,643
58,215
58,215
58,215
58,215
58,215
48,750
45,179
48,750
48,750
249,642
65,001
18,572
13,929
1,073,307
53,571
142,857
11,905
208,333
150,000
0
0
150,000
1,520,789
10,000
21,420
1,190
5,952
10,115
10,710
29,762
89,149
84,375
39,821
39,821
58,215
58,215
58,215
58,215
58,215
48,750
45,179
48,750
48,750
249,642
65,001
18,572
13,929
993,665
53,571
142,857
11,905
208,333
150,000
150,000
1,441,147
39,821
39,821
79,643
Bangladesh 
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project 
First 18 Months Annual Work Plan and the 
Budget (AWPB) 
Aggregate Summary 
Components 
& Sub 
Components 
Activities 
Component 1: Value Chain Development 
Design 
Total 
Budget 
(USD) 
Total for Sub-Component 1.1: Organization 
5 857 738 
18 
Months 
AWPB 
Total 
Budget 
(USD) 
2 051 
883 
Financiers 
IFAD (USD) 
Other 
(USD) 
131 498 
1 920 386 
Total for Sub-Component 1.2: Technical and Business Service 
4 104 735 
920 284 
548 119 
372 165 
Total for Sub-Component 1.3: Value chain sub-project 
implementation 
9 694 286 
935 000 
935 000 
Total for Sub-Component 1.4: Enterprise strengthening 
1 000 000 
300 000 
300 000 
Total for Sub-Component 1.5: Policy dialogue 
600 000 
150 000 
150 000 
0 
0 
0 
Component 2: Financial Services 
B 1 
B 2 
B 1. Line of credit for PKSF's ME loan programme 
130 257 
607 
107 070 
750 
23 186 857 
83 883 893 
B.2  Line of credit to PKSF for ME loan through NBFIs 
20 000 000 
15 000 
000 
7 500 000 
7 500 000 
Component 3: Remittances Management 
C 1 
C.1 Remittances - Project Implementation 
1 000 000 
500 000 
500 000 
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Project management 
D 1 Sub Component 4.1: PKSF's Capacity Building 
1 592 262 
35 000 
35 000 
D 2 Sub Component 4.2: POs capacity building 
375 000 
11 905 
11 905 
0 
0 
0 
D 3 Sub Component 4.3: Project management 
6 020 000 
1 520 
789 
1 441 147 
79 643 
Grand Total 
180 501 
628 
128 495 
612 
34 739 526 
93 756 086 
A 1 
A 2 
A 3  
A 4 
A 5 
D 1 
D 2 
D 3 
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 7:  Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Bangladesh
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project
First 18 Months Procurement Plan (PP)
Component 1: Value Chain Development - Procurement of Service Providers and TA
Thresholds: US$ 300,000 or above for IFAD approval
Advertising 
for EOI 
(Date)
TOR/ 
Prequalified 
Shortlist 
Finalized 
(Date)
RFP Final 
Draft 
forwarded 
to IFAD 
(Date)**
6
Q 1
Q 2
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 2
Q 3
Q 2
Q 3
Q 2
Q 3
Q 2
Q 3
7
Q 2
Q 2
Q 5
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 2
Q 3
Q 2
Q 3
Q 3
Q 3
Q 2
Q 2
Q 3
8
Q 3
Q 2
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 2
Q 3
Q 2
Q 3
Q 3
Q 4
Q 2
Q 3
IFAD’s No 
Objection 
for TOR 
Shortlist/ 
Final REP 
(Date)**
9
Q 3
Q 2
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 2
Q 4
Q 2
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 2
Q 3
Q 3
RFP Issued 
(Date)
10
Q 3
Q 2
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 2
Q 4
Q 2
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 3
Q 3
Proposals 
Received 
by the 
Project 
Authorities 
(Date)
11
Q 4
Evaluation 
Finalized 
(Draft 
Contract/Fina
l Contract) 
(Date)
12
Q 4
Q 2
Q 6
Q 5
Q 5
Q 3
Q 5
Q 3
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 3
Q 3
Q 2
Q 6
Q 6
Q 6
Q 3
Q 5
Q 3
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
IFAD’s No 
Objection for 
Final 
Contract) 
(Date)**
Contract 
(Service / 
Consultancy) 
Offer
13
Q 3
Q 4
Q 4
14
Q 4
Q 2
Q 6
Q 6
Q 6
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 3
Q 6
Q 4
Q 4
Q 5
Q 5
Q 3
Q 4
Q 4
DATE OF SUBMISSION
IFAD APPROVAL DATE:
o
T
(
o
N
f
e
R
.
)
B
P
W
A
1
Sub Act A 1.1.5
Sub Act A 1.1.6
Sub Act A 1.2.1
Sub Act A 1.2.2
Sub Act A 1.3.1
Sub Act A 2.2.1
Sub Act A 2.2.2
Sub Act A 2.2.3
Sub Act A 2.2.4
.
o
N
e
g
a
k
c
a
P
D
A
F
I
y
b
w
e
i
v
e
R
t
s
o
P
/
r
o
i
r
P
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
post
post
post
post
post
post
post
post
post
Sub Act A 2.3.1
10
prior
Sub Act A 2.3.2
11
post
Description of Services
Estimated 
Cost (USD)
Method of 
Selection @
3
4
5
SP: Training on business management 
for ME and PA members
   119,000.00 
LCB
TA: Developing and revising training 
module by PKSF
       5,952.00  DIR_CON
Trainers: Information campaign for 
nutrition education
          595.24 
LCS
SP: Development of training material 
for nutrition training
       1,190.48 
LCS
SP: Training on contract farming and 
exchange visits
       4,760.00 
IC
Trainer: Advanced technological and 
management training on Horticulture
       1,785.71 
Trainer: Advanced technological and 
management training on Fisheries
       1,785.71 
Trainer: Advanced technological and 
management training on Poultry
       7,142.86 
Trainer: Advanced technological and 
management training on Livestock
       3,571.43 
DIR_CON 
[PKSF Staff]
DIR_CON 
[PKSF Staff]
DIR_CON 
[PKSF Staff]
DIR_CON 
[PKSF Staff]
TA: Contracts with certification 
authorities for developing training 
modules
TA: Training of Master Trainer & 
Protocol Development
   300,000.00 
LCB
       1,412.50 
LCB
Sub Act A 2.4.1
12
post
TA: Generic training material
       1,785.00 
LCS
Sub Act A 2.4.2
13
post
SP: Generic training
          240.00 
LCS
Sub Act A 2.4.3
14
post
SP: Specialised training material
          900.00 
LCS
Sub Act A 2.4.4
15
post
SP: Specialised training
          240.00 
LCS
Sub Act A 3.1
16
post
SP: Value chain analysis by PKSF
     95,240.00 
DIR_CON 
[PKSF Staff]
Sub Act A 4.1
17
prior
TA: Specialized Agribusiness 
Consultant providing TA
   300,000.00 
QCBS
Sub Act A 5.1
18
prior
Policy dialogue on identified areas
   150,000.00 
DIR_CON 
[University]
Row Nb>>
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
Component 1: Value Chain Development - Total
  995,600.93 
PP: Target dates agreed as per Procurement Plan          R: revision      A: actual dates           
 ¨RFP (Request for Proposal): Same as ‘Bid Document’
** Applicable in case of ‘Prior Review’ by IFAD
SP : Service Provider
TA: Technical Assistance Consultancy
LCB
DIR_CON
LCS
QCBS
Local competitive bidding
DIR_CONTRACT_PM ( 100% )
LCL_SHOPPING_PM ( 100% )
QCBS_PM ( 100% )
Bangladesh
Rural Micro-Enterprise Transformation Project
First 18 Months Procurement Plan (PP)
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Project management - Procurement of Service Providers and TA
Thresholds: US$ 300,000 or above for IFAD approval
.
o
N
e
g
a
k
c
a
P
D
A
F
I
y
b
w
e
i
v
e
R
t
s
o
P
/
r
o
i
r
P
Description of Services
Estimated 
Cost (USD)
Method of 
Selection @
Advertising 
for EOI 
(Date)
TOR/ 
Prequalified 
Shortlist 
Finalized 
(Date)
RFP Final 
Draft 
forwarded 
to IFAD 
(Date)**
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
6
7
3
4
5
prior
Trainer: Block chain platform, e-
commerce & crowd funding platform
   466,900.00 
LCB
post
post
post
post
SP: Business management and 
financial analysis
     10,000.00 
LCS
SP: Value chain analysis and VCD 
subproject design - training
     10,000.00 
LCS
SP: M and E system design and 
management
       5,000.00 
LCS
TA: ICT based platforms: Overview 
and management
       5,000.00 
LCS
post
TA: ICT based Realtime MIS
       5,000.00 
LCS
post
post
1. Value chain integration and 
contract intermediation
     11,905.00 
TA: Studies (baseline, Mid-term and 
end-project impact studies)
   150,000.00 
DIR_CON 
[PKSF Staff]
DIR_CON 
[PKSF Staff]
6
Q 2
Q 3
Q 3
Q 3
Q 3
Q 3
Q 1
7
Q 2
Q 3
Q 3
Q 3
Q 3
Q 3
Q 4
Q 1
8
Q 3
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 1
IFAD’s No 
Objection 
for TOR 
Shortlist/ 
Final REP 
(Date)**
9
Q 3
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 5
Q 1
Proposals 
Received 
by the 
Project 
Authorities 
(Date)
11
Q 4
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
RFP Issued 
(Date)
10
Q 3
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Q 4
Evaluation 
Finalized (Draft 
Contract/Final 
Contract) 
(Date)
IFAD’s No 
Objection for 
Final 
Contract) 
(Date)**
Contract 
(Service / 
Consultancy) 
Offer
13
Q 4
12
Q 4
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
14
Q 4
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 5
Q 2
Q 2
Q 2
Q 2
Q 2
DATE OF SUBMISSION
IFAD APPROVAL DATE:
o
T
(
o
N
f
e
R
.
)
B
P
W
A
1
Sub Act D 1.1
Sub Act D.1.2.1
Sub Act D.1.2.2
Sub Act D.1.2.4
Sub Act D.1.2.5
Sub Act D.1.2.8
Sub Act D 2.1
Sub Act D 3.4.1
Row Nb>>
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Project management - Total
  663,805.00 
DATE OF SUBMISSION
IFAD APPROVAL DATE:
o
T
(
o
N
f
e
R
.
)
B
P
W
A
1
Sub Act D 3. 1.1
Sub Act D 3. 1.2 - 4
Sub Act D 3. 1.5
Sub Act D 3. 1.6
.
o
N
e
g
a
k
c
a
P
2
1
2
3
4
First 18 Months Procurement Plan (PP)
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Project management - Procurement of Goods
Thresholds: US$ 300,000 or above for IFAD approval
D
A
F
I
y
b
w
e
i
v
e
R
t
s
o
P
/
r
o
i
r
P
Description of Goods
Estimated 
Cost (USD)
Method of 
Procurement
Specs. 
Completed
Finalization 
of Bidding 
Document 
(Date)
IFAD No-
Objections 
for Bidding 
Document
Bid 
Invitations
Bid 
Opening
Bid 
Evaluation 
and 
Ranking
IFAD No-
Objections for 
Bid 
Evaluation
IFAD No-
Objections 
for Bid Offer
Contract 
Awarding
3
4
5
prior
SUV: 4-Wheel Vehicle for Field Visits
     10,000.00 
LCB
post
Laptops, printers, photocopy machine      28,562.00 
LCS
post
post
Office furniture
     10,115.00 
LCS
Cellphones
     10,710.00 
LCS
6
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
7
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
8
Q 1
9
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
10
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
11
Q 2
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
12
Q 2
13
Q 2
14
Q 2
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
Q 1
Sub Act D 3. 1.7
post
Training and recording equipment
     29,762.00 
LCS
Row Nb>>
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
*PP
R
A
5
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Project management - Total
     89,149.00 
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Bangladesh: Rural Micro-enterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
RMTP: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: May 2019  
Palli Karma Sahayak Foundation (PKSF) 
Rural Micro-enterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
May 2019  
1 
Bangladesh: Rural Micro-enterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
RMTP: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: May 2019  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1.  Introduction to PIM and RMTP  
2.  Project Objective and Components 
3.  Project Area and Target Population  
4.  Project Implementation Approach 
5.  COMPONENT 1: Value chain development/enhancement  
1.1 Subcomponent 1.1: Organization of Producers  
1.2 Subcomponent 1.2: Technical and Business Services 
1.3 Subcomponent 1.3: Integration of Value Chains  
1.4 Subcomponent 1.4: Strengthening of Enterprises (agribusinesses) 
1.5 Subcomponent 1.5: Policy Dialogue with Government 
6.  COMPONENT 2:  Financial services 
2.1 Subcomponent 2.1: Microfinance through Partner Organizations 
2.2 Subcomponent 2.2: Commercial finance through NBFIs 
2.3 Sub-component 2.3. Optimal utilisation of remittances 
7.  COMPONENT 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management 
3.1 Sub-component 3.1 PKSF capacity building 
3.2 Subcomponent 3.2: PO Institutional Strengthening 
3.3 Subcomponent 3.3: Project Management  
8.  Project Outreach and Benefits 
9.  RMTP Project Implementation 
10. Planning, M&E, Learning and Knowledge Management    
11.  Financial Management and Procurement 
12.  RMTP Project Costs and Financing   
Appendices    
1.  Project Fund flow 
2.  Project physical targets and financial plans; and details COSTAB 
3.  Value chain facilitators 
4.  Eample of Preparing Value Chain Analysis and Strategic Investments 
5.  IFAD Financial Management Manual  
6.  IFAD Procurement Manual 
2 
Bangladesh: Rural Micro-enterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
RMTP: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: May 2019  
1.  INTRODUCTION TO PIM and RMTP 
2. 
3. 
This project implementation manual (PIM) has been prepared to guide the project management 
unit (PMU) to implement all project activities as per project design documents and annual plan. 
The  PIM  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  project  design  report  (PDR)  with  associated 
Appendices  and  technical  background  papers  produced  during  the  design  process.  Aside  from 
the PIM, there will be separate manuals/documents such as Financial Management Manual, and 
Procurement Manual to support the PIM. These documents have been referred to in the PIM as 
appropriate.  
Project  Partners:  The  project  will  be  implemented  by  PKSF  through  its  existing  partner 
organizations  (POs)  as  well  as  future  partner  organizations  and  NBFIs.  Besides,  during  the 
course  of implementation of the project the  PMU/PKSF may engage new and different types of 
partner  organizations  or  project  participant  such  as  research  organizations,  academic 
institutions,  testing  &  certification  institutions,  regulatory  agencies  and  any  other  government, 
non-government and private agencies to achieve objective of the project.       
4. 
The PIM has been reviewed and approved by the PMU (PKSF team) and by IFAD. The PMU will 
seek IFAD’s approval for future amendments and revisions.   
5. 
Important Dates: The following dates are important for the project: 
 
 
Financing Agreement: The Financing Agreement (FA) was signed between IFAD and the 
Government of Bangladesh (GoB) on ………… 2019. 
Letter  to  the  Borrower:  IFAD  issued  the  Letter  to  Borrower  on  ….  2019  that  mentions 
…….. 2019 as Financing Agreement enforce date.   
  Project  duration:  The  Project  Completion  Date  is  ----  -----  2025  and  the  Financing 
Closing Date is ------------------------ 2025.  
2. PROJECT OBJECTIVE AND COMPONENTS 
6.  The  project  goal  of  RMTP  is  to  sustainably  increase  the  income,  food  security  and  nutrition  of 
marginal and small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs across selected value chains.  
7.  The development objective is the sustainable growth of selected rural commodity value chain. 
8.  Project Components: The project has three complementary components as follows: 
9.  Component 1: Value Chain Enhancement. This component will enable 445,000 microenterprises to 
sustainable  expand  their  activities  through  adoption  of  efficient  production  methods,  compliance 
with internationally recognised food safety and traceability standards, and strong market linkages. 
It will contribute to creating an enabling environment that promotes the growth of micro and small 
enterprises, and strengthens their linkages with the agribusinesses and other value chain actors. 
It has five sub-components: (i) organisation of producers; (ii) provision of technical and business 
services  (including  GGAP  compliance)  to  producers  through  private  advisory  services;  (iii) 
integration  of  actors  across  selected  value  chains;  (iv)  strengthening  of  downstream 
agribusinesses (including GGAP and HACCP compliance as required); and (v) policy dialogue with 
Government. 
10. Component  2:  Financial  Services.  This  component  will  provide  sustainable  financial  services  to 
micro-enterprises  and  to  growing/larger  enterprises  and  agribusinesses.  It  has  three  sub-
components: (i) provision of financial services to micro-enterprises through partner organisations 
(microfinance institutions); (ii) provision of commercial finance to larger micro-enterprises as well 
as small/medium agribusiness companies, through non-banking financial institutions (NBFIs); and 
(iii) optimal utilisation of remittances through training to the family members of overseas workers. 
3 
Bangladesh: Rural Micro-enterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
RMTP: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: May 2019  
11. Component  3:  Institutional  Strengthening  and  Project  Management.  This  component  aims  to 
strengthen  PKSF  and  PO  capability  as  development  organisations  by  leveraging  trends  in 
Information  Communication  Technology  (ICT),  financial  services,  commercial  platforms  and  new 
technologies,  and  to  ensure  that  the  project  is  managed  satisfactorily.  It  has  three  sub-
components:  (i)  PKSF  capacity  building;  (ii)  POs  capacity  building;  and  (iii)  project  management 
(see organisation and management section). 
12. Project duration: The project is designed for a period of six years, 2020-2025. 
13.  Design and monitoring framework (DMF): Design and Monitoring Framework (Logframe) of 
RMTP is presented below (Table 1) [See separate XL file for full details]   
4 
Bangladesh: Rural Micro-enterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
RMTP: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: May 2019  
Table 1: RMTP: Design and Monitoring Framework (DMF or Logframe) 
5 
NameBaselineMid-TermEnd TargetSourceFrequencyResponsibilityNo delay in project launching; and no delay in disbursement of project funds and ME loanMales - Number                          -                      80,000                  200,000 Females - Number                          -                    100,000                  245,000 Sustainable and qualified POs are available to implement VCD programs Young - Number                          -                      20,000                    50,000 Country remains politically stableNot Young - Number                          -                    160,000                  395,000 Young - Percentage (%)                          -                       11.11                     11.24 Non-women-headed households - Number                          -                    170,000                  425,000 Women-headed households - Number                          -                      10,000                    20,000 Households - Number                          -                    180,000                  445,000 Household members - Number of people                          -                    810,000               2,002,500 1.2.8 % of women reporting improved food quality in their dietBase line diet combintion - 50%PMU/PKSF• Economy maintains or increases growth rates• Terms of trade for rural communities shall not deteriorate • Price inflation for staple food remains below 10%• Rural and peri-urban infrastructure available70% of project supported households increase income by ---%: Estimated baseline HH annual income: Taka -------                          -   50%Impact surveys of households, qualitative (PRA) assessment of participating HHs and quantitative assessment (profitability analysis) of micro-enterprisesResults HierarchyIndicatorsMeans of VerificationAssumptionsOutreach1.b Estimated corresponding total number of household membersPOs and PKSF monitoring reportAnnual POs and PMU/PKSF1.a  Corresponding number of households reached1  Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the projectat baseline, mid- term and completionProject Goal:  To sustainably increase the income, food security and nutrition of marginal and small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs across selected value chains.         
Bangladesh: Rural Micro-enterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
RMTP: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: May 2019  
6 
Development Objective:   Sustainable growth of selected rural commodity value chains supported by the projectat baseline, mid- term and completionHHs - Number0                 100,000                  275,000 % increase in sales of sample microenterprises in the value chains baseline: average annual sales (Taka--- million)15%30%% increase in profit (year to year) of sample microenterprises in the value chains baseline: average annual profit (Taka--- million)10%20%Outcome 1Producers/microenterprises  - NumberBaseline: --                 400,000 Producer organizations  - NumberBaseline: --500                    1,500  Increase in # of producers groups adopted GAP Bseline: --                    2,000                     7,000 Men -  number0                   80,000                  180,000 Women - number0                   65,000                  165,000 Households - Number0               200,000                445,000 1.2.4 HHs reporting increase in productionPMU• Government maintains favorite policies for small businesses• Government continues to support micro-finance programs and NGO activities  • Absence of political unrest that could adversely affects business and economic Quantitative assessment of productin, sales, and profitability of sample micro-enterprises from sectorsPMU• POs remain institutionally and financially viable and offer competitive loan products• POs establishe separate non-financial services units and enhance capacity to manage value chain projects• No major external shocks such as major spread of disease• PKSF and POs successful identify technologies and 2.1.4  Supported rural producers that are members of a rural producers' organizationimplementing partners' records and project recordsquarterlyPMU• Farmers willing to adopt new technologies1.2.2 Producers and microenterprises in the selected value chains adopted improved production technolgies* implementing partners' records and project recordsquarterlyPMUFarming microenterprises expand sustainable businesses through adopting efficient production methods, internationally recognized safety standards and traceability, and building strong market linkages.efficient production methods and strong market linkages2.2.3 Rural producers organizzations  engaged in infromal and formal partnerships/agreements or contracts with buyersimplementing partners' records and project recordsquarterlyOutput1.1. Organization: Formation of producer organizations1.1.8  Households provided with targeted support to improve their nutrition 
Bangladesh: Rural Micro-enterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
RMTP: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: May 2019  
7 
Males - Number4,900                  11,900                Females - Number2,100                  5,100                  Young - Number4,200                  11,900                Not Young - Number2,800                  5,100                  Persons trained (total) - Number7,000                  17,000                Males - Number5600                   14,020 Females - Number2400                    6,008 Young - Number5600                   14,020 Not Young - Number2400                    6,008 Persons trained (total) - Number8000                   20,028 Men - number                   10,000                    32,000 Women- number                    1,000                     3,000 Men - number                       500                     5,000 Women - number                       100                     1,000 HHs - Number                 200,000                  445,000 Output 1.4  Enterprise strengtheingNumber of enterprises - number                    2,000                    20,000 Output 1.5 Policy dialoguePolicy related knowledge products completed# policy issues identified, policy products (papers) prepared and policy advocay/dialogue initiated35%Increase in avearge loan size to ME borrowersbaseline average loan size: Taka ----25%40%POs  remain institutionally and financially viable • Private business companies are interested in sourcing products from micro-enterprises and willing to engage in partnership in the selected value chains Increase in PKSF ME loan portfoilio (Taka -- billion)Baseline portfolio Taka --- BillionPKSFPKSFPMU• PKSF and POs successfully establish collaborative business arrangements between MEs and mainstream businesses1.1.4 Persons trained in production technologies and business management in three sectors (by sector) irrespective of providersimplementing partners' records and project recordsquarterlyPMU• PKSF and POs remain committed to facilitating non-financial services along with providing financial services program to MEs• POs establishe separate non-financial services units and enhance capacity to manage Persons paid partially or fully for training or advisory services in selected value chainsimplementing partners' records and project recordsmid-term and completionPMU2.1.1 Rural enterprises accessing business services3.2.2 Number of HHs reporting adoption of climatically sustainable and climate resileint technologies, and practicesOutput 1.3: Value chain integration Outcome 2: Sustainable financial services for microenterprisesimplementing partners' records and project recordsquarterlyPMUOutput1.2. Technical and business servces: Value chain advisory services provided to producers and producer organizationsPersons trained in GLOBAL GAP and HACCPimplementing partners' records and project recordsquarterly1.1.4 Persons trained in Technical services (e.g. paravet) 
Bangladesh: Rural Micro-enterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
RMTP: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: May 2019  
8 
POs  remain institutionally and financially viable • Private business companies are interested in sourcing products from micro-enterprises and willing to engage in partnership in the selected value chains Increase in ME borrowers -men                   15,000                    25,000 Increase in ME borrowers - women                   35,000                    75,000 Increase in PO ME loan outstanding to ME borrowersBaseline PO ME loan outstanding: Taka ----- BPKSF PKSF Increase in PKSF ME loan outstanding to POsBaseline PKSF ME loan outstanding: Taka ----- BPKSFPKSFIncrease in number of ME borrowersBaseline ME borrowers (#): ----5001400Increase in PKSF ME loan outstanding to NBFIsBaseline loan outstanding (Taka -- m)250800increase in NBFI ME loan oustanidng to borrowersBaseline loan outstanding (Taka -- m)5001600Output 2.3 Optimal utilization of remittancesSupport to families of expatriate workers# of persons trained on vcational and business management training baseline: 0• Presence of non-bank financial institutions in project area• Portfolio quality of ME loan program of POs remains high (PAR <5%)• Loan recovery rate of overall MF program and ME loan of POs remains high (>95%)1.1.5 Persons in rural accessing financial services  implementing partners' records and project recordsQuaterlyPMUOutput 2.1: Financial Services through Partner Organizations (MFIs)MEs supported by selected NBFIs implementing partners' records and project recordsquarterlyPMUOutput 2.2 Financial services to Mes through NBFIs 
Bangladesh: Rural Micro-enterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
RMTP: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: May 2019  
9 
Outcome   3PKSF and POs’ capacity is enhanced in areas of ICT and the project is satisfactorily managed.# of ICT solutions developedBaseline: 044Output 3.2 PKSF human resources developmentPersons - number25155Output 3.3 POs Institutional strengtheningServices providers - number1525 persons trained in various coursesMen - number40100Women- number20120* PKSF will define actual technology during implementationimplementing partners' records and project recordsmid-term and completionPMUOutput 3.1 PKSF’s institutional strengthening through ICT based solutions•Policy environment present to implement platform.•Institutional capacity present to implement platform.1.1.6 Financial service providers supported in delivering outreach strategies, financial products and servcies to rural areasPeople trained in various capacity building courses 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
3.  PROJECT AREA AND TARGET POPULATION 
14. Project area. The project has a national mandate and will invest throughout Bangladesh. Specific 
focus  areas  will  be  selected  based  on  poverty  incidence,  economic  opportunity,  implementability, 
and  complementarity  with  ongoing  investments  in  agricultural  value  chain  development.  The 
following  procedure  will  be  applied  to  select  districts/sub-districts  (upazilas)  where  project 
activities will take place: 
 
First,  PKSF  will  identify  districts/sub-districts  that  have:  (i)  already  developed  production 
clusters of the selected  value chains; and, (ii) the potential to develop production clusters 
of the selected value chains. 
  Second, PKSF will map the incidence of poverty in all districts/sub-districts of the country. 
 
Third,  PKSF  will  make  a  final  selection  of  the  target  areas  covering  districts/sub-districts 
with existing/potential value chain clusters and with greater incidence of poverty. 
15. Two  additional  considerations  will  be  taken  into  account:  (i)  avoiding  investments  in  the  same 
value  chains  and  same  sub-districts  already  covered  by  other  PKSF  programmes  (while  seeking 
complementarities with World Bank-financed Sustainable Enterprise Project); and (ii) focusing on 
areas  where  Partner  Organisations  (POs)  have  lending  programmes  and  have  the  capacity  to 
implement value chain financing.  
16. A  list  of  districts/sub-districts  with  high  potential  for  the  selected  value  chains  is  presented  in 
Table 2 below:   
Table 2: Potential Project Districts 
Commodity or 
agribusiness 
Districts with existing clusters  
Potential districts  cluster 
development 
High value cereals 
Greater Dinajpur 
Thakurgaon, Rangpur 
High value 
vegetables, 
floriculture, 
beans/lentils 
Dhaka, Comilla, Manikganj, 
Shariatpur, Narshingdi, Bogra, 
Jessore, Chuadanga, Meherpur, 
Dinajpur, Rajshahi, Naogaon, 
Chittagong, Joypurhat, Bhola, and 
greater Barisal 
All districts except haor districts, flood 
affected sub-districts, and coastal 
sub-districts with high soil salinity 
High value fruits 
Greater Dinajpur, Greater Rajshahi, 
Chapai Nawabganj, Satkhira, Bogra, 
Tangail, Mymenshing, and Narshingdi 
Thakurgaon, Panchagar, and parts of 
three Chittagong hill districts 
(Banderban, Rangamati, Khagrachari) 
High value spices and 
medicinal plants 
Natore, Chittagong hill districts 
Plain and low hilly part of three 
Chittagong hill districts (Banderban, 
Rangamati, Khagrachari) 
Dairy products 
Tangail, Munshiganj, Manikganj, 
Sirajganj, Pabna, Dhaka, Bogra, 
Greater Faridpur, Bhola, Comilla 
All districts  
Dairy farm 
Sirajganj, Pabna, Rangpur, Bogra, 
Satkhira, Munshiganj, Manikganj, 
Comilla, Dhaka, Gazipur, Shariatpur, 
Tangail, Sylhet 
Greater Dinajpur, Greater Kushtia, 
Greater Rajshahi, Greater Faridpur 
10 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Goat and sheep farm 
Kushtia, Meherpur, Chuadanga, 
Tangail, Rajshahi 
Jessore, Comilla 
Cattle fattening 
Sirajganj, Pabna, Bogra, Comilla, 
Kushtia, Meherpur, Jessore, 
Chuadanga, Cox’s bazaar, Chittagong 
Hill districts, Manikganj, Dhaka 
Greater Dinajpur, Greater Kushtia, 
Greater Rajshahi, Greater Faridpur 
Poultry and feed 
Gazipur, Tangail, Dhaka, Bogra, 
Joypurhat, Mymenshing, Narshingdi, 
Comilla 
Greater Rajshahi and Greater 
Rangpur; parts of all districts 
Aquaculture (crab 
culture, crayfish, etc) 
Pond fisheries 
Cox’s bazaar, Satkhira 
Khulna, Laxmipur, Noakhali 
Mymenshing, Rajshahi, Munshiganj, 
Jessore, Meherpur, Natore, Bogra, 
Dinajpur, Comilla, Chapai, Pabna, 
Ishwardi, Gopalganj, Madaripur, 
Sirajganj, Noakhali 
Greater Rajshahi, Greater Rangpur, 
Greater Faridpur 
Fish hatchery 
Greater Jessore, Mymenshing, 
Comilla, Chittagong 
Note: RMTP/PKSF may choose any sub-district/district in the country to respond to demand and 
opportunity, and proposal from POs   
17. Target  groups.  RMTP  will  directly  target  marginal  and  small  farmers  and  micro-entrepreneurs 
engaged  in  producing  or  processing  field  crops,  horticulture,  aquaculture  and  livestock.  Within 
these  groups,  the  project  will  focus  on  the  ultra  poor,  the  transitional  poor,  and  the  enterprising 
poor. These are characterized below: 
  Ultra-poor (approx. 10% of beneficiaries): The ultra-poor are typically landless and depend 
on  unskilled  wage  labour  and  seasonal  migration.  They  have  poor  literacy  and  numeracy 
skills.  The  ultra-poor  are  involved  in  producing  commodities  such  as  poultry  and  small 
ruminants. This group is directly targeted by PKSF's pro-poor lending programme (Buniad). 
 
 
Transitional poor (approx. 19% of beneficiaries): The transitional poor typically possess less 
than 30 decimals of land (30% of an acre), including homestead land, and/or are involved 
in  sharecropping  and  wage  labour.  They  participate  in  crop,  livestock  and  poultry  value 
chains, and sometimes supply output to micro-enterprises. The transitional poor have been 
able  to  gradually  increase  their  asset  base  over  the  past  5-10  years  by  diversifying  their 
income base, and in some cases by receiving remittances. This group is targeted by PKSF’s 
household 
lending  programme  (Jagoron)  or  seasonal 
income-generating  activities 
agricultural lending programme (Sufolon). 
Enterprising  poor  (approx.  71%  of  beneficiaries).  The  enterprising  poor  typically  possess 
between  30  and  90  decimals  of  land  (30%  to  90%  of  an  acre).  They  operate  micro-
enterprises  in  crops/horticulture,  aquaculture,  livestock  and  poultry  value  chains,  and 
supply  output  to  markets  or  larger  enterprises.  The  enterprising  poor  are  expanding  land 
ownership,  and  in  some  cases  receive  remittances.  This  group  is  targeted  through  PKSF’s 
Jagoron, Sufolon, and Agrosor (micro-enterprise) loan products. 
18. However, in case of loan products PKSF will its existing criteria, which may be updated from time 
to  time.  Besides,  these  criteria  may  vary  from  PO  to  PO  and  geographical  location  of  respective 
PO’s operational area.  
11 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
19. Other  potential  project  participants:  In  addition,  the  project  will  indirectly  target  all  other 
value chain actors, such as input suppliers, advisory service providers, traders and processors. 
20. Participants  in  value  chains:  In  a  particular  value  chain  producers  belonging  to  all  three 
categories  of  beneficiaries  as  well  as  larger  producers  may  also  being  doing  business  and 
consequently may participant in the project activities. But larger and wealth participants may not 
receive any subsidized services that might be offered in a particular situation.   
21. Microfinance  groups will be the main  entry  point for  value chain activities,  although  participation 
will  also  be  open  to  micro-entrepreneurs  outside  these  groups.  As  per  POs'  regular  practices, 
borrowers are included in microfinance groups for administrative, transactional and organisational 
purposes.  Microfinance  groups  typically  consist  of  borrowers  of  all  four  loan  products.  POs  will 
make efforts to increase participation of Buniad borrowers in these groups. 
22. Targeting strategy. The project's targeting mechanisms are outlined below: 
  Geographical targeting: outlined in paragraph 14 above. 
 
Procedural  targeting:  existing  procedures  will  be  applied  for  targeting  under  PKSF's  four 
standard loan products. Standard loan packages will correspond  to the financial capacities 
of  the  ultra-poor,  transitional  poor  and  enterprising  poor  respectively.  Similar  procedures 
will  be  established  for  the  participation  of  non-banking  financial  institutions  in  lending  to 
larger/ growing enterprises and to agribusinesses. 
  Direct  targeting:  POs  will  identify  and  directly  target  microfinance  groups  that  have  the 
potential  to  upgrade  production  and  develop  market  linkages,  and  that  have  a  higher 
proportion of ultra-poor borrowers. 
  Self-targeting:  Micro-finance  groups  engaged  in  the  selected  value  chains  will  have  the 
option of forming into producers' associations, with project support. 
23. Targeting Youth: Youth may be the targeted in the following manner: a) borrowers of ME loan 
and other loan products from POs; b) trainees of GGAP and HACCP training courses; and c) 
trainees of other specialized training courses for development local service providers.   
24. Targeting Women: Women will be main recipients of microfinance services (ME loans and other 
loans) and also participants of value chains as producers, and sometimes as traders and 
processors.   
4.  PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION APPROACH 
25. Project implementation approach: The PMU/PKSF will ensure the following core implementation 
approach while designing a value chain subproject as well as offering financial services:  
  Work in clusters and new cluster development: One of the core elements of the project is 
to  offer  services  or  introduce  new  technologies  in  an  existing  cluster  of  businesses.  The 
PMU must advice POs to identify successful clusters of business to determine constraints 
as well as services needed to further develop the clusters and or expand the businesses in 
another  locations  (new  clusters).  This  critical  step  is  to  reach  out  to  a  large  number  of 
similar business, develop commercially viable support and advisory services, disseminate 
new technologies and information, and collecting produces for buyers.     
  Combine  microfinance  and  non-financial  services  in  each  value  chain:  While  designing  a 
value chain subproject involving a specific product or a group of similar products (such as 
vegetables) the PMU  will ensure  that  participants receive loans as and when demanded.    
Since  producers  groups  will  have  members  of  various  size  and  capacity  loans  will  be 
12 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
offered from four PKSF/POs lending windows. However, it is understood that not all value 
chain participants will need loans or ask for  loans as many of them may join the groups 
for technology, training and accessing market; 
  Transform  subsistence  producers 
introduce 
management  practices,  technologies,  and  support  services  to  improve  productivity  and 
expand  businesses  to  create  broad  economic  multiplier  effects  that  transform  the  rural 
sector and reduce poverty; 
into  microenterprises:  The  PMU  will 
 
 
 
 
 
apply  a  nutrition-sensitive  approach  to  the  selection  of  commodities  to  be  promoted,  to 
ensure better nutrition for producers and consumers; 
specifically  target  women  through  the  selection  of  commodities/value  chains  in  which 
women are heavily involved (poultry, livestock, homestead production); 
introduce  compliance  with  food  safety  and  quality  standards  at  producer  and  processor 
levels, to ensure the supply of safe food for producers and consumers;  
leverage commercial  finance  through  non-banking  financial  institutions  for investment in 
larger enterprises  and  agribusinesses  to expand  the  market for  micro-enterprise  output; 
and  
strengthen  the  capability  of  PKSF  and  POs  as  development  institutions  by  leveraging 
trends in financial services, commercial platforms and new technologies. 
5.  COMPONENT 1: VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT/ENHANCEMENT 
26. This  component  will  enable  345,000  microenterprises  to  sustainably  expand  their  activities 
through adoption of efficient production methods, compliance with internationally recognised food 
safety  and  traceability  standards,  and  strong  market  linkages.  It  will  contribute  to  creating  an 
enabling environment that promotes the  growth  of micro and small enterprises, and strengthens 
their linkages with the  agribusinesses  and other value  chain actors.  It  has  five sub-components: 
(i)  organisation  of  producers;  (ii)  provision  of  technical  and  business  services  (including  GGAP 
compliance)  to  producers  through  private  advisory  services;  (iii)  integration  of  actors  across 
selected  value  chains;  (iv)  strengthening  of  downstream  agribusinesses  (including  GGAP  and 
HACCP compliance as required); and (v) policy dialogue with Government. 
27. The  microfinance  groups  supported  by  POs  are  the  main  entry  point  for  investments  under 
component  1  (Figure  1).  Based  on  the  principles  of  self-
selection,  cohesive  microfinance  groups  can 
request 
additional  support  and  become  informal  producers'  groups 
under  sub-component  1.1.  These  groups  will  receive 
technical  and  business  services  to  increase  productivity  and 
ensure  compliance  with  GGAP  and  HACCP  (where  required) 
under  sub-component  1.2.  Value  chain  integration  support 
will connect microenterprises to agribusinesses and markets 
under  sub-component  1.3.  Agribusinesses  will  be  supported 
to  adopt  new  technologies,  comply  with  HACCP  (where 
required)  and  expand  their  market  linkages  under  sub-component  1.4.  The  relevant  policy 
environment, and any needed reforms, will be covered by sub-component 1.5. Policy Dialogue. 
13 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Targeting Strategy  
28. Geographical target: The below table providing the indicative target districts, the commodities and 
existing  clusters  are  already  developed.  It  also  provides  the  districts  having  the  potential  for 
developing new clusters. The project will not support districts where other development partners 
implement  similar  activities.  However,  POs  is  encourage  to  expand  clusters  initiated  under  PACE 
and  POs  own  initiatives  and  expand  VC  activities  within  these  clusters  including  introduction  of 
GGAP, HACCP and other relevant standards. 
Table 3: Indicative Districts with existing Commodity Clusters and Potential Districts  
Commodity 
Districts with successful clusters 
already developed 
Districts with potential for 
cluster development 
High value cereals 
Greater Dinajpur 
Thakurgaon, Rangpur 
High value 
vegetables, 
floriculture, 
beans/lentils 
Dhaka, Comilla, Manikganj, 
Shariatpur, Narshingdi, Bogra, 
Jessore, Chuadanga, Meherpur, 
Dinajpur, Rajshahi, Naogaon, 
Chittagong, Joypurhat, Bhola, and 
greater Barisal 
All districts except haor districts, 
flood affected sub-districts, and 
coastal sub-districts with high soil 
salinity 
High value fruits 
Greater Dinajpur, Greater Rajshahi, 
Chapai Nawabganj, Satkhira, Bogra, 
Tangail, Mymenshing, and 
Narshingdi 
Thakurgaon, Panchagar, and parts 
of three Chittagong hill districts 
(Banderban, Rangamati, 
Khagrachari) 
High value spices 
and medicinal plants 
Natore, Chittagong hill districts 
Plain and low hilly part of three 
Chittagong hill districts (Banderban, 
Rangamati, Khagrachari) 
Diary products 
Dairy farm 
Tangail, Munshiganj, Manikganj, 
Sirajganj, Pabna, Dhaka, Bogra, 
Greater Faridpur, Bhola, Comilla 
Sirajganj, Pabna, Rangpur, Bogra, 
Satkhira, Munshiganj, Manikganj, 
Comilla, Dhaka, Gazipur, 
Shariatpur, Tangail, Sylhet 
All districts  
Greater Dinajpur, Greater Kushtia, 
Greater Rajshahi, Greater Faridpur 
Goat and sheep 
farm 
Kushtia, Meherpur, Chuadanga, 
Tangail, Rajshahi 
Jessore, Comilla 
Sirajganj, Pabna, Bogra, Comilla, 
Kushtia, Meherpur, Jessore, 
Chuadanga, Cox’s bazaar, 
Chittagong Hill districts, Manikganj, 
Dhaka 
Gazipur, Tangail, Dhaka, Bogra, 
Joypurhat, Mymenshing, Narshingdi, 
Comilla 
Greater Dinajpur, Greater Kushtia, 
Greater Rajshahi, Greater Faridpur 
Greater Rajshahi and Greater 
Rangpur; parts of all districts 
Cox’s bazaar, Satkhira 
Khulna, Laxmipur, Noakhali 
Cattle fattening 
Poultry and feed 
Aquaculture (crab 
culture, crayfish, 
etc) 
14 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Pond fisheries 
Mymenshing, Rajshahi, Munshiganj, 
Jessore, Meherpur, Natore, Bogra, 
Dinajpur, Comilla, Chapai, Pabna, 
Ishwardi, Gopalganj, Madaripur, 
Sirajganj, Noakhali 
Fish hatchery 
Greater Jessore, Mymenshing, 
Comilla, Chittagong 
Greater Rajshahi, Greater Rangpur, 
Greater Faridpur 
Note: RMTP/PKSF may choose any sub-district/district in the country to respond to demand and opportunities, and 
proposal from POs   
Target Group  
29. The  RMTP  will  directly  target  marginal  and  small  farmers  and  micro-entrepreneurs  engaged  in 
producing or processing field crops,  horticulture,  aquaculture and livestock.  Within these  groups, 
the project will focus on the ultra poor, the transitional poor, and the enterprising poor. These are 
characterised below: 
  Ultra-poor (approx. 10% of beneficiaries): The ultra-poor are typically landless and depend 
on  unskilled  wage  labour  and  seasonal  migration.  They  have  poor  literacy  and  numeracy 
skills.  The  ultra-poor  are  involved  in  producing  commodities  such  as  poultry  and  small 
ruminants. This group is directly targeted by PKSF's pro-poor lending programme (Buniad). 
 
 
Transitional poor (approx. 19% of beneficiaries): The transitional poor typically possess less 
than 30 decimals of land (30% of an acre), including homestead land, and/or are involved 
in  sharecropping  and  wage  labour.  They  participate  in  crop,  livestock  and  poultry  value 
chains, and sometimes supply output to micro-enterprises. The transitional poor have been 
able  to  gradually  increase  their  asset  base  over  the  past  5-10  years  by  diversifying  their 
income base, and in some cases by receiving remittances. This group is targeted by PKSF’s 
lending  programme  (Jagoron)  or  seasonal 
income-generating  activities 
household 
agricultural lending programme (Sufolon). 
Enterprising  poor  (approx.  71%  of  beneficiaries).  The  enterprising  poor  typically  possess 
between  30  and  90  decimals  of  land  (30%  to  90%  of  an  acre).  They  operate  micro-
enterprises  in  crops/horticulture,  aquaculture,  livestock  and  poultry  value  chains,  and 
supply  output  to  markets  or  larger  enterprises.  The  enterprising  poor  are  expanding  land 
ownership, and in some cases receive remittances.  
 
In  addition,  the  project  will  indirectly  target  all  other  value  chain  actors,  such  as  input 
suppliers, advisory service providers, traders and processors. 
  Direct  targeting:  POs  will  identify  and  directly  target  microfinance  groups  that  have  the 
potential  to  upgrade  production  and  develop  market  linkages,  and  that  have  a  higher 
proportion of ultra-poor borrowers. 
  Self-targeting:  Micro-finance  groups  engaged  in  the  selected  value  chains  will  have  the 
option of forming into producers' associations, with project support. 
Subcomponent 1.1: Organization   
30. The PKSF will be overall responsibility for project implementation and field implementation will be 
the direct responsibility of selected PKSF Micro  Finance  Partner Organizations (PO) also including 
Non-Bank Financial Institutions (NBFI).  
31. PKSF’s  Partner  Organizations  (POs).  Field  implementation  of  the  RMTP  will  be  the  direct 
responsibility  of  selected  PKSF  Partner  Organizations  (POs).  When  PKSF  have  selected  the  POs, 
15 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
the  POs  can  hire    value  chain  facilitators  (ToR  Annex  1).  The  PKSF  will  select  the  POs  based  on 
their existing criteria which includes: 
 
 
 
Level of engagement with micro, small and medium agriculture enterprises and willingness 
to expand the engagement 
Loan  repayment  (portfolio  quality):  portfolio  at  risk  (PAR),  and/or  loans  at  risk  (LAR) 
and/or, current recovery rate (CRR) together with Annual loan loss rate (ALR) 
Financial sustainability (profitability): return on assets (ROA) or for subsidized institutions, 
return  on  equity  (ROE),  financial  self-sufficiency  (FSS)  or  adjusted  return  on  assets 
(AROA)  or  subsidy  dependence  index  (SDI)  Compliance  with  all  other  MRA  guidelines  on 
financial soundness, management, accounting etc.  
  Management information and  reporting systems  that provides suitable information  to the 
PO’s  owners  and  management  on  the  general  and  financial  performance  of  the  POs, 
inclusive of the management of risks. Allowance for loan losses (risk fund) at an amount 
prescribed by Microcredit Regulatory Authority (MRA). 
  Hold a valid micro finance license. 
  Compliant with all guidelines and financial covenants imposed by the MRA and PKSF. 
  Maintain  accounting  evidence  for  overall  transactions  and  operations  in  accordance  with 
acceptable accounting procedures and standards acceptable to MRA and PKSF. 
  Annual  audited  report  inclusive  of  the  auditors  comments,  and  MRA  decisions  based  on 
supervision  reports  and  copies  of  document  on  remedy  measures  as  well  as  the 
information on implemented actions by the Po and MRA. 
Efficiency: operating expense ratio (OER) and cost per client. 
 
  Sound and updated business plan that ensures the PO institutional capacity development 
and its sustainability. 
  Satisfactory procedures for external and internal auditing and internal control. 
  Outreach (breadth) number of active clients or accounts. 
  Outreach (depth) average outstanding balance per client or account. 
32. Existing Microfinance  Groups and Formation  of New  Groups.  Over the  years the POs under  PKSF 
has  assisted  to  form  thousands  of  informal1  microfinance  groups.  These  groups  were  originally 
formed,  and  used  for  savings  and  for  channelling  of  credit  to  individual  group  members.  Under 
PACE,  these  groups  are  functioning  as  focal  points  for  dissemination  of  new  technologies, 
knowledge and to a lesser extend market information. Public advisory services hired by the POs, 
PO’s own hired advisors and private advisors paid for by the farmers disseminated the knowledge 
and  new  technologies.  Advisory  service  delivered  for  free  directly  by  POs  was  not  nearly  as 
convincing as the pay based advisory service, introduced by some of the POs.    
33. Based  on  the  experience  from  PACE,  the  RMTP  will  also  make  use  of  existing  and  new  groups2 
(calls  Producer  Groups  PG)  as  the  focal  point  for  dissemination  of  new  technologies,  knowledge, 
and standards/traceability, linking PGs with downstream agro-business (Lead Firms)  for buying of 
commodities and linkage to line of credits. Particularly linkages of PG with LF will receive attention, 
ensuring a more stable market and prices for both conventional and GGAP certified farm produce.  
PKSF  will  generate  a  long-list  of  agribusinesses  that  may  be  interested  in  buying  agriculture, 
aquaculture and livestock  produce. POs will cluster  PG’s    to enable them  to meet the quantities 
and quality required by LFs. The size and proximity of clusters will be influenced by availability of 
public  and  private  advisory  services.  PGs  will  be  supported  by  POs  to  enter  into  contractual 
arrangements with interested agribusinesses. 
1 Despite being informal the groups has a structure like a formal groups including elected leaders. 
2 The project will use a broad definition of private sector: farmers, producer groups, informal/formal microenterprises, service 
providers, private businesses of inputs, traders, business associations, informal businesses and formal businesses, processors, 
transporters, domestic market businesses, exporters, private and non-government financial institutions etc.   
16 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
34. If requested by farming enterprises, the POs will assist  them to form new PAs. The new PGs and 
existing  PGs  can  receive  PO  support  to  register  formally  if  required.  A  formal  registration  is 
necessary if a PG, wants to enter into business together e.g. milk collecting  centre; grain storage 
with box dryer and cleaner; seed processing, drying, packaging and storage; tractor services with 
full implements; cold storages for fish, vegetables and fruits etc.  
35. The  POs  will  also  support  the  formation  of  apex producer  associations  (PA)  if requested.  A  PA  is 
typically  composed  of  many  PG  and  engage  in  negotiating  better  condition  on  a  wider  scale, 
engage in policy dialogue with local government, public institution authorities, and infrastructure, 
negotiate better prices for inputs, services and credit.  
36. The  engagement  of  the  existing  PGs  and  formation  of  new  PGs  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the 
Value Chain Facilitators under each PO. Support to PGs will commence upon POs being shortlisted 
for  project  support  (this  could  take  place  before  project  commencement).  Around  8,000  farming 
enterprise  groups,  each  with  around  45  households  will  participate  in  the  value  chain  activities. 
Listed below are the typical activities, timelines and parties responsible.  
Table 4: Sequential Activities and Timeline, Responsible Party for Facilitating PGs 
Participation in Value Chain Activities 
Sequential Activities 
Awareness of potential VCs for PGs to 
participate in  
Linking PGs with LFs 
Formation of new PGs  
Support to PGs formal registration  
Training of new PGs 
Prepare a long list of potential LFs 
interested to buy produce from PGs 
Timeline 
Responsible Party 
Upon PO being 
shortlisted for project 
support 
As part of preparing 
proposals for project VC 
support 
When required  
When business 
partnership require  
As soon as formation is 
completed 
Prior to commencement 
of the project 
Value Chain Facilitator with 
assistance of the pay based 
advisor 
Value Chain Facilitator with 
assistance of the pay based 
advisor 
Value Chain Facilitator 
Value Chain Facilitator 
Value Chain Facilitator 
For LFs with national coverage 
PKSF and for LFs with district 
coverage POs 
37. The  project  will  not  provide  direct  general  support  to  national  value  chains,  but  rather  focus  on 
building relationship between LFs, (making up the national national value chains) and the PGs. The 
relationship between  LF and PGs will be in the form of contractual engagement buying/selling all 
or  part  of  the  raw  material,  produced  by  the  farming  enterprises  members  of  the  PGs.  In  most 
instance, the PO will provide credit for production investment of the  PG’s farming enterprises, as 
most LFs anticipated to participating in the RMTP have insufficient financial strength to undertake 
this task. If an advantage, tripartite/four-partite financing arrangement will be organised between 
the PO/NBFI, LF and the PGs.   
17 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Figure 1: Value Chain 
38. Training  for  microfinance  and  producers’  groups  (See  COSTAB  for  details):  The  following  Table 
presents various training items planned for development of microfinance and producer groups. The 
items a) to d) are responsibilities of the POs to enhance knowledge of their microfinance members 
on  financial  literacy,  especially  related  to  savings/credit,  awareness  on  nutrition,  climate, 
environment and social issues. The POs will organize  low-cost campaigns on these  issues,  rather 
classroom  trainings,  throughout  the  year  among  microfinance  groups  and  PGs  and  population  in 
general  to  develop  awareness  and  consequently,  encourage  behavioural  changes  (e.g.  in 
nutritional  aspects  of  diet,  protection  of  environment  etc).  Various  social  media  and  other 
information dissemination channels, direct contact with communities, microfinance groups, various 
social events etc should be used by POs to implements these activities.            
a.  Information & Orientation on financial literacy for MC & PO members 
b.  Training on Nutrition, climate, environmental and social issues 
c.  Prepare information sheet and discussion notes for village meetings 
d.  TOT on financial literacy for PO trainers by POs 
e.  Training on business management for ME and PA members  
f.  Developing and revising training module by PKSF 
39. The  PMU  will  produce/revise  modules  for  the  campaigns  mentioned  above.  However,  all  such 
modules  should  be  in  video  form  and  wide  shared  through  social  media.  Even  the  project  may 
consider developing an App for dissemination purpose, and upload all such video materials in the 
project website.   
40. Subcomponent  1.2:  Technical  and  Business  services:  The  project  will  support  micro-
enterprises to better engage in selected value chains. Key services will include: privatised advisory 
services  to  optimize  production;  preparation  of  business  models  and  plans;  support  to 
microenterprises  for  GGAP  compliance;  support  to  agribusinesses  for  HACCP  compliance; 
assistance to source financing; and development of contract management arrangements. 
41. Private  Advisory  Services:  A  pool  of  highly  knowledgeable  and  skilled  local  service  providers 
such  as  paravets, trainers, and certified  local  agricultural  technicians will be  gradually  developed 
to provide privatised technical and business services. PKSF will develop a pre-qualification system 
for developing this pool of private advisors. It will issue periodic calls for interest inviting qualified 
persons  to  apply.  Candidates  will  be  evaluated  according  to  educational  background,  technical 
knowledge and experience; ability to specifically target women microentrepreneurs  and the youth 
will also be assessed. 
18 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Table 5: Evaluation Matrix for Shortlisting Candidates for Pay Based Advisors  
 Criteria 
Educational Background (maximum 15 points each) 
Maximum 
Points 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
Educational background  
Post educational relevant courses  
Other relevant skills  
Published reports and training material  
Working Experience  (maximum 10 points each) 
Is the working experience relevant  
Is the duration of experience sufficient for the position 
Additional Knowledge/experience  (maximum 5 points each) 
Is the candidate knowledgeable of human nutritional requirements   
Experience working with youth and gender 
Experience working with private sector in a commercial fashion  
Others 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Total 
42. PKSF/POs  will  organise  generic  and  advanced  training  for  pre-qualified  advisors  in  commodity-
specific  crop,  livestock,  and  aquaculture  management.  For  cropping,  specific  attention  will  be 
devoted  to  the  selection,  application  and  safe  handling  of  pesticides.  For  livestock,  training  will 
cover  para-veterinarian  activities  such  as  vaccinations  and  health  care.  For  aquaculture,  training 
will  focus  on  environmentally-sustainable  production  practices  and  fish  health  care.  All  advisory 
services will comply with food safety protocols and standards for crops, fresh vegetables, livestock 
and aquaculture products. 
43. Preparing  of  Training  Material  and  Training  of  Pay  Based  Advisors.  PKSF  will  prepare  training 
modules  for  each  selected  value  chain.    To  the  extent  possible,  existing  training  material 
developed by PKSF and its POs will be update as required and new modules developed if needed. 
The training modules will include generic training of the three broad value chains supported by the 
project. Likewise, commodity specific advanced training modules will be prepared. If needed, PKSF 
will engage qualified third party to assist develop the training material. Upon completion, relevant 
expertise will be engaged to validate all training material to ensure highest quality possible. The 
training  material  will  centre  on  good  agriculture  practises,  environmental  sound,  climate  smart, 
gender specific, innovative and commercialisation of agriculture and aquaculture. 
44. The Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) manual for Microenterprise developed under PACE will 
be modified and adopted by RMPT and its use thought to the pay based advisors and value chain 
facilitators  as  a  reference  tool.  The  use  of  RMPT’s  Environmental  and  Social  Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be part of the training for pay-based advisors and value chain facilitators 
for implementation of VC activities.   
45. PKSF  will  undertake  training  of  preselected  candidates  to  become  advisors,  with  support  from 
relevant  private  and  public  institutions,  as  and  when  required.  Upon  passing  final  examination, 
PKSF  will  accredit  the  advisors  for  jobs  within  selected  VC.  It  is  envisaged  that  the  majority  of 
private  advisors  will  be  young  women  and  men  (i.e.  between  18  and  35  years  of  age).  POs  will 
draw  from  the  pool  of  accredited  private  advisors  to  meet  value  chain  actors’  requests  for 
services, ideally on cluster basis. 
19 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Table 6: Sequential Activities and Timeline, Responsible Party for Preparing Training 
Material for Farming Enterprises and Training Pay Based Advisors 
Sequential Activities 
Prepare generic training material 
Prepare specialized commodity specific 
training material 
Training of pay based advisors in 
generic and specialized  
Training of pay based advisors in 
generic and specialized 
Training of pay based advisors in 
generic and specialized 
Timeline 
Commence upon signing the LA and 
completed within two months 
Commence upon signing the LA and 
completed within two months 
First batch of 130 pay based 
advisors. Completed within the first 
4 months after signing the LA 
Second batch of 325 pay based 
advisors during the last quarter of 
2021 
Final batch of 195 pay based 
advisors during the last quarter of 
2022 
Responsible Party 
PKSF 
PKSF 
PKSF 
PKSF 
PKSF 
46. The provision of advisory services will be cost-shared by the project over three years on declining 
basis (80% in the first year of operation; 50% in the second year; 30% in the third year). The PO 
will offer pre-qualified advisors to take up a position within a value chain cluster of sufficient sizes 
able to generate the required income for the advisor.  
47. The  average  number  of  PGs  per  pay-based  advisor  will  be  around  15  with  30-45  in  each  group, 
totaling  600  farming  enterprises.  On  average,  a  pay-based  advisor  will  be  visiting/training  PG 
members  each  7  times  per  crop  season  with  an  average  of  3  seasons  per  year  totaling  21 
visits/trainings  per  annum.  The  training/visits  for  crops  will  typically  include  (1)  Gap  need 
assessment for introducing GGAP (see list in Annex: xx), (2) pre-planting, (3) fertilizer application, 
(4)  pest  control,  (5)  harvest,  (6)  harvest  and  (5)  postharvest/marketing.  At  each  of  these 
visits/trainings,  relevant  elements  of  introduction  of  GGAP  will  be  included.  If  the  pay  based 
advisor  earns  Taka  350,000  per  year  it  will  translate  into  Taka  27  (Taka  350,000/  (600  farming 
enterprises*3)/  7  visits)  per  farming  enterprise  per  visit/training,  which  is  Taka  575  for  21 
visits/training  for  three  cropping  seasons  per  year.    In  addition,  the  advisor  will  undertake 
observation visits to identify nutritional deficiencies, pest problems, water management issues etc. 
These  visits  are  not  directly  charge  to  the  farming  enterprises  but  use  for  determining  the  right 
timing and subjects for visiting/trainings.  
48. The  pay-based  advisor  will  keep  a  logbook  specifying  the  nature  of  training/visit  to  the  PG.  The 
chairperson/treasure  of  the  PG  will  sign  the  log  after  each  visit  and  pay  the  amount  due  to  the 
advisor.  Relevant  pictures  from  each  training/visit  session  showing  no  of  participants  and  other 
relevant events during the training event will accompany the protocol.   
49. Instead of charging the PGs, the advisor can also promote and sell inputs during the training/visits 
on commission basses for input suppliers and in strict compliance with GGAP regulations/protocol. 
The  commission  earned  has  to  recorded  in  the  logbook,  and  the  PGs  should  pay  any  difference 
between commission and actual cost of the service received. Similar to a fee based only scenario, 
relevant  pictures  should  accompany  the  logbook  when  partly  or  fully  paid  by  commission.  When 
more experience is gained from the pay based system, PKSF will fine tune the payment system.  
Year 
Table 7: Cost for Advisory Service for Crops (Taka)  
Y1 
Y3 
Y2 
Payment by Farming Enterprises 
115 
287 
402 
Y4 
575 
50. Advisory  service  for  livestock  and  aquaculture  will  typically  involve  vaccination/medication, 
deworming/parasite  control,  insemination,  birth  assistance.  The  advisor  will  typically  visit/train 
each  farming  enterprise  24  times  per  year  averaging  Taka  25  per  visit/training  or  Taka 
20 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
585/year/farming enterprise. This cost  do not include expenses  for medications.  Similar to  crops 
the  advisor  will  keep  a  logbook  accompanied  with  relevant  pictures  for  each  visit/training. 
Handling of commission from sale of medications, feed and other items should be dealt with in the 
same manner as for crops mention above.   
Year 
Table 8: Cost for Advisory Service for Livestock (Taka)  
Y1 
Y3 
Y2 
Y4 
Payment by Farming Enterprises 
117 
293 
410 
585 
51. Advisory service  and training of farming  PGs  will be  in coordination  with  LF, input  suppliers, and 
other relevant stakeholder of the value chain. 
52. The  models  developed  for  deriving  the  financial  analysis  for  the  RMTP  investments’  clearly  show 
that the incremental return will easily pay for the advisory service.   
Table 9: Budgets of all enterprise models representing the VCs used for the EFA of RMTP 
53. Global  Good  Agriculture  Practices.  To  overcome  the  increasing  concern  of  food  safety,  the 
RMTP  will  assist  to  introduce  Global  Good  Agriculture  Practices  (GGAP)  for  PGs/VC  clusters 
involved  in  primary  production  of  crops,  livestock  and  aquaculture.  GGAP  Chain  of  Custody 
Standard  (Traceability)  will  be  introduce  for  all  commodities  receiving  GGAP  certification.  The 
RMTP  will  support  enterprises  involved  in  produce  handling/transport,  feed  manufacturing,  and 
hatchery to obtain GGAP if required.  
54. GGAP can be defined as optimization of technologies and resources for sustainable agriculture and 
food safety. There are costs related to introducing GGAP as well as recurrent cost. The initial  cost 
is  related  to  farm  assurers  assessing  the  gaps  to  be  closed  for  achieving  GGAP  certification, 
training of members of PGs to close the gaps and meet the GGAP management requirements and 
the  cost  of  audit  and  certification.  There  are  also  cost  related  to  soil  and  water  analysis  and 
21 
Production (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)ROIProduction (kg)Total labour use (md)Net benefits (USD)ROIAman RiceGAP, No P-price1 ha3,85012715016%4,1304235143%462Boro RiceGAP, No P-price1 ha4,55012717716%5,0503931829%550Aromatic RiceFrom Boro To1 ha5,75014233627%2,92513962051%828PotatoGAP, No P-price1 ha16,50019034921%18,0007559138%1,133BananaGAP, No P-price1 ha15,06012023912%22,5007877230%2,116Aman RiceGAP, With P-price1 ha4,1303933741%4,1304240548%501Boro RiceGAP, With P-price1 ha5,0503917791%5,05039759102%411Aromatic RiceGAP, With P-price1 ha2,92513970862%3,360601,03090%703Vegetables (6 veg)GAP, With P-price1 ha8,146365993156%8,9573831,440189%1,130Mung BeansGAP, With P-price1 ha2801710261%3802015065%196PotatoGAP, With P-price1 ha16,50019140826%19,500561,14282%1,004BananaGAP, With P-price1 ha22,5007898941%22,500781,23748%2,116Fish pondsImproved practice30 decimal2101026164%3001538567%537Large Fish pondsGAP, With P-price1 ha (total)2,5001005,388206%4,10025011,089209%4,686Poultry - EggsBetter feeds300 birds19,20010063029%30,2401501,19737%2,874Poultry - BroilerBetter feeds150 birds180206113%2702018229%578Beef fattening: bullFaster fattening1 per Yr175206812%2452024840%564Dairy Milk [1]Better Feeds/Breed1 Cow1,440151,42319%2,880602,39820%1,400Poultry - BroilerGAP, With P-price150 birds180206113%2702523333%650Banana+Potato: DripGAP, With P-price7 ha93816,64941%1,00835,73582%2,030Micro-Enterprises:Milk Collection CentreGAP Standard500 kg/day182,50030024,88327%6,725Hand Loom MEWomen ME300 Lungy30088936%72Basket weavingWomen ME200 Basket20048630%69Fingerling production5 ponds in 5 ha9,600700125,01323%39,584Demand for the Loan: 22% An. Int. (USD)Model TypeUnit of ProductionWith Project (WP)GAP: Global Good Agricultural Practices; P-Price: Premium price with Value chain linkages; ROI: Return on Investment; [1] Dairy milk: net benefit is in NPV (10% DR); Milk collection: building with GGAP standards; All ME s are new and the WOP benefits is assumed as the opportunity cost of labour involved. Net benefits are in NPV (10% DR) and IRR for 20 years. Drip - Drip IrrigationEnterprises representing the VCsWithout Project (WOP) 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
construction/modification of storage facility of chemicals and fertilizer. The recurrent cost is annual 
audit and renewal of certification. There are also savings, which can generate benefits in excess of 
the cost e.g. Vietnam report that on average farmers generates USD 1,250 per Ha in net benefit 
from GAP. 
55. The  PKSF  will  engage  a  recognized  institution  (international/national)  to  prepare  the  GGAP 
protocols for selected commodities value chain. PKSF will also examine the feasibility of providing 
capacity-building  support  for  Bangladesh  Standards  and  Testing  Institution  (BSTI)  enabling  the 
institution  to  undertake  audits  and  certifications  of  GAAP.  PKSF  will  also  carefully  asses  the 
feasibility  of  providing  equipment  support  for  BSTI  conduct  pesticide  residue,  heavy  metal  and 
antibiotic laboratory test. When drafting of protocols for HACCP and GAAP are completed, they will 
be  shared  with  Bangladesh  Food  Safety  Authorities  (BFSA)  for  comments  and  information.  The 
BFSA  will also be  consulted when preparing  soil and water sampling methods and  in selection of 
best choice of laboratories to be used for the analysis.  
56. Value chains where the PGs are  vertical  integrated with the LF is the most relevant for GGAP as 
movement of produce from farm to fork is easy to trace. Example of such VC are milk, vegetables 
and fruit for processing, fisheries commodities for export, branded grain for domestic and export 
markets. It is anticipated that around 250,000 HH or around 70% of the targeted beneficiaries will 
be part of a vertical integrated value chain. However, all PGs will undergo GGAP training to ensure 
safe and to increase the profitability of farming by using optimal levels of inputs instead of present 
practice of overusing both pesticide and fertilizer.  
57. Qualified  pay  based  advisors  will  receive  training  to  become  GGAP  Master  Trainers  to  support 
marginal/small farmers, micro-enterprises and LFs to obtain GGAP.  
Table 10: Sequential Activities and Timeline, Responsible Party for Training GGAP 
Master Trainers3 
Sequential Activities 
Training of pay based 
advisors to become GGAP 
master trainers 
Training of pay based 
advisors to become GGAP 
master trainers 
Training of pay based 
advisors to become GGAP 
master trainers 
Timeline 
First batch of 130 pay based advisors. Completed 
within the first 4 months after signing the LA 
Second batch of 325 pay based advisors during the 
last quarter of 2021 
Final batch of 195 pay based advisors during the 
last quarter of 2022 
Responsible Party 
PKSF hire Farm 
Assurers from an 
accredited 
GLOBALG.A.P. 
institution 
(international/ 
national 
58. The first step on the way to obtain GGAP certification is assessment  of existing one-farm gaps to 
be  closed  in  order  to  obtain  GGAP  certification.  Example  of  crop  assessment  (similarly  livestock 
and aquaculture will also be assed) will examine the following:  
 
Production  conditions  must  be  safe  including  soil,  water  for  irrigation  and  washing  products 
must  be  safe,  processing  area,  which  can  ensure  the  hygiene  and  safety  and  farmers 
understanding of IPM and environment protection. 
  Good  production  management  for  groups  including  safe  management  of  input  materials  like 
fertilizer,  pesticide  and  agriculture  chemicals  (require  a  common  facility  which  can  be  locked 
and inputs going in and out is kept in a logbook by appointed store keeper), recording keeping 
of production management, internal audit, management plans and lesson learnt, and farmers 
understanding about IPM, GAP, environment protection 
3 GLOBALG.A.P. Farm Assurers 
22 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
  Good production practice including safe production procedures, use of approved pesticide, and 
fertilizer  in  proper  way,  use  of  unknown-origin  of  pesticide,  agriculture  chemicals,  use  of 
organic fertilizers, compost etc., field record keeping. 
  Good harvesting and post-harvest handling including the understanding and maintain of pre – 
harvesting Interval4, wash products by clean water, keep produce in clean storage/container/ 
packaging and label the produce for traceability 
 
Protect  health  and  environment  by  using  approved  chemical  in  the  recommended  quantities, 
use proper work wear to protect the workers, safe  disposal of waste and chemical containers 
according to regulations 
59. Based on the assessment, a training protocol will be prepared to close all the gaps and the training 
needs of the PGs within a cluster. The  master trainer  assesses  when the PG  has reached a level 
warranting  GGAP  certification  and  invites  the  GLOBALG.A.P.  Farm  Assurer  to  confirm  the 
assessment. If the level  of  PG’s compliance  acceptable, the accredited certification frim  is call to 
undertake the audit and issue certification.  
60. It will take around 6-12 months for PGs’ and LFs’ to achieve GGAP certification. PKSF will engage 
with  a  recognized  accredited  institution  (international/national)  to  undertake  the  audit  and 
certification.   
Table 11: Sequential Activities and Timeline, Responsible Party for Training GGAP 
Master Trainers5 
Sequential Activities 
Timeline 
Responsible 
Party  
GGAP training of PGs  
Certification  
GGAP training of PGs 
Certification  
GGAP training of PGs 
Certification  
First batch of 1,600 farming enterprise groups 
qualifying for GGAP within the first 12 months after 
signing the LA 
Within the first 12 month after signing the LA 
Second batch of 4,000 farming enterprise groups 
qualifying for GGAP within the second year after 
signing the LA 
Within the first 24 month after signing the LA 
Final batch of 2,400 farming enterprise groups 
qualifying for GGAP within the third year after 
signing the LA 
Within the first 36 month after signing the LA 
61. Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point. Enterprises engaged in crop/meat/fish processing are going 
to receive assistance to obtaining Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) certification. The 
project  will  engage  national  HACCP  team  of  experts  to  guide  processors  obtaining  HACCP 
certification.  If  national  experts  are  not  available,  training  will  be  organised  to  develop  this 
expertise.  The  training  will  cover  the  Codex  Alimentarius  Commission's  Good  Manufacturing 
Practices  and  all  steps  to  full  HACCP  certification.  Subsequently,  PKSF  will  enter  into  a  retainer 
contract  with  the  team  of  experts  to  support  enterprises  to  undertake  the  necessary  steps  to 
obtain HACCP certification. PKSF will engage with an in-country accredited authority to undertake 
audits and certification.  
4 Pre-harvest interval (PHI) refers to the amount of time that must lapse (in days) after a pesticide application before the crop is 
harvested according to the product specification of the chemical used. 
5 GLOBALG.A.P. Farm Assurers 
23 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
62. The  HACCP  team  will  be  composed  of  individuals  having  specific  knowledge  and  expertise  in  the 
product and process of the LF in question and will broadly undertake the following: 
 
First, the HACCP team provides a general description of the food, ingredients and processing 
methods.  
  Describe the normal expected use of the food. The intended consumers may be the public or a 
particular segment of the population (e.g., infants, immune compromised individuals, the 
elderly, etc.) 
  Construct flow diagram to describe the production process.  The flow diagram should provide a 
clear, simple outline of all the steps involved in production the process. 
  On-site confirmation of flow diagram by the HACCP team 
  Conduct a hazard6 analysis (Principle 1) and identifies appropriate control measures.  
  Determine critical control points (CCPs) (Principle 2) where control can be applied and prevent 
 
or reduce food safety hazard.  
Establish Critical Limits for Each CCP (Principle 3) to prevent eliminate or reduce to an 
acceptable level the occurrence of a food safety hazard.  
 
  Critical limits must be on a scientifically basis. For each CCP, there is at least one criterion for 
food safety that is to be met. The critical limits and criteria for food safety may be derived 
from sources such as regulatory standards and guidelines, literature surveys, experimental 
results and experts. 
Establish a monitoring system for each CCP (Principle 4) to produce an accurate record for 
future use in verification. 
Establish corrective actions (Principle 5) to prevent potentially hazardous foods from reaching 
consumers.  
Establish verification procedures (Principle 6) that determine the validity of the HACCP plan 
and that the system is operating according to the plan. 
 
 
  Establish documentation and record Keeping (Principle 7) including: (i) A summary of the 
hazard analysis, including the rationale for determining hazards and control measures; (ii) the 
HACCP Plan will include: 
Listing of the HACCP team and assigned responsibilities 
 
  Description of the food, its distribution, intended use and consumer 
  Verified flow diagram 
  HACCP Plan Summary Table that includes information for 7*: 
  Steps in the process that are CCPs 
  The hazard(s) of concern 
  Critical limits 
  Monitoring* 
  Correction actions* 
  Verification procedures and schedule* 
  Record-keeping procedures* 
 
Finally,  a  plan  needs  to  be  prepared  stating  the  individuals  responsible  for  developing, 
implementing and maintaining the HACCP system. It is important to insure that all individuals 
involved,  receive  proper  training  so  they  understand  their  role  and  can  effectively  fulfil  their 
responsibilities. 
6 A hazard is defined as a biological, chemical or physical agent that is reasonably likely to cause illness or injury in the absence of 
its control (i.e. safety concerns, not quality concerns). 
7 *A brief summary of position responsible for performing the activity and the procedures and frequency should be provided 
24 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Table 12: Sequential Activities and Timeline, Responsible Party for HACCP 
Sequential Activities 
Identify national/regional expert 
panel for most common 
processing agro-businesses and 
provide them with relevant 
training if required 
Expert panel develop HACCP 
protocols for most common agro-
businesses 
Provide guidance to agro-
business in develop business 
specific protocols and obtain 
HACCP certification  
Prepare HACCP plan  
HACCP certification of agro-
businesses  
Timeline 
During the first 1 month 
after signing the FA  
Responsible Party 
PKSF and local HACCP 
accredited company 
During the first 3 
months after signing 
the FA 
As and when required 
PKSF lead HACCP officer and 
expert panel  
Expert panel and PKSF lead 
HACCP officer 
At the final stage before 
certification 
As and when required 
Expert panel and PKSF lead 
HACCP officer 
One of the four accredited 
HACCP companies 
63. GGAP  and  HCCAP  Awareness  Campaign.  The  project  will  raise  public  awareness  of  the  benefits 
derived from GGAP and HACCP for domestic consumers (safe food), producers (personnel safety in 
handling  chemicals  and  overall  savings  in  production),  processors  (safety  and  traceability  of 
produce) and exporters (increases the potential for export), through mass media. The project will 
contract  an  advertising  company  to  assist  prepare  and  roll  out  the  campaign.  The  campaign  will 
also serve as an attraction for farming enterprises to participate in value chains supported under 
RMTP’s activities. 
Table 13: Sequential Activities and Timeline, Responsible Party for GGAP and HACCP 
Awareness Campaign  
Sequential Activities 
Prepare a national awareness 
campaign  
Air the campaign using the mass 
media  
Measurer the effect of the 
campaign and make adjustment 
as required 
Timeline 
Within the first 2 
months after signing 
the LA 
First exposer on the 
mass media starting 6 
month after signing the 
LA and thereafter every 
two month for the 
duration of the project 
End of first year  
Responsible Party 
PKSF and advertising firm 
PKSF 
PKSF 
64. Introduction  of  appropriate  new  technologies.  RMTP  will  promote  appropriate  new/modern 
technologies  in  the  selected  value  chains,  such  as  vertical  recycling  production  systems  for  mud 
crab, recycling systems for other aquaculture commodities; hybrid solar driers for vegetables and 
fruits;  drip  and  micro  irrigation;  modern  rice  mills;  briquette  machine  for  urea,  urea/compost, 
urea/compost/DAP,  and  tractor  operated  implement  for  deep  placement  of  urea  briquettes  etc. 
New 
development 
findings/recommendation  from  the  public  and  private  sector  e.g.  new  crop  varieties  using 
biofortification  for increased  levels  of  nutrition,  resistance  against  pest  and  deceases,  tolerant to 
salinity, draught and flood. Through selection new improved local breed of poultry, ruminants and 
cattle,  and  fish.  Biostimulants,  biopesticides,  biomedecines,  urea/compost  briquettes,  Alternate 
Wetting  and  Drying  (AWD)  and  System of Rice Intensification  (SRI).  Prior  to  commencement  of 
technologies  will 
appropriate 
research 
include 
also 
and 
25 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
the  project  PKSF  will  map  all  available  climate  smart  technologies  and  environmental  safe 
technologies as a reference guide to pay based advisors and value chain facilitators.  
65. The  project  will  provide  financial  support  for  feasibility  studies,  training,  technical  assistance  for 
the  introduction  of  new  technologies  and,  in  appropriate  situations,  subsidized  machinery  and 
equipment.  Level  of  subsidies  depends  on  the  in  country  experience.  If  never  tried  before  in 
country PKSF can grant 100% subsidy for the first introduction and if tried in the country but not 
at the respective district level PKSF can provide 50% subsidy. 
Table 14: Sequential Activities and Timeline, Responsible Party for Introduction of 
Technologies 
Sequential Activities 
Prepare a list of appropriated new 
technologies for the VC supported 
by the RMTP  
Compile a list of suppliers from 
where to buy i.e. domestically or 
from regional B2B platforms 
Provide TA for feasibility studies, 
training, technical 
Timeline 
Within the first 1 
months of project 
implementation  
Within the first 1 
months of project 
implementation 
Ongoing as and when 
required  
Responsible Party 
PKSF 
PKSF 
PKSF hired consultants  
Cost sharing procurement of 
machinery and equipment 
Ongoing as and when 
required  
PKSF and beneficiary  
Evaluation  of  the  new  technology 
and  recommendations  for  broad 
adoption 
Ongoing as and when 
required  
PKSF 
66. Subcomponent  1.3  Value  chain  integration:  The  project  will  invest  in  value  chains 
commodities  that  have  comparative  advantage,  market  demand,  growth  potential  and  cultivated 
by  small  farmers  and  micro-entrepreneurs.  The  commodities  selected  should  be  cultivated  in 
geographical  clusters  to  ensure  economies  of  scale  and  the  possibility of  private  sector  linkages. 
More  than  50% of  the  selected  commodities  should  also  have  the  potential to  improve  food  and 
nutrition  security  for  both  producers  and  consumers.  Commodities  not  contributing  directly  to 
improved nutrition should generated sufficient income, which can contribute to increased purchase 
of nutritional food. The value chains the project supports fall into three broad categories:  
  Crops and horticulture: (i) high value cereal crops (for example, aromatic and fine rice); (ii) 
high  value  fruits  and  vegetables  (including  dark  green  leafy  vegetables);  and  (iii)  pulses 
(such  as  lentils,  mung  bean,  chickpeas  etc.),  beans,  and  seeds;  related  trading  and 
processing;  
  Aquaculture:  technology-based  aquaculture  for  example,  mud  crab;  carp;  tilapia,  crayfish 
and other local species, particularly small fish; related trading and processed fish products; 
  Livestock: (i) dairy production; (ii) red meat including cattle; goats; sheep; and buffalo. 
  Poultry:  Including  meat  and  eggs  from  chicken;  duck;  gees;  turkey;  and  quail  related 
trading and processed products. 
67. The  project  will  support  PKSF  to  undertake  countrywide  value  chain  analyses    for  select 
commodities,  by  either  upgrading  existing  analyses  or  undertaking  new  ones    (Annex  I  provide 
example of VCA). Based on these value chain analyses, PKSF will issue calls of interest for POs to 
implement value chain support for their clients. The project will avail 100 VC support packages, of 
USD  100,000  each.  Each  of  these  packages  will  assist  in  the  formation  of  PGs;  development  of 
value chains; demonstrations for  PGs;  PG  to  PG  visits;  LF  training and  training visits; support to 
26 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
build  apex  Producers  Associations  if  required.  On  average  each  of  these  packages  will  support 
linking  3,185  farming  enterprises  to  seven  downstream  agro-business’s  VCs.  Total  anticipate 
benefiting PGs are around 8,000 with 345, 000 members linked to 700 LFs’ VCs. In addition, there 
is around 80,000 farming enterprises choosing other routes of marketing.  
68. The  project  will  support  each  participating  PO  to  engage  four  value  chain  facilitators  responsible 
for  supporting  the  implementation  of  the  VC  support  packages  with  the  assistance  of  the  Pay 
based  advisors.  The  value  chain  facilitators  will  receive  training  by  the  PKSF  similarly  to  the  pay 
based  advisors.  Those  passing  the  final  examination,  can  be  hired  by  POs  on  a  3  months  trial 
period, and if performing extended yearly over a 3 year period.  
69. The PKSF will issue calls of interest for POs to express interest to implement value chain packages 
for its clients. The call of interest will include the countrywide VC analysis prepared by PKSF as a 
point of reference. Based on these analyses the POs will prepare proposals for specific commodity 
VCs. Steps to be undertaken by POs to obtain value chain support packages to strengthen market 
arrangements between PG and LF are shown in Annex 3) 
70. Approval  of  the  PO  proposal.  PKSF  will  use  below  matrix  to  evaluate  proposals  from  POs.  If  the 
proposal  score  meets  the  threshold,  it  will  be  approve  for  financing.  Financing  of  proposals  is 
according  to  the  principle  of  first  come  first  served,  until  the  budget  is  exhausted.  The  POs  not 
being financed during first submission, but qualifying can resubmit during the subsequent call for 
proposals. PO’s having the proposal rejected because of low score can improve their proposals and 
resubmit during subsequent call for proposals. 
Score  
Table 15: Evaluation Matrix for Scoring PO Proposals 
Criteria  
Identify the commodity value chains in need of upgrading, which will benefit 
the PG (10 max and 1 smallest) 
Nutritional sensitivity  VC (15 max and 1 smallest)  
Undertake value chain analysis. The VC analysis can be based on, existing 
studies.  The VC analysis will also include benefit cost analysis of proposed 
upgrading along the value chain (10 max and 1 smallest) 
Identify LF interested to procure produce from how many PG (and # HH), (10 
max and 1 smallest) 
During the identification process, the PO will also identify the required 
upgrading of the LF interested to participate in the RMTP (10 max and 1 
smallest) 
Identify the size of the commodity cluster in terms of PG and # of farming 
enterprises and total area under production (10 max and 1 smallest)  
Identify constraints and opportunity for upgrading the primary production and 
product differentiation (10 max and 1 smallest) 
Environmental sustainability of the productive area and climate risk assessment 
(10 max and 1 smallest) 
Road infrastructure connecting productive areas with the main road network 
(10 max and 1 smallest) 
Service providers and relevant support institutions (10 max and 1 smallest) 
The PO together with the LF and representatives from PGs will prepare 
appropriated training packages for stakeholder in the VC. (10 max and 1 
smallest) 
The proposal will also include a detailed budget  (5 max and 1 smallest) 
Number of pay based advisors required (5 max and 1 smallest) 
Number of PGs in need of GGAP certificates (15 max and 1 smallest) 
Number of LF in need of GGAP certificates (produce handling, transport, 
hatcheries, feed mills) (15 max and 1 smallest) 
Number of LF in need of HACCP certificates (15 max and 1 smallest) 
27 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
71. Visible  and  significant  impact.  The  POs,  while  expand  existing  value  chains  should  strive  for 
approaches  that  would  create  significant  impact  in  an  area  not  limited  to  members  of  PG    or 
Producer  associations.  For  example,  any  initiative  to  develop  commercial  animal  health  services 
should try to cover all goats/sheep and cattle farming enterprises in the area and not only HH that 
are members of a PG.   
72. Evaluation of value chain support. After each season the PO, have to undertake evaluation of the 
VC  support  including  simple  (no  need  for  IRR  and  NPV)  benefit  cost  analysis  of  all  investments 
supported  by  the  project  e.g.  advisory  service,  GGAP,  HACCP,  new  technology,  machinery  etc. 
Evaluation of the governance structure and effectiveness will also be undertaken. Both the PO and 
PKSF will post the results in their MIS and on their webpages. 
73. The POs will publish the results and lessons learned from each VC, and select the best performing 
VCs for visit and training exchange programmes within the PO and across POs.  
74. Value Chain Governance. For each supported value chain, the project will assist establish a value 
chain  committee  composed  of  one  representatives  from  each  participating  group,  the  LF,  input 
suppliers, transporters,  researchers,  public  advisory  services,  pay  based  advisor  and  end market 
representatives  if  required.  The  committee  will  elect  a  chairperson  who  in  collaboration  with  the 
value  chain  facilitator  will  organize  meetings.  The  VC  committee  will  meet  at  pre-planting  and 
post-harvest.  The  first  meeting  will  deal  with  required  training  during  the  production  season, 
including  GGAP  and  HACCP,  quantities,  quality,  variety  (crop/fish/livestock),  staggering 
production,  testing  innovations  and  price  mechanism,  including  permissible  side  selling.  The 
second  meeting  will  coordinate  harvest  operations  and  related  logistic  like  drying,  moisture 
content, refrigeration, transport etc. Other meeting might take place when and if required. The VC 
committee will also be responsible for championing the introduction of GGAP and HACCP.  
75. If  a  large  number  (more  than  10%)  of  farming  enterprises  within  a  cluster,  are  not 
interested/willing to be member of a PG, but want to participate in the value chain activities they 
can select one person for every 45 HH to represent them at the VC committee.   
Table 16: Sequential Activities and Timeline, Responsible Party for Facilitating Value Chain 
Governance 
Sequential Activities 
Timeline 
Responsible Party 
Linking downstream Agro-business 
with farming enterprises  
Invite other stakeholder to participate 
in the VC committee  and elect the 
chairperson  
Select the VC committee chairperson 
Conduct regular by-seasonal meetings 
As part of preparing PO 
proposals for receiving 
PKSF VC support 
As part of preparing PO 
proposals for receiving 
PKSF VC support 
As soon as the VCC is 
formed 
Pre- and post-season 
meetings  
Value chain facilitators  
Value chain facilitators and 
leaders of farming enterprises 
and management of LF 
(downstream agro-business) 
Value facilitator  
VC committee chairperson and 
PO value chain facilitator  
76. Subcomponent 1.4 Enterprise strengthening: The project will provide specialised consultancy 
support to the LF for:  
1.  Food safety standards and traceability (GGAP and HACCP) 
2.  Introduction of new products like dried fruit; fruit juice; parboiled speciality rice etc. 
3.  Introduction of new equipment and machinery like small scale seed processing;  
4.  Market entry studies for both domestic and export markets 
5.  Trial shipments for domestic and export markets 
6.  Product branding including geographical indication, and GGAP labeling/certification 
28 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
7.  Operational business planning for small LFs having potential for rapid growth.  
77. The  project  will  not  generally  provide  direct  subsidies  for  the  business  operations  of  farming 
enterprises, micro-enterprises and/or agro-businesses. However, PKSF will develop a scale for the 
provision of subsidies to individual training recipients and downstream agro-businesses to catalyse 
the  introduction  of  specific  services,  products  or  contract  farming  arrangements  based  on  their 
financial  and  managerial  strength.  This  support  will  only  be  for  those  engaging  in  contractual 
arrangements with producers' groups and providing sustainable services  
78. Subcomponent  1.5  Policy  dialogue.  The  IFAD  Country  Office  will  support  PKSF  in  its  policy 
dialogue  with  relevant  Government  institutions  on  important  topics  relevant  to  the  project. 
Possible topics for policy dialogue include:  
1.  Reviewing regulations governing PO loan portfolio structure 
2.  Increasing micro-enterprise loan ceilings to enable introduction of new technologies 
3.  Revisiting regulations governing the livestock sub-sector 
4.  Ague for allowing the establishment of commercial hatcheries for mud crab-lets 
5.  Establishing an ISO 17025 accredited laboratory for analysis of residue of pesticide, heavy 
metal, antibiotics etc. 
6.  Address  any  emerging  issues  in  financial  services  and  selected  agricultural  production 
sectors.  
79. PKSF  is  encourage  to  engage  public  and  private  institution  (research  institution,  universities)  to 
prepare position papers in support of policy dialogue with the GoB.  
6.  COMPONENT 2:  FINANCIAL SERVICES 
80. Component  2:  This  component  will  provide  sustainable  financial  services  to  micro-
enterprises  and  to  growing/larger  enterprises  and  agribusinesses.  It  has  three  sub-
components:  (i)  provision  of  financial  services  to  micro-enterprises  through  partner 
organisations  (microfinance  institutions);  (ii)  provision  of  commercial  finance  to  larger 
micro-enterprises as well as small/medium agribusiness companies, through non-banking 
financial institutions (NBFIs); and (iii) optimal utilisation of remittances through training to 
the family members of overseas workers. 
81. Sub-component  2.1:  Financial  services  through  Partner  Organizations  (POs):  PKSF  offers 
four  loan  products  through  POs:  (i)  Buniad  (ultra-poor  loans);  (ii)  Jagoron  (household 
income-generating  loans);  (iii)  Sufolon  (seasonal  agricultural  loans);  and  (iv)  Agrosor 
(microenterprise  loans).  Demand  for  micro-enterprise  loans  across  the  country  is  very 
high,  and  growing  faster  than  the  other  three  loan  products.  The  project  fund  will  be 
utilized  for  expansion  of  Microenterprise  loan  product  of  PKSF,  and  consequently,  that  of 
POs. 
82. ME loan size: It is estimated that an additional 100,000 microenterprises will be financed, 
with  an  average  loan  size  of  BDT  120,000.  However,  the  actual  loan  size  will  be 
determined  by  the  POs  as  per  demand  from  the  client  and  prevailing  ceiling  of  loan  as 
determined by  PKSF. It is  understood that  PKSF will  update its policy regarding loan size 
from time to time, which will be accepted as the policy for the project. 
83. Microenterprise borrowers within the value chain subprojects will receive loans in line with 
the existing practices of the respective POs. Leasing (hire-purchase) will be encouraged for 
investments  in  power  tillers,  tractors,  mechanical/motorized  rice  planters,  solar-powered 
drip/micro  irrigation  systems,  automatic  poultry  slaughter  houses,  and  other  relevant 
activities. 
29 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
84. Definition of MEs and ME loan: The project fund will use the same definition of PKSF and 
POs while defining ME borrowers. PKSF from time to time will revise/update the definition 
to reflect changes in the microfinance markets and or regulatory changes.  
85.  Interest rate: PKSF will change its prevailing rate of interest to POs as per its policies, which 
is understood to be revised from time to time. The interest to the client by the POs will also be 
as per prevailing rate of interest. 
86.  Management  process:  The  selection  of  POs,  savings  and  loan  policies,  implementation 
process  and  policies,  monitoring  and  evaluation,  institutional  development  and  any  other 
issues related to ME loan program will be managed by Loan Operations Division of PKSF as 
per prevailing rules and norms.  
87.  PKSF ME Loan Fund: The fund from IFAD for Component 2 will be added to the pool of funds 
for the ME loan program of PKSF. The pool will have other resources: PKSF’s own fund, from 
other international organizations such as the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, GoB 
etc. It is expected that PKSF will enhance ME loan fund from other sources as well. 
88.  Measurement of IFAD loan: No distinction will be made between sources of fund of ME loan 
program.  IFAD  will  monitor  increase  in  loan  outstanding  of  PKSF  ME  loan  to  POs  and 
compare that to total increase in ME loan fund and determine its amount proportionally. Such 
proportional  increase  in  loan  outstanding  at  the  PO-  level  will  be  used  to  determine  next 
withdrawal from IFAD.    
89.  Record keeping: The PMU/RMTP will keep record and produce report of overall ME program, 
and  keep  track  and  produce  report  on  incremental  number  of  beneficiaries,  disbursement, 
loan outstanding, withdrawal from IFAD, contribution of PKSF and POs etc. 
90.  Reporting: PMU will produce report for Component 2 as part of overall report for RMTP. 
91. Subcomponent  2.2:  Commercial  finance  through  NBFIs:  The  objective  of  this  sub-
component  is  to  develop  a  new  channel  of  financing  for  larger  microenterprises  and 
small/medium  agribusiness  companies  (the  'missing  middle')  which  are  currently  neither 
clients  of  microfinance  institutions  nor  commercial  banks.  This  financing  will  be 
administered by licensed non-banking financial institutions (NBFIs), with interest rates to 
final  borrowers  typically  ranging  between  9%  and  18%.  NBFIs  currently  lend  to  small 
enterprises (in one case offering special loan products for women entrepreneurs), but their 
agribusiness portfolios are limited due to financial constraints. 
92. The  project  will  provide  resources  through  PKSF  to  selected  licensed  NBFIs  for  this 
purpose.  This  would  substantially  expand  the  market  for  the  output  produced  by  small 
farmers  and  micro-enterprises,  which  are  the  primary  target  groups  of  the  project,  and 
improve  their  integration  within  the  selected  value  chains.  Larger  agribusinesses  will  be 
encouraged to also enter into contract  farming arrangements with producers' groups and 
micro-enterprises,  obtaining  NBFI  financing  where  required,  with  project  support  in  the 
form of technical assistance, technology transfer, and organisation of producers. 
93. NBFIs will be a new type of PO for PKSF. RMTP is the first project through which PKSF will 
engage  with  POs  that  are  not  registered  under  the  Microfinance  Act,  but  rather  are 
licensed by Bangladesh Bank under the Financial Institutions Act (1993). PKSF regulations 
have recently been adjusted to allow working with NBFIs. 
94. PKSF will develop an assessment process for selection of NBFIs as its new kind of Partner 
Organizations.  The selection  of  NBFIs  under  the  project will be  competitive,  based on an 
approved assessment process. PKSF will issue a request for EOI from NBFIs interested to 
30 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
participate  in  the  project.  On  this  basis,  a  number  of  NBFIs  will  be  invited  to  submit 
proposals.  In  addition  to  standard  financial  criteria,  NBFI  selection  criteria  would  include 
their interest to venture into this sector leveraging their experience in other sectors,  their 
willingness  to  lend  to  downstream  value  chain  actors,  their  proposed  lending  terms  and 
conditions, and the amount of cost-sharing from their own resources.  
95. PKSF will  enter into an agreement  with each selected NBFI  which outlines the terms and 
conditions  of  project  financing,  and  the  parameters  governing  how  the  funds  will  be 
utilised. This process may be repeated periodically during implementation. 
96. NBFIs  will  assess  the  profitability,  cash  flow,  reputation  and  credit  history  of  businesses 
applying  for  loans.  Normally  businesses  that  are  financed  by  NBFIs  will  be  supported  by 
the  project  (under  component  1)  to  enter  into  relationships  with  microenterprises  and 
producers' groups if the value chain activities of POs fall within the working areas of POs. 
PKSF  will  advise  NBFIs  to  lend  in  value  chain  development  operational  areas.  But  PKSF 
shall not direct NBFIs to lend to any particular person or group of people. NBFIs will apply 
their prevailing criteria and selection process to select clients.  
97. The  possibility  of  financing  larger  enterprises  and  agribusinesses  also  through  a  state-
owned bank, such as Karmasangsthan Bank, may be explored. 
98. Participating NBFIs will finance agribusiness investments in capital equipment (on debt or 
hire-purchase  basis)  for  relevant  value  chain  activities.  Repayments  will  be  revolved  into 
new loans for the duration of the project implementation period and beyond. Agribusiness 
selection  criteria  would  include  their  commitment  to  enter  into  commercial  relationships 
with targeted micro-enterprises. 
99. Reporting: PKSF will submit a report indicating amount of disbursement, loan outstanding, 
number of clients of this subcomponent as a part of overall RMTP report.   
100. Sub-component  2.3.  Utilisation  of  remittances8.  Millions  of  Bangladeshis  live  and  work 
outside  the  country  and  send  home  an  estimated  USD  20  billion  annually  in  the  form  of 
remittances.  These  remittances  are  used  for  consumption,  house  improvements  and  in 
some cases the purchase of land. Remittance receivers often do not invest these funds in 
sustainable  economic  activities  due  to  lack  of  skills,  and  fall  back  into  poverty  when  the 
expatriate worker returns home. 
101. A small in-loan grant will be provided to the Ministry of Expatriates' Welfare and Overseas 
Employment  (MoEWOE),  which  is  mandated  to  handle  non-resident  Bangladeshi  (NRB) 
affairs,  for  the  promotion  of  diaspora  investment  and  optimal  utilisation  of  remittances 
under  the  project.  The  objective  would  be  to  develop  the  skills  of  households  receiving 
remittances  so  that  they  can  invest  a  portion  of  the  remittances  received  into  micro-
enterprises,  and  sustainably  improve  their  economic  status.  The  MoEWOE  would  identify 
remittance-receiving households in the project areas, and link them to project component 
1.2  for  the  provision  of  business  and  technical  training  to  expatriate  family  members 
(mainly women  and the  youth). They  would also be linked to  sub-component 2.1 for  the 
provision of microfinance where required. 
102. Most  remittance-receiving  families  are  headed  by  women,  and  have  underemployed 
youth.  This  sub-component  will  provide  an  important  contribution  to  women's  economic 
empowerment  any  youth  employment  in  the  project  areas.  Piloted  methodologies  will 
subsequently be scaled up across rural areas of Bangladesh. 
8  This  subcomponent  will  be  implemented  by  the  Ministry  of  Expatriates'  Welfare  and  Overseas 
Employment  (MoEWOE).  PKSF  does  not  have  any  responsibility  regarding  implementation  and 
monitoring of this subcomponent. 
31 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
7.  COMPONENT 3: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT 
103. This component aims to strengthen PKSF and PO capability as development organisations 
by  leveraging  trends  in  ICT,  financial  services,  commercial  platforms  and  new 
technologies,  and  to  ensure  that  the  project  is  managed  satisfactorily.  It  has  three  sub-
components:  (i)  PKSF  capacity  building;  (ii)  POs  capacity  building;  and  (iii)  project 
management (see organisation and management section). 
104. Sub-component 3.1 PKSF capacity building. This subcomponent has two major activities: 
i)  PKSF’s  capacity  building  through  ICT  based  solutions;  and  ii)  PKSF’s  human  resources 
development through specialized training.  
financial  management,  human 
105. 3.1.1  ICT  based  solution  for  PKSF:  Over  time,  PKSF  has  introduced  numerous  software 
resources  management,  PO 
modules  covering 
management,  and  mobile  financial  service  systems  for  POs.  Through  the  provision  of 
technical  assistance  and  training,  the  project  will  assist  PKSF  to  gradually  and  carefully 
integrate  additional  ICT-based  solutions  into  its  operations.  The  ICT  solutions  proposed 
below  will  be  subject  to  feasibility  studies  and  pilot  phases,  and  the  availability  of  local 
service providers will be assessed, before they are introduced. A brief description for each 
ICT application is given below: 
106. Distributed  digital 
ledger  technology  (transparency  engine).  A  recent  technical 
assessment commissioned by IFAD  investigated the opportunities, risks and  alignment of 
partners, and found the introduction of distributed digital ledger technology within PKSF to 
be  feasible.  The  project  will  support  PKSF  to  create  an  information  management  and 
sharing  platform  built  on  distributed  ledger  blockchain  technology  to  ensure  improved 
management  of  records  and  greater  transparency  in  fund  management.  This  will  allow 
borrowers,  producers,  associations,  organisations,  public  entities,  POs  and  PKSF  to  track 
sources of funding and to better monitor the detailed credit history of clients. Over time, 
this  will  translate  into  lower  interest  rates  for  proven  credit-worthy  borrowers  and  will 
facilitate  their  integration  into  the  national  banking  system.  Other  financial  institutions 
may  eventually  be  invited  to  use  the  platform  as  an  input  for  loan  appraisal  decision 
making.  ICT  applications  for  blockchain  use  will  also  be  developed.  PKSF  will  contract  a 
qualified  fintech  service  provider  to  develop  the  platform,  related  applications,  a  user 
guide  and  training  materials,  and  to  train  potential  users.  Other  options,  such  as  using 
blockchain application for commodity traceability, will be assessed during implementation. 
107. E-commerce  platform.  The  project  will  upgrade  PKSF's  e-commerce  platform  for  rural 
products  and  integrated  business  services,  which  was  established  under  PACE.  It  will 
leverage  technology  to  connect  rural  producers  (women,  small  farmers  and  micro-
entrepreneurs)  with  new  sets  of  customers,  creating  a  parallel  marketplace.  POs  will  be 
assisted to connect borrowers to the platform and orient them on transactional methods – 
business  to  business  (B2B)  and  business  to  consumer  (B2C).  The  option  of  technical 
cooperation with Alibaba/Ant Financial in upgrading this platform will be assessed. 
108. Crowd-funding (fraternity funding) platform. Crowd-funding, which enables entrepreneurs 
to raise funding from multiple individuals/investors, including migrant remitters, is now the 
second-largest  financier  of  enterprises  globally  (after  venture  capital).  Subject  to  a 
positive assessment by a feasibility study, the project will support PKSF to create a crowd-
funding platform and associated marketing campaign. Two approaches will be promoted – 
initially  the  lending-based,  peer  to  peer  (P2P)  model;  and  eventually  the  equity-based 
32 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
model  (such  as  the  'Bangladesh  Angels'  model,  a  pioneering  angel  investment  network. 
The  platform  owner  (PKSF)  will  provide  financial  due  diligence  and  legal/contractual 
services  as  it  links  investors  to  micro-enterprises  and  agribusinesses.  Interested 
entrepreneurs  will  be  trained  to  prepare  and  disclose  the  financial  information  required. 
Technical assistance on regulatory aspects will be provided to relevant authorities. 
109. Microenterprise ICT. PKSF will develop an ICT platform and a mobile phone application for 
the  sharing  of  advisory  services  related  to  selected  value  chains  (as  well  as  household 
health  and  nutrition  information).  Users  will  be  able  to  download  illustrated  training 
modules.  The  platform  will  include  an  expert  panel  to  respond  to  queries  of  producers' 
groups. 
110. In leveraging ICT solutions, the project will collaborate with and build upon the knowledge 
generated by the IFAD grant-funded ongoing research by the Consultative Group to Assist 
the Poor (CGAP). The aim of this grant is to overcome the persistent digital divide between 
women  and  men  in  the  mobile  money  market  in  Bangladesh.  CGAP  supports  the 
introduction of new smart phone apps to POs, as the penetration of smart phones in rural 
areas is increasing. Together with financial literacy training, the grant expects to improve 
the role of women in financial decision making. 
111. 3.1.2  PKSF’s  Human  resources  development:  The  following  Table  provides  the  training 
courses (see COSTAB for number of persons and estimated cost for training): 
Short training courses  
Main topic for training 
Provider 
Business management 
and financial analysis 
Value chain analysis and 
VCD subproject design - 
training 
Suggested Topics: Focus of the training will be on 
management of one typical business, preferably 
agribusiness. Main issues of discussion: a) 
Bangladesh private sector environment and 
agribusiness; b) four functions of a business – 
marketing, production, HR and finance; c) financial 
analysis – profitability analysis, cash flow analysis, 
balance sheet; d) risk and sustainability of 
agribusiness; e) financing of agribusiness and MEs; 
f) IRR and NPV; g) small business loan program of 
MFIs, NBFIs, commercial banks.    
Participants: Officers of Loan Division, selected 
RMTP officials, other PKSF officers, selected PO 
officer   
Topics: a) define sector and concept of value chain 
development; b) basic sector analysis techniques; 
c) SWOT analysis; d) Determining constraining and 
corresponding solutions; e) selection of critical 
solutions; f) Determine project activities and cost; 
g) develop work plan budget; h) implementation; i) 
M & E, j) Sample VCD projects – success and 
failure; h) recent debates on VCD approach of 
business promotion and impact on poverty.   
Participants: RMTP officials, PKSF’s core officials, 
selected PO officers etc 
Bangladeshi individual 
experts, and Bangladeshi 
institutions including 
Universities, Business 
schools.  
Bangladeshi individual 
experts, and Bangladeshi 
institutions including 
Universities, Business 
schools 
Project design and 
management 
Topic: Situation analysis; SWOT analysis; setting 
goal and objective; selection of solutions for 
intervention; project activities; determine cost; 
annual plan development; implementation plan 
development; M&E 
Bangladeshi individual 
experts, and Bangladeshi 
institutions including 
Universities, Business 
schools 
33 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Participants: PKSF officers  
M and E system design 
and management 
Concept of M&E; project Logframe development; 
indicators and evaluation methodologies; 
monitoring and reporting; low cost evaluation 
methods; common statistical techniques and 
application; Evaluation report writing; MIS    
Bangladeshi individual 
experts, and Bangladeshi 
institutions including 
Universities, Business 
schools 
ICT based platforms: 
Overview and 
management 
Development project 
management 
Financial services and 
institutions 
Participants: PKSF officers in Loan and other Units; 
MIS 
Selected ICT based solutions: Block chain; crowd 
funding; e-commerce; online and mobile financial 
services; online MIS; oneline project management 
system. 
Review of selected development projects in areas of 
financial services, VCD, agribusiness development, 
environment,  climate change, livelihoods 
development; discuss common project activities; 
critical issues related to success and failure; M&E of 
various types of projects; implementation 
challenges and mitigation.  
Review of financial services for poor, ME and SMEs; 
basic management and operations of commercial 
bank, NBFIs and selected MFIs; online and mobile 
financial services. 
ICT based Real time MIS  Design of MIS with good indicators; implementation 
of online MIS; analysis of MIS reports for 
management decision. 
Participants: PKSF MIS team; loan officers; PMU 
MIS officer 
Exchange visits (VCD) /a  Focus of visits: agribusiness; agro processing; 
agro-processing technologies; agri-implements; 
GGAP and HACCP    
Bangladeshi individual 
experts, and Bangladeshi 
institutions including 
Universities, Business 
schools 
Bangladeshi individual 
experts, and Bangladeshi 
institutions including 
Universities, Business 
schools 
Bangladeshi individual 
experts, and Bangladeshi 
institutions including 
Universities, Business 
schools 
Bangladeshi individual 
experts, and Bangladeshi 
institutions including 
Universities, Business 
schools 
The countries to be visited 
will be confirmed during 
implementation. 
112. Subcomponent  3.2:  PO  Institutional  Strengthening.  The  project  will  provide  capacity 
building for POs in:  (i) IT  systems; (ii)  value  chain  management,  integration, technology 
and  contract 
(iii)  nutrition-sensitive  value  chain  design  and 
implementation; and, (iv) new product development where required. 
intermediation; 
113. The  above  support  can  be  provided  in  the  form  of  training  and  exchange  visit,  advisory 
services. The PMU must take great care in selection of relevant and appropriate candidate 
for training. 
Subcomponent 3.3: Project management and coordination 
114. PKSF will: (i) continue to review and evaluate value chain subproject proposals through its 
Value Chain Evaluation Committee; (ii) organise and fund the capacity building of its own 
staff as well as  that of  POs and  value chain  actors; (iii) identify potential  value chains  to 
invest in and outsource commodity/sub-sector/market studies; (iv) provide clear guidance 
to POs on preparation and management of value chain subprojects; (v) contribute to the 
preparation  of  value  chain  proposals  by  POs  by  providing  guidance  and  sharing  relevant 
34 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
sector and marketing studies; (vi) share experiences with other value chain development 
operations and rationalize common activities; (vii) engage in policy advocacy for necessary 
changes  in  rules,  laws,  and  standards;  and,  (viii)  identify  suitable  technical  assistance 
providers or individual experts to  provide capacity building to PKSF staff, POs, and  value 
chain actors and associations. 
115. POs will: (i) undertake or outsource an initial mapping of key actors in each selected value 
chain  (producers,  service  providers,  input  suppliers,  traders)  as  well  as  marketing 
channels and relevant associations; (ii) prepare proposals for value chain subprojects; (iii) 
provide and manage microenterprise credit and other financial products for producers and 
entrepreneurs;  (iv)  guide  the  upgrading  of  the  selected  value  chains;  (v)  ensure  the 
availability and linkages of qualified providers of services to value chain actors; (vi) advise 
producers  on  input  supply  and  market  access;  (vii)  ensure  that  all  services  to  producers 
are supplied by the private sector (where feasible) on commercial basis; and, (vii) monitor, 
evaluate and report on progress, and analyze issues and lessons. 
116. For the purposes of the project, PKSF will establish a Project Management Unit, integrated 
within its structure, for overall project management purposes. The PMU will be headed by 
a Project Coordinator appointed from PKSF's pool of senior officials or recruited through a 
competitive process. PMU staff will consist of 2-3 officers seconded from PKSF's core team 
and  nineteen  recruited  from  the  market. The PMU  will  work  with  PKSF's  Loan Operations 
Division  to  implement  the  financial  services  programme  through  POs  as  per  established 
processes  and  norms.  This  Division  will  assist  with  the  selection  of  qualified  NBFIs  for 
financing larger enterprises and agribusinesses. It will work with POs and selected service 
providers  for  the  implementation  of  the  value  chain  component.  PKSF’s  support  divisions 
such  as  Audit,  Administration,  Agriculture,  Human  Resources,  Accounts  and  Finance, 
Livestock,  Research,  Training,  M&E,  MIS  and  IT  will  provide  relevant  services  to  the 
project. 
117. The  following  Table  presents  the  designation,  number  of  staff  in  each  rank  and  type  of 
contract:  
Number of 
officers 
PKSF Officers 
Contractual  
PKSF officer or 
contractual 
PKSF officer 
PKSF officer 
Project Coordinator 
Deputy project Coordinator 
(Technical) 
Deputy project Coordinator 
(Financial Service) 
Sector Specialist (Livestock) 
Sector Specialist (Horticulture) 
Sector Specialist (Fisheries) 
ICT Specialist 
Financial Analyst 
Procurement Specialist 
Communication, Publication & 
Knowledge Management 
Specialist 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Contractual, Fulltime 
Contractual, Fulltime  
Contractual, Fulltime 
Contractual, Fulltime  
Contractual, Fulltime 
Contractual, Fulltime  
Contractual, Fulltime 
Contractual, Fulltime  
35 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Specialist 
Nutrition Specialist 
Value Chain Project Manager 
Assistant Manager (Accounts) 
Computer Operator cum MIS 
Officer 
Driver  
1 
6 
2 
1 
1 
Contractual, Fulltime 
Contractual, Fulltime  
Contractual, Fulltime 
Contractual, Fulltime  
Contractual, Fulltime 
118. Recruitment of PMU staff members: PKSF will follow its established recruitment process 
that involves initial short listing of potential candidates, written test, followed by viva-voce for 
recruiting all project staff members.    
36 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
119. Qualification and TOR for each position: The following Table provides qualification and brief job description of each PMU official: 
Position  
No. 
(#) 
Work 
station 
Education and Training 
Project 
Coordinator 
1 
Dhaka  
and  25%  of 
total spent in 
the  field  to 
supervise 
project 
activities 
Deputy 
Project 
Coordinator 
(Technical) 
1 
Dhaka  
and 50% of 
total spent in 
the field to 
supervise 
project 
activities 
  Advance  degree;  at 
least 
year 
four 
undergraduate  degree 
with  good  academic 
standing. 
  Training on financial 
services management 
and institutional 
development; training 
on enterprise 
management 
  Fluent 
in  oral  and 
written  English  and 
Bengali.  
  Advance  degree;  at 
least 
year 
four 
undergraduate  degree 
with  good  academic 
standing. 
  Training on business 
management, project 
management, Value 
chain development, 
institutional 
development; training 
on enterprise 
management 
Fluent  in  oral  and  written 
English and Bengali 
Experience and other 
factors 
Senior PKSF officer or 
recruited from the market.  
Solid experience of private 
sector, value chain 
development, planning, and 
management and 
supervision of field activities 
(in case recruitment from 
the market the candidate 
must have at least 20 years 
of work experience, 
education in areas of 
business, finance, 
marketing, technology, 
economics)   
Major Job description 
  Provide 
overall 
and 
guidance  for  implementation  of  RMTP 
project. 
leadership 
  Accountable to produce results through 
implementation of the project   
  Develop  work  plan  and  budget  and 
receive  approval  from  PKSF,  GOB  and 
IFAD 
  Supervise  PMU  staff  members  and 
activities of POs.  
  Organize  recruitment  and  training  of 
project staff members 
  Prepare RMTP reports 
  Coordinate  with  IFAD,  GoB  and  other 
stakeholders  
  Coordinate  with  LOD  and  other 
divisions of PKSF 
  Act  as  overall  chief  of  administration, 
accounts and finance of the project    
Senior PKSF officer   
  Supervise  all  VCD  activities  of  the 
project 
Solid experience of private 
sector, value chain 
development, planning, and 
management and 
supervision of field activities, 
Experience of managing 
similar project 
37 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Deputy 
Project 
Coordinator 
(Financial 
services) 
1 
Dhaka  
and 50% of 
total spent in 
the field to 
supervise 
project 
activities 
1 
Sector Value 
chain 
specialist 
(Livestock) 
Dhaka and at 
least 50% of 
time spent in 
project 
supervision 
in the field 
working with 
POs and 
other 
stakeholders 
PKSF officer (Asst General 
Manager)  with  experience 
of  managing 
financial 
services program of PKSF 
  Advance  degree;  at 
least 
year 
four 
undergraduate  degree 
with  good  academic 
standing. 
  Training on financial 
services management 
and institutional 
development; training 
on enterprise 
management 
Fluent  in  oral  and  written 
English and Bengali 
  Advance 
marketing, 
degree 
(master’s  degree) 
in 
one  of  the  following 
subject animal science, 
agribusiness,  business 
administration, 
finance, 
agribusiness,  
agricultural  economics, 
and 
engineering/technology 
can 
(exception 
be 
in 
made 
academic 
if  a  highly 
subject 
experienced  person  is 
the 
found 
activities 
this 
category). 
lead 
in 
to 
  Training 
in  business 
management, 
value 
chain development and 
management 
  Fluent  in  Bangla  and 
English 
experience 
  Minimum  of  15  years 
in 
organizations, 
in 
work 
reputed 
preferably 
developmental 
organizations,  of  which 
minimum  of  3  years  in 
senior 
management 
position. 
  Minimum  of  10  years 
experience in agribusiness 
business  management, 
technology  transfer  and 
value  chain  development 
project(s). 
  Progressively 
advanced 
career 
and 
demonstrated  capacity  in 
project management 
path 
  Willingness  and  ability  to 
undertake  regular  travel 
all over the country  
  Age  limit:  Maximum  45 
years 
  Manage ME component of the project; 
  Financial planning and budgeting of the 
project 
  Produce all reports 
  Coordinate  with  Finance  and  acct 
person 
  Supervise  M&E,  KM,  communication 
activities the project  
  Plan  and  execute  all 
institutional 
development  (component  3)  of  the 
project 
  Develop  value  chain  strategy 
for 
livestock sector. 
  Manage VCD subprojects; oversee GAP 
and HCCP training 
  Work with MEs, POs and private sector 
firms  to  establish  market  linkage  and 
develop contract farming arrangement  
  Explore  export  potential  of  each 
subsectors 
  Identify 
new 
for 
interventions,  transfer  of  technology, 
solve problems in value chains 
opportunities 
  Advise the PC and other managers and 
chain 
on 
value 
supervisors 
development 
  Conduct market research 
  Help the PC to develop annual plan and 
implement plans 
  Visit 
subprojects 
identify 
opportunities  and  constraints,  monitor 
progress and observe impacts   
to 
  Prepare reports, case studies etc  
   Do any other work assigned by the PD 
Sector Value 
1 
Dhaka and at 
  Advance 
degree 
  Minimum  of  15  years    Develop  value  chain  strategy 
for 
38 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
chain 
specialist 
(Fisheries) 
least 50% of 
time spent in 
project 
supervision 
in the field 
working with 
POs and 
other 
stakeholders 
1 
Sector Value 
chain 
specialist 
(Horticulture
)  
Dhaka and at 
least 50% of 
time spent in 
project 
supervision 
in the field 
working with 
POs and 
other 
stakeholders 
marketing, 
in 
(master’s  degree) 
one  of  the  following 
subject 
fisheries, 
aquaculture, 
agribusiness,  business 
administration, 
finance, 
agribusiness,  
agricultural  economics, 
and 
engineering/technology 
can 
(exception 
be 
in 
made 
academic 
subject 
if  a  highly 
experienced  person  is 
the 
found 
activities 
this 
category). 
lead 
in 
to 
  Training 
in  business 
management, 
value 
chain development and 
management 
  Fluent  in  Bangla  and 
English 
  Advance 
degree 
in 
(master’s  degree) 
one  of  the  following 
subject 
agricultural 
science,  agribusiness, 
business 
administration, 
finance, 
agribusiness,  
agricultural  economics, 
and 
engineering/technology 
can 
(exception 
be 
in 
made 
academic 
if  a  highly 
subject 
marketing, 
experience 
in 
organizations, 
in 
work 
reputed 
preferably 
developmental 
organizations,  of  which 
minimum  of  3  years  in 
senior 
management 
position. 
  Minimum  of  10  years 
experience in agribusiness 
business  management, 
technology  transfer  and 
value  chain  development 
project(s). 
  Progressively 
advanced 
career 
and 
demonstrated  capacity  in 
project management 
path 
  Willingness  and  ability  to 
undertake  regular  travel 
all over the country  
  Age  limit:  Maximum  45 
years 
experience 
  Minimum  of  15  years 
in 
organizations, 
in 
work 
reputed 
preferably 
developmental 
organizations,  of  which 
minimum  of  3  years  in 
senior 
management 
position. 
  Minimum  of  10  years 
experience in agribusiness 
business  management, 
technology  transfer  and 
value  chain  development 
project(s). 
fisheries sector. 
  Manage VCD subprojects; oversee GAP 
and HCCP training 
  Work with MEs, POs and private sector 
firms  to  establish  market  linkage  and 
develop contract farming arrangement  
  Explore  export  potential  of  each 
subsectors 
  Identify 
new 
for 
interventions,  transfer  of  technology, 
solve problems in value chains 
opportunities 
  Advise the PC and other managers and 
chain 
on 
value 
supervisors 
development 
  Conduct market research 
  Help the PC to develop annual plan and 
implement plans 
  Visit 
subprojects 
identify 
opportunities  and  constraints,  monitor 
progress and observe impacts   
to 
  Prepare reports, case studies etc  
   Do any other work assigned by the PD 
  Develop  value  chain  strategy 
for 
horticulture sector. 
  Manage VCD subprojects; oversee GAP 
and HCCP training 
  Work with MEs, POs and private sector 
firms  to  establish  market  linkage  and 
develop contract farming arrangement  
  Explore  export  potential  of  each 
subsectors 
  Identify 
new 
for 
interventions,  transfer  of  technology, 
solve problems in value chains 
opportunities 
  Advise the PC and other managers and 
chain 
on 
supervisors 
value 
39 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
experienced  person  is 
the 
found 
activities 
this 
category). 
lead 
in 
to 
  Progressively 
advanced 
career 
and 
demonstrated  capacity  in 
project management 
path 
  Training 
in  business 
value 
management, 
chain development and 
management 
  Willingness  and  ability  to 
undertake  regular  travel 
all over the country  
  Age  limit:  Maximum  45 
  Fluent  in  Bangla  and 
years 
English 
ICT 
Specialist 
1 
Dhaka 
and 
25%  in  the 
to 
field 
observe 
applications 
  Undergraduate  degree 
in  computer  science, 
computer applications 
  Training  in  web  based 
development  
  At  least  15  years  work 
experience  as  software 
system 
developer, 
implementer, 
or 
application developer  
Financial 
analyst 
1 
Dhaka 
and 
25%  in  the 
field 
to 
observe 
applications 
  Undergraduate  degree 
in  Finance,  accounting, 
Business 
administration, 
accounting     
cost 
  At  least  15  years  work 
relevant 
in 
experience 
areas  
development 
  Conduct market research 
  Help the PC to develop annual plan and 
implement plans 
  Visit 
subprojects 
identify 
opportunities  and  constraints,  monitor 
progress and observe impacts   
to 
  Prepare reports, case studies etc  
   Do any other work assigned by the PD 
  Coordinate  all  ICT  applications  of 
Component 3 
  Develop requirements, guide suppliers, 
supervise  installation,  monitor  system 
performance 
  Coordinate 
online  MIS 
development and application 
system 
  Advise PC on ICT related issues     
  Conduct  financial  analysis  subproject 
proposals;  
  Analyse  project  budget,  plan  annual 
activities and budget;  
  Conduct 
profitability 
various 
technological 
business 
processing  proposal  that  RMTP  may 
receive from different organizations. 
options, 
of 
  Assist POs with financial analysis 
  Conduct relevant training.  
  Analyse ME loan program   
  Track project spending  
  Conduct 
financial 
analysis 
of 
microenterprises  
  Work  with  M&E  specialist  to  prepare 
financial  analysis  of  MEs  and  other 
businesses 
  Prepare  case  analysis  of  individual 
40 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Procuremen
t specialist  
1 
Dhaka;  visit 
POs 
and 
other  places 
if  and  when 
necessary 
M&E 
specialist  
1 
Dhaka 
50% 
visit 
and 
field 
4-year 
Undergraduate 
degree  reputed  public  or 
private 
selected 
in 
universities 
management, 
public 
administration, 
accountancy, 
economics etc 
business, 
Training/degree 
procurement 
thorough  knowledge 
rules 
procurement 
required. 
on 
and 
in 
is 
At least four year 
undergraduate degree 
with good academic 
standing in one of the 
following subjects: 
business administration, 
finance, marketing, 
agribusiness, economics, 
agricultural economics, 
management. 
Training or degree on 
project design, planning, 
monitoring and evaluation 
methodologies of 
development projects 
Minimum  of  10  year  work 
experience  in  in  which  at 
in 
least 
procurement   
years 
five 
subprojects, MEs   
   
  Process  all  procurements  under  the 
project 
  Ensure  IFAD  and  PKSF  procurement 
rules  are  complied  by  the  project  and 
POs. 
  Help  POs  develop  IFAD  compliant 
procurement rules. 
  Act as office manager for the project  
in 
of 
10 
year 
Minimum 
experience 
project 
management,  planning  and 
at  least  5  years  experience 
in  leading  monitoring  and 
evaluation  of  development 
projects  preferably  in  value 
chain development projects.    
Experience  in  designing  and 
surveys, 
conducting 
data  analysis  and 
report 
writing;  
field 
Fluent  in  English  –  oral  and 
written.    
  Coordinate  with  respective  authorities 
and 
any 
machineries  are  imported  for  value 
chain development. 
organizations 
case 
in 
  Manage 
all 
logistics, 
small 
procurements etc 
  Prepare  TORs  for  various  surveys  and 
studies; 
  Conduct  baseline  and  other  impact 
assessment studies; 
  Conduct studies planned for the project 
to be managed by the PMU; write TOR, 
coordinate  with  procurement  specialist 
to procure all services; 
  Prepare project reports;  
  Assist  POs 
to  prepare  subproject 
indicators  and  subproject  log-frame, 
and prepare project reports. 
  Prepare  impact  studies  of  individual 
subprojects  in  collaboration  with  VC 
managers. 
  Conduct 
training 
subproject 
planning,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of 
individual subprojects by POs. 
on 
  Prepare  sector  specific 
report  on 
experience of PACE 
41 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Communication
,  Publication  & 
Knowledge 
Management 
Specialist 
1 
and 
Dhaka 
50%  in  the 
field 
undergraduate 
business 
in 
4-year 
degree 
administration, 
communication, 
journalism, 
media 
finance, 
management, 
marketing,  agribusiness, 
economics, 
agricultural 
economics,  management 
etc. 
on 
Training 
communication, 
professional 
publication, 
content preparation  etc 
writing, 
website 
  Prepare KM products 
  Organize  seminar,  workshops  and 
other  activities  to  disseminate  project 
results    
  Develop contents for project website 
  Maintain  project  website, 
facebook 
page 
  Organize  seminars,  workshops,  and 
produce KM products 
  Coordinate with media/press 
  Disseminate  project  KM  products 
among stakeholders 
  Coordinate with M&E and other officials 
to produce contents  
  Produce  all  video  materials  of  the 
project. 
of 
10 
year 
Minimum 
in 
experience 
communication, 
content 
production,  training  material 
preparation, media work etc.    
in  preparation 
Experience 
case 
report, 
project 
preparation, 
field 
investigation  methodologies, 
report 
data  analysis  and 
writing;  
Fluent  in  English  –  oral  and 
written 
Nutrition 
specialist  
1 
Dhaka 
50% 
works 
and 
field 
year  degree 
4 
from 
reputed  public  or  private 
university  on  nutrition, 
public health   
year 
10 
experience  
relevant  work 
  Develop  nutrition  strategy 
for  the 
project 
  Design  and  roll  out  campaign  on 
nutrition  and  other  related 
issues 
under  component  1.1  in  collaboration 
with POs and other stakeholders  
  Assess  impact  of  such  campaign  in 
and 
with 
collaboration 
Communication specialist  
M&E 
Asstt. 
Manager 
Accounts)  
( 
2 
Dhaka;  visit 
POs 
and 
other  places 
if  and  when 
necessary 
Undergraduate 
4-year 
degree  in  accountancy  or 
finance, 
cost 
accounting (part) etc. 
or 
Training in computer 
accounting software  
  Produce reports   
Minimum  of  8  year  work 
experience  as  accountant  in 
reputed organization  
  Maintain  all  books  of  accounts 
in 
project  office;  maintain  records  of  all 
bank accounts 
  Process all payments and disbursement   
  Prepare  monthly,  quarterly  and  annual 
financial reports 
  Assist  PC  to  prepare  budget;  maintain 
bank accounts of the project 
42 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
VC  project 
Manager  
6 
Dhaka and at 
60% 
least 
time  at  the 
field level  
  Advance  degree;  at 
year 
four 
least 
undergraduate  degree 
with  good  academic 
standing  from  reputed 
public 
private 
and 
universities  preferably 
in  one  of  the  following 
subjects: 
business 
administration, 
finance, 
agribusiness, 
economics,  agricultural 
economics, 
and 
engineering/technology 
marketing, 
 
 
Training on VCD 
management and 
institutional 
development; training 
on enterprise 
management 
Fluent in oral and 
written English and 
Bengali. 
  Assist financial analyst  
  Coordinate  with  PKSF  accounts  depart 
regarding accounts and budget  
  At  least  5  years  work 
  Design value chain project 
experience 
  Experience of VCD project 
management;  
  Assist POs to design VCD subprojects 
  Supervise 
and  monitor 
selected 
subprojects. 
  Prepare reports, case studies  
  Conduct market research 
  Identify business opportunities 
  Liaison  with  private  sector,  public 
training  providers,  TA 
institutions, 
providers etc 
  Prepare reports   
1 
Dhaka 
Computer 
operator 
cum 
officer 
MIS 
Undergraduate 
degree 
and  training  on  computer 
(Microsoft 
application 
office) and MIS  
year 
3 
experience  
relevant  work 
  Drafting  of  reports,  communication 
documents  
  Prepare MIS report 
43 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
8.  PROJECT OUTREACH AND BENEFITS 
120. Outreach: The following Table presents overall outreach targets for the project by categories 
of people – men, women, young, and women-headed households. The project through its ME 
and VCD subprojects will reach the target population. The targets will be monitored through 
regular  project  monitoring  tools  –  project  reports  by  POs  and  other  implementers,  annual 
survey etc. (see logframe for various methods for monition and evaluation). 
Indicators 
Name 
1  Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Males - Number 
Females - Number 
Young - Number 
Not Young - Number 
Young - Percentage (%) 
                          -    
                   80,000  
                 200,000  
                          -    
                 100,000  
                 245,000  
                          -    
                   20,000  
                   50,000  
                          -    
                 160,000  
                 395,000  
                          -    
                    11.11  
                    11.24  
1.a  Corresponding number of households reached 
Non-women-headed households - Number 
                          -    
                 170,000  
                 425,000  
Women-headed households - Number 
                          -    
                   10,000  
                   20,000  
Households - Number 
                          -    
                 180,000  
                 445,000  
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of household members 
                          -    
Household members - Number of people 
                 810,000  
              2,002,500  
121. Project  Benefits:  The  project  will  directly  benefit  an  estimated  445,000  households, 
including  small  farmers,  micro-entrepreneurs  and  other  value  chain  participants  (input 
suppliers,  traders,  service  providers).  Of  these,  100,000  households  will  receive  several 
rounds  of  microfinance  as  well  as  value  chain  services,  while  345,000  households  will 
receive value chain services. Considering an average household size of 4.5, the project will 
benefit 2 million people within a period of six years. 
122. The project  will generate multiple  social, nutritional,  financial, economic and institutional 
benefits.  A  preliminary  financial  analysis  indicates  that  all  selected  value  chains  are 
financially  viable.  Aromatic  rice,  representing  high  value  cereals,  has  Return  on 
Investment  (ROI)  of  51%;  banana  representing  fruits  30%;  potato  representing 
vegetables 38%; technology-based aquaculture 67%; dairy 20%; red meat 40%; poultry 
meat 29%; and poultry eggs 37%. 
123. RMTP  will  generate  significant  positive  effects  on  rural  household  incomes,  food  security 
and  nutrition.  Other  benefits  include  improved  advisory  services;  better  food  safety; 
improved  animal  health  (dairy,  beef  cattle,  poultry  and  fisheries);  improved  market 
access, and growth of rural businesses. RMTP will also generate employment opportunities 
for  women  and  men,  particularly  the  youth  through  their  involvement  of  the  value  chain 
activities and related backward and forward linkages. 
44 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
124. Estimation of Benefits: The PMU, as per logframe targets and methods and led by M&E 
Specialist will conduct impact studies to estimate project impacts accrued to different target 
population. Such studies will be part of annual M&E plan of the project.    
9.  RMTP PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 
Implementation plans 
125.  Pre-project  readiness:  As  outlined  in  the  aide  memoire  of  the  final  design  mission,  PKSF  will 
undertake the following preparatory activities for successful launching of the project:   




Complete  reassignment  of  officials  from  within  PKSF  and  recruitment  process  of  all 
new project officials to ensure they join right after launching of the project;  
Train  a  core  group  PKSF  officials  on  GGAP  and  HACCP  (including  site  visits)  by 
employing a Bangladesh-based training, development, and certification agency as this 
service  is  now  available  in  the  country,  using  resources  from  IFAD-funded  PACE 
project;     
Conduct  a  survey  to  map  products,  locations  and  supply  chains  of  all  important 
agribusiness  and  processors  along  with  support  service  providers  in  three  broad 
sectors - horticulture, fisheries and Poultry & livestock - using resources from the PACE 
project; and 
Develop policies for lending to NBFIs and assessment process for selection of NBFIs.  
126.  Identify  successful  POs  and  Value  Chains  under  PACE:    PKSF  will  identify  the  successful  value 
chains  and  competent  POs  for  launching  first  round  of  funding  to  expand  value  chains  as  per 
design of the RMTP project.       
127.  Start-up readiness- ME program: PKSF has established systems, policies, procedures and skilled 
managers  and  staff.  The  project  will  not  require  revision  of  existing  policies  or  procedures  or 
management  system  for  ME  loan  part  of  the  project.  PKSF  will  develop  annual  disbursement 
plan for ME part of the project as a part of total ME disbursement plan. 
128.  Start-up activities: VC Development (Component 1) under RMTP: Similarly, the methodology for 
value  chain  activities  has  been  developed  under  PACE  and  will  be  strengthened  and  applied 
under RMTP. PKSF will undertake following activities for starting the project:  
  Develop guidelines including format(s) for POs for submission of VCD proposals; 
  Organize a start-up workshop involving all potential POs to explain the project, particularly 
Component 1; 
 
Invite POs to submit proposals in the very early stages of implementation;  
  Start the VCD activities by expanding successful products and clusters under PACE 
  Conduct  broad-based  value  chain  analysis  of  three  sectors  –  horticulture,  livestock,  and 
fisheries; 
  Complete the feasibility studies on crowdfunding and block chain;  
  Complete procurement procedures for the carrying out of the baseline survey, and launch 
the survey as soon as project funds are available. 
45 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
129.  Supervision:  IFAD  will  conduct  regular  supervision  and  implementation  support 
missions  as  per  standard  procedures.  These  missions  will  review  project  performance, 
progress towards achievement of objectives, and compliance with fiduciary requirements. 
10.  PLANNING, M&E, LEARNING AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
130. AWPB: The PMU/PKSF will prepare the annual work plan and budget for RMTP, and obtain 
approval  from  FID  and  IFAD.  The  plan  will  include  activity  plan  along  with  targets  and 
expenditure plan and should reflect overall project targets and activities. IFAD supervision 
missions and mid-term review mission  will offer opportunities for  review of  progress and 
assessment of effectiveness of the project. 
131. Monitoring  and  evaluation:  The  PMU  will  develop  an  effective  M&E  system  to  measure 
indicators included in the log frame. It will be part of a larger MIS system which will serve 
as  an  information  and  knowledge  sharing  platform.  The  M&E  system  will  be utilised  as  a 
management tool and will include assessment of progress and compliance, identification of 
constraints and proposed remedial actions.  
132. Online  application  based  project  management:  PSKF  will  develop  project  management 
application  for  management  of  Component  1  of  RMTP.  It  will  be  given  to  all  POs 
implementing Component 1. PKSF will able to observe real-time all physical progress of all 
participating POs and the application will generate comprehensive reports. It will eliminate 
the need for sending paper-based reports from POs and   
133. Desegregated  data:  All  data  will  be  disaggregated  by  gender,  age,  and  geographical 
location.  Participatory  M&E  including  qualitative  surveys  will  be  undertaken  on  a  regular 
basis.  A  baseline  survey  will  be  undertaken  at  start  up,  and  outcome  surveys  will  be 
carried  annually.  The  key  production  and  financial  indicators  of  small  farmers  and 
microenterprises will be monitored annually to assess the emerging results of the project. 
134. Knowledge  Management  and  Learning:  The  PMU  will  prepare  a  comprehensive  KM 
action plan in the early stages of implementation. The project's KM activities must support 
the  effective  flow  of  relevant  information  among  project  staff,  beneficiaries  and  other 
stakeholders. Output, outcome and impact data generated by the M&E system will inform 
case studies, briefs and reports. These will be used for policy dialogue, peer-learning, and 
potential scaling-up.  
135. KM  products  will  be  communicated  through  multiple  sources  including  blogs,  written 
publications,  video  and  social  media  (e.g.  facebook).  However,  most  of  the  publications 
should be in electronic and video form. The written documents should be at a minimum.  
136. Website:  The  project  will  have  a  website  to  share  reports,  impact  studies,  case  studies, 
training  materials,  videos  and  application  technologies.  It  will  discourage  printing  of 
reports  and  other  documents.  POs  will  be  encouraged  to  follow  the  same,  and 
communications with beneficiaries will be via mobile phones. 
Baseline and other surveys 
137. Baseline survey: The PMU will prepare TOR for baseline survey and cleared it by IFAD. All 
goal and objective level indicators must be in survey questionnaire. Sample must be 
statistically valid.   
138. Midterm and final impact survey: The PMU will prepare TOR for baseline survey and cleared 
it by IFAD. All goal and objective level indicators must be in survey questionnaire. Sample 
must be statistically valid.   
46 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
139. PCR preparation: The PMU will prepare PCR as per IFAD guidelines 
Disbursement Profile 
11. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND PROCUREMENT 
140. RMTP´s withdrawal of funds and its use of loan proceeds are governed by the IFAD’s Loan 
Disbursement  Handbook  (LDH)  and  Financing  Agreement  between  IFAD  and  the 
Bangladesh  Government.  Applicable  procedures  of  disbursement,  financial  reporting  and 
maintenance  of  appropriate  project  records  will  be  described  in  details  in  a  Letter  to  the 
Borrower  subsequently  after  signing  the  Financing  Agreement  between  IFAD  and  the 
Bangladesh Government.  
141. 
After the Financing Agreement for RMTP enters into force, PKSF will sign a subsidiary 
Loan and Grant agreement in which the Government of Bangladesh will on-lend a portion 
from the proceeds of the Loan as a subsidiary loan to PKSF. The remaining portion of the 
loan  will  be  provided  in  the  form  of  a  Grant  to  PKSF  and  for  the  Components  of:  Value 
Chain Enhancement and Institutional Strengthening/Project Management. 
142. 
An online guided overview  of IFAD  financial management practices  and procedures is 
available  for  project  staff9.  Project  staff  is  encouraged  to  avail  this  training  to  ensure  an 
efficient disbursement and an appropriate fiduciary control. 
143. 
Three  standard  disbursement  procedures  are  available  for  RMTP  withdrawal  of 
financing:  
a.  Advance withdrawal 
b.  Direct payment 
c.  Reimbursement 
144.  Advance withdrawal 
a.  This modality is used to advance and/or replenish funds to a bank account as designated 
by  the  borrower.  The  Fund  places  a  limit  on  the  amount  to  be  advanced  and/or 
replenished. Relevant details on the modality – which is project specific – are to be agreed 
between the borrower and the Fund, and be detailed in the LTB.  
b.  The ceiling amount will be a reasonable limit, sufficient enough to cover average projected 
eligible expenditures of RMTP  for a  period  of  six  months. The  ceiling amount may be set 
depending on the level of expenditures as to be incurred based on (i) the approved AWPB; 
and  (ii)  the  project’s  specific  reporting  of  actual  and  projected  expenditures  foreseen 
within that AWPB period. The Fund will ascertain and certify clearance of the figure to be 
advanced,  which  may  vary  during  the  implementation  of  the  project,  depending  on  the 
projected expenditure requirements. 
c.  Should it be found necessary to revisit the ceiling figure considered a reasonable limit at 
any time during project implementation, this shall be subject to prior agreement between 
the  borrower  and  the  Fund,  with  communication  by  IFAD  to  the  borrower  through 
modification of the LTB.  
d.  The  advance  withdrawal  is  foreseen  to  be  the  principal  method  to  be  used  for  the 
disbursement  of  RMTP.  The  main  conditions  precedent  to  withdrawal  the  initial  advance 
from the Loan to the Designated Account (DA) of the Project are: (i) evidence that the DA 
has  been  opened;  (ii)  authenticated  specimen  signatures  of  each  authorised  person  that 
will  operate  the  DA;  and  (iii)  sufficient  evidence  of  the  authority  of  the  persons  who  will 
sign  the  withdrawal  applications  on  behalf  of  the  PKSF.  The  Project  Coordinator  (PC)  will 
ensure a proper cash flow from the Loan Account to the DA to ensure the implementation 
9 https://www.ifad.org/web/knowledge/publication/asset/39631355  
47 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
of  the  project  is  not  hindered.  RMTP  will  use  the  IFAD  Client  Portal  (ICP)  for  the 
submission of withdrawal applications. 
e.  Subject  to  the  recommendation  of  the  first  IFAD  supervision  mission,  the  project  is 
expected to enter into the Straight Through Processing (STP) to justify advances and seek 
replenishments. This facility was incorporated in the last stage of PACE.  
f.  Supporting documentation and records of the expenditures claimed under the STP facility 
should be maintained and be readily available for review by IFAD's supervision missions or 
any  other  review  team  assigned  by  IFAD  and  external  auditors.  The  PMU  will  be 
responsible to ensure the SOEs are elaborated in accordance with IFAD requirements. 
145.  Direct payments 
a.  This  modality  is  used  for  eligible  project  expenditures  to  be  paid  directly  by  IFAD  as  per 
the request of the PMU, generally for large contracts, to suppliers, contractors, consultants 
or third parties, as authorized by the borrower. 
b.  This procedure is generally suitable for payment of large civil works, consultant fees (when 
these are of substantial), importation of goods for which a letter of credit is not practical, 
and  when  exchange  rate  control  regulations  are  present  in  the  country.  The  minimum 
value threshold for direct payments is specified in the LTB. 
c.  Under  this  procedure,  RMTP  requests  the  fund  to  pay  the  supplier  directly  on  its  behalf 
from the loan account in IFAD. RMTP must indicate in the WA the date on which payment 
becomes due to the supplier. The WA will need to be accompanied by a signed copy of the 
contract and relevant supporting documents evidencing the eligibility of the expenditure. 
146.  Reimbursement 
a.  This  is  applicable  when  eligible  project  expenditures,  reimbursable  under  the  financing, 
have been pre-financed by the project or incurred (that is, the suppliers of goods, works, 
consulting or other services has already been paid by the project from its own funds). This 
reimbursement procedure is generally suitable for payment of: (i) local currency costs; (ii) 
petty  cash  or  small  purchases;  (iii)  small  civil  works  payments;  and  (iv)  the  borrower’s 
provision  of  financial  resources  to  the  project  when,  for  example,  requests  for  advance 
replenishment to the designated account have not been submitted promptly, thus enabling 
the project to continue uninterrupted implementation.  
b.  Usually,  IFAD  will  reimburse  the  project  in  the  currency  of  payment  as  affected  by  the 
borrower.  Nevertheless,  the  borrower  may  request  reimbursement  to  be  made  in  the 
currency of the Financing Agreement. However, the amount to be paid will be determined 
by the Fund, using the rate of exchange determined by IFAD Treasury. This methodology is 
used as a safeguarding principle. 
c.  Requests for reimbursement are to be submitted to the Fund within ninety calendar days 
from  the  date  of  payment  by  the  project.  Should  special  circumstances  prevail  for  the 
loan, these will be described in the agreed-on, project-specific LTB. 
147. 
Flow of Funds.  
a.  RMTP  shall  maintain  and  operate  two  Designated  Accounts  (DAs)  denominated  in  US 
dollars  in  the  Bangladesh  Bank  open  under  the  SAFE  modality,  to  receive  the  loan  and 
grant  proceeds.  The  DAs  are  administered  following  imprest  arrangements,  in  which  an 
initial  amount  of  the  loan  and  grant  is  advanced  and  then  replenished  periodically  based 
on  justified  expenditures.  The  maximum  advances  provided  by  IFAD  to  the  DAs  are 
established as an Authorized Allocation (AA) in the LTB. 
b.  An additional DA in US dollars shall be maintained by the Ministry of Expatriates' Welfare 
and  Overseas  Employment  (MoEWOE)  following  the  same  arrangements  to  receive  funds 
for the Sub-component 2.3. Optimal utilisation of remittances. 
48 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
c.  RMTP shall maintain two Project Accounts (PA) in Bangladesh Taka (BDT) in a commercial 
bank  for  day-to-day  project  management  operations  and  activities.  One  Project  Account 
for  the  loan  proceeds  and  the  other  one  for  the  grant  proceeds.  An  additional  Project 
Account following the same arrangements shall be maintained by MoEWOE. 
d.  Transfers to POs, NBFIs and VC development projects will be transferred from the Project 
Accounts  in  local  currency  following  similar  imprest  arrangements  for  quarterly 
replenishment. 
e.  Specific  details  for  enabling  further  transfer  of  advance  resources  are  described  in  the 
LDH. Towards project completion, the Fund initiates procedures and takes steps to ensure 
recovery of advances provided. (see Appendix 1 of PIM for visual representation). 
148. PKSF  contribution:  a)  PKSF  counterpart  to  RMTP  is  for  the  Subcomponent  2.1  Financial 
Services through Partner Organizations (POs) and taxes and duties. 
149. PKSF contribution will be incorporated in the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) cycle 
for all PO’s and NBFIs and will be consolidated and reported by the PMU level.  
150. Non-Banking  Financing  Institutions  and  Partner  Organizations  contribution:  The 
PMU will establish appropriate procedures with POs and NBFIs to ensure that the matching 
contribution of its part is done in a timely manner.  
151. Private sector contribution: The private sector contribution will be contingent upon the 
production and market linkages that are facilitated by the POs. No cash contribution to the 
project is foreseen by the private sector. Their contributions represent an estimate in the 
form  of  training  to  beneficiaries,  advisory  services,  etc.  The  PMU  will  ensure  that  the 
private sector contribution is accounted and tracked properly to ensure its reporting by the 
PMU level. 
152.  Beneficiaries contribution: Beneficiary contributions for RMTP are in kind. The PMU 
will  ensure  that  this  counterpart  is  tracked  and  quantified  at  fair  market  value.  The  PMU 
will ensure that the beneficiaries’ contribution is accounted and tracked properly to ensure 
its reporting by the PMU level. 
153. Accrual  basis  accounting:  Some  POs  and  NBFIs  apply  the  accrual  basis  of  accounting, 
while  others  utilise  the  cash  basis.  During  implementation,  it  is  expected  that  all  POs 
gradually  move  to  an  accrual-based  system  for  the  preparation  of  financial  reports.  POs 
are  audited  annually  by  independent  audit  firms  appointed  by  PKSF.  These  audits  cover 
only  microfinance  operations.  For  RMTP,  it  is  agreed  that  the  same  independent  auditors 
will also audit value chain activities. 
154. The  internal  control  arrangements  for  RMTP  will  consider:  (i)  appointment  of  qualified 
personnel with clear responsibilities and adequate segregation of duties; (b) establishment 
of an adequate financial records management system which has a complete audit trail; (c) 
set up of physical safeguards; (d) independent checks, with procedures subject to random 
independent reviews. 
155. There  is  an  adequately  staffed  Internal  Audit  Unit  (IAU)  in  PKSF.  The  IAU  prepares  an 
annual plan for internal audit reviews within PKSF and POs. These audits mainly focus on 
compliance  review  and  checking  of  payment  vouchers  prior  to  issuing  payments  to 
suppliers/vendors. There may be room for the inclusion of risk review in the internal audit 
process; this will be assessed during implementation. 
156. RMTP accounts will be audited annually by the private firm that audits PKSF in accordance 
with  International  Standards  on  Auditing  (ISA)  and  in  compliance  with  IFAD's  Handbook 
for  Financial  Reporting  and  Auditing.  The  audited  project  financial  statements  together 
49 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
with the auditor’s opinion will be submitted to IFAD in English within 6 months of the end 
of the fiscal year. 
157. External audit: PKSF will recruit as per its own process. The TOR of external auditor and 
audit report must meet IFAD’s requirements. 
158. Procurement.  PKSF  has  effective  governance  and  internal  control  mechanisms  for 
procurement and contract management. It has experience in handling procurement under 
IFAD financing. Procurement managed by POs is moderately satisfactory, with continuous 
follow up by PKSF. 
159. Procurement under the project will be undertaken in accordance with IFAD's Procurement 
Guidelines  and  Procurement  Handbook.  Specific  procurement  arrangements,  procedures 
and  thresholds  will  be  elaborated  in  the  PIM,  aligned  with  PKSF  procurement  policies  as 
applicable.  Controls  will  be  ensured,  and  risk  mitigation  measures  will  be  strengthened. 
Procurement  under  RMTP  will  be  undertaken  by  the  Administration  Department  of  PKSF, 
which  currently  manages  all  procurement  for  the  organisation.  All  project-related 
procurement by POs will also be undertaken in accordance with IFAD guidelines. PKSF will 
assist POs to develop/upgrade their procurement policies and processes as required. 
12.  RMTP PROJECT COSTS AND FINANCING 
160. The total project cost is USD 200 million over a six-year implementation period. The project 
cost summary by component/financier is outlined below (in USD '000). 
Table 17: RMTP cost summary by component/financier 
161. Details Project Cost: See associated COSTAB (XL files) for details costs, unit costs, annual 
and total targets. 
162. IFAD  Loan  terms  and  conditions:  The  Financing  is  granted  on  67%  Highly  Concessional 
Terms and 33% Blend terms.  
163. The Financing granted on highly concessional terms shall be free of interest but shall bear 
a fixed service charge as determined by the Fund at the date of approval of the Financing 
by  the  Fund’s  Executive  Board,  payable  semi-annually  in  the  Loan  Service  Payment 
Currency. The Financing shall have a maturity period of forty (40) years, including a grace 
period of ten (10) years starting from the date of approval of the Financing by the Fund’s 
Executive Board.  
50 
IFADIFAD GrantPKSFCo-FinanciersPrivate SectorPOsNBFIBeneficiariesPKSF-TaxTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Value Chain Development Organization 2403.1--3925.11,13914.8--5,80875.6----1051.47,6853.8Technical and Business service 2,07119.6----2,30721.84,64643.9----8778.36916.510,5925.3Value Chain Integration 9,32661.6----5,82138.4---------0-0.015,1477.6Enterprise strengthening 50060.0----33440.0----------8340.4Policy Dialogue 60060.0----40040.0----------1,0000.5Subtotal 12,73836.1--3921.110,00028.44,64613.25,80816.5--8772.57962.335,25717.6B. Financial Services Micro-Finance through PO 49,87436.9--10,7567.9----74,70655.2------135,33667.7Commercial Finance 10,00050.0----------10,00050.0----20,00010.0Subtotal 59,87438.5--10,7566.9----74,70648.110,0006.4----155,33677.7C. Capacity Building of Remittance Earners --1,000100.0--------------1,0000.5 PKSF's Capacity Building 1,961100.0--------------0-1,9611.0POs Capacity Building 33585.9--------------5514.13900.2Project Management 5,09284.1--89014.7----------741.26,0553.0Subtotal 7,38887.9--89010.6----------1291.58,4074.2Total PROJECT COSTS 80,00040.01,0000.512,0396.010,0005.04,6462.380,51440.310,0005.08770.49250.5200,000100.0D. Institutional Strengthening and Project management 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
164. The principal of the Financing granted on highly concessional terms will be repaid at four 
and half per cent (4.5%)  of  the  total principal  per  annum for  years eleven (11) to  thirty 
(30), and one per cent (1%) of the total principal per annum for years thirty-first (31) to 
forty (40).  
165. The  Loan  granted  on  blend  terms  shall  be  subject  to  interest  on  the  principal  amount 
outstanding and a service charge as determined by the Fund at the date of approval of the 
Loan by the Fund’s Executive Board. The interest rate and service charge determined will 
be  fixed  for  the  life  cycle  of  the  loan  and  payable  semi-annually  in  the  Loan  Service 
Payment  Currency,  and  shall  have  a  maturity  period  of  twenty  (20)  years,  including  a 
grace period of five (5) years starting from the date of approval of the Loan by the Fund’s 
Executive Board.10 
10 PKSF requested that the full amount of IFAD loan be disbursed at Highly Concessional Terms as the loan is for poverty 
reduction   
51 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Appendix 1: Project Fund flow 
[See separate PDF file] 
52 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Appendix 2: Project physical targets and financial plans; and details COSTAB 
SEE COSTAB in separate XL files 
53 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Appendix 3: Value Chain Facilitators 
The Value Chain Facilitator will provide implementation support to the POs including:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
Assist prepare VC proposals 
Undertake value chain analysis 
Assist identify VC activities 
Assist  linking  farming  enterprises  with  input  dealers  for  financing/co-financing 
demonstration activities and bulk purchase 
Support  access  to  markets,  market  information  and  contractual  linkages  with 
downstream agro-business (contract farming, out grower schemes) 
Assist to establish access to storage and primary processing options 
Assist to establish access to mechanization (in areas of insufficient labor supply) 
Provide  training  to  downstream  agro-businesses  in  business  planning  and  analysis  of 
financial returns 
Introduce new high value crops and new cropping systems  
Assist  linking  farming  enterprises  to  downstream  agro-businesses  via  contract 
arrangements 
Assist organize value chain committee meetings  
Assist  organize  and  facilitate  farming  enterprise  to  farming  enterprise  visits  across  the 
project area 
Qualifications of the Value Chain Facilitator 
  Hold  a  university  degree  or  equivalent  relevant  to  agriculture  (agronomy,  livestock, 
aquaculture, poultry, economics, advisory service, agribusiness)  
Proven records of working with agriculture value chains; 
 
  Added  advantage  if  the  VCF  has  experience  from  working  with  a  pluralistic/private/cost 
recovery advisory system; 
Fluency in written and spoken Bengal and English. 
 
Pay Based Advisor  
The pay based advisor will provide advisory service for nutritional sensitive commodities of:  
(xiii) 
(xiv) 
(xv) 
(xvi) 
High value cereal, fruit and vegetable crops  
Pond and tank aquaculture   
livestock cattle (milk and beef), buffalo (milk and beef), goat and sheep  
Poultry including egg and meat of chickens, turkeys, geese and ducks, guineas fowl and 
quails  
The area of advisory service will include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Farm economics and financials analysis  
Modern  production  methods  using  sustainable  approaches  i.e.  GGAP,  IPM,  precision 
placement  of  plant  nutrition,  use  of  organic  plant  nutrition,  improve  animal  and  fish 
breed adjusted to the climate, mechanisation etc. 
Postharvest technologies reducing losses and drudgery  
Linkage to financial services, input supplier for bulk procurement and to market for bulk 
sale 
54 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
Qualifications of the Value Chain Facilitator 
  Hold  a  university  degree  relevant  to  agriculture  (agronomy,  livestock,  aquaculture, 
poultry, economics, advisory service, agribusiness)  
Proven records of working with agriculture value chains; 
 
  Added  advantage  if  the  VCF  has  experience  from  working  with  a  pluralistic/private/cost 
recovery advisory system; 
Fluency in written and spoken Bengal and English. 
 
Appendix 4 : Eample of Preparing Value Chain Analysis and Strategic Investments 
Step One: Data Collection 
The  value  chain  analysis  team  will 
first  conducts  background  research  on  the  chosen 
commodity/crop/livestock/poultry/aquaculture  by  reviewing  websites  and  other  secondary  sources  of 
information. During this phase, the team looks for information such as: 
 
Importance of commodity to Project Area’s economy (percentage of GDP, employment in the 
sector, etc.)  
  Global end markets for commodity/crop (demand, trends, potential expansion)  
  Project Area's position within the Bangladesh and global commodity/crop market  
  Average size (ha) of commodity/crop per farming enterprise in Project Area 
  Climatic conditions in Project Area for commodity production  
  Trade data of import and export on the commodity/crop in Project Area and Bangladesh at 
large. 
  Undertake a value chain analysis of potential commodities in need of upgrading, which will 
 
 
 
benefit the farming enterprises and the LFs 
Identify downstream agro-business interested to procure produce from farming enterprises 
particularly for GGAP certified commodities. During the identification process, the PO will also 
identify the required upgrading of the downstream agro-business interested to participate in 
the RMTP.  
Identify the size of the commodity cluster in terms of farming enterprises and total area under 
production 
Identify constraints and opportunity for upgrading the primary production and product 
differentiation 
  Environmental sustainability of the productive area and climate risk assessment 
  Road infrastructure connecting productive areas with the main road network 
  Service providers and relevant support institutions 
  The VC analysis can be based on, existing studies.  The VC analysis will also include benefit 
cost analysis of proposed upgrading along the value chain. 
  The PO together with the LF and representatives from PGs will prepare a training package for 
PG members and the LF. 
  The proposal will also include a detailed budget  
  Number of pay based advisors required 
  Number of GGAP certificates for PGs  
  Number of GGAP certificates for LF  
  Number of HACCP certificates for LF  
55 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
After  a  thorough  review  of  relevant  secondary  sources,  the  VC  team  conducts  primary  research  in 
Project Area through a combination of one or more of the following methods: interviews, focus groups, 
surveys  and  observation.  Through  this  process,  which  takes  approximately  1  week  in  the  field,  the 
team  gather  more  information  on  the  value  chain  actors  i.e.  farming  enterprises,  downstream  agro-
businesses, input  suppliers, machine hire,  advisory  services  etc., relationships between the actors of 
the chain and factors affecting the competitiveness of the chain. 
Step Two: Value Chain Description 
Using  the  information  gathered  during  interviews  as  well  as  secondary  research,  the  value  chain 
analysis  team  develops  description  of  the  commodity/crop  sector  in  Project  Area.  Value  chain 
description  enables  the  analysis  team  to  visualize  the  flow  of  the  product  from  conception  to  end 
consumer  through  various  actors,  as  well  as  the  supporting  markets  and  enabling  environment 
affecting the value chain. The first step is to list all the functions and actors in the value chain. 
Input suppliers for agriculture and non-agriculture businesses 
Who are the actors in the commodity/crop value chain? 
 
  Producers belonging to the FARM target group   
  Small-scale traders for both agriculture and non-agriculture produce 
  Small-scale processors –local sale 
  Medium/large-scale processors-exporter sale 
  Retailers  
Input supply  
Functions  may  be  performed  by  more  than  one  actor,  and  each  actor  may  perform  more  than  one 
function. What are the functions in the commodity/crop value chain? 
 
  Production  
  Trading  
  Processing  
  Exporting  
 
Importing  
Once they are identified, the functions and actors are placed in a matrix to show who does what. List 
the functions along the side and the actors across the top and mark the boxes to indicate which actors 
perform which functions. Once this table is complete, a map can be drawn showing how the product 
moves  from  one  actor  to  another  and  when  it  passes  through  the  different  functions.  Based  on  the 
map it is possible to establish the cost and margin make-up for each level the produce passes through 
used as the base line for present distribution of cost and benefits among actors.  
Step Three: Analysis of Opportunities and Constraints 
The next step is to prepare a  matrix  like shown  below, list the structural and dynamic factors in the 
value  chain,  and  then  briefly  describe  the  current  situation,  opportunities,  constraints  and 
recommendations for addressing the constraints including tangible How, Who and Financing.  
Framework 
Situational 
analysis 
Opportunities 
for Upgrading 
Constraints to 
Upgrading 
End market 
Business 
Structural Elements of the Value Chain 
Recommendation 
for Upgrading 
Constraints 
(How, who and 
financing) 
56 
Bangladesh 
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project (RMTP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) – Final Design Mission 
Draft RMTP Implementation Manual   
enabling 
environment 
(both  soft  and 
hardware) 
Vertical linkages 
Horizontal 
linkage 
Supporting 
markets 
chain 
Value 
Governance  
Inter-firm 
Relationship  
Dynamic of the Value Chain 
Step Four: Prepare Brief Sample Value Chain Action Plans for Each Recommended Upgrading showing 
the expected Results of the Upgrading 
This step included technical description of the upgrading’s viable for standalone investments within the 
VC, together with financial analysis, economic  analysis listing all the incremental estimated forecasts 
e.g.  increased  farming  enterprises  income,  number  of  farming  enterprises  benefiting;  job  creation; 
increased export; import substitution;  etc. Standalone investments can be on-farm investments e.g. 
dripfertigation, new varieties, introduction of HVC, off-farm investment e.g. repair shops, tractor and 
machine rental enterprises, processing facilities of HVC for generating markets. 
This step should also include the preparation of a matrix showing the current cost and benefit make-
up  and  profit  distribution  along  the  value  chain  before  and  after  upgrading  and  an  evaluation  of 
change in governance after upgrading. 
Step five: VC Committee workshop 
The VC Committee workshop brings together key actors from various levels in the value chain to vet 
the  findings  of  the  analysis  and  discuss  if  the  chosen  strategy  for  increasing  value  chain 
competitiveness is valid and beneficial for the stakeholders.  
57 
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
1/2
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
1. Political and governance
Low
Medium
2. Macroeconomic
Medium
Medium
3. Sector strategies and policies
High
Medium
4. Technical aspects of project or
program
Medium
Medium
5. Institutional capacity for
implementation and sustainability
Low
Low
-Slow start-up due to delays in government processes. 
C: PKSF is excluded from certain governmental processes
(e.g. DPP) allowing for a quick start-up. 
-Lack of government commitment to policy change on
crowdfunding and block chain. 
M: Align project activities with and "Strategic priorities of
Bangladesh in IT" action plan - build partnerships with
designated institutions. 
M: Learn from best practices generated by other
institutions. 
-Political volatility may adversely impact on the
performance of public institutions. 
C: Project works through MFIs, NGO, NBFIs and the
private sector.
-Price variations incentivizing breaches in partnership
between producer organizations and private sector
partners. 
M: Build flexibility in the partnerships so producers can
also serve alternative markets if needed and avoid side
selling. 
-Market dynamics negatively affects selected value
chains. 
M: Careful selection of value chains in close cooperation
with private sector entities; selection of diversified value
chains. 
-M: Improved technologies and production techniques are
provided to increase productivity. 
C: Allow for flexibility in project design to drop certain
value chains or include additional value chains if needed.
-Outdated policies governing agriculture sector and
financial services. 
M: Policy dialogue sub-component will provide evidence
basis for policy reform, and capacity building.
Low capacity of Partner Organizations to manage and
implement technological and agricultural innovations as
proposed by the projects due to lacking experience 
M: Promote effective cooperation modalities between POs
and private sector (e.g. PPPs) assuring that private sector
"know how" strengthens the project. 
M: Promotion of private extension services and technology
extension services are offered
-Lack of capacity (in specific with regards to IT
components and Nutrition) in-house to implement project
activities. 
M: Utilize capacity already build under PACE and use
period when both projects are overlapping for cross-
learning and capacity building. 
M: Develop an incentive scheme to attract qualified
personnel. 
M: Develop a roadmap for IT interventions by international
consultants prior to project design.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
2/2
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
6. Financial management
Medium
Medium
7. Procurement
Medium
High
8. Stakeholders
Low
Medium
9. Environment and social
Medium
High
The inherent risks for RMTP is considered to be medium
due to the diversified set of activities and decentralized
activities involving multiple Partner Organisations (PO’s)
and Non-Banking Financial Institutions (NBFIs). The latter
is a new approach for the Palli Karma-Sahayak
Foundation (PKSF) business model. This assessment
took into account the overall environment surrounding
financial management, the existing pursuit for improving
financial management practices and progress thereof and
experience gained by PKSF within IFAD’s portfolio.
-Mis-procurement leading to reputational risk. 
M: Training on procurement provided during project
implementation 
M: IFAD reviews all procurement actions and installation
of NOTUS.
-Insufficient interest from stakeholders to participate in the
project. 
C: Demand for financing by small farmers and MEs far
exceeds supply;
Adverse climate shocks affecting agricultural production
and producer's yields. 
-M: Advocate for climate-smart production methods. 
Gender inequality and lack of female participation in the
project and unintended exclusion from project activities. 
-M: Target value chains that are gender-sensitive. 
-M: Promote participatory approaches and gender
sensitization activities. 
-M: Development of comprehensive targeting guidelines.
Overall
Medium
Medium
Based on the overall assessment, the risk assessment is
medium.
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: Exit Strategy and Sustainability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exit  strategy.  PKSF  and  its  Partner  Organisations  (PO),  farming  enterprises  and 
downstream  agro-businesses,  will  implement  the  project.  The  farming  enterprises, 
downstream  agro-businesses,  and  other  private  sector  will  be  engaged  from  the  earliest 
possible opportunity. The PKSF and POs are permanent structures that will be able to absorb 
support activities after the end of the project. 
Interventions  supported  by  the  project  will  be  owned  by  farming  enterprises,  downstream 
agro-businesses, pay based advisors and other private sector value chain actors. The PKSF 
and POs will also take ownership through expansion of their financial markets.  
The  commercial  relationship  between  all  parties  involved  in  RMTP  will  increase  the  change 
for  long-term  ownership  and  sustainability.  The  availability  of  pay  base  advisory  service 
beyond  the  project  will  ensure  continues  transfer  of  technologies  and  knowledge  and 
maintaining the GGAP.  
The project design is built on lessons learnt from recent IFAD-financed projects. Particularly 
PACE  have  provided  important  insights  for  project  sustainability  and  the  exit  strategy.  The 
above  approach  and  the  sustainability  factors  mentioned  below  will  ensure  a  smooth, 
responsible and sustainable exit of project-funded activities. 
Institutional  sustainability.  IFAD's  strategy  in  working  with  PKSF  has  been  to  expand 
core PKSF programmes, and to introduce innovations which PKSF then takes to scale using 
core  resources  as  well  as  other  partners'  financing.  This  strategy  has  proven  to  be  very 
successful.  The  first  project  (MFTSP)  supported  PKSF  to  graduate  from  lending  only  to 
lending  with  associated  services;  this  is  now  practised  across  all  PKSF  operations.  The 
second  project  (MFMSP)  helped  PKSF  to  enter  into  agricultural  lending;  agriculture  loans 
now  constitute  12%  of  its  portfolio.  The  third  project  (FEDEC)  assisted  PKSF  to  introduce 
micro-enterprise  lending  and  business  clusters;  micro-enterprises  now  account  for  31%  of 
its  portfolio.  The  fourth  project  (PACE,  ongoing)  is  helping  PKSF  to  upgrade  agriculture 
lending towards a commercial approach, proving that small farms and rural microenterprises 
are  economically  viable.  The  emerging  lesson  is  that  PKSF  is  capable  of  growing 
institutionally on an incremental basis. 
Social  sustainability  (Empowerment).  Using  value  chain  as  a  basis  for  linking 
micro/small  farming  enterprises  with  downstream  agro-businesses  will  make  the  parties 
become  accustomed  to  working  together  and  sharing  knowledge  and  information.  This  will 
build trust over time and become a sustainable basis for them to expand their relationship, 
related to the production and marketing of their products.  
Participation  of  the  private  sector.  RMTP  will  involve  private-sector  entrepreneurs  such 
micro/small  farming  enterprises,  downstream  agribusinesses  like  wholesalers,  processors 
and exporters. Financial institutions like PKSF and its Partner Organisations (MFIs) operating 
at both local and national level. The delivery of pay based agricultural advisory services, are 
some  of  the  key  tools  that  will  promote  the  development  of  mutually  beneficial  business 
relationships  between  RMTP  target  groups  and  private  stakeholders,  and  thus  enhance  the 
long term sustainability of the project’s investments. 
Economic  and  financial  sustainability.  The  overall  EFA  shows  that  RMTP  is  financially 
profitable for farming enterprises with financial ROI for farming enterprise ranging from 20% 
to above 100% depending on the production system. The sensitivity analysis shows that the 
economic  profitability  would  remain  satisfactory  even  if  the  project  cost  increase  by  10% 
and benefits decrease by 10%. 
Environmental  sustainability.  Introduction  of  GGAP  will  contribute  to  environmental 
sustainability of  agriculture and aquaculture production. Combined with the promotion of a 
wide  range  of  bio-control  agents  for  pest  control,  new  crop  varieties  resistance  to  abiotic 
stresses caused by climate change as well as new crop varieties (aromatic rice) bio-fortified 
with increased level of micro nutrition, vitamins, and proteins. Promotion of increased use of 
organic  fertilizer,  precision  placement  of  fertilizer,  slow  releasing  fertilizer  briquettes.  
Environmental  sustainability  will  be  further  enhanced  by  the  adoption  of  drip  irrigation, 
System of Rice Intensification  increase  productivity  without  raising  emission,  improved 
livestock breeds heat tolerant with  high FCR resulting in a better meat-milk emission ratio, 
improved  fish  breed  through  selection  increasing  FCR  and  thereby  income.  Introduction  of 
solar  energy  for  operating  milk  coolers  at  milk  collecting  centres,  cold  storage,  processing 
facilities, driers, irrigation pumps.     
 
Enabling  policy  environment.  The  project  will  benefit  from  a  highly  enabling  policy  and 
institutional environment, for private sector operation.  IFAD together with PKSF will engage 
government  in  policy  dialogue  for  improving  the  gaps  in  laws  and  policies  to  facilitate 
agriculture sustainable growth. 
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Apr Comments To Qag Review
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
APR responses to QAG desk review. 
Empowerment: DRM recommended that 
empowerment needed to be better reflected 
in the PDR. A bullet point has been added to 
para 33 ‘women are actively targeted as 
recipients of microfinance and financial 
literacy training’ – however the PDT may wish 
to amplify this into areas other than just 
micro-finance. 
Sectoral policies: The DRM noted that the 
outdated nature of the country’s sectorial 
policies presented a significant risk to the 
project. The PDT may wish to expand of this 
aspect either within the national context or 
lesson learnt section to give more context to 
its policy dialogue support. 
TORs in PIM. The DRM suggested that to be 
more nutritional and gender sensitive these 
aspects should be included in the TOR of 
project staff. However, staff ToR could not be 
found in the PIM. 
Para 165 states that all M&E data will be 
disaggregated by gender, age and geographic 
location. This is mostly reflected in the 
logframe, although Output 1.3 ‘value chain 
integration’ still refers to ‘total persons’. 
Logframe. The logframe is now aligned with 
the PDR (goal and Development Objective). A 
few clarifications are however still required: 
1)  Given the project’s focus and targeting 
on female beneficiaries it is not clear 
why only 75,000 (16.8%) out of 445,000 
persons receiving project services or 
support are female - is this correct? 
(Output 1.1 indicates 225,500 supported 
rural producers who are members of POs 
are female).  
2)  The number of individual beneficiaries is 
the same as the total households i.e. 
445,000 - assumedly there is only one 
beneficiary per household (it is the same 
with Output1.1)?  
3)  Young = 10 ??   
4)  Project GoaI: o Should the end target be 
70% rather than 50%? 
An additional matrix on the gender 
empowering aspects of the project has been 
included in the SECAP. The SECAP also 
includes a list of gender sensitive value chains. 
Under component 1.5 “the revision of 
outdated sectoral policies” has been 
specifically included as a topic for policy 
engagement.  
Please refer to para 119 on pp. 37 of the PIM. 
Together with the NSVC specialist from the 
design team it was decided that a nutrition 
specialist will be hired to support the PMU 
with incorporating gender.  
Noted, this has been adjusted. 
1)  This has been corrected both numbers 
and now the outreach is 225,500 men 
and 225,500 women. 
2)  Correct, there will be 1 beneficiary per 
household. 
3)  Please refer to the logframe in ORMS 
and bring this technical issue up with 
IT. In ORMS it is indicated that the 
percentage of young people is 10%. 
When the logframe is extracted from 
ORMS in a draft report, the “%” is not 
included in the logframe.   
4)  This has been corrected to 70%. 
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Bangladesh Rmtp Response To Qag Comments
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Bangladesh: Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project 
Response to QAG Comments 
Comments 
Responses 
Overall Assessment 
1 
Microfinance sector. The PDR lacks 
information on the microfinance sector, 
its structure, overall outreach and 
volume of lending, challenges and 
opportunities.  Given that 80% (i.e. USD 
155 million) of project resources will be 
financial services through Partner 
Organizations (POs)/NBFIs, it is 
important that an overview of the 
financial sector is provided. The rationale 
for providing a credit line should also be 
strengthened. 
Files 
2 
Policy Dialogue. According to the PDR 
"Supported by the IFAD Country Office, 
PKSF will undertake policy dialogue with 
concerned Government institutions on 
key topics relevant for the project". IFAD 
should directly be engaged in policy 
dialogue, which can occur with the 
support of other partners, but it should 
not be delegated to the implementing 
agency PKSF which is a government 
owned institution. 
Microfinance sector review has already been 
completed (see attached presentation). The 
key elements are being incorporated into the 
final version of the PDR. The rationale is 
outlined in the project rationale and in the 
description of Component 2. 
Credit lines provided to PKSF in the past by 
IFAD and other IFIs evidently triggered the 
development of sustainable financial services 
and met the longer-term needs of some 200 
POs/MFIs without any negative impact on 
the wider financial sector in Bangladesh. This 
is because the market has demonstrated a 
clear lack of liquidity up to the date of the 
design of RMTP. Actually, previous lines of 
credit encouraged other IFIs to co-finance 
the on-ending operations by PKSF to their 
financially sound and independent POs, some 
have even managed to borrow from 
commercial banks. POs have the capacity to 
efficiently and transparently absorb and 
manage the credit line. Loans to POs and 
from POs to its clients, micro-entrepreneurs 
and producer associations (PAs), are priced 
at commercial rates. POs also developed and 
expanded the range of lending products to 
serve new market segments. 
This repeated comment displays a 
fundamental misunderstanding of policy 
dialogue processes at country level. 
The IFAD Country Office of course has 
intensive and strategic policy dialogue with 
Government on a range of topics of 
relevance to the country programme. This is 
governed by the COSOP and structured 
through direct evidence-based interaction 
with relevant Ministries, the Local 
Consultative Group (LCG) – Plenary, the LCG 
– Water Sector, and the LCG – Agriculture 
Sector. IFAD policy dialogue is broad and 
transcends individual projects which are 
financed by loans to Government.In addition, 
IFAD is involved in policy dialogue as part of 
the UN country team. There is no scope nor 
legal basis for IFAD to directly implement 
policy dialogue through a project which is 
implemented by Government and financed 
through a loan to Government. IFAD does 
not, and should not, have a direct 
implementation role at project level. 
PKSF is not owned by the Government. It 
has been established by Government but has 
an independent board and management. For 
RMTP, policy reforms will be promoted by 
PKSF with support from partners such as 
such as agri-research agencies, the 
Bangladesh Food Safety Authority, the 
Bangladesh Standard and Testing Institute, 
private sector stakeholders, the Credit and 
Development Forum, POs, and other relevant 
organizations (on case to case basis). IFAD 
can and will facilitate these processes. 
The description of poverty is indicated in the 
PDR main text and detailed in the SECAP 
review note which is an integral part of the 
project design documentation. More 
information on the relation with national 
poverty statistics can be provided in the PDR 
main report if deemed necessary, although 
the page limit will be exceeded. 
The PDR very clearly indicates that the 
project will invest exclusively in farm sectors 
– refer to para 53. 
The features of the targeted micronterprises 
are presented in the SECAP review note. 
The numbers and average loan sizes are 
indicated in para 66 of the main report. 
The disbursement procedures are indicated 
in para 67 and are being detailed in the PIM. 
There is no risk in the domestic cofinancing. 
In all previous IFAD-financed projects 
implemented by PKSF, POs have fully 
achieved (and often exceeded) their 
cofinancing commitments. It should be noted 
that POs have multiple sources of funding – 
savings, retained earnings, and commercial 
borrowing. 
The Embassy of Denmark has confirmed that 
it will cofinance the project. This will increase 
the number of beneficiaries receiving 
services under component 1 from 400.000 
(without co-financing) to 445.000 (with co-
financing).Should this contribution not 
materialise, the targets will be adjusted 
accordingly prior to design report 
finalisation.  
The design report submitted for the DRM 
contained the basic structure and outline of 
the PIM. The full PIM is being prepared and 
will be incorporated into the final design 
report. 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Target group definition. The PDR 
specifies that beneficiaries will be ultra-
poor (approx. 10%), transitional poor 
(19%), and enterprising poor (71%) 
categorised based on land ownership 
bands. It should be clarified how these 
categories compare with national poverty 
lines that are based on consumption 
expenditure. 
Component 1 - value chain financing. The 
PDR should (a) clarify extent to which the 
project support will focus on the farm 
sector and/or non-farm sectors, including 
opportunities and challenges of each; and 
(b) present the main features of the 
micro-enterprises it will be working with, 
including the characteristics of their 
membership 
Component 2 - financial services. 
Estimates on number and loan sizes to 
micro-enterprises should be provided, 
and also on how the disbursements will 
be undertaken.   
Project financing.  The total project cost 
is US$ 200.0 million, of which IFAD is 
expected to provide US$80.0million, 
Denmark US$10.0 million, POs US$ 80.5 
million and NBFIs US$10.0million.  This 
expected co-financing is significant and if 
it does not materialize may require a 
redesign of the project. In particular, 
component 2 relies heavily on POs/NBFI 
financing (approx. US$85.0million) while 
Denmark would provide US$10.0 million 
value chain financing.  The team is 
invited to provide an update on the 
financing and mitigation should this fall 
through. 
The Project Implementation Manual is 
incomplete and only provides a list of 
potential districts and implementation 
guidelines for component 1.  
Implementation guidelines for component 
2 and 3, as well as detailed project 
management arrangements, financial 
management and procurement, and 
terms of reference for project staff and 
service providers should be developed. 
8 
The  log-frame should be revisited to 
align the goal statement with that in the 
The logframe is being revised. 
9 
10 
11 
PDR, have more specific indicators, and 
revise targets to be more ambitious given 
the overall size of the project and 
experience from previous IFAD financed 
projects in the country.   
Compliance with issues raised at the OSC/Concept Note stage 
The SECAP review note provides a 
description of the target group. Should it be 
deemed necessary, further details can be 
added to this description. 
On targeting, the PDR specifies (para 26) 
that about 10% of beneficiaries will be 
ultra-poor, 19% transitional poor, and 
71% enterprising poor. It is however not 
clear how the PDR has defined poverty – 
it mentions typical land ownership bands, 
with enterprising poor having up to 0.9 
acres.   It is not known how these 
categories compare with national poverty 
lines that are based on consumption 
expenditure,  but it would be thought 
that many (if not most) of the 
enterprising poor will be above the 
poverty line.  Almost three-quarters of 
rural households are now above the 
poverty line (para 6), and it will be 
difficult to find a large number of people 
below the poverty line with the capacity 
and willingness to take risks to invest in 
larger enterprises. 
Context and Rationale for IFAD's Engagement 
Project rationale. The rationale for the 
project appears good – while support to 
increase agricultural production increases 
incomes and reduces poverty and food 
insecurity, without value chain 
integration this will not generate the 
growth of scale needed to transform the 
rural economy and to sustainably 
eliminate poverty.  This is not an 
unreasonable assertion, but the PDR 
offers no evidence to support this 
statement.  Earlier IFAD projects 
(especially FEDEC and PACE) have aimed 
to do just this (as have projects 
supported by other donors), and are said 
to have generated good results – it would 
be good to know about these. 
This rationale fits well with component 1 
(value chain development), but not so 
well with component 2 – financial 
services.  While it is accepted that micro-
enterprises need capital, the extent of 
capital shortage has not been mentioned. 
The key principals for IFAD engagement 
(para 24), are good – (i) build on 
successful microfinance programmes; (ii) 
micro-entrepreneur integration within 
value chains; (iii) nutrition-sensitive 
approach in selection of commodities; 
(iv) target women through the selection 
of commodities/value chains; (v) 
compliance with food safety and quality 
standards; (vi) leverage commercial 
The lessons learned from previous IFAD-
financed projects implemented by PKSF are 
contained in para 23 of the main report. 
Comprehensive documentation on previous 
projects is publicly disclosed by IFAD and 
easily accessible. 
The core strategy in the project is to 
combine finance and non-financial services, 
based on the lessons learned from previous 
projects which are documented in the PDR. 
This will maximize RMTP impact, unlike 
many other value chain projects in the 
country where finance is absent. PKSF and 
POs are in unique position to do this. Please 
also refer to the response on comment # 1 
above. 
finance through non-banking financial 
institutions; (vii) strengthen the 
capability of PKSF and POs as 
development institutions.  But in this list, 
only leveraging finance from NBFIs 
applies to component 2, and no mention 
is made of the major activity in 
component 2 – finance for MFIs (PKSF 
POs). 
12  Microfinance sector.  The PDR includes, 
as Appendix 1, a paper on the financial 
services available through POs and 
NBFIs.  It would have been useful if this 
Appendix, or the section in the main 
report on the national context, could 
have provided an overview of the 
microfinance sector, including its 
structure , the overall outreach and 
volume of lending.  It would be useful to 
know the size of the current ME portfolio 
of PKSF POs how this is currently funded, 
average loan sizes and numbers of 
borrowers. This would show if planned 
increase in portfolio size of about US$140 
million and 100,000 borrowers is either 
so small as to be insignificant, or so large 
as to be unrealistic.  There is also no 
background information on NBFIs and 
their current role in the financial sector. 
Detailed information on this is contained in 
the attached presentation, which will be 
incorporated into the PDR. 
13 
14 
This will continue in case of RMTP clients. It 
is not clear what further research is 
required, nor where the budgetary resources 
for such further research will be obtained. 
The appendix also includes some useful 
lessons learned, but primarily describes 
an approach to value chain finance.   It 
also says that informal credit contributes 
to value chain financing – although the 
volume and extent of this are not known.   
The impact study for CDSP IV and 
interviews with farmers in the south-west 
of Bangladesh suggests that such 
informal value chain financing is very 
significant in some locations and for 
some crops.  This financing is provided 
both by buyers of farm products and 
suppliers of farm inputs.  More research 
on this would be worthwhile. 
Project Description 
Component 1 is value chain 
development, and aims to reach 445,000 
microenterprises (ME) – although in 
some places in the PDR the number is 
400,000.   The component includes 
training (including nutrition), links to 
agribusiness buyers, technical and 
business services (including private 
advisory services), and support for food 
standards.  Around 110 value chain sub-
projects will be implemented by POs, at 
an average cost of $84,000 (in the cost 
tables – in the report text it is 
$100,000).   VC sub-projects have been 
included in earlier projects with PKSF 
(especially FEDEC and PACE) and the 
The average unit cost per sub-project 
including contingencies is USD 100,000. 
There is absolutely no discrepancy between 
the main report and the detailed cost tables. 
Kindly appreciate the difference between 
base cost and cost including contingencies. 
As mentioned earlier, full documentation on 
FEDEC, PACE and other projects is already 
publicly disclosed by IFAD. 
The difference in target group outreach 
numbers is due to the likelihood of DANIDA 
co-financing (see response to comment #6 
above).. 
15 
PDR could be enriched by briefly 
providing the experiences of these sub-
projects in terms of their number, scale, 
outreach, sectors and results. 
Farm sector vs non-farm sector.  It is not 
clear from the PDR the extent to which 
value chains will be in the broad farm 
sector (including livestock and 
aquaculture) and in the non-farm sector.   
The report does not explain the 
advantages and disadvantages of 
focusing on  either the farm or the non-
farm sector, however the main report 
and the EFA imply that the project will 
overwhelming focus on the farm sector.   
This appears to be similar to the 
approach of PACE.   This is despite the 
fact that the non-farm sector is growing 
more quickly and more and more rural 
employment comes from the non-farm 
sector.   In CDSP IV, the impact survey 
reported that the proportion of household 
income coming from the non-farm sector 
was 60% (but that included wage labour 
on farms), and an increasing proportion 
of loans were being invested in non-farm 
IGAs as the loan programme matured.    
It may be that PKSF has had better 
results from developing microenterprises 
in the farm sector – especially in terms of 
job creation.    It should be remembered 
that 87% of rural households are 
involved, to some extent and in some 
way, in the farm sector.   
16  Micro-enterprises.  Linked to the previous 
point, if RMTP is focusing on the farm 
sector, it is not clear what constitutes a 
microenterprise (for the purposes of 
RMTP).    Are not all farms also 
microenterprises?  Or are MEs defined as 
those enterprises that are taking loans of 
a size that is over PKSF’s threshold for 
ME lending?  When FEDEC was being 
implemented, ME loans were defined as 
being between Tk30,000 and 
Tk1,000,000.    It is recommended a 
brief description of the micro-enterprises 
be provided in the PDR.   
As clearly indicated in the PDR, RMTP will 
focus on farm sectors, not non-farm sectors. 
PKSF has other projects which focus on the 
non-farm sector, such as the World Bank-
financed SEP. 
Micro-enterprises are described in the PDR 
main text, the SECAP review note, and the 
attached presentation. 
PKSF's present microenterprise average loan 
size is BDT 120,000. PKSF is considering to 
raise this ceiling to BDT 3 million.  
The average loan size of the NBFI window 
ranges from BDT 3 million to BDT 6 million. 
17 
The team should consider providing more 
attention to the development of farm 
sector support enterprises.  While it is 
clear that these are included (milk 
collection centres are in the EFA), there 
is nothing much on the scope and scale 
of these businesses – which include input 
suppliers for the different farm sub-
sectors, farm marketing enterprises 
(including primary processing), 
machinery agents, workshops and hire 
services, irrigation providers, tree and 
plant nurseries, animals and fish 
Further information is being placed in the 
PDR on this aspect (summarised below). 
The project will support investments in 
expansion of rolling stock for hire service 
including tractors, power tillers, combine 
harvesters and rice planters. Implements for 
tractors/power tillers could include potato 
harvesters, planter-fertilizer drills for potato, 
maize, sorghum, medicinal plants, 
vegetables, etc. This includes: trailers; silage 
choppers; fertilizer injectors for deep 
placement of briquettes for rice cultivation 
made from urea, urea/DAP, urea/compost, 
and urea/DAP/compost; plows, harrows, 
rotary tillers, levellers, drip irrigation, etc. 
The project will also provide investment 
support to repair shops for tractors and 
implements. 
Investments in agricultural support 
enterprises will include small 
slaughterhouses for poultry/cattle/goat, 
poultry hatcheries, feed mills, produce 
transporters, small processing facilities for 
vegetables and milk, compost making, 
fertilizer briquettes making, bakeries, fruit 
drying, and pulp/concentrate/juice 
production. 
Oilseeds will be included under the 
commodity selection heading of 
crops/horticulture, in para 53. The word 
legumes may be included in the text. 
The PDR clearly and explicitly selects the 
following livestock value chains: (i) dairy 
production; (ii) red meat (e.g. cattle, goats, 
sheep, and buffalo); (iii) poultry (including 
water birds and turkey) and eggs; (iv) 
related trading and processing. Ref para 53 
of the PDR main report. 
Appendix II has been revised to better 
reflect the nutritional attractiveness of the 
products specified above. 
It is expected that 30%-50% of the selected 
value chains are nutrition-sensitive. 
PKSF has just launched a large DFID-
financed project (PPEP) that provides 
significant resources for ultrapoor 
households. Furthermore, PKSF-funded 
Ujjibito and ENRICH programmes are 
specifically targeted to the ultra-poor. RMTP 
will campaign to increase awareness about 
nutrition and foster behavioural change, 
especially in diets, further to a nutritional 
analysis in the early stages of 
implementation. 
Refer to PDR para 94 and Appendix 2. 
breeding services and so on.  The PDR 
does not say what may be done to 
develop their outreach and efficiency.  
There may be value chains to be 
developed within these support 
enterprises – for example the value chain 
for irrigation pumps.   In total the PDR 
talks of only 200 agricultural support 
enterprises being supported – this seems 
a very low number.   
18 
Value chains.  Oilseeds have not been 
mentioned as a potential sub-sector for 
VC development, despite the sunflower 
VC being mentioned in Appendix 1.  
There is also potential to develop value 
chains for soyabean – including links to 
processing mills.   
19  Nutrition and targeting. The PDR includes 
Appendix II: Nutrition-sensitive value 
chain approach.  This makes an 
evaluation of a number of farm products 
in terms their nutrition sensitivity – and 
also how appropriate they are for 
women.  Some of the evaluation of farm 
products in terms of their nutrition-
sensitivity does not take account of local 
production practices and the 
attractiveness for poor households.  It 
dismissed beef and milk production and 
goat rearing as suitable enterprises – all 
of which are attractive for land-poor rural 
households who are nutritionally 
vulnerable.  In particular goats have 
been very successful in past PKSF 
projects, especially for the poorest 
households. 
20  Nutrition-sensitive value chains are more 
relevant for a project targeting the 
extreme poor (who are likely to consume 
the products produced) than one scaling 
up commercial production units (which is 
the thrust of RTMP).  Commercial 
producers will be primarily concerned 
with making money – that they can use 
to buy foodstuffs that they do not 
produce.   Although RMPT aims to reach 
extreme poor households, there does not 
seem to be any special targeted 
assistance for these households.  Rather 
the project will link up with PKSF’s 
existing ultra-poor programme.  There 
could have been an opportunity for RMPT 
to fund a special package of support for 
ultra-poor households, along the lines of 
the earlier PKSF PRIME project – but 
quite possibly PKSF is able to access 
other resources for this, and the need for 
21 
such support has declined in line with the 
numbers of ultra-poor households. This 
aspect should be clarified. 
Financing. The proposed US$10 million 
grant from Denmark would fund much of 
Component 1, of which total cost is US$ 
35.3 million .  If this grant funding were 
not to be available, the scope and scale 
of value chain development would need 
to be significantly reduced.   
22  Micro-enterprise lending. The PDR (para 
66) says project resources will be used to 
expand PKSF’s micro-enterprise lending 
programme by 100,000 borrowers with 
an average loan size of Tk120,000 (which 
will rotate a number of times so the 
average borrower will get a multiple of 
this amount) – but this does not match 
up with calculations in the EFA (Annex 4) 
showing that all 445,000 households 
involved in RMTP will get loans using 
project resources.  100,000 loans with an 
average size of Tk120,000 comes to a 
total of US$143 million -  compared to 
US$135 million allocated in the project 
cost tables (of which 37% is IFAD 
funding, 8% PKSF and 55% from POs).  
Moreover PACE, which seems to be 
rather similar in terms of concept, is 
reported to have financed 609,566 
micro-enterprises.   Why is the number 
going to be so much lower in RMPT?     
23 
There does not seem to have been any 
attempt to calculate how many loans of 
what size will be provided from the 
resources available, and what growth 
there will be in the loan portfolio from 
PKSF to POs, and from POs to households 
in terms of the total amount outstanding 
– as well as the numbers of enterprises 
The DANIDA co-funding has been confirmed 
by Denmark. Should this funding not 
materialise, the project cost structure will be 
refined prior to EB submission. 
Other borrowers will receive loans from three 
other windows of PKSF. 
The average loan size of microenterprise 
borrowers is increasing fast in all POs. Larger 
loans implies a lower number of clients. As 
such, increased resources will not increase 
client base, but rather deepen investment 
and expand impact. The average loan size of 
BDT 120,000 is a starting value; it could rise 
in subsequent years. 
As shown in the Financial analysis in the EFA 
(Annex 4) it is expected that all 445,000 HH 
will take loans to commence the agriculture, 
livestock and non-agriculture activities that 
are supported by the project. In the EFA, the 
analysis focused on only on round of loans 
per HH to commence the production activity 
and also the EFA analysis demonstrated the 
repayment schedule. These 445,000 HH take 
loans in different years and therefore it is 
expected that the POs will use re-flows of 
loans for more than one round during the 
project period to meet the total demand of 
US $ 285 million loans (this is shown in EFA 
Excel sheets – Financial analysis workbook) 
although the total loan amount included in 
the project cost tables is USD 135 million. It 
is possible to deliver USD 285 million since 
the duration of one loan is maximum 1 year 
and the modal time is 6 months.  
The estimated demand of USD 285 million 
would be expected to be realised during 
project year 2 to the end of the project 
(project year 6) taking only one loan per HH. 
However, assessment of POs Annual Reports 
shows that one HH (or one entrepreneur) 
takes multiple loans using both project 
resources and re-flows. Thus, it is difficult to 
ex-ante estimate the number of loans that 
would be sourced by the beneficiaries during 
the full development period of the project. 
The estimation for the PACE project is ex-
post and based on monitoring information. 
PSKF’s and POs’ portfolio growth are being 
estimated. These figures will be inserted in 
the logframe. Revolving of loans by POs has 
been calculated.  
The size of an individual loan depends on the 
type of enterprise that is supported by the 
project. The observed practice in project 
areas is to have a combination of 
enterprises. HH demand for loans for 
project-supported enterprises therefore 
depends on the combinations of these 
production activities. The EFA assessed 7 
different typical and representative 
production models to demonstrate the 
typical size of a loan (Annex 4) that would 
be potentially demanded. In order to 
estimate the total demand for loans, these 
were multiplied by the total lands, other 
enterprise size and size of livestock that are 
supported by the project. As such the typical 
loan sizes that would be demanded have 
been estimated. However, the actual size of 
the loan that HHs would demand would only 
be known once they present their production 
models to the POs during the project. 
The practices applied under FEDEC and POs 
will be followed. This is indicated in the PDR. 
PKSF will estimate the increase in its loan 
outstanding portfolio to POs, as well as POs’ 
loans outstanding portfolio with micro-
enterprises. IFAD disbursements will be 
based on the increase in the loan 
outstanding portfolio from PKSF to POs. This 
is standard operating procedure applied by 
all IFIs financing PKSF (including WB and 
ADB). 
getting funding from POs.  This needs to 
take account of loan repayments being 
re-lent and growth in PO member savings 
used for on-lending.        
24  ME loan disbursements.  Linked to the 
above, it is not clear how IFAD funds for 
on-lending to POs will be disbursed.   It is 
easy for POs to say they have disbursed 
ME loans to the value of x, and apply to 
have this amount funded by PKSF – and 
in turn by IFAD.  But this takes no 
account of the stream of loan 
repayments and overall growth in the 
portfolio.   In the FEDEC project, funds 
were disbursed to PKSF on the basis of 
growth in PKSF’s ME lending to POs.  For 
each withdrawal application, PKSF 
provided a list of POs and the amount in 
ME lending to the PO which is 
outstanding (i.e. amount lent net of 
repayments).   IFAD then provided PKSF 
with funds equal to 50% of the growth in 
the total amount outstanding – the other 
50% PKSF’s contribution to project cost.     
25 
26 
The rules for disbursement of IFAD and 
co-financier funds need to be clearly set 
out, as do the definitions of what 
constitutes contributions by PKSF, POs, 
NBFI, the private sector and beneficiaries 
to the costs of different project activities.     
Already done. Beneficiaries and the private 
sector will contribute in kind. This will be 
tracked by the project. 
PO lending. For RMTP, the contribution of 
PKSF to PO lending funds is relatively 
small (8%), with more funds coming 
from POs (55%).   If this is to be 
incremental lending (expanding the ME 
loan portfolio), where are POs going to 
get this money from?   The possibility for 
further increases in bank borrowing by 
POs may be limited.    What mechanism 
will the project have the monitor the 
increase in PO funding of ME lending? 
The main sources of PO funds are savings 
and retained earnings. Some POs even 
borrow from commercial banks. The 
monitoring of PO lending activities is a core 
activity of PKSF as a wholesale lending 
organization to its POs. 
27 
Component 3 is institutional 
strengthening and project management.   
Much of sub-component 3.1 (PKSF 
capacity building) concerns innovations – 
distributed digital ledger technology 
(block chain), e-commerce platform, 
Yes. And this will lead to enhanced 
operations by a strengthened apex / 
wholesale lending organization. 
28 
29 
30 
The PMU will have 22 staff including one 
driver. This is estimated based on previous 
IFAD experiences with PKSF, particularly 
PACE. 
The detailed list of positions and 
organigramme is described in the PIM. 
crowd funding platform, and micro-
enterprise ICT platform.   
Project management. What is missing 
from the component description (it is also 
not in the part of Section K on project 
management and coordination) is any 
description of the staffing of the PMU. 
There is also no organogram.   The first 
three IFAD projects with PKSF (MFTSP, 
MFMSFP and FEDEC) all had very small 
PMUs with less than a handful of staff.   
PKSF then implemented PRIME with grant 
funding from DFID with a much larger 
staff.  This enabled PMU staff to 
frequently visit participating POs, which 
in turn built a sense of real partnership in 
project implementation and enabled 
problems to be more easily solved.  The 
PKSF proposed staffing for RMTP should 
be described in the PDR/PIM. 
Risks and Safeguards 
Risks. One risk that is not in the 
framework is the institutional risk to 
PKSF and POs.  In particular will POs 
continue to be viable as microfinance 
lenders and able to stand up to 
competition from the big three MFIs?   
Another risk that is not mentioned is the 
ability / willingness of POs to make a 
major contribution towards project costs.  
In total POs are to contributes US$80.5 
million – slightly more than the IFAD 
loan. This includes 55% of the cost of 
microfinance lending.   
Safeguards. The QAG notes that the 
project may finance solar powered 
irrigation pumps. This could have adverse 
environmental impacts that have not 
been recognised in the environmental 
screening process.  Solar pumps have 
zero (or near zero) operating costs. This 
means there is no incentive not to 
extract water regardless of the need for 
irrigation.  Where irrigation water 
resources are limited (due to shallow 
aquifer constrains or limited surface 
water supplies in drainage channels), 
over use of water by solar pump 
operators will mean there is less water 
available for other farmers – or for 
domestic purposes.  Support for solar 
powered pumps needs to be carefully 
considered according to local water 
resource availability. 
The three very large MFIs are not expanding 
laterally any more. The main expansion is 
vertical – that is, financing micro-enterprises 
and increasing loan size. All PKSF POs, 
especially those offering micro-enterprise 
loans, are viable, and many of them are very 
profitable. They have been profitable for 
more than 15 years. There is no reason to 
be otherwise, as loan sizes are increasing 
fast and micro-enterprise portfolios exceed 
50% of total lending.  
This risk and the associated mitigation 
measures are documented in the ESMF 
which is an integral part of the project 
documentation. 
The ESMF recognizes the risk of increased 
competition over natural resources which 
includes abstraction of groundwater beyond 
sustainable levels and proposes the 
introduction of drip irrigation and other 
precision irrigation techniques. The actual 
risk of increased water use as a result of the 
promotion of solar-powered irrigation should 
however be qualified and contextualized. In 
many cases this will involve a change from 
diesel powered pumps to solar powered 
pumps. Due to the much higher upfront 
investment costs of solar systems and a 
steep increase in that cost when increasing 
the number of solar panels, farmers will 
often choose a pump with lower capacity 
than a diesel pump which often have a too 
high capacity for the purpose. The 
combination of solar pumps with precision 
irrigation techniques therefore in reality 
leads to a higher system efficiency compared 
to diesel pump systems. Notwithstanding the 
above, there will indeed be risks in certain 
areas of the country even if they are not 
directly related to the actual source of 
energy for pumping. These will be identified 
through the cluster-level risk analysis 
(section 6.2 of the ESMF) and a mitigation 
measure will be found at that cluster level. 
These mitigation measures would comprise 
both awareness raising on conscious use of 
freshwater, as well as checks on compliance 
with national and local regulations on 
groundwater pumping such as through water 
use permits. 
Implementation Readiness and Evaluability 
The logframe has already been revised and 
will be inserted into the final version of the 
PDR. 
The logframe has already been revised and 
will be inserted into the final version of the 
PDR. 
The logframe has already been revised and 
will be inserted into the final version of the 
PDR. 
The comment on indicators contradicts 
IFAD's published core indicators. The 
indicators “percentage of women reporting 
improved food quality” and “increased profit” 
are IFAD core indicators 1.2.8 and 2.2.2. 
Please discuss this at corporate level. 
The comprehensive PIM has been prepared 
and will be inserted into the final version of 
the PDR. 
31 
32 
33 
34 
Logframe. This needs considerable 
revision.  It currently covers six pages 
(partly due to poor formatting) and it 
should be possible to reduce this to two 
pages. The logframe has 34 indicators, 
considerably more than the permitted 
maximum of 20 
The goal statement in the text of the 
report “To sustainably increase the 
income, food security and nutrition of 
marginal and small farmers and micro-
entrepreneurs across selected value 
chains” is quite different to that in the 
logframe “To provide strategic enabling 
conditions for the sustained growth of 
rural commodity value chains with 
comparative advantage, nutritional 
potential, market demand, growth 
potential, and backward linkages to small 
farmers and microentrepreneurs”.  The 
goal statement in the report text is to be 
preferred, and relates much better to the 
logframe indicators such as an increase 
in income. 
Some of the logframe targets at goal and 
objective levels are either too vague 
(percent of women reporting improved 
food quality), difficult to measure 
(increased profit), and some targets have 
been set so low that they will be 
achieved regardless of what the project 
does.   There also needs to be 
consistency in and between the targets 
presented in the PDR and logframe.   
Project implementation manual: The PIM 
only has a list of potential districts and 
implementation guidelines for component 
1.  Implementation guidelines are needed 
for component 2 along with detailed 
project management arrangements, 
financial management and procurement 
guidelines, and terms of reference for 
project staff and service providers.  
There is only one paragraph on M&E in 
the main report, and there are no 
detailed guidelines in the PIM.    For M&E 
it should be possible for RMTP to follow 
what PACE has done – provided that 
PACE has had a fully operational M&E 
system that has generated all the data 
and reports that are needed.  However 
there is no information on this in the 
PDR.   The same applies to some other 
aspects of the PIM – PACE could be used 
as a model 
35  Overall readiness: despite the very 
incomplete PIM, PKSF will be ready to 
implement RMTP.  PKSF’s track record 
shows that it can get projects going 
within a short period and achieve (or 
exceed) the required outputs within the 
project period.   There is however a need 
to sort out disbursement rules for lending 
funds.   
36 
Evaluability: The financial analysis 
calculates net returns from project 
interventions using a number of 
enterprise models (almost all of these are 
farm enterprises producing different 
products.  From these seven farm models 
have been created, each with a different 
combination of enterprises.   For each 
model total with and without project net 
farm income has been calculated.  
However the overall impact on family 
income and poverty reduction has not 
been assessed as this would need to take 
account of non-farm / non enterprise 
sources of income.  The change in 
volume of farm production and total 
labour requirements have also been 
calculated.   However labour has not 
been disaggregated in family and hired 
labour.      
37 
Economic analysis uses economic values 
for inputs and outputs and calculates net 
benefits accruing to households less the 
project investment costs.   However 
these investment costs do not include 
funds used for credit.  This is not 
The comprehensive PIM has been prepared 
and will be inserted into the final version of 
the PDR. 
The EFA is in compliance with IFAD 
requirements. The impact of project 
investments on household incomes has been 
carefully calculated. EFA does not include 
hypothetical exogenous changes which are 
not attributable to the specific project 
investment. 
In the Production Model analysis, the 
existing income generating activities that are 
not supported by the project are not 
included in the analysis. The approach of 
partial budgeting was used where only the 
component of HH economy that would be 
impacted has been the focus of the analysis. 
It is shown in the production model analysis 
the “with-project” income and the comment 
is made about the poverty line, i.e whether 
the “with-project” income would be sufficient 
to come out of poverty. In all production 
model, the income would be sufficient. 
Whilst it is, in theory, correct to disaggregate 
labour into HH and hired, and cost HH labour 
with an imputed value, during the farm visits 
it was revealed that there is a high level of 
interconnectivity between HH labour and the 
hired labour at the HH level. In many 
occasions when HH labour is used on the 
own farm, the option of wage labour is 
foregone. Same labour pool has both types 
and is highly transient and the farm sector 
has year-round work. It is also seasonal and 
hardly any “HH designated” farm activities 
have been observed. As such it is very 
difficult to separate and value HH labour 
from wage labour – same HH will have 
labour which will be ‘HH labour” in January 
and “hired labour” in February.  Hence the 
analysis did not disaggregate. 
The economic cost does not include credit 
since it is a transaction cost. The balance 
total project economic cost is USD 38 
million. The total incremental production cost 
of all production activities during the project 
period of 6 years is USD 232 million (85% of 
unreasonable as credit funds will not be 
used up during the project period.  The 
credit fund will remain intact, and may 
even grow as surplus funds are re-
invested.   However around 80% of 
project cost is the line of credit, and the 
improved availability of credit is a major 
factor behind the generation of benefits.   
The base case EIRR is 30%.  Given that 
only 20% of the project investment has 
been set against the economic value of 
increased household income, it is 
surprising that the EIRR is not higher.   
One interesting figure to come out of the 
sensitivity analysis – if 30% of land were 
to become unusable due to climate 
change, the EIRR would only fall to 29%.    
the total economic cost of the project period 
comes from activities). So, the project 
benefits have to outweigh this cost. 
Moreover, many individual production 
models which contribute largely to the net 
present value (i.e. large fish ponds, milk 
collecting canters and fingerling production, 
all livestock etc) have IRRs which are in the 
range of the base case EIRR. This is the 
main reason of having 30%. 
Regarding the sensitivity analysis, the main 
reason is the land loss scenario has been 
applied only to crops. It is assumed that 
other enterprises would not be affected by 
the loss of cultivable lands. On the other 
hand, the contribution of them to the net 
benefit flow is relatively larger than that 
from crops. 
Bangladesh Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project 
Response to Peer Review Comments 
Comments 
Responses 
Context and Rational for IFAD's Engagement 
1 
2 
3 
4 
The project will focus on a few value 
chains that have been identified on the 
basis of strong comparative advantages, 
market demand and growth potential. 
These include selected field crops, 
horticulture, aquaculture and livestock 
commodities and products. A brief 
description of these value chains, 
particularly highlighting their status, 
growth trends, opportunities and 
bottlenecks in each case, may help to 
strengthen the rationale for their 
prioritisation in the context of the 
country's agricultural sector 
development. 
IFAD  has a strong background of 
engagement in Bangladesh in building 
resilience and reducing vulnerability to 
climate-related risks, especially under the 
Haor Infrastructure and Livelihood 
Improvement Project (HILIP) and Climate 
Adaptation and Livelihood Protection 
Project (CALIP). Some activities under 
the project are very relevant to RMTP, 
including vocational training to develop 
skills for selected micro-enterprises, as 
well as enhanced production, 
diversification and marketing of crop, 
livestock products and aquaculture, and 
innovations that can be scaled up with 
the financial resources of RMTP. There is 
no mention of linkages with IFAD 
projects that are not in the domain of 
micro-finance, which could be additional 
point of IFAD's comparative advantage 
and to fortify the rationale for IFAD's 
engagement in this project. 
Under Lessons Learnt, conspicuously 
missing are any of the emerging lessons 
from IFAD's work on resilience building 
across the agricultural sector landscape. 
It would be useful to give a brief 
description of IFAD's experience with 
different approaches to reduce 
vulnerability that are linked to the value 
chains targeted by the project. 
The potential role of the line ministries 
responsible for the targeted value chains 
is not coming out clearly. Lessons from 
HILIP-CALIP show the need to involve the 
state ministries responsible for 
development of specific value chains, 
especially on issues around policy, 
licensing/ certification and provision of 
some services. In particular the Ministry 
This information is being included in the 
updated/comprehensive PIM, which forms an 
integral part of the final PDR. 
A brief summary was also included in the 
concept note shared with the Government 
and with OSC. 
Linkages with other IFAD-financed projects 
in Bangladesh is indicated in para 93 of the 
PDR main report. 
It is not clear how this would be relevant to 
a project which will not invest directly in land 
development/protection activities. Resilience 
elements are included in the SECAP review 
note and ESMF. 
Agreed. Wording will be added on 
cooperation with relevant Ministries. 
of Fisheries and Livestock will have a key 
influence on the proposed activities on 
aquaculture and livestock, and therefore, 
the role of the public sector in the project 
needs to be clarified. 
Project Description 
This is covered by separate Government 
programmes. 
This is documented in the PIM which is being 
updated. 
The selection of the project will comply with 
para 26 and 27 of the PDR main report. This 
may include areas where other IFAD-
financed projects are operating. 
5 
6 
7 
Under targeting, clarify the provisions for 
inclusion of those with disabilities, 
possibly identifying potential enterprises 
that may specifically accommodate less 
physical requirements.  (It is mentioned 
that disabled persons are covered by 
governmental safety net programs, 
however the project could consider 
tailored training to further reduce their 
vulnerability). 
Under Sub-component 2.3, which will be 
implemented by the Ministry of 
Expatriates' Welfare and Overseas 
Employment (MoEWOE), considering that 
recipients of remittances are spread out 
and scattered across the country, and 
that these are private transactions, there 
needs to be a clear strategy on how they 
will be identified and reached. Does this 
intervention target only recipients of 
remittances that fall within IFAD target 
groups (e.g. rural poor) or is it open to 
all categories? Furthermore, a detailed 
analysis on how remittances are currently 
spent could be useful for a better 
understanding of the competing interests 
and conditions preventing such 
remittances from being invested in 
sustainable economic activities, rather 
than to simply assume it is due to lack of 
skills among recipients. 
The selection of the Project Area avoids 
areas of potential duplication with other 
PKSF programmes, seeks 
complementarities with World Bank-
financed Sustainable Enterprise Project 
and focuses on areas where identified 
Partner Organisations have the capacity 
to implement value chain financing. 
There is need to clarify if consideration 
will also be given to the areas with 
potential to generate linkages with other 
IFAD projects. For instance there could 
be added value to give particular 
attention to the areas where IFAD has 
invested in capacity development (e.g. 
youth vocational training under HILIP-
CALIP), which therefore have potential 
demand for financial services and where 
IFAD has already developed networks. 
8 
Under technical risks, highlight the risk of 
investing in some value chains where 
IFAD lacks sufficient experience in the 
Not clear about this comment. The project is 
not being implemented by IFAD. It will be 
Risks and Safeguards 
country e.g. aquaculture of crabs. The 
mitigation may include SSTC to promote 
learning from other countries and IFAD 
projects, which have the experience and 
expertise in such value chains. 
9 
Highlight the institutional risks of working 
with new partners e.g. the Ministry of 
Expatriates' Welfare and Overseas 
Employment (MoEWOE), noting there is 
no mention of IFAD's previous experience 
of working with this Ministry. 
implemented by PKSF through POs. PKSF 
and POs have experience in aquaculture 
lending. 
Agreed, this risk will be added. 
Implementation Readiness and Evaluability 
10  Draft PIM, 18-month Procurement Plan 
and 1st AWPB are fairly advanced, 
suggesting the project's implementation 
readiness. These will need to be updated 
and revision should include the necessary 
edits (e.g. the Table of Content paging 
are not fully aligned with the document 
content). 
Table of contents will be reviewed. 
Bangladesh Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project 
Response to SECAP Compliance Review Comments 
Comments 
Responses 
Agreed, wording will be included. 
The project will be obliged to comply with all 
relevant regulations regarding labour. 
1 
2 
Gender violence and Sexual 
Exploitation/Abuse: The rate of violence 
against women is considered alarming. 
PKSF has a policy and strategy for 
“Protecting Women Employees from 
Possible Sexual Harassment” aimed at 
PKSF employees, however, the PDR is 
not clear on: (i) the extent to which 
sexual exploitation and abuse is 
addressed in this policy (ESMF, 4.1); and 
(ii) specific project support to 
prevent/remedy/report SEA cases (PDR 
#15, SECAP review note #9). Note that 
IFAD is presently identifying SEA focal 
points in the region. 
Labour: Microenterprises/companies will 
be obliged to comply with national and 
state regulations governing labour. The 
design appears to place emphasis on 
occupational health and safety using the 
Standard Operating Procedures, training 
and awareness raising, however, what is 
unclear is whether the Procedures cover 
other labour management issues related 
to fair treatment, worker organisations, 
etc. (ESMF #5.2). 
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Technical Working Papers
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Appendix I: Financial services through POs and NBFIs.1 
1.  Introduction and Background 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF), an apex development organization was established 
by  the  Government  of  Bangladesh  (GoB)  in  May  1990  for  sustainable  poverty  reduction 
through employment generation. PKSF aims to create self-employment opportunities in rural 
off-farm  sector  by  extending  loan  facilities  to  the  rural  moderate  poor.  Over  the  last 
decades, this loan programme has been diversified to cater the changing needs of the rural 
Bangladeshi  population.  PKSF’s  “inclusive  financing  programme”  currently  serves  the  ultra-
poor, moderate poor, small and marginal farmers,  and micro-entrepreneurs. In addition to 
financial  service  delivery,  the  foundation  provides  a  wide  range  of  development  services 
including  appropriate  credit,  basic  education,  primary  health  care,  technology  transfer  and 
business development services through 274 so-called Partner Organizations (POs). All PKSF 
POs,  especially  those  offering  micro-enterprise  loans,  are  viable,  and  many  of  them  are 
profitable.  They  are  profitable  given  the  fact  that  loan  sizes  are  increasing  fast  and  micro-
enterprise portfolios exceed 50% of total lending  
As  at  September  2018,  PKSF  had  $9,522,639  and  an  outstanding  loan  amount  of 
$527,485,950  to  its  partner  organizations.  Leveraging  PKSF  funds,  with  retained  earnings, 
equity  and  occasionally  commercial  finance,  the  PO  are  able  to  lend  a  total  of 
$2,651,040,000 to their borrowers. There is a wide variety among the partner organizations 
served by PKSF. Some of  the partner organizations are grass roots and have specific focus 
on for example employment generation for the marginalized women, whilst others are larger 
and  bear  a  more  commercial  signature.  Partner  organizations  typically  operate  through  a 
decentralized  model.  Meaning  that  they  have  bigger  offices  at  district  level  and  smaller 
offices  and  branches  at  upazila  level.  This  allows  the  loan  officers  at  these  branches  to 
closely  monitor  the  loans  of  borrowers  and  assure  high  repayment  rates.  In  fact,  the 
portfolio  at  risk  (PAR)  of  PKSF  POs  in  negligible  and  the  recovery  rate  of  PKSF  loans 
currently stands at 99.53% with defaults mostly caused by a “force majeure”.  
Due  to  the  surge  in  economic  growth  and  increased  need  for  financial  services,  POs  have 
been  able  to  gradually  expand  their  operations.  Although  PKSF  works  with  a  variety  of 
partner organizations, they use standardized their loan products. Regular adjustments in the 
terms  and  conditions  of  PKSF  loans  were  required  in  order  to  meet  the  financial  needs  of 
borrowers.  Over  the  course  of  years  PKSF  therefore  gradually  increased  the  loan  ceiling  of 
their  products.  Also,  the  Sufolon  product  is the  direct  result of  PKSFs  aim  to  offer  financial 
services that are aligned with seasons.  
Another apparent trend in the (micro) financial sector of Bangladesh is the loan ceiling of the 
different  loan  products.  Also,  the  demand  for  ME  loans  increased  sharply  over  the  last 
decade  with  PKSFs  ME  loan  portfolio  doubling  between  2011  and  2016.  Bangladesh  has 
three very large MFIs (Grameen, BRAC and ASA) who are not expanding laterally any more. 
Their  main  expansion  is  vertical  –  that  is,  financing  micro-enterprises  and  increasing  loan 
size.  
IFAD and PKSF recognises constraints of rural entrepreneurs and designed RMTP to leverage 
the usually intangible assets that smallholders do have, namely their – as often is the case - 
long  term  relationships  with  their  suppliers  and  buyers,  to  access  small  credits  for  small 
investments  from  the  Partner  Organizations2  (POs).  These  smaller  loans  enabled  the  rural 
producers to  pay  for  the inputs  required  to expand their  production  and  sales.  These  loans 
are  being  repaid  within  six  to  twelve  months.  However,  these  investments  are  being 
typically  for  production  does  not  add  to  their  assets  creation  and  entrepreneurship 
development.  The  project  envisaged  to  introduce  a  new  dimension  by  including  non-bank 
1 Prepared by Prasun Das and Michael Hamp 
2 The partner organizations of PKSF are in general the MFIs and NGOs across the country 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
financial institutions (NBFIs) as potential partners in supplying long term loans and support 
capital formation. 
The proposed project to be implemented by PKSF is expected to support the achievements 
of  PACE  project  and  escalate  its  financial  service  programme  of  supporting  the  POs  to 
transform  rural  microenterprises  into  sustainable,  productive  and  employment  generating 
enterprises. The proposed approach of RMTP is to expand access to financial services for the 
rural  producers  and  microenterprises  through  the  POs  and  support  the  non-bank  financial 
institutions  (NBFIs)  to  develop  and  delivery  of  credit  products  to  support  the  downstream 
business  entities.  These  resources  will  be  utilised  exclusively  for  development  of  value 
chains  of  selected  sub-sectors  in  agriculture  (horticultural  commodities,  livestock  and 
fisheries). The specific objectives of this financing arrangement through the POs and NBFIs 
are to develop/streamline access to improved assets, technology, inputs and services. 
Keeping the above in view, this project proposed to include both the POs and the NBFIs3 to 
provide  financial  services  to  facilitate  both  production  and  fixed/long-term  assets  creation 
activities.  The  project  will  identify  the  strong  and  weak  nodes  in  the  value  chains  (out  the 
commodities  selected  in  the  clusters)  and  assess  the  needs  of  financial  and  non-financial 
support.  The  project  also  envisaged  to  partner  with  the  information  and  communication 
technology (ICT) service providers to support easy outreach to millions of rural enterprises 
and linking them with the finance and markets.  
The above arrangements of financial services and support are frequently called “value chain 
financing  (VCF)”4.  Value  chain  finance  is  a  method  that  has  been  used  successfully 
worldwide, but only to a limited extent in Bangladesh (although it is probable that more of 
this kind of lending is taking place in the country, but individual initiatives may not be fully 
documented as such). The rationale for these types of financing arrangements is that, when 
they are properly constructed, they are profitable for and beneficial to providers of financial 
services (e.g. MFIs/Banks/NBFIs) and their clients (e.g. Input suppliers, primary producers, 
aggregators, logistic service providers, processors, domestic/foreign buyers etc.) The aim of 
this  working  paper  is  to  develop  and  formalise  value  chain  finance  (without  any  structural 
change  in  the  financing  system)  and  apply  the  same  through  this  project  with  selected 
commodities  in  RMTP  project  areas  as  one  way  to  scale  up  cost  effective  and  sustainable 
lending to rural enterprises. 
The Theory of Change for this project is that involvement of diverse financial institutions (in 
this  project  MFIs  and  NBFIs)  in  Bangladesh  are  equipped  with  the  skills  and  capability  to 
engage in profitable applications of VCF, then rural based microenterprises will have greater 
access  to  the  kinds  of  financial  services  and  markets  (including  market  information)  they 
need to make the investments required to enhance their competitiveness and increase their 
incomes. 
2. Context of Introducing Value Chain Finance Approach 
10.  Rural and agricultural lending system with special reference to microfinance has undergone 
significant changes in Bangladesh since last three decades and it was observed that the rural 
clients are being catered by the MFIs through lending and non-lending services and fostered 
a  healthy  environment,  with  the  number  of  borrowers  consecutively  growing.  This 
phenomenon also supported higher level of financial inclusion in the country.  However, the 
average  lending  size  by  the  MFIs  failed  to  cater  the  agri-business  enterprises  even  at  the 
3 NBFIs in Bangladesh have substantial experiences of financing fixed/long term assets in the rural areas. However, lending experience to agricultural sub-
sectors is limited. 
4The VCF mechanism are used primarily to reduce the lending risks by leveraging relationships as assets, and/or reduction in transaction costs of lending by 
using value chain actors as loan assessors, distributors or collectors for financial services. 
rural  levels.  For  many  smallholder  farmers  and  microenterprises,  access  to  finance  from 
formal  institutions  were  difficult  because  of  the  scarcity  or  unavailability  of  assets  that  can 
be  pledged  as  collateral,  their  low  financial  education,  the  limited  range  of  risk  mitigation 
options such as insurance schemes, and the lack of a robust asset base to help ease shocks.   
11.  With the growth in middleclass and youth population in Bangladesh, demand for high quality 
foods likewise increases. The consumers in Bangladesh become more interested in how their 
food  is  produced.  Additionally,  consumers  demand  confidence  in  the  safety  and  security  of 
their  food;  they  want  to  know  that  it  was  produced  under  safe,  humane  and 
environmentally-sustainable  conditions.  This  requirement  has  led  to  a  demand  for 
traceability  of  food  items,  ones  that  have  been  produced  with  minimal  or  no  harsh 
ingredients etc. which overall are driving towards higher standards for food production and 
handling.  These  developments  are  putting  pressure  on  food  producers  and  other  actors  in 
the  agricultural  value  chains  (AVC)5  to  find  ways  to  meet  these  expectations  which  need 
more investments in building capacity of the downstream actors in the chains. 
12.  Value  chain  financing  often  requires  a  different  mindset  by  financial  institutions  and  hence 
most  loans  are  “one  off”  and  ad-hoc.  Even  though  the  individual  producers’  loan  analysis, 
the  administration  of  the  loan  transaction,  and  monitoring  is  passed  on  to  the  value  chain 
actors, it does require a measure of trust between financial institutions and the actors in the 
value  chain.  To  mitigate  some  of  the  risks,  the  financial  institution  requires  a  greater 
understanding of sector dynamics like production potential, market demand and externalities 
like weather and international commodity prices. This is knowledge that most of the MFIs do 
not possess and commercial banks do not like to enter into these nitty-gritties. 
13.  At  the  same  time,  some  value  chain  actors  (which  are  typically  MSMEs  or  larger  agri-
businesses)  that  act  as  intermediaries  also  need  to  develop  certain  skills.  They  need  to 
understand  how  credit  works,  how  to  make  good  loans  and  how  to  monitor  these  loans 
so  that  they  get  their  money  back.  These  businesses  may  be  capable  providers  of  other 
non-financial  services6,  and  may  lack  good  credit  management  capabilities.  They  also 
need  to  understand  how  they  can  effectively work with financial institutions to expand and 
improve the quality of their loan portfolios. 
14.  Networked ICT has profoundly improved the value chains of industrial goods and services in 
Bangladesh; and it can likewise elevate the face of agricultural industry in the country. The 
AVC  suffers  from  a  lack  of  information  on  traceability  and  other  valuable  data/  indicators 
which  ICT  applications  are  proficient  to  capture,  store  and  share  and  potentially  important 
instrument  to  overcome  some  of  the  severe  agricultural  market  inefficiencies  and  price 
racialization issues7. The market for bringing ICT to the AVC is wide open, and this project 
can leverage the investments by the private sectors that are moving to fill the need.  
3. Existing Financing Models to Microenterprises in Agriculture   
15.  Conventionally,  agricultural  development  programmes  in  Bangladesh  have  tended  to  be 
public-sector  focused,  with  an  emphasis  on  agricultural  extension  and  research,  food 
security, infrastructure, rural livelihoods and financial inclusion. Reviews of experience have 
shown  that  such  approaches  have  frequently  been  unable  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of 
5 In the simplest sense, food moves "from farm to table"; and while most people can envision a farmer growing produce and a consumer who ultimately eats 
it, in fact, the AVC is quite a bit more complex, involving scores of individual players and dozens of processes and transactions. 
6 which includes Technical assistance and market information 
7 ICT can provide access to experts and information on best practices at the farm level, map the consumers demand (pull marketing) 
and traceability of products.  It can bring transparency in pricing to promote competitive advantage to the skilled producers; ICT is 
potentially the most important tool to reach to multiple buyers and sellers which could help in achieving price discovery mechanism for 
the actors in the value chains.  
benefits  to  the  poor  once  programme-funded  activities  cease.  The  Promoting  Agricultural 
Commercialization and Enterprises (PACE) project supported by IFAD being implemented by 
PKSF supports a progressive move for Bangladesh towards a “market systems” or a “making 
markets  work  for  the  poor”  approach.  This  approach  has  emerged  as  one  of  the  preferred 
methods for smallholder farmer development for many multilateral/bilateral donor agencies 
over  the  last  decade,  and  has  been  successfully  applied  in  other  rural  situations  in  other 
countries  (for  example 
for  Agricultural  Development  and  Economic 
Empowerment  (PADEE)  in  Cambodia  and  Cordillera  Highland  Agricultural  Resource 
Management project (CHARMP) in the Philippines). 
the  Project 
16.  Currently,  there  are  several  loan  programmes  of  PKSF  that  are  targeting  rural  poor, 
agricultural  activities  and  small  enterprises;  the  most  important  of  these  programme  are 
Agrosor  (microenterprise),  Jagoran  (microcredit  for  moderately  poor),  Sufalon  (seasonal 
agricultural loan) and Buniad (loan for the very poor) which are being delivered through the 
POs.  The  Government  of  Bangladesh  (GOB)  encourages  the  financial  institutions  to  lend 
more  to  agriculture  and  microenterprises  through  the  government  schemes.  The  current 
policy  of  the  government  is  for  these  schemes  to  operate  independently  of  one  another. 
Bangladesh Bank (Central Bank of the country) issue policy guidelines from time to time to 
ensure  reasonable  flow  of  credit  and  develop  a  sustainable  agricultural  credit  system8. 
However,  these  directives  are  not  directly  applicable  to  the  MFIs  who  are  predominantly 
financing  in  the  rural  and  agricultural  sector.  It is  to  be  noted that  the  MFIs  in  Bangladesh 
are regulated by Microfinance Regulatory Authority (MRA). 
17.  Similar  to  what  can  be  observed  in  other  countries,  formal  financial  institutions  in 
Bangladesh tend to provide services that do not reach or cannot be accessed by smallholder 
farmers and rural microenterprises. Many smallholders access credit through agribusinesses 
in the value chain, where input finance is prevalent and secured not through collateral, but 
through relationships for example sunflower value chain project in southern delta districts in 
Bangladesh9.  These  types  of  lending  arrangements  within  the  value  chains  need  to  be 
recognized  while  mapping  the  flow  of  finance  in  this  sector.  Given  the  very  nature  of 
informal financing relationships and in the absence of demand-side market data on the use 
of  financial  services  in  Bangladesh,  it  is  hard  to  assess  the  volume  and  type  of  informal 
credit that is making its way to smallholder farmers in the country.  
18.  There  have  been  a  number  of  initiatives  undertaken  in  Bangladesh  to  support  agricultural 
finance,  some  of  which  are  still  on-going  (for  example  PACE  project).  Some  of  these 
initiatives  have  not  been  successful  implemented  at  scale.  In  other  cases,  some  of  the 
initiatives are still in their early stages of implementation. Nevertheless, these initiatives do 
offer  some  useful  lessons  that  can  inform  the  design  of  future  agricultural  finance 
interventions.  There  is  an  urgent  need  that  the  future  projects  includes  implementing  a 
strategic  business  planning  (SBP)  exercise  to  help  the  POs  analyse  their  present  strategic 
position and develop an action plan to meet their desired goals and key objectives. PKSF is 
working  with  some  POs  to  develop  products  and  help  introduce  innovations  in  delivering 
financial services, especially for hard-to-reach rural-based clients. 
19.  Non-Bank Financial Institutions (NBFIs) are playing a crucial role in Bangladesh by providing 
additional  financial  services  that  cannot  be  always  provided  by  the  banks.  The  NBFIs,  with 
more multifaceted products and services have taken their place in the competitive financial 
market  to  satisfy  the  changing  demands  of  customers.  NBFIs  are  investing  in  different 
sectors of the economy, but their investments are mostly concentrated in industrial sector. 
8 For example, Bangladesh Bank issued credit policy guide lines for the year 2018-19 which emphasized that the lenders need to disburse at least 10 percent of 
their agricultural credit to the fisheries sector (https://www.bb.org.bd/mediaroom/press_release/press/jul252018_press.pdf)  
9 Value chain development for adoption of new agricultural knowledge: BRAC’s initiatives in Khulna with Sunflower  
According  to  the  release  of  Bangladesh  Bank10,  the  NBFIs'  investment  in  agriculture  sector 
at the end of June 2015 was 1.7 percent of their total investments. 
4. Challenges to overcome and lessons learned 
20. 
Providing profitable financial services, and in particular lending to microenterprises (farmers 
and agri-businesses) is very demanding in any context. Financial services providers must be 
able to deal with a combination of risks – e.g. weather shocks, fluctuating input and output 
prices,  contract-  enforcement  difficulties,  potential  government  interventions  that  can 
negatively affect the behaviour of market participants, etc. While there are approaches that 
can  be  applied  more  generally,  financial  service  providers  will  also  need  to  consider  more 
specific  approaches  that  are  appropriate  to  the  clusters  they  are  targeting  (i.e.  given  the 
differences in the characteristics of market locations, the commodities produced and traded, 
the kinds of actors involved, etc.). 
21.  The proposed RMTP recognises that there are demand and supply side constraints that can 
be eased, if not overcome, to effectively enable rural microenterprises’ access to short and 
long term financing. They are as follows: 
Main demand side barriers 
1. Required loan sizes: Rural microenterprises 
will require loans that are typically small crop 
production, medium size for livestock 
production units and plantation/fruit crops and 
relative big tickets for acquisition of farm 
machineries. 
2. Capacity and Knowledge Standards of 
existing rural microenterprises are not up to 
the mark to understand the value chains. They 
are not likely to be knowledgeable about the 
financial products and services and/or have 
little experience with dealing with financial 
service providers. 
3. Risks related to main assets: Smallholders 
may be unwilling to risk their only productive 
asset to secure financing for production even if 
long term profitability may be favourable, given 
risk spikes in the short term gains.…? 
4. Participation in groups: Producers associations 
(Pas) are existing, however, due  past bad 
experience, smallholders may not participate in 
groups/ and/or cooperatives to own common 
assets, which could serve as viable conduits for 
financing. 
Main supply side barriers 
1. Typically short term loan products: 
Financing by the MFIs while obtained in a 
timely fashion, does not always meet the type 
of capital required (i.e. long term or medium 
term funds). 
2. Mismatch of cash flows: All forms of 
lending models followed by the POs  are not 
always appropriate for financing seasonal 
production, where the interest rate and 
repayment  terms do not adequately reflect 
the seasonal nature of the investments and 
returns. 
3. Limited additional services: Financing by the 
MFIs rare typically unable to provide additional 
financial services beyond short term credit and 
savings. 
4. Restricted use of credit: Internal value chain 
finance - provided by suppliers, buyers and 
aggregators within the value chain - is often 
directed to one crop only, and does not finance 
the farm as a whole. Also the credit delivered 
is typically in kind only, and cannot be used to 
cover contracted labour costs at the farm 
level. 
22.  The  table  below  outlines  some  of  the  important  lessons  that  can  be  drawn  from  the  early 
experience  in  agricultural  finance  in  Bangladesh–  lessons  which  are  also  echoed  in  the 
experiences of other countries: 
Challenges to overcome 
Lessons learned 
10 https://www.bb.org.bd/pub/annual/anreport/ar1415/chap7.pdf 
High transaction costs 
(dealing with small-
scale  transactions, 
involving  those in hard-
to-reach  locations) 
Limited understanding of 
the agricultural sector 
  Dealing with organised groups of farmers and other ways of 
aggregating  demand  (for  financial  services)  can  help 
to  reduce  the  costs  of  delivering  financial  services.  This 
may  come 
financing 
(especially  for  high-value  crops  and  more  integrated  supply 
chains),  specifically  when  it  is  part  of  a  broader  package  of 
financial  and  non-financial  services.   
form  of  value  chain 
the 
in 
  There  are  opportunities  to  introduce  innovation  in  terms  of 
using  alternative  channels  or  ways  of  delivering 
services  –  such  as  NBFIs  (offering  lower  interest  rate  and 
provide  finance  to  downstream  value  chain  actors),  digital 
finance  and  market  platform  (to  reach  out  to  multiple 
borrower and market place). 
  Financial 
to 
need 
service 
providers 
in 
understanding  agriculture  and 
its  value  chains, 
including  specific  agriculture  sub-sectors,  and  adapt  their 
products  to  meet  specific  demand  patterns.  This  also 
involves  undertaking  a  good  analysis  of  the  key  drivers  of 
profitability for  both  the bank and  the  actors  involved  in  the 
lending chain and risk mitigation  approaches. 
invest 
  The  agriculture  sector  is  quite  heterogeneous  and  many 
financial  institutions  require  sectoral  expertise  to  assess 
opportunities  and  develop  appropriate  financial  products.  It 
would  be  useful  to  begin  engagement  with  “easier  cases” 
(i.e.  with  some  of  the  “low  hanging  fruit”)11,  to  allow 
financial  service  providers  to  steadily  go  through  the 
learning  phase  without  prejudice 
to  developing  a 
healthy/high quality loan portfolio. 
Difficulties in assessing 
credit risk 
 
there  doesn’t 
to  be  much 
In  Bangladesh, 
in  terms  of  credit  risk 
sophistication  or 
assessment 
flow-based 
techniques  (e.g.  use  of  cash 
assessments,  agronomic  models  or  more  tailored  credit 
scorecards). 
innovation 
seem 
Identifying and adopting 
other approaches to 
mitigate and manage risks 
  However,  some  of  the  NBFIs  are  using  these  models  for 
financing    long  term  assets  in  other  sectors  through  strong 
linkages  with  supplier,  producers,  traders  and  buyers  in  the 
value  chains  –  This  experiences  can  be  leveraged  in  case  of 
agricultural  sector  which  can  be  helpful  to  make  a  more 
informed assessments of risk. 
  There  are  emerging  models  in  other  countries  where 
security  is  provided  other  than  through  the  requirement 
for  borrowers  to  pledge  traditional  collateral.  Financial 
service  providers  are 
to  underwrite 
anticipated  cash  flows  from  the  farmer  and  the  buyer,  and 
use  other  forms  of  collateral  (such  as  movable  assets). 
Inventory 
receipts)  and 
collateral  management  agreements  are  also  being  used  by 
more  financial  institutions  worldwide.  These  models,  are, 
(using  warehouse 
increasingly  able 
financing 
11 This can be done by helping POs and other financial service providers to identify already bankable opportunities (that 
remain untapped),  working with the best farmers or microenterprises, and then seeking a multiplier effect. 
however,  not  widely  used 
institutions  in  Bangladesh. 
(if  at  all)  by 
financial 
lending 
  Risk  sharing  is  a  typical  approach  adopted  –  e.g.  by 
indirectly 
producers 
associations),  or  having  savings-account-linked  input  loans 
–  especially  in  the  absence  of  accessible  insurance  products 
(to  cover  production  or  weather  risk)  as  in  case  of 
Bangladesh. 
through 
groups 
(e.g. 
5. Addressing the constraints through Value Chain Finance Approach 
23.  Value chain finance involves a range of methods through which different actors in the value 
chain  finance  their  activities.  Sources  of  finance  can  be  external  actors,  such  as  financial 
service providers, social investors, community savings groups, etc. or internal actors such as 
input  suppliers,  producers,  aggregators/producer  groups,  logistics  service  providers 
(warehouse/cold  storages,  transporters)  processors,  traders,  exporters,  etc.  Value  chain 
actors  typically  have  a  number  of  financial  needs  depending  on their  activities  in  the  value 
chains. Value chain finance mechanisms are primarily used to reduce risk (i.e. by leveraging 
relationships  or  assets)  and/or  to  reduce  transaction  costs  (where  value  chain  actors  may 
act as analytical, distribution or collection points for financial products). 
24.  There are a number of advantages to this type of lending system, most of which address the 
constraints which smallholders face when accessing credit in Bangladesh: 
 
 
 
Finance is usually built into buy-and-sell mechanisms. This allows producers at the village 
level to feel more comfortable with the transaction and it is more cost-effective means of 
delivery  when  compared  with  a  financial  institution  providing  financial  services  directly  to 
farmers. 
Financing  can  use  existing  assets  (often  non-tangible),  which  do  not  require  formal 
collateral  on  the  part  of  producers.  When  collateral  is  required,  it  can  be  given  by  larger 
agribusinesses which have sufficient titled assets in place. 
It  is  in  the  interest  of  buyers  and  suppliers  to  finance  producers  to  either  increase  or 
encourage  sales  (e.g.  of  inputs)  to  them  or  to  enhance  the  quality  of  the  supply  of 
commodities they receive from them (i.e. in the case of buyers). 
  Repayment of credit is better assured as producers can receive payment for their product, 
net of any loan repayments. 
  Repayment  rate  tends  to  be  higher.  This  is  often  helped  by  the  fact  that  internal  value 
chain  finance  does  not  take  place  unless  smallholders  receive  the  technical  assistance 
needed to improve their production. 
25. 
Financial service providers (in this project MFIs and NBFIs) will be able to lend to all sizes of 
rural  enterprises  dealing  with  three  focussed  subsector  of  agriculture  and  indeed,  the  agri-
businesses  are  more  likely  to  qualify,  especially  considering  their  ability  to  provide  the 
required  estimated  business  for  these  loans.  Financial  service  providers  are  not  currently 
taking  full  advantage  of  linking  to  the  value  chain  to  mitigate  risks  or  to  reduce  costs  to 
deliver  finance  to  smallholders  or  agribusinesses  which  can  be  easily  achieved  through  this 
approach.  It  is  expected  that  the  participating  POs  and  NBFIs  will  take  advantage  of  some 
risk-mitigating  instruments  available  in  value  chain  financing,  such  as  cash  flow  based 
lending, third party guarantees etc.  
6. Implementation Strategies  
26.  While  implementing  the  proposed  RMTP  project,  the  emphasis  will  be  given  to  develop 
agricultural  value  chains  of  three  sub-sector  agriculture  already  identified  during  the  IFAD 
scoping and design mission. As per the component 2 of the project, the emphasis will be on 
increased  access  to  finance  for  the  rural  microenterprises  through  financial  products  and 
services  delivery  by  the  POs  (MFIs)  and  the  NBFIs.  The  project  will  also  seek  to  build 
synergies between both types of financial service providers (MFIs and NBFIs), and how they 
might come together to leverage finance to the microenterprises. The other lens of RMTP is 
to provide a robust platform for the angle inverters and crowd funding leveraging the strong 
background of PKSF and its due diligence process.   
27.  As  stated  above,  this  project  will  be  composed  of  two  streams  of  interventions:  the  larger 
stream will deal directly with POs those will be selected by PKSF,; while the other stream will 
encompass  support  extended  to  the  selected  NBFIs  who  will  be  interested  to    venture  into 
this  sector  leveraging  their  experiences  in  other  sectors  and  follow  the  wholesale  financing 
mechanism of PKSF. 
28.  The first stream of intervention will be on core capacity building for POs will be in the area of 
administration and credit management delivery, in particular, assisting them to: 
 
  Develop cost effective products and processes to use market intermediaries as wholesalers 
of small loans to producers (horticultural crops, livestock and fishery sub-sector), and 
Lend  to  producers  directly,  but  using  value  chain  finance  approach  to  reduce  costs  and 
mitigate risks (using cash flow based financing after mapping the flow of products and flow 
of finance along the value chains). 
The  selection  of  the  appropriate  sub-  sectors    in  agriculture  (out  of  the  broadly  identified 
clusters) will be made by these Pos and will be based on their own strategies for building a 
portfolio of loans in three sub-sectors of agriculture.  
29.  The  second  stream  of  interventions  will  be  delivered  in  collaboration  with  the  NBFIs  who 
need  to  take  a  pragmatic  view  into  the  targeted  sub-sectors  of  agriculture  (due  to  their 
low/no  exposure)  and  build  their  capacities  for  future  business  opportunities.  A  facilitation 
window  need  to  be  created  for  the  NBFI  partners  who  are  interested  to  develop  their 
products and services (to cater the financial needs of the rural enterprises which are higher 
than  the  capacity  of  Pos),  to  achieve  efficient  value  chains.  This  may  entail,  for  example, 
helping NBFIs to identify value chain financing opportunities, help to structure loans for SME 
intermediaries,  and  then  providing  guidance  on  how  to  deliver  these  loans  successfully.  It 
could  be  that  some  of  these  loans  will  involve  the  identified  Pos;  in  other  cases,  however, 
this  might involve  other  financial  institutions  (non-Pos).  For  example,  an  SME  intermediary 
in a sector may already have some established track record with a NBFI, which has not been 
selected in the above mentioned first stream.  
30.  Within  the  capacity  building  activities,  it  is  critical  that  there  is  some  hands-on  product 
design advisory service that makes it easier for the MFIs and NBFIs to design and implement 
these  products.  The  table  below  is  illustrative  of  the  kinds  of  capacity  building  measures 
envisaged. 
Theme 
Illustrative Capacity Building 
Linking/Facilitations 
•  Support 
  RMTP 
in 
linking  project  partners  (e.g. 
identified 
microenterprises) with financial Service providers (MFIs and NBFIs) 
•  Design    and    develop    value    chain    finance    arrangements    to 
minimize risk/costs 
Upgrading 
Knowledge 
• 
• 
Technical  assistance  to  microenterprises  in  administration  and  credit 
management, in conjunction with existing project e.g. PACE 
Technical  assistance  to  POs  in  product  development,  cash  flow  based 
finance,  building 
value  chain  business  opportunities, 
developing tools, etc. 
linkages 
•  Helping  to  develop  greater  understanding  of  competitiveness 
in 
agricultural  sectors  (among  POs)  and  where  there  are  financing 
opportunities 
•  Developing and dissemination of training / tools to manage risk 
• 
• 
Pilot testing new products 
Facilitating    field    visits    /    interactions    between    providers    and 
targeted users of financial services 
•  Developing financial education for producers  and for microenterprises 
Innovation 
•  Support  for  innovation,  first  in  lending  and  then  potentially for  savings 
• 
through technical assistance and training 
Establishing  an 
innovative products, delivery systems, etc. 
Innovation  Fund 
for  strategic  cost-sharing 
for 
Monitoring 
Evaluation 
and 
•  M&  E  framework  to  be  developed  as  per  the  financing  agreement  with 
IFAD 
•  RMTP  Indicators  need  to  be  measurable  and  in  line  with  the  IFAD’s 
country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP)  
Appendix II: Nutrition-sensitive value chain approach.  
1.  A value chain approach is emerging as a useful way to analyze and navigate the complexity of 
the food system to improve food security and nutrition. Such an approach can help to identify 
entry  points  for  policy  interventions,  investment  decisions  and  capacity  development.  The 
traditional  focus  of  value chain  development is  on increasing  the  economic development.  The 
traditional  focus  of  value  chain  development  is  on  increasing  the  economic  value  of  the 
commodity  to  the  producer  (or  the  value  chain  actors).  Nutrition-sensitive  value  chains 
(NSVCs)  leverage  opportunities  to  enhance  nutrition  value  as  well,  increasing  supply  and 
demand  for  safe  and  diverse  food  and  adding  nutrition  value,  or  minimizing  nutrition  loses 
through  for  examples  promotion  of  biofortitified  crops  or  improved  transport  and  storage.  In 
this  way,  NSCVs  contribute  to  a  households  consumption  of  a  healthy,  diverse  diet  ans 
consequently  to  the  improvement  of  the  nutritional  status  of  all  its  members.  This  chapter 
presents discussion of the two steps of the NSVC process undertaken in a study commissioned 
to the center for tropical agriculture (CIAT). In consists of two steps. Step 1 is the assessment 
of the nutrition situation and Step 2 is the commodity selection. 
Step 1: assessment of the nutrition situation. 
2.  Bangladesh has recorded tremendous improvement in food and nutrition security over the past 
decades.  In  terms  of  child  nutrition  status,  until  the  mid-1990s,  Bangladesh’s  stunting  rates 
have  been  significantly  higher  than  those  of  Sub-Saharan  Africa.  However,  over  the  past 
decades,  Bangladesh  nutrition  has  been  improving.  The  rate  of  stunting  (low  height-for-age) 
among children under five (0 to 59 months), which reflects the state of chronic undernutrition, 
has  decreased  from 51  percent  in  2004  to  36  percent  in  2014, but  still  falls  below  the  World 
Health Organization’s (WHO) cut off for very high prevalence. Prevalence of stunting is higher 
among  rural  children than  urban  children  (38  percent  compared  with  31  percent).  In  spite  of 
the overall better health and nutrition scenario in urban areas, half of the under-five children 
in slums are stunted, which is around one-third for non-slums and other urban areas (NPAN2, 
2017).  Across  the  seven  regions  of  Bangladesh,  stunting  is  most  prevalent  in  Sylhet  (50 
percent) followed by Barisal (40%) and Chittagong (38%) and lowest in Khulna (28 percent). 
The  nutritional  status  of  Bangladeshi  women  shows  a  better  trend  than  that  of  children.  The 
maternal undernutrition, as measured by “low” body mass index (BMI) of <18.5 has declined 
sharply  from  52  percent  to  17  percent  between  1996-97  and  2014  (Figure  3).  At  the  same 
time  there  has  been  a  rapid  increase  in  prevalence  of  overweight  and  obesity  (BMI  >=25) 
among ever-married women from 3 percent in 1996/97 to 24 percent in 2014.  
3.  Underweight  (low  weight-for-age)  among  children  under  5  years  has  also  decreased  in 
Bangladesh  over  the  past  decade,  from  43  percent  in  2004  to  33  percent  in  2014.  Acute 
malnutrition- or wasting (low weight-for-height) has remained worryingly stubborn and almost 
static  over  a  long  period, ranging  from  14  to  15  per  cent  between  2004  and  2014).  Children 
living in urban areas are less likely to be wasted (12 percent) than children living in rural areas 
(15  percent).  By  regions,  wasting  among  children  ranges  from  12  percent  in  Dhaka  to  18 
percent in Rangpur and Barisal. Micronutrient deficiency among children (under 5s and school 
going)  is  still  a  challenge  in  Bangladesh.  About  20.5%  of  school going  children  are  vitamin  A 
deficient, 44.6% are zinc deficient and 40% are iodine deficient. Prevalence of iron deficiency 
is at 10.7% and 9.5% for pre-school and school age children respectively (ICDDR, 2011-12). 
Thirty  three  percent  of  preschool  children  are  anemic.  Prevalence  of  vitamin  D  deficiency  is 
39.6%  for  pre-school  and  45.5%  for  school-aged  children  (NIPORT,  2013;  ICDDR,  2011-12). 
Women of reproductive age (15-49 years) in Bangladesh have high micronutrient deficiencies. 
About 42 percent of non-pregnant non-lactating (NPNL) women suffer from iodine deficiency. 
Prevalence of iron deficiency is at 7.1 percent and zinc deficiency is at 57.3 percent for NPNL 
women  (ICDDR,  2011-12).  Fifty  percent  of  pregnant  women  are  anemic  and  71.5  percent  of 
NPNL women are vitamin D deficient (NIPORT, 2013; ICDDR, 2011-12). 
4.  In Bangladesh, non-communicable diseases (NCDs) are rapidly increasing among adults. About 
31.9  percent  of  Bangladeshi  women  and  19.4  percent  men  have  elevated  blood  pressure  or 
are currently taking medicine to lower their blood pressure, another 28 percent of women and 
men  are  pre-hypertensive.  Approximately  11  percent  of  women  and  men  are  diabetic  with 
additional  25  percent  of  women  and  men  are  pre-diabetic  (NPAN2,  2017).  Generally,  even 
though  food  access  and  availability  has  increased,  there  is  very  little  improvement  in  the 
quality and diversity of diet. The Bangladeshi diets are still largely dominated by cereals, which 
contributes around 70% of the per capita total caloric intake remaining much higher than the 
WHO/ FAO recommendation (2003) of 60%. The diets are deficient in important micronutrients 
such as vitamin A, iron, zinc and iodine.  
5.  The  ongoing  climate  change  is  expected  to  have  detrimental  consequences  for  food  security 
and nutrition in Bangladesh. Climate change is likely to reduce crop production in Bangladesh 
by 30 percent by end of the century (WFP, 2016). In addition, rising carbon dioxide emission is 
going to make Bangladesh’s staple food crops less nutritious, hence exacerbating the nutrition 
problem  further.  Increased  salinity  in  the  coastal  zones  might  also  alter  the  micronutrient 
content of foods, including rice, which may become deficient in zinc and other micronutrients. 
In addition, intake of saline water may lead to increased preeclampsia in pregnant women due 
to  hypertension,  which  in  turn  would  aggravate  the  problem  of  low  birthweight  and 
malnutrition of babies in the coastal zones. 
6.  During  2015,  food  insecurity  became  almost  rare  in  Bangladesh.  Furthermore,  over  the  last 
four  years  the  proportion  of  households  with  one  or  more  members  going  to  bed  hungry 
declined  from  28  to  4%  (JPGSPH,  2016).  The  proportion  of  households  reported  to  eat  only 
rice  and  running  out  of  food  stock  decreased  substantially  (11  and  13%  in  2015)  than  the 
previous  years  (45  and  51%  in  2011).  However,  to  minimize  the  in-house  food  insecurity, 
sacrifices are mostly made by women, even the adolescent girls of the households to cope up 
with  the  situation.  In  addition,  consumption  of  sub-optimal  food  increased  (26%)  from  the 
previous  year  (23%)  which  is  found  to  be  highest  in  Sylhet  division  (37%)  followed  by 
Rangpur  (36%)  (JPGSPH,  2016).  A  major  concern  in  Bangladesh  is  the  lack  of  sufficient 
dietary diversity in the average person’s (and especially the poor person’s) daily consumption, 
which  is  often  traced  back  to  agricultural  diversification—that  is,  the  availability  of  a  diverse 
range of affordable food. 
7.  On  average,  the  energy  gap  between  requirements  and  actual  intake  for  a  typical  adult 
Bangladeshi  is  82  kilocalories  (2,400  kilocalories  vs.  2,318  kilocalories),  which  may  differ 
between socio-economic levels, urban/rural location, and food security status. Dietary intakes 
vary  substantially  depending  on  socio-economic  status  and  residence  (i.e.  whether  rural  or 
urban). Diets are still largely dominated by cereals, which contributes around 70% of the per 
capita total caloric intake remaining much higher than the WHO/ FAO recommendation (2003) 
of 60%. Since 1992, there has been an increase in average per capita daily calorie intake from 
2266  kcal  in  1991-92  to  2318  kcal  in  2010  as  well  as  increase  in  average  per  capita  protein 
intake of about 4.54 gm (66.26 in HIES 2010 versus 62.52 gm in HES 1991-92). Consumption 
of  fish  is  near  desirable  dietary  pattern  (60gm/day),  pulse  intake  has  markedly  declined  to 
14g/d  while the  intake  of fruits  and  vegetables  has improved  reaching to  about  210  gm/day, 
which  is  half  of  WHO/FAO  (2003)  recommended  quantity  (400  gm/day).  The  usual  diets  in 
Bangladesh  are  typically lacking  in  important  micronutrients,  as  shown  by  high  prevalence  of 
micronutrient  deficiencies  for  iodine,  zinc,  vitamin  A  and  iron,  which  can  be  attributed  to 
monotonous diets dominated by plant sources, particularly cereals. For instance, thirty-five per 
cent of the population had mean dietary diversity scores of less than 6 out of 12 food groups 
(BBS, 2010). 
8.  Households  have  slowly  been  changing  their  diets  and  are  consuming  a  broader  range  of 
foods, with greater consumption of vegetables, fruits, and animal source foods. However, the 
consumption  rate  of  these  foods  remains  below  the  recommended  amounts.  While  there  is 
enough  evidence  to  establish  desirable  dietary  patterns  that  are  beneficial  for  preventing 
malnutrition  in  all  its  forms,  dietary  guidelines  have  not  been  accompanied  by  desirable 
changes  in  the  dietary  patterns.  Data  from  the  Bangladesh  Bureau  of  Statistics,  Household 
Income  and  Expenditure  Survey,  2016)  show  a  clear  recent  trend  from  2010-2016  for 
decreased  consumption  of  rice,  wheat,  potato,  mil/milk  products  and  fruits  (-11.74%,  -
23.73%, -7.78%, -19.01%, -19.96%), and increase in consumption of specific animal sourced 
foods  such  as  eggs  +88.61%),  fish  (+26.42%  and  chicken  (+54.46%).    Trans  fat  intake  is 
increasing  and  ultra-processed  foods  and  sugar  sweetened  beverages  in  diets  are  on the  rise 
(CIP2, 2016). 
9.  People’s  economic  capacity  to  access  food  has  risen  through  a  rapid  decline  in  the  poverty 
headcount  -from  48.9%  in  2000  to  23.2%  in  2016  -,  90%  of  which  is  accounted  for  by 
agriculture  and  an  increasing  purchasing  power  even  among  the  poorest.  The  proportion  of 
households  with  no  food  stocks  and  no  ability  to  purchase  food  on  the  market  dropped  from 
51%  in  FSNSP  2011  to  13%  in  FSNS-NNS  2015  (JPGSPH,  2016).  With  regards  to  food 
utilization  and  nutrition,  the  third  dimension  of  food  security,  it  also  claims  ‘the  fastest 
prolonged reductions in child undernutrition in recorded history’ (WFP 2016). 
10. Currently,  Bangladesh  can  boast  a  surplus  in  rice  and  potato  production.  But  for  other  crops 
including  fruit,  maize,  oilseeds,  pulses,  sugarcane,  vegetables  etc.  there  is  still  a  big  gap 
between  demand  and  production,  and  this  accounts  for  much  of  the  hidden  hunger  in  the 
country  (Li,  X.  and  Siddique,  K.H.M.  2018).  BIHS  data  shows  that  the  share  of  rice  in  total 
cropped  area  from  2012  to  2015  decreased  slightly  whereas  non-rice  food  crops  increased. 
The  Government  of  Bangladesh  is  seeking  to  increase  the  availability  of  diverse  food  supply 
through improved agricultural production and trade, and by according priority to food security 
and  nutrition  as  important  national  goals.  The  only  crops  which  have  not  increased  in 
production  in  the  eight  years  between  2007  and  2015  are  pulses,  banana,  and  jackfruit.  The 
annual  growth  of  food  production  from  animal  sources  (e.g.  meat,  milk  and  egg)  has  been 
comparatively larger, with an increase of 13% for eggs, 22% for milk, and 56% for meat from 
2007/2008 levels. 
11. In  Bangladesh,  estimates  for  post-harvest  losses  of  crops  range  between  20%  and  40%  in 
fruits and vegetables. This is particularly problematic when it concerns nutrient dense produce 
that are rich in protein and micronutrients -vegetables, fruits, fish, meat and dairy- which are 
potentially critical for food security and nutrition. Food loss include losses in nutritional value, 
economic  value  and  food  safety.  In  addition,  climate  change  and  natural  resource  depletion 
place stress on food production and increase the volatility of supply. Also, animal source food 
supply  contributes  to  climate  change  through  increased  carbon  dioxide  emissions  (CIP2, 
2016). 
12. The idea that food insecurity arises when food is available but people are unable to afford it is 
still quite a recent development in the history of food security. Akhter et al. (2017) calculated 
the cost of desirable food intakes for Bangladeshis, adjusted for population-level requirements. 
The  diet  costs  Taka  59  (USD  0.70)  per  capita  per  day  and  covers  in  a  cost  efficient  way  the 
energy,  protein  and  micronutrient  requirements.  The  most  cost-efficient  energy  sources  are 
cereals  (rice,  wheat),  followed  by  oil  and  spices.  The  most  cost-efficient  protein  sources  are 
rice,  lentils  followed  by  small  fish.  The  by  far  most  cost-efficient  source  of  vitamin  A  is  leafy 
vegetables, whereas rice and lentils are the most cost-efficient sources of zinc, and spices and 
lentils  the  most  cost-efficient  sources  for  iron.  Other  cost-efficient  animal  sourced  food  items 
are small fish and eggs providing a good source of protein. 
 Step2: Commodity Selection and Prioritization 
13. Further  to  a  discussion  with  the  implementing  agency,  livestock,  aquaculture  and  crops  were 
identified  as  commodities  to  be  included  in  the  project.  These  commodities  are  the  starting 
point for selection and prioritization as done in this paper. Specific commodities presented here 
were selected for having potential in addressing the nutrition gaps but that have at the same 
time, a market potential, income generation potential, potential for women empowerment, and 
environment and climate impact. They were selected based on the NSVC commodity selection 
criteria  recommended  by  de  la  Peña  &  Garret,  (2018).  In  due  course,  this  list  will  be  fine-
tuned. Information on the commodities is collected from the literature as well as face-to-face 
interviews with nutrition and agriculture experts in Bangladesh. The step concludes with a full 
overview  of  the  rating  and  a  SWOT  analysis  on  the  different  commodities.  The  rating  also 
presents  tuber  as  a  potential  commodity.  However,  as  tubers  were  not  included  in  the  initial 
list  at  concept  note  stage  and  thus  have  not  been  discussed  with  the  implementing  partner, 
they are currently left out of the selection.  
14. Crops  including  cereals:  Three  pulses  were  selected:  Lentils,  chickpeas  and  mung  beans. 
Lentils  and  chickpea  scored  higher  31  points  and  29  points  respectively,  out  of  the  highest 
possible score of 33 points. Lentils and chickpea scored highly due to their nutrition value and 
also  given  that  they  can  provide  diverse  nutrients  to  consumers  in  a  cost  efficient  way.  In 
addition,  the  two  are  widely  accepted  by  the  Bangladesh  people,  although  their  consumption 
(especially for lentils) has gone down due to low production within the country resulting from 
crop substitution with rice. Further, lentils and chickpeas are legumes and therefore important 
in  nitrogen  fixation.  Given  that  the  focus  of lentil  and  chickpea  production in  the  country  has 
decreased overtime, less attention has also been put on developing new varieties. As a result, 
most of the present varieties are low yielding and susceptible to diseases, drought, and weed 
infestation.  Chickpea  producers  also  have  poor  management  practices.  All  these  combined, 
have  a  negative  affect  production  and  productivity.  On  the  positive  side,  both  of  these 
commodities  have  high  consumer  demand  locally  (rural  and  urban)  and  export.  In  fact,  the 
demand  is  said to  exceed  available  supply,  therefore  indicating  an  opportunity  for  producers. 
Lentils  are  however  facing  a  threat  from  influx  of  cheap/subsidized  imports,  especially  from 
Canada.  Chickpea  on  the  other  hand  face  threats  from  pest  and  diseases  and  also  imports 
from neighboring countries. 
15. Mung  beans  are  also  highly  nutritious,  have  a  short  growing  cycle,  and  tolerance  to  abiotic 
stresses,  hence  becoming  favorable  for  production  in  Bangladesh  in  the  light  of  climate 
change.  As  a  legume,  it  helps  in  in  nitrogen  fixation.  There  is  an  opportunity  to  increase 
production  of  this  commodity  in  several  agro-ecological  zones  of  the  country  because  it  is 
widely  adaptable.  In  addition,  the  commodity  has  several  varieties  for  production  during  all 
cropping seasons (kharif-I, kharif-II and rabi).  
16. Under this food group, pumpkin and dark green leafy vegetables (both exotic and indigenous) 
were considered to have high potential in improving nutrition of the Bangladesh people. Grean 
leafy  vegetables  attained a  score  of  33  and  pumpkin  29  against  the  possible 33  points.  Dark 
green  leafy  vegetables  are  highly  nutritious  and  affordable  in  terms  of  production  and 
purchase. They can be produced all year round, especially for the producers who have access 
to  irrigation  water,  hence  providing  important  nutrients  throughout  the  year.  They  do  not 
require a lot of water to produce. These vegetables have a  high demand by rural, peri-urban 
and urban consumers.  They are mainly produced by women. Therefore, upgrading this value 
chain would create an opportunity for women empowerment. The downside of this vegetables 
is that it is highly perishable, and due to lack of cold storage facilities by producers and value 
chain  actors  in  Bangladesh,  and  also  minimal  value  addition,  there  is  high  post-harvest  loss, 
especially  during  peak  seasons.  In  addition,  value  chain  actors  do  not  have  appropriate 
knowledge  on  appropriate  handling  of  the  commodity  to  avoid  nutrient  loss.  This  includes 
cooking  practices  for  consumers,  as  well  as  transportation  and  packaging  for  producers  and 
other  value  chain  actors.  The  commodity  faces  threats  due  to  climate  change  which  is 
increasing  salinity  and  having  an  effect  on  micronutrient  content  in  the  soil.  In  addition, 
inappropriate  use  of  pesticides  at  production  level  may  have  a  negative  effect  on  consumer 
health. 
17. Pumpkin is an annual crop, tolerant of hot, humid weather and display a resistance to disease 
and insects. It can be grown the year round, intercropped and rotated with other plants and is 
salinity  tolerant.  Most  parts  of  the  pumpkin  are  edible,  including  the  fleshy  shell,  the  seeds, 
the  leaves,  vines,  and  even  the  flowers.  Important  source  of  protein,  minerals  (calcium, 
potassium and phosphorus), vitamins (especially vitamin A), and antioxidants. Pumpkin leaves 
are  good  source  of  Vitamin  A,  calcium,  Vitamin  C,  iron  and  protein.  Development  of  stress-
tolerant  varieties  and  hybrids,  areas  under  pumpkin  cultivation  are  increasing.  BARI  has 
developed an effective, eco-friendly and low-cost integrated pest management (IPM) package. 
Private  seed  companies  have  introduced  a  number  of  hybrid  pumpkins  that  are  becoming 
incredibly  successful  crops  in  char  land  and  saline-prone  coastal  regions  carotenoids.  As  a 
downside  the  existence  of  fruit  flies  can  be  mentioned,  which  can  cause  serious  damage  to 
pumpkin  crops.  In  addition,  there  are  fertility  and  moisture  constraints  in  stress-prone 
ecosystems (char land, coastal areas, hilly areas).  Pumpkin is currently considered by FAO as 
an  underutilized  crop  for  Bangladesh.  If  more  research  and  development  is  undertaken,  it 
could become a major crop in Bangladesh. 
18. Four  fruits  were  identified  as  important  in  Bangladesh,  in  terms  of  their  contribution  to 
nutrition of the population as well as other four criteria in de la Peña & Garret, (2018). These 
are mangoes, bananas, pineapples and bael. Mangoes, bael and bananas scored 29 out of 33 
points, while pineapples attained a score of 28. Mangoes are widely consumed in the country 
and are a good source of vitamin A, one of the main micronutrient deficiency identified in the 
country.  They  are  consumed  as  fresh  fruits  and  juice,  and  they  have  a  high  demand  both 
locally  and  export.  Some  mango  farmers  wholly  rely  on  sale  of  mangoes  for  their  livelihood. 
The  commodity  however,  is  highly  perishable  and  faces  high  market  dynamics  in  supply  and 
demand  during  the  peak  and  off-peak  seasons.  Production  of  mangoes  in  the  country  is  not 
very  competitive  compared  to  the  neighboring  countries,  such  as  India.  Furthermore,  mango 
yields in Bangladesh are much lower than most other mango growing countries. 
19. Bananas  are  also  nutritious  fruits,  widely  consumed  and  a  good  source  of  income  for 
producers. Many actors are involved in the banana value chain, from production, distribution, 
to final consumer, therefore creating employment opportunity for local population. Consumers 
however, are not aware of the nutrition benefits of bananas are most of them just consume it 
because  it  is  widely  available,  and  affordable.  The  commodity  faces  threats  of  imports  from 
neighboring countries. 
20. Bael is currently considered by FAO as an underutilized crop for Bangladesh. It grows under a 
wide  range  of  soil  conditions  (pH  range  5-10),  is  tolerant  of  water  logging  and  has  an 
unusually wide temperature tolerance (from -7 °C to 48 °C). Bael is cultivated with minimum 
or  no  care,  mainly  in  homestead  boundaries.  It  is  a  rich  source  of  carbohydrate,  carotene, 
vitamin B complex, calcium and iron. Demand for bael is high all over the country and the crop 
can demand high prices. If more research and development is undertaken, bael could become 
a  major  crop  in  Bangladesh.  BARI  has  already  developed  one  new  variety  of  bael.  A  hardy 
plant and can be grown in stress-prone areas, especially drought areas with poor soil.  
21. Even  though  pineapple  did  not  score  as  high  as  the  other  two  fruits,  they  are  also  widely 
produced  and  consumed  in  the  country.  One  of  their  strengths  is  that  they  can  be  produced 
almost  the  whole  year,  providing  incomes  for  farmers  year  round,  as  well  as  nutrients  for 
consumers.  In  addition,  several  varieties  are  available  in  Bangladesh,  and  different  varieties 
are  produced  for  different  uses.  The  Bangladesh  pineapples  are  said  to  be  more  juicy  and 
tastier than those from the neighboring countries, hence becoming favorable not just for local 
consumption  but  also  for  export.  The  commodity  is  highly  perishable.  Lack  of  appropriate 
storage, transportation and marketing facilities leads to high post-harvest loss. They also face 
threats form disease and pest attacks at production level.  
22. Four  cereals  were  identified  as  important  in  Bangladesh,  in  terms  of  their  contribution  to 
nutrition of the population as well as other four criteria in de la Peña & Garret, (2018). These 
are  bio-fortified  rice,  aromatic  rice,  wheat  and  foxtail  millet.  Whereas  foxtail  millet  (29)  and 
bio-fortified  rice  (28)  attained  the  highest  scores,  wheat  (24)  and  aromatic  rice  (22)  were 
ranked considerably lower.  The main results are as follows: 
23. First, bio-fortified rice is a cost-efficient way to increase zinc content in the diet of Bangladesh 
citizens, as rice is the main staple food in the country, as it accounts for more than 70% of the 
calorie intake among rural consumers. Bio-fortified rice cultivars have been a result of efforts 
from  national  and  international  research  centers,  the  current  varieties  in  the  market  have 
acceptable yields and profits for farmers, and it is an important priority in current government 
policies. However, challenges are evident, the lack of a formal seed system affects adoption of 
biofortified  rice  at  a  large  scale,  and  there  is  lack  of  consumer  awareness  about  bio-fortified 
rice. Furthermore, current high zinc varieties are susceptible to increases in salinity that harm 
crop suitability and reduces micronutrient content. 
24. Second,  aromatic  rice  is  another  target  crop  that  was  considered  for  the  analysis.  It  is  a 
product that has an attractive market potential in the country, it has a higher price (more than 
double of coarse rice), and new widely adopted varieties have yields close to conventional high 
yielding  varieties,  making  aromatic  rice  very  appealing  for  farmers,  and  competitive  in  the 
export  markets.  New  climate  resistant  (salinity)  and/or  high  zinc12  (via  biofortification) 
varieties have been released, and these are having twofold higher yields, these new cultivars 
are increasing gaining popularity in the country. Furthermore, the new aromatic rice varieties 
are resistance to climate change effects, and pest pressure. 
25. Third, wheat was also considered as a target crop. It has the advantage of having a huge (and 
increasing)  demand  of  wheat  flour  (Atta)  in  the  country,  and  it  is  a  sub-product  that  can  be 
easily  fortified  to  close  nutritional  gaps  among  urban  and  rural  consumers.  Most  importantly, 
according  to  Akhter  et  al,  2017),  wheat  (not  fortified)  currently  represents  the  most  cost-
efficient way to cover the caloric, protein, iron and zinc requirements in Bangladesh. Although 
the demand is high, the cultivation of the crop has not increased accordingly, this is due to the 
fact  that  there  is  no  culture  or tradition  of  wheat  production  in  the  country.  Wheat  competes 
with  other  cereals  (including  rice)  for  cultivation  areas,  and  that  production  is  not  highly 
profitable,  as  it  seems  to  be  more  cost  efficient  to  import  wheat  flour  from  other  countries. 
12 High grain Zn trait has been found to be tightly linked with aromatic rice, Advances in breeding for high grain Zinc in Rice  by: 
B. P. Mallikarjuna Swamy, 1 Mohammad Akhlasur Rahman,1,2 Mary Ann Inabangan-Asilo,1Amery Amparado,1 Christine 
Manito,1 Prabhjit Chadha-Mohanty,1 Russell Reinke,1 and Inez H. Slamet-Loedin1 
Turkish Journal of Agriculture - Food Science and Technology, 3(3): 107-111, 2015 
Currently,  there  are  new  improved  High  Yield  Varieties  (HYV)  available  in  the  market,  but 
those are not widely cultivated in the country yet. 
26. Fourth, foxtail millet, an underutilized cereal species, has been identified as a potential product 
for nutrition-sensitive interventions. Foxtail millet has the advantage of being a rich source of 
carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals. It is a crop that can be grown year-round in marginal, 
low  fertile  and  saline  lands.  It  gathers  high  market  price,  as  de-husked  foxtail  millet  can  be 
sold for twice and thrice the price of fine and coarse rice respectively. Furthermore, it has an 
appealing market demand, and requires marginal care, yet the area dedicated to foxtail millet 
is negligible, and yields can vary widely depending on the variety and growing season. 
27. Overall, there are two cereals that scored highly in our analysis; bio-fortified rice13 and foxtail 
millet seem to be suitable crops for potential nutrition-sensitive interventions, there seems to 
have growing market opportunities, and having very little adverse environmental effects. 
28. Livestock and aquaculture: Six animal sourced food products were identified as important in 
Bangladesh,  in  terms  of  their  contribution  to  nutrition  of  the  population  as  well  as  other  four 
criteria  in  de  la  Peña  &  Garret,  (2018).  These  are  fish  (aquaculture,  poultry  (chicken,  duck), 
eggs, cattle fattening (beef meat production), small dairy (milk production) and the production 
of goats and sheep. Whereas aquaculture (31), poultry (30) and egg production (29) attained 
the highest scores, milk (23) and goats and sheep (23) were ranked considerably lower. Cattle 
fattening (beef meat production) attained by far the lowest score (18). The main results are as 
follows: 
29. First, aquaculture might be one of the most suitable options for investments for smallholders. 
It  is  a  product  (or  group  of  products),  that  is  widely  consumed  and  accepted  by  the 
Bangladeshi  population,  regardless  of  income  level  (poor,  middle,  rich),  location  (urban  and 
rural), and vulnerability (children, pregnant women, elderly). Furthermore, it is a product that 
has  experienced  tremendous  growth  in  the  local  market,  making  it  more  affordable  for  the 
poor.  Aquaculture  products  are  also  a  great  and  cost-efficient  source  of  animal  sourced 
protein,  and  other  essential  nutrients  that  can  help  close  the  nutritional  deficiency  gaps,  and 
from the agricultural development perspective, it is a potential income generation activity that 
can provide smallholders with profits tenfold compared to rice. 
30. The  main  challenges  with  aquaculture  production  are  that  it  requires  initial  fixed  investments 
(excavating ponds, installing aerators), that might be beyond the reach of poor smallholders. 
Furthermore,  once  the  ponds  are  excavated,  the  land  can  no  longer  be  used  for  agriculture, 
and mismanaging cultural practices can have adverse effects on the environment. In addition, 
lack of quality seed and feed are important challenges, plus the risk of diseases. 
31. Second, poultry (chicken and duck) are other important target crop for investment. It can be 
easily  integrated  in  smallholder’s  farming  systems.  It  is  an  affordable  animal  source  food,  a 
cost-efficient way to provide required nutrients to fill the nutrition gaps, especially protein and 
vitamin A. It is a product that traditionally is reared by women, which gives them more control 
over the farm household income, and it has a high market potential. The challenges related to 
poultry production are related mainly to the fact that depending on the production system that 
it is used, poultry may have severe environmental impact depending on manure management, 
feed  production  and  transportation.  Furthermore,  poultry  production  is  susceptible  to  a  wide 
variety of diseases, which in turn will have negative impacts on smallholders’ incomes. 
32. Third, another product that is related to poultry is the production of eggs. Once again, this is a 
product that can create opportunities for women’s empowerment as hens are typically reared 
by  women.  It  is  a  nutrititous  product  (especially  vitamin  A  and  protein)  that  can  be  home 
consumed  by  farm  households,  or  sold  to  other  rural  and  urban  markets.  As  eggs  are  an 
important and affordable component of the Bangladeshi diet, it has huge market potential for 
both  domestic  and  export  markets.  Egg  production  also  carries  the  same  type  of  risk  that 
poultry  has,  and  it  can  also  have  adverse  environmental  effect  depending  on  the  chosen 
production system, and the management of manure and feed. 
33. Fourth, cattle fattening (beef production) was another considered product as a potential value 
chain  intervention.  Beef  is  a  great  animal  source  food  product,  it  can  help  tremendously  to 
13 Hybrid zinc rice variety, BU Aromatic Zinc Rice, developed by BSMRAU 
meet the nutrition deficiencies of the population, yet it seems that currently Bangladesh might 
have  incredible  challenges  for  beef  production  to  become  a  suitable  and  sensible  option  for 
smallholder  farmers.  The  most  evident  challenge  would  be  the  lack  of  grazing  lands  for 
production,  even  the  production  of  fodder  and  other  types  of  feed  might  put  unnecessary 
pressure  on  the  scarce  food  crop  areas.  Furthermore,  there  is  lack  of  availability  of  drugs, 
vaccines,  and  artificial  insemination  facilities,  poor  husbandry  practices,  lack  of  laboratory 
facilities,  etc.  all  of  these  makes  beef  production  in  the  country  highly  risky,  especially  for 
smallholders.  In  addition,  cattle  production  requires  a  high  demand  of  water,  and  has  many 
other  adverse  effects  on  the  environment.  Finally,  due  to  its  high  price  beef  meat  is  not  an 
affordable  source  of  protein  and  micronutrients  to  the  majority  of  the  population  in 
Bangladesh.  Therefore,  beef  might  not  be  a  suitable  option  in  a  country  whose  population 
evidences a low purchasing power and that is prone to climatic disasters, and could be easily 
affected by climate change. 
34. Fifth,  another  product  that  was  considered,  and  that  it  is  related  to  double  purpose  cattle 
production  is  small  dairy  production.  The  production  of  milk  is  another  great  source  of 
nutrients  (such  as  calcium  and  vitamins)  and  protein  that  are  needed  to  close  the  nutrient 
deficiencies  among  the  most  vulnerable  population.  However,  Bangladesh  does  not  seem  to 
have  the  suitable  conditions  for  commercial  milk  production,  as  there  is  lack  of  high  yielding 
breeds,  knowledge  gaps  among  dairy  farmers,  inadequate  milk  value  chain  and  veterinary 
services, and shortage of quality feed and fodder. In addition, currently commercial feed is not 
affordable for the majority of smallholders, and there is lack of access to credit, insurance, and 
adequate  market  information.  However,  a  limited  amount  of  dairy  cows  integrated 
meaningfully  in  smallholder  farming  systems  and  fed  from  locally  available  food  and  fodder 
sources may represent an important source of daily income, protein and micronutrients.   
35. Sixth,  goats  and  sheep  production  has  also  been  considered  as  a  potential  value  chain  for 
intervention,  as  long  as  it  is  well  integrated  into  a  smallholder  farming  system.  Goats  and 
sheep have the advantage that are well adapted to hot humid climate, and saline prone areas. 
Therefore,  goat  production  has  the  potential  to  be  developed  all  over  Bangladesh.  The  main 
challenge  with  goat  and  sheep  production  is  that  the  main  breed  reared  in  the  country  does 
not  produce  high  yields,  and  therefore,  it  is  not  an  appealing  income  generating  activity  for 
smallholders.  Furthermore,  as  ruminants,  commercial  production  of  goats  and  sheep  is 
exposed to the same challenges that are faced by cattle production in Bangladesh. 
36. Overall,  there  are  three  animal  source  value  chains  that  have  very  acceptable  scores  when 
analyzing  nutrition-sensitive  interventions  in  Bangladesh:  The  production  of  fish  (via 
aquaculture), poultry (chickens), and eggs, seems to be products that have enormous benefits 
for smallholder producers, urban and rural consumers Although these value chains might have 
important  environmental  impacts  that  need  to  be  considered,  as  long  as  they  are  well 
integrated into smallholder farming systems and livelihood realities, they are appealing income 
generating  activities,  that  can  reduce  nutrition  deficiencies,  with  great  market  potential,  and 
especially for eggs and chickens, can become means to increase empowerment among women 
in rural Bangladesh. 
Table 1-A: Scoring Summary for Commodity Selection 
Criteria 
Sub-criteria 
Score criteria 
List of commodities 
Plant Based Food 
Cereals 
Aromatic 
Rice 
Wheat  Foxtail 
Millet 
High 
Zinc 
Rice 
Roots 
Tubers 
Orange 
fleshed 
Sweet 
Potato 
& 
Pulses 
Vegetables 
Taro  Lentils  Chick 
Pea 
Mung 
Beans 
Pumpkins 
Dark 
Green 
Leafy 
Vegetables 
Nutrition 
improvement 
potential 
Market 
potential 
(each  to  be  scored  1  to 
3) 
Food consumption 
Food preferences 
Food composition 
Market demand  
Private-sector 
and upgrading potential 
Agroecological conditions 
interest 
Income 
generation 
potential 
Level  of  engagement  of 
smallholder producers 
Profit margins for farmers 
Employment generation 
Gender 
Women’s empowerment 
Environment 
and climate 
NRM  and  climate-smart 
agriculture 
3–4 
5–7 
(sum across the 
sub-criteria) 
3 
Low: 
Med: 
3 
High: 8–9 
2 
Subtotal Score  8 
3 
Low: 
Med: 
3 
High: 8–9 
3–4 
5–7 
3–4 
5–7 
3 
Subtotal Score  9 
2 
Low: 
Med: 
High: 8–9 
3 
2 
Subtotal Score  7 
2 
Low: 
Med: 
High: 3 
Subtotal Score  2 
2 
Low: 
Med: 
High: 3 
Subtotal Score  2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
TOTAL SCORE 
28 
3 
1 
1 
5 
2 
3 
2 
7 
2 
2 
2 
6 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
2 
7 
3 
3 
1 
7 
3 
1 
2 
6 
2 
2 
2 
3 
2 
3 
8 
2 
2 
3 
7 
2 
3 
3 
8 
3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 
7 
2 
2 
3 
7 
2 
2 
2 
6 
3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
3 
8 
2 
2 
3 
7 
2 
2 
3 
7 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
9 
3 
3 
3 
9 
2 
3 
3 
8 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
9 
3 
2 
2 
7 
3 
3 
3 
9 
3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
3 
8 
2 
2 
3 
7 
2 
3 
3 
8 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
9 
3 
3 
3 
9 
3 
3 
3 
9 
3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
3 
8 
2 
2 
3 
7 
2 
3 
3 
8 
3 
3 
3 
2 
22 
2 
24 
3 
29 
3 
26 
3 
28 
3 
31 
3 
31 
3 
29 
3 
33 
3 
29 
Double 
purpos
e 
livestoc
k  
Milk 
Animal 
produc
ts 
Eggs 
Table 1-B: Scoring Summary for Commodity Selection 
List of commodities 
Plant Based Food 
Fruits 
Animal Sourced Food 
Fish 
Poultr
y 
Small 
ruminan
ts  
Beef 
fattenin
g  
Criteria 
Sub-criteria 
Nutrition 
improveme
nt potential 
(each  to  be  scored  1 
to 3) 
Food consumption 
Food preferences 
Food composition 
Market 
potential 
Income 
generation 
potential 
Market demand  
Private-sector  interest 
and 
upgrading 
potential 
Agroecological 
conditions 
Level  of  engagement 
of 
smallholder 
producers 
Profit  margins 
farmers 
Employment 
generation 
for 
Gender 
Women’s 
empowerment 
Score 
criteria 
(sum  across 
the 
sub-criteria) 
Low: 
Med: 
High: 8–9 
Subtotal 
Score 
Low: 
Med: 
High: 8–9 
3–4 
5–7 
3–4 
5–7 
Subtotal 
Score 
Low: 
Med: 
High: 8–9 
3–4 
5–7 
Subtotal 
Score 
Low: 
Med: 
High: 3 
1 
2 
Mang
o 
Banan
a 
Pineapp
le 
Ba
el 
Aquacultu
re 
Chicke
n 
Goats, 
sheep 
Beef 
Meat 
2 
3 
3 
8 
3 
3 
3 
9 
3 
2 
3 
8 
2 
2 
3 
3 
8 
3 
2 
3 
8 
3 
2 
3 
8 
3 
2 
2 
3 
7 
3 
3 
3 
9 
2 
3 
3 
8 
2 
3 
2 
3 
8 
2 
2 
3 
7 
2 
3 
3 
8 
3 
3 
3 
3 
9 
3 
3 
3 
9 
3 
3 
3 
9 
2 
3 
3 
3 
9 
3 
2 
3 
8 
3 
2 
3 
8 
3 
3 
2 
2 
7 
3 
2 
3 
8 
2 
2 
1 
5 
1 
3 
1 
2 
6 
2 
2 
1 
5 
1 
3 
1 
5 
1 
3 
2 
2 
7 
3 
2 
2 
7 
2 
2 
2 
6 
2 
3 
3 
2 
8 
3 
2 
3 
8 
3 
2 
3 
8 
3 
Environme
nt 
climate 
and 
NRM  and 
smart 
agriculture 
climate-
Subtotal 
Score 
Low: 
Med: 
High: 3 
Subtotal 
Score 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
2 
2 
3 
2 
3 
2 
2 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
3 
2 
2 
TOTAL SCORE 
29 
29 
28 
29  31 
30 
23 
18 
23 
29 
Table 2: Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats Analysis 
High 
Rice 
Zinc 
Aromatic 
Rice 
Wheat 
in 
SWOT Analysis 
Strengths 
Cost  efficient  way  to  increase  zinc 
is  widely 
rice.  Rice 
content 
consumed.  Higher  yields  and  profit 
margins for farmers. 
-  This  is  a  product  that  has  huge 
potential 
market 
- There are new varieties that are more 
climate 
and/or 
biofortified 
- There is a huge increasing demand of 
country. 
in 
wheat 
- The main product derived from wheat 
(Atta,  flour)  can  be  easily  fortified  to 
help 
zinc 
nutritional gap. 
consumers 
resistant 
shock 
close 
their 
flour 
the 
Foxtail Millet  Rich source of carbohydrates, vitamins, 
minerals.  Can  be  grown  year-round  in 
marginal,  low  fertile  and  saline  lands, 
high market price and potential market 
demand, requires marginal care.  
Orange 
fleshed 
Sweet Potato 
-  Rich  source  of  vitamin  A  and  other 
micronutrients. 
-  Easily  adaptable  to  marginal  areas. 
- Adaptable to saline prone soils. 
Taro 
Rich  source  of  major  and  minor 
nutrient  elements.  Tuberous  roots, 
stolon,  leaves  and  petioles  can  be 
eaten.  During  kharif-I  season,  there  is 
formal 
Weaknesses 
-Lack  of 
seed 
system affects. adoption at 
large 
of 
-Lack 
scale. 
consumer awareness. 
Current  widely  adopted 
low 
varieties  have  very 
yields,  and  therefore  even 
with  higher  prices,  profits 
are not too attractive. 
Cultivation  of  wheat  might 
in 
not  be 
Bangladesh;  it  might  be 
more  cost  effective 
to 
import  wheat  from  other 
countries. 
and 
Share 
in 
production 
is  negligible. 
Low investment in research 
and  development  so  far. 
Yield of foxtail millet varies 
according  to  the  variety 
and growing season. 
competitive 
area 
-  Perceived  as  poor's 
people 
food,  not  widely 
acceptable  among  typical 
consumers. 
-  Low  yields  paired  with 
moderate  price  do  not 
very 
translate 
into 
appealing 
income 
generating product. 
and 
area 
in 
Share 
production  is  still  limited. 
Low investment in research 
and development so far. 
a 
Opportunities 
-HarvestPlus  has  released  several  high 
zinc  varieties,  -Biofortification  included 
in government priorities. 
Local  universities  have  released  new 
high zinc varieties that are supposed to 
have  twice  as  much  yields  as  the 
traditional varieties, yet these varieties 
are not widely cultivated. 
There  are  better  HYVs  available  in  the 
market. 
Threats 
Climate 
change 
increases  salinity,  crop 
suitability  and  reduces 
micronutrient content. 
Climate 
change 
increases  salinity,  crop 
suitability  and  reduces 
micronutrient content. 
Climate 
change 
increases  salinity,  crop 
suitability  and  reduces 
micronutrient content 
to 
and 
-Bari  has  developed  3 
improved 
varieties  with  high  yield  potential  and 
tolerance 
abiotic 
biotic 
constraints. Priority crop considered by 
FAO for Bangladesh.  
-Dehusked foxtail millet is sold for BDT 
90  per  kg  as  against  BDT  46  and  BDT 
35 per kg of fine and coarse rice. 
-  Probably  one  of  the  most  climate 
resilient,  nutrient  rich  crop  that  can  be 
promoted 
nutrition-sensitive 
programs. 
for 
Crop can be made available during the 
kharif season when Bangladesh faces a 
shortage  of  nutritious  vegetables.  Taro 
is  increasingly  popular  and  in  demand 
-  Lack  of  availability  of 
quality 
seeds 
-  High  market  risk,  as 
the  product 
is  not 
widely  consumed,  a 
in 
small 
production 
national 
might 
the 
market. 
increase 
collapse 
Lentils 
Chick Pea 
Mung Beans 
Dark  Green 
Leafy 
Vegetables 
Pumpkins 
SWOT Analysis 
Strengths 
wide  scope  of  horizontal  expansion  of 
the crop. 
Cost  efficient  source  of  protein  and 
micronutrients;  widely  accepted  by 
consumers  -rural  and  urban;  legume 
hence assist in nitrogen fixation. 
One  of  the  best  plant-protein  sources- 
in  terms  of  protein  quality;  high  farm 
gate  prices;  legume  hence  assist  in 
nitrogen fixation. 
growing 
-Mung  beans  are  a  rich  source  of 
nutrients  including  B  vitamins,  copper, 
foliate,  manganese,  magnesium  and 
zinc.  
-Short 
wider 
adaptability,  tolerance  to  biotic  and 
abiotic  (salinity,  drought)  stresses. 
Growing production areas.  
-By  far,  most  cost-efficient  source  of 
Vitamin A, and other micronutrients.  
-Year-round 
Women's crops. 
production 
possible. 
time, 
-It  is  an  annual  crop,  tolerant  of  hot, 
humid weather and display a resistance 
to  disease  and  insects.  It  can  be 
intercropped  and  rotated  with  other 
plants.  Most  parts  of  the  pumpkin  are 
edible,  including  the  fleshy  shell,  the 
seeds,  the  leaves,  vines,  and  even  the 
flowers.  Important  source  of  protein, 
(calcium,  potassium  and 
minerals 
(especially 
phosphorus), 
vitamins 
Weaknesses 
Opportunities 
across the country.  
Threats 
productivity 
Low yields, susceptibility to 
and 
drought 
diseases, 
weed 
infestation  hamper 
lentil production.  
of 
-Low 
in  Bangladesh 
chickpea 
due  to  use  low  yielding 
varieties  as  well  as  poor 
management practices; 
-Consumers  unaware  of  its 
nutrition benefit. 
-High  Perishability,  lack  of 
cold storage facilities.  
-VC 
not 
actors 
knowledgeable  on  best 
practices 
handling 
(including  cooking) 
that 
retains nutrients. 
-Fruit 
flies,  which  can 
cause  serious  damage  to 
pumpkin  crops.  -Fertility 
and moisture constraints in 
stress-prone 
ecosystems 
(char  land,  coastal  areas, 
hilly areas)  
Current  local  demand  exceeds  supply- 
market opportunity for producers.  
Imports 
Cheap 
of 
subsidized  lentils  from 
Canada. 
High  market  demand,  domestic  and 
export 
Pest  and  diseases;  and 
import influx 
-Introduction of BARI Mung-6, which is 
high  yielding  (1.5  ton  per  ha),  has  a 
short growing duration (55-58 days). 
High  demand 
nutritious and safe vegetables 
in  urban  areas 
for 
change 
Climate 
increases  salinity,  crop 
suitability  and  reduces 
micronutrient content 
-Can  be  grown  the  year  round  and  is 
salinity  tolerant.    -Development  of 
stress-tolerant  varieties  and  hybrids, 
areas  under  pumpkin  cultivation  are 
increasing.  BARI  has  developed  an 
effective,  eco-friendly  and 
low-cost 
integrated  pest  management  (IPM) 
package.  private  seed  companies  have 
introduced  a  number  of  hybrid 
pumpkins  that  are  becoming  incredibly 
Mango 
SWOT Analysis 
Strengths 
vitamin A), and antioxidants.  
-Pumpkin  leaves  are  good  source  of 
Vitamin A, calcium, Vitamin C, iron and 
protein. 
-High preference among consumers.  
-Highly  accepted  by  consumers  as 
fresh  fruit  or  processed  (juice)  a  good 
source of Vitamin A; and a good source 
of income for mango producing farmers 
Banana 
-Nutritious  commodity;  good  source  of 
income for producers. 
-Highly  accepted  by  consumers  as 
fresh fruit or processed (juice). 
Pineapple 
Bael 
Aquaculture 
-Nutritious 
throughout the year. 
and 
produced 
almost 
-Grows  under  a  wide  range  of  soil 
conditions  (pH  range  5-10),  is  tolerant 
of  water  logging  and  has  an  unusually 
wide  temperature  tolerance  (from  -7 
°C to 48 °C).  
-Bael is cultivated with minimum or no 
care,  mainly  in  homestead  boundaries 
A 
carbohydrate, 
carotene,  vitamin  B  complex,  calcium 
and iron 
-  Huge  local  market  and  potential  for 
growth 
exports. 
in 
-  Huge  potential  to  overcome  nutrition 
source 
rich 
of 
Weaknesses 
Opportunities 
successful  crops  in  char  land  and 
saline-prone 
regions 
carotenoids 
coastal 
Threats 
yields 
Mango 
in 
Bangladesh  are  lower 
in  most  other 
than 
growing 
mango 
countries-  production 
not  very  competitive 
compared 
to 
neighboring countries. 
-High  banana  imports 
from 
neighboring 
countries 
Threats of diseases and 
pests  at  production 
level. 
and 
perishable 
 Highly 
commodity 
high 
market  dynamics  in  supply 
and  demand;  consumers 
not  aware  of  its  nutrition 
benefit. 
High market demand for mangoes both 
in  rural  and  urban  areas;  high  value 
addition  options 
for  domestic  and 
export markets. 
chain  not  well 
-Consumers  not  aware  of 
its  nutritional  benefits-they 
consume  just  because  it  is 
widely available. 
-Value 
organized. 
-Production  is  quite  capital 
intensive  
Highly  perishable;  lack  of 
storage, 
appropriate 
transportation 
and 
marketing  facilities  lead  to 
high post-harvest losses. 
-Share 
production is still limited.  
-Low 
in 
research  and  development 
so far 
investment 
area 
and 
in 
-High  employment  opportunity 
Banana value chain 
in 
-Wide  range  of  varieties  for  different 
uses;  Bangladesh  pineapples  juicier 
and  tastier  than  others  especially  form 
Asia-  so  a  high  export  market 
potential. 
-Demand  for  bael  is  high  all  over  the 
country and the crop can demand high 
prices. 
and 
development  is  undertaken,  bael  could 
become a major crop in Bangladesh.  
-BARI  has  already  developed  one  new 
variety  of  bael.  A  hardy  plant  and  can 
be  grown 
in  stress-prone  areas, 
especially drought areas with poor soil. 
If  more 
research 
-  It  can  have  high  entry 
costs 
smallholders. 
-  It  can  have  negative 
for 
- Once initial investments are met, it is 
a  great  opportunity  for  famers  as  an 
IGA. 
-  Diseases  and  lack  of 
good 
of 
fingerlings  and  PL  is  a 
quality 
SWOT Analysis 
Strengths 
deficiencies. 
- Most affordable animal source food. 
Chicken 
Affordable  animal  source  foods;  cost 
efficient  in  providing  required  nutrients 
to  fill  nutrition  gap,  especially  protein, 
vitamin A; women's commodity;  
Goats, sheep 
-Goats  are  well  adapted  to  hot  humid 
climate  and  often  produces  twins  and 
triplets and have the potential of being 
developed 
Bangladesh- 
-Sheep  are  well  adapted  to  the  saline 
environment. 
over 
all 
Beef Meat 
-  Great  source  of  animal  source  food, 
including protein, and vitamins. 
Milk 
Great  source  of  animal  source  food, 
and 
including 
vitamins. 
calcium, 
protein, 
Opportunities 
Threats 
huge 
smallholder farmers. 
risk 
for 
High  market  potential  domestic  and 
export;  profitable  and  potential  for 
women empowerment. 
Susceptible 
diseases; 
export  bans  due 
diseases 
negative 
producer incomes 
to 
frequent 
to 
-which  has 
impacts  on 
effects 
Adverse 
on 
environment, 
high 
of  water, 
demand 
adverse  effect  on  food 
crop  area  (due  to  the 
need  of  fodder  crop 
area). 
of 
-Risk 
disease 
outbreaks  paired  with 
limited 
to 
veterinary services. 
access 
on 
the 
exciting 
depending 
breeds 
to 
and 
Weaknesses 
effects 
environment. 
-  Once  ponds  are  made, 
the land cannot be used for 
agriculture anymore. 
Poultry  production  may 
have  severe  environmental 
on 
impact 
manure  management,  feed 
production 
and 
transportation,  and  poultry 
production systems used. 
although 
The 
different 
adaptable 
climates 
soil 
conditions,  do  not  produce 
high  yields,  therefore  are 
not 
income 
generating activities. 
-Poor  availability  of  drugs, 
vaccines 
artificial 
and 
insemination facilities, poor 
husbandry  practices  and 
lack  of  laboratory  facilities 
adverse 
on 
environment,  high  demand 
of water, adverse effect on 
food  crop  area  (due  to  the 
need of fodder crop area). 
-Lack  of  high  yielding 
breeds,  knowledge  gaps  of 
farmers,  inadequate  milk 
lack 
value 
of 
adequate 
veterinary 
services  and  shortage  of 
quality  feeds  and  fodder 
commercial 
being 
unaffordable.  
effects 
chain, 
feed 
SWOT Analysis 
Strengths 
Eggs 
-Can  create  opportunity  for  women 
empowerment. 
-An  affordable  animal  source  protein 
and vitamin A. 
insurance; 
and 
-Lack 
Weaknesses 
-Lack  of  access  to  credit 
improper 
and 
storing 
processing 
of 
facilities; 
market 
adequate 
information, 
especially 
when 
input  and  output 
market  prices  are  very 
volatile. 
-Poultry  production  may 
have  severe  environmental 
impact 
on 
manure  management,  feed 
production 
and 
transportation,  and  poultry 
production systems used. 
depending 
Opportunities 
Threats 
-High  market  potential  domestic  and 
export. 
-Profitable  and  potential  for  women 
empowerment 
are 
to 
-Poultry 
Susceptible 
diseases. 
-Frequent  export  ban 
due  to  diseases  -which 
has  negative  impacts 
on producer incomes. 
Appendix III: GGAP and HACCP.  
1.
2.
The first effort to develop a global standard for food safety and food quality was initiated by 
the    FAO  and    WHO,  and  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  so-called  Codex  Alimentarius  in 
1961.  This  is  a  collection  of  inter-nationally  recognized  standards,  codes  of  practice  and 
guidelines for food production and food safety. The Codex Alimentarius is recognized by the 
WTO  as  reference  point  for  the  resolution  of  disputes  in  food  safety  and  consumer 
protection. The standards  are globally accepted by 186 states. Next to the heavy influence 
of    the  Codex  Alimentarius  on  international  trade  in  food,  most  states  use  the  Codex  as  a 
basis  for  their  national  food  safety  policies.  Also,  the  Codex  has  been  worked  out  into  a 
number  of  sector-specific  guidelines  and  has  formed  the  basis  for  other  standards  such  as 
the well-known HACCP standard. 
Bangladesh  is  member  to  the  Codex  Alimentarius.  In  1985  the  Bangladesh  Standards  and 
Testing  Institution  (BSTI)  was  established.  This  is  the  only  national  institution  operating 
under  the  Ministry  of  Industries  to  formulate  national  standards  and  to  conduct  quality 
controls  for  industrial,  food  and  chemical  products  coherent  to  regional  and  international 
standards.  Next  to  these  public  standards,  a  slow  but  gradual  development  of  so-called 
private  standards  started  at  the  end  of  the  previous  century.  In  1997,  British  retailers  got 
aware  of consumers’ growing concerns regarding food  product safety  and  quality, what led 
to  the  development  of  an  independent  certification  system  for  Good  Agricultural  Practice 
(G.A.P.). Initially this was done for the European market but in the next decade it evolved, 
due  to  globalization  and  value  chain  integration,  into  the  world’s  leading  farm  assurance 
program,  translating  consumer  requirements  into  a  global  system  for  safe  food  standards, 
called  GlobalGAP.  Nowadays,  GlobalGAP  is  one  of  the  key  standards  for  the    international 
market for food. Bangladeshi exporters of high-value food products like fruits and vegetables 
and  seafood  therefore  will  be  confronted  more  and  more  with  GlobalGAP  standards, 
especially  when  they  export  to  Western  markets.  More  specific  standards  have  been 
developed  throughout  the  years,  which  are  often  specifications,  or  further  add-ons  on  the 
Codex Alimentarius and GlobalGAP14. 
Food safety issues in Bangladesh. 
3.
4.
In  Bangladesh  unsafe  food  is  an  urgent  matter;  food  safety  problems  are  frequently 
reported and have a serious impact on public health, trade in food and agricultural products 
and  consumer  confidence.  Major  reasons  for  unsafe  food  is  unhygienic  practice  in  food 
handling and the use  of toxic food  adulterators.  According to a report from the Directorate 
General  of  Health  Services  (DGHS),  on  an  average  3,850  people  died  from  diarrhea  each 
year from the period of 2003 to 2009 attributed mainly to unsafe food. The list of toxic food 
adulterators  is  endless  and  occurs  in  the  fruit,  fish,  milk  and  vegetable  sector  for  quicker 
ripening, colouring and longer lasting storage time. A report from the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare  (MOHFW)  of government  of  Bangladesh reveals that  nearly  half of  the  food 
samples have been found adulterated, as tested by Institute of Public Health (PH) from 2001 
to  2009.  In  addition,  Bangladesh’s  middle  class  has  a  growing  middle  class  who  are  more 
and more concerned about food safety standards. Offering  GGAP compliant  produce  allows 
smallholders to tap into a huge market potential.    
The government of Bangladesh ensures safe food through approximately 15 laws, and these 
laws are implemented by a large number of public institutions.  This scattering of legislation 
and  institutions  led  to  a  suboptimal  situation,  where  laws  were  frequently  broken  and 
enforcement  capacity  was  too  limited  to  put  this  to  a  halt.  In  addition,  Bangladesh 
consumers have a lack of awareness about the consumer rights they have, and lack specific 
knowledge on what exactly constitutes safe food. To improve this situation, the government 
of  Bangladesh  developed  the  Safe  Food  Act  in  2013,  which  was  eventually  approved  by 
14 This report is based on a case study developed by the Bottom of the Pyramided initiative. 
(http://www.bopinc.org/sites/www.bopinc.org/files/updates/the_impact_of_food_standards_on_inclusive_gr
owth_in_agriculture_-_the_case_of_bangladesh.pdf). 
parliament early 2015. The law aims to reduce  food adulteration in all stages of the supply 
chain and to put an end to multi-ministry controlled mechanisms for food safety issues. 
Food safety and smallholder farming. 
5.
6.
7.
Smallholder farmers in developing countries are increasingly integrated into global markets, 
and the development of food standards worldwide has an increasingly influence on these 
smallholder farmers, even if they only produce for the national markets.  The impact of 
these developments for small farmers has been frequently debated. Even though several 
thought leaders agree that potentially these trends can have a positive effect on smallholder 
farmers, others argue that food standards are reinforcing global inequality and poverty. A 
key concern is that the process of vertical coordination will exclude smallholder farmers. 
Three reasons are mentioned for this. First, transaction costs favor larger farms in supply 
chains, since it is easier for companies to contract with a few large farms than with many 
small ones. Second, when some amount of investment is needed in order to contract with 
companies or to supply high value produce, small farms are often more constrained in their 
financial means for making necessary investments. Third, small farms typically require more 
assistance from the company per unit of output. 
However, there is considerable debate and uncertainty on the validity of these arguments, 
and more generally on the welfare implications of high value chains. While quality and safety 
standards can make production more costly for smallholder farmers, at the same time they 
can reduce transaction costs in trade, both domestic and internationally. For example, a 
positive catalytic effect for smallholders can occur when the introduction of higher quality 
requirements has coincided with the growth of contracting and technology transfer. 
Contracts for quality production with local suppliers in developing countries not only specify 
conditions for delivery and production processes but can also include the provision of inputs, 
credit, technology, management advice, etc. Costs of compliance as critical point. In trying 
to summarize the different findings in the literature, the 2014 IFPRI discussion paper titled 
“Food Safety and Developing Markets” investigates the assumption that the most important 
negative effect of food standards is related to the costs involved with complying with these 
standards, and that the investment needed to cover these costs could potentially crowd out 
smallholder farmers. 
It is clear that the general assumption mentioned above is the main reason why food 
standards could form a barrier to more inclusive growth. At the same time, the IFPRI 
literature review  showed evidence for potential positive catalytic effects of food standards 
on inclusive growth. In general, IFPRI found that the potential positive effects that 
smallholder farmers can have from increases in food standards are related to reduction in 
income risk and increased production efficiency, rather than from a possible price premium 
related to the compliance with the food standards. With regard to the increases in 
production efficiency, complying with food standards to a large extent means improving your 
production practices to get these in line with general Good Agricultural Practices. These 
changes in production practices can not only improve production quality, but also production 
quantity and the efficiency in terms of kg of product produced per unit of inputs. Farmers 
might produce more products and therewith also have the potential to earn more income. 
Bringing production practices in line with Good Agricultural Practices does not automatically 
mean that a smallholder farmer has to make more costs. The basic aspects of good 
agricultural practices often mainly have to do with a better understanding of how to grow 
your crop.  
RMTP project activities. 
8.
To address the increasing concern of food safety, the project will assist to introduce Global 
Good Agriculture Practices (GGAP) for marginal/small farmers and micro-enterprises 
involved in primary production of the selected crops, poultry and livestock, and aquaculture 
commodities. The GGAP Chain of Custody Standard (Traceability) will be introduced for all 
commodities supported by the project. The project will support enterprises involved in 
produce handling, feed manufacturing, and hatchery to obtain GGAP if required. 
9.
The project will engage a recognized institution (international/national) to prepare the GGAP 
protocols for commodities in the selected value chains. The local service providers will 
receive training to become GGAP Master Trainers to support marginal/small farmers, micro-
enterprises and downstream enterprises within the selected value chains. An in-country 
accredited audit and certification firm will be engaged to certify producers' groups, micro-
enterprise groups and downstream enterprises. 
10.
  Support will be provided to enterprises engaged in crop/meat/fish processing to obtain 
Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) certification. The project will engage national 
HACCP experts to guide processors on obtaining HACCP certification; if national experts are 
not available, training will be organised to develop this expertise. The training will cover the 
Codex Alimentarius Commission's Good Manufacturing Practices and preliminary steps to full 
HACCP. Subsequently, PKSF will enter into a retainer contract with an in-country company to 
support enterprises to undertake the necessary steps to obtain HACCP certification. PKSF 
will engage with an in-country certification authority to undertake certification. 
11.
  The project will raise public awareness of the benefits derived from GGAP and HACCP for 
domestic consumers, producers, processors and exporters, through mass media. If required, 
the project will contract an advertising company to roll out the campaign 
Appendix IV: Typical Value Chains to be Considered 
1.  Aromatic and fine rice. Bangladesh has a trade deficit in rice; imports in 2015 amounted to 
USD 450 million. The bulk of rice produced is short, medium and long, while the production of 
aromatic  and  fine  rice  is  relatively  low.  New  varieties  of  aromatic  rice  have  yields  that  are 
close  to  or  at  par  with  conventional  rice  if  an  appropriate  input  package  is  used,  with 
emphasis on organic fertilizer and organic pest control. The output price for conventional rice 
is  about  BDT  40/kg  compare  with  BDT  95/kg  for  aromatic  rice.  The  export  price  of  aromatic 
rice  is  154%  higher  than  that  of  imports  or  conventional  rice.  Aromatic  rice  has  higher 
nutritional  values  compared  to  conventional  rice  (protein  and  lipid  fat  is  two  times  higher; 
dietary  fibre  is  seven  times  higher).  To  optimise  the  returns  from  producing  aromatic  rice, 
there  is  scope  to  address  identified  constraints  related  to  plant  spacing,  mechanisation, 
fertilizer and pesticide use, irrigation, and harvest and post-harvest handling. Food safety and 
traceability also needs to be addressed for both domestic and export markets. 
2.  Onion.  Bangladesh has a  trade deficit in onion, amounting to USD 255 million in 2015. This 
can  be  addressed  through  the  introduction  of  improved  varieties,  improved  production 
technologies  with  mechanisation,  better  post-harvest  handling  (drying,  storage,  packaging), 
introduction of labelling, and compliance with food safety standards and traceability. 
3.  Mango. Bangladesh is the world’s seventh largest producer of mangoes. It is estimated that 
mango production is currently worth USD 4 billion annually, and is growing by 4% per annum. 
Most mango is sold on the domestic market, either fresh or for juice. Export of fresh mango 
offers a huge potential; however, export attempts particularly to the EU faced serious issues 
with food safety due to inappropriate use of pesticides and ripening chemicals. Production can 
be  substantially  improved  by  introducing  integrated  pest  management;  applying  balanced 
fertiliser, approved pesticides and ripening agents; improving pruning and orchard sanitation; 
using fruit sleeves; better post-harvest handling, cold chain and fruit drying;  complying with 
food safety standards and traceability; and modern packaging and labelling. 
4.  Mud  crab.  Mud  crab  production  engages  some  300,000  people  along  the  commodity  chain. 
However, production has recently declined due to the lack of crablets collected from the wild, 
as  the  resource  is  over-exploited.  Presently  there  is  only  one  hatchery  for  mud  crablets, 
serving  about  5%  of  demand.  Land  for  increasing  production  is  also  becoming  scarce.  This 
situation can be addressed by establishing additional hatcheries, introducing vertical recycling 
production  systems  that  take  up  limited  space,  and  introducing  compound  feed.  Marketing 
and output prices can be enhanced by introducing food safety standards and traceability. 
5.  Goat.  Domestic  demand  for  goat  meat  has  risen  by  5.5%  per  annum  between  2005  and 
2015, and the growth trend is increasing. It is estimated that the goat mortality rate is 40% 
per annum, while the weight growth rate is 30% below potential. The rising demand for goat 
meat  can  be  met  by  improving  present  production  systems  to  reduce  or  eliminate  mortality 
and  improve  fodder  quality,  feeding,  health  care  and  breeding.  Marketing  and  output  prices 
can be improved by introducing food safety standards, traceability and branding. 
6.  Dairy. In 2015, the import of milk products amounted to USD 290 million. There is scope for 
import substitution while at the same time increasing the supply of young animals for the beef 
industry. Domestic production of milk is currently 2.8 million MT; combined with imports this 
amounts  to  consumption  of  18  litres/capita/year,  compared  to  90  litres/capita/year  in  India. 
Demand for milk product is increasing by 5% annually; a large part is met by reconstituting 
imported  powder  milk.  The  present  very  low  productivity  must  be  addressed  to  make  milk 
production  competitive.  The  breed  needs  to  be  improved  using  AI  sourced  from  milking 
animals  developed  for  the  tropics,  as  well  as  the  Swiss  brown  breed.  The  Frisian-Holstein 
breed  currently  used  is  not  suitable  for  the  climate  nor  the  level  of  management  applied  by 
small farmers. The quality of fodder, feeding, water and watering also needs to be improved. 
Investment  in  vaccinations  and  health  care,  housing  of  animals,  milking  machines,  and  milk 
collection  cooling  centres  is  required.  Marketing  and  output  prices  can  be  improved  by 
introducing food safety standards and traceability. 
7.  Beef.  Domestic  beef  consumption  grew  by  4%  per  annum  between  2000  and  2015.  Beef 
production in Bangladesh is a function of milk production as bull calves are used for fattening, 
and low milk yields imply low meat production. The introduction of improved milking cows will 
increase  the  supply  of  animals  with  higher  meat  productivity.  Productivity  of  the  local  breed 
can  also  be  improved  by  improving  health  care,  water  quality,  fodder  quality,  feeding  and 
housing. Marketing and output prices can be improved through the introduction of food safety 
standards and traceability. 
8.  Poultry.  Domestic  demand  for  poultry  products  has  increased  by  15%  per  annum  for  meat 
and 11% per annum for eggs between 2000 and 2015. The backyard poultry sector accounts 
for  88%  of  total  poultry  production  and  is  an  important  food/protein  source.  The  recent 
development  of  improved  backyard  breeds  such  as  the  Indian  Kroiler  offers  potential  for 
increasing  the  productivity  of  backyard  poultry.  Improving  productivity  will  require  parent 
stock  of  existing  hybrids  or  cross-breeding  between  commercial  and  local  breeds.  Marketing 
and output prices can be improved by introducing food safety standards and traceability. 
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex: RMTP FINANCIAL & ACCOUNTING MANUAL
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
PALLI KARMA-SAHAYAK FOUNDATION (PKSF) 
FINANCIAL & ACCOUNTING MANUAL 
PALLI KARMA-SAHAYAK FOUNDATOIN (PKSF) 
FINANCIAL & ACCOUNTING MANUAL 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
P/2 
CHAPTER – 1 – INTRODUCTION 
    Page 
                   9-13   
1.1  
1.2  
1.3  
1.4  
1.5  
1.6  
1.7  
- About PKSF 
- Preamble 
- Accounting Objectives  
- Accounting and Auditing Requirements  
- Accounting Offices 
- Accounting Year 
- Books of Account  
CHAPTER – 2 - ACCOUNTING SYSTEM 
2.1  
2.2  
2.3  
2.4  
2.5 
2.6  
2.7  
2.7.1 
2.7.2  
2.8  
2.9  
2.10  
2.11  
2.12  
2.13  
- Background 
- Basis of Accounting 
- Accounting responsibility 
- Accounting Policies of PKSF 
- Accounting Assumptions of PKSF 
- Characteristics of financial transactions & statements 
- Procedure for Recording Transactions 
- Money receipts and recording thereof 
- Payment made in cash/by cheque and recording thereof 
- Preparation of daily cash and bank balance statement: 
- Passing Adjusting Journal and Closing entries 
- Preparation of Trial Balance 
- Reporting of Accounting Offices 
- Activity Chart of financial transactions and their documentation 
- Financial Accounting Flow Chart 
CHAPTER – 3 – ACCOUNTING FORMS, VOUCHERS & RECORDING BOOKS 
14-33 
34-39 
3.1  
3.2  
3.3  
3.4  
3.5  
3.6  
3.7 
3.8  
3.9  
3.10  
3.11  
3.12  
3.13  
3.14  
- Introduction 
- Cash Journal – Debit / Payment Voucher  
- Cash Journal – Credit / Receipts Voucher  
- Journal Voucher - Adjustments / Non Cash Transactions 
- Cash Journal Register 
- Control General Ledger 
- Project Ledger 
- Money Receipts 
- Subsidiary Ledger 
- Store Ledger 
- Bank Reconciliation Statement  
- Formats to be Used  
- Erasing & overwriting prohibited 
- Conclusion 
CHAPTER – 4 – WRITING PROCEDURES OF FORMS, VOUCHERS & RECORDING BOOKS 
P/3 
4.1  
4.2  
4.3  
4.4  
4.5  
- Instructions to write up Cash Journal 
- Instructions to write up Journal Voucher 
- Instructions to write up Cash Journal Register 
- Instructions to write up Control General Ledger 
- Instruction to write up Bank Reconciliation Statement 
CHAPTER – 5 - MAINTENANCE OF REGISTERS 
5.1  
5.2  
5.3  
5.4  
5.5  
5.6  
5.7  
5.8  
- Types of Registers  
- Fixed Assets Register 
- Salary and Payroll Register 
- Cheque Issue Register 
- Cheque/DD/PO Receipt Register 
- VAT & Income Tax Register 
- Advance Slip / IOU Register 
- Budget Register 
CHAPTER – 6 – ACCOUNTS & FINANCE ACTIVITIES & JOB DESCRIPTION 
6.1  
6.2  
6.3  
6.4  
6.5 
6.6 
- Accounts & Finance Activities 
- Treasury, Bills & Salary Activities 
- General Accounting, Ledger and Final Accounts Activities 
- Loan to POs Accounting & Store Accounting Activities 
- Budgeting, Tax and Internal & External Reporting Activities 
- Job Description of Finance & Accounts Section 
CHAPTER – 7 - CASH MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES 
40-43 
44-46 
47-55 
57-59 
7.1  
7.2  
7.3  
7.4  
7.5  
7.6  
7.7  
7.8  
7.9 
- Duration of Cash Transaction 
- Closing of Account 
- Daily Cash Holding Limit 
- Handling of Cash 
- Cash Scroll 
- Cash Security  
- Receipt in Cash Section 
- Petty Cash 
- Cash Deposited in to Bank 
CHAPTER – 8 - BANK ACCOUNTS OPERATION MANAGEMENT 
P/4 
    60-65 
8.1  
8.2  
8.3  
8.4  
8.5  
8.6.  
8.7  
8.8  
8.9  
8.10  
8.11  
8.12 
8.13  
8.14  
8.15  
8.16  
8.17  
8.18  
8.19  
- General 
- Procedure of Opening Bank Account 
- Project Bank Accounts 
- Operation of Bank Accounts 
- Signatories Details 
- Cheque Counterfoil 
- Cancellation of cheques 
- Canceled Cheques 
- Cheque Issue Register 
- Cheque, Demand Draft & Pay-order Receipt Register 
- Payment from Bank 
- Withdrawal of Cash from Bank 
- Bank statement and Bank Certificate 
- Bank Reconciliation Statement 
- Ordering of New Cheque book 
- Safety to Cheque Books 
- Receipts of Cheque / Drafts 
- Dishonour of Cheques 
- Payment for Lost Cheques 
CHAPTER - 9 - INTERNAL CONTROL   
    66-76 
9.1  
9.2  
9.3  
9.4  
9.5  
9.6  
9.7  
9.8  
9.9  
9.10  
9.11  
9.12  
9.13  
- Introduction and Concept 
- Internal Control Categories 
- Classification of Control Procedures 
- Internal Check System 
- Payment Management 
- Payment to Partner Organizations (POs) 
- Payment for Services 
- Payment of Salaries 
- Management of Receipts 
- Staff Advance and its' Liquidation 
- Physical Inventory Counting & Checking 
- Internal Audit - Pre-Audit 
- Preservation of Accounting Records 
CHAPTER – 10 - FIXED ASSETS & DEPRECIATION ACCOUNTING  
    77-86 
- Concept 
10.1  
- Introduction 
10.2 
- Safe Custody of Fixed assets 
10.3  
- Procurement of Fixed Assets  
10.4  
- Fixed Assets Registration 
10.5  
- Classification of Fixed Assets 
10.6  
- Identification of Fixed Assets 
10.7  
- Depreciation & their Accounting 
10.8  
10.9  
- Sale of Fixed Assets 
10.10   - Accounting of Fixed Assets 
10.11   - Fixed Assets Register  
10.12   - Instruction to Write up Fixed Assets Register 
10.13   - Physical Counting of Fixed Assets & Reporting 
10.14   - Damage, Loss & Destruction, & Insurance 
10.15   - Use of Fixed Assets on Payment or on Lending 
10.16 
- Scrapping, Condemnation & Write-off of Fixed Assets: 
CHAPTER – 11 - COMPENSATION PACKAGE & ACCOUNTING 
- Introduction 
- Salary Payment 
- Some Noteworthy Points with Regard to Payment 
- Attendance Register & Statement  
- Leave Statement 
- Procedures of Salary Payment 
- Timing of Salary Payment 
- Deduction from Salary 
- Overtime Management 
11.1  
11.2  
11.3 
11.4  
11.5  
11.6  
11.7  
11.8  
11.9  
11.10   - Telephone 
11.11   - Accounting of Salary 
CHAPTER – 12 – ADVANCES, DEPOSITS & PREPAYMENTS & ITS' ACCOUNTING 
12.1  
12.2  
12.3  
12.4  
12.5 
12.6  
12.7 
12.8  
12.9  
12.10 
- Introduction 
- Types of Advances to be Allowed 
- Staff Advances Against Traveling 
- Staff Advances Against Purchase 
- Staff Advances - Program Expenses 
- Third Party Advance Against House Rent 
- Third Party Advance Against Material Suppliers 
- Third Party Advance Against Service Providers 
- Authorization of Advances 
- Internal Control in Advance Management & Accounting 
CHAPTER – 13 - ACCOUNTING & RECORDING OF LOAN TO POS  
13.1  
13.2  
13.3 
13.4 
13.5 
13.6 
13.7 
13.8 
13.9 
- Lending Policy - Introduction 
- Accounting of Loan to POs 
- Accounting of Recovery of loan to POs 
- Accounting of Recovery of Service Charge on Loan to POs 
- Accounting of Accrual of Service Charge on Loan to POs 
- Accounting of Overdue Service Charge on Loan to POs 
- Accounting of Loan Loss Provision 
- Records & Documentation of Loan to POs 
- Internal Control in Loan Disbursement Process 
CHAPTER – 14 - GOVERNMENT GRANTS & ITS' ACCOUNTING 
14.1 
14.2 
14.3 
- Definitions 
- Application of IAS - Government Grants Accounting 
- Accounting of Government Grants 
CHAPTER – 15 – ACCOUNTING OF LABILITIES & BORROWING COSTS 
15.1 
15.2 
15.3 
15.4 
15.5 
- Definitions 
- Recognition of Liabilities 
- Accounting of Liabilities 
- Application of IAS - Borrowing Costs 
- Accounting of Borrowing Costs 
P/5 
87-90 
91-102 
103-107 
108-112 
113-116 
CHAPTER – 16 – APPLICATION OF INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS (IAS) 
P/6 
117-119 
120-124 
125-133 
134-138 
16.1  
16.2  
16.3  
16.4  
- Introduction 
- Application of International Accounting Standards 
- Adoption of Accounting Policies as per IAS 
- Disclosure of Accounting Policies as per IAS 
CHAPTER – 17 - PREPARATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
17.1  
17.2  
17.3  
17.4  
17.5  
17.6  
17.7  
17.8 
17.9 
17.10 
17.11 
17.12   - Computerization of Accounts 
- Introduction 
- Finalization of Monthly Financial Statements 
- Income Statements 
- The Balance Sheet 
- Cash Flow Statements 
- Notes to Accounts 
- Subsidiary Ledger Accounts Statement 
- Accounts Schedules & Statements: 
- Interpretation of Accounts – Ratios Analysis 
- Other Reporting through Accounts Maintenance 
- Budgeting & Its Monitoring 
CHAPTER – 18 - PURCHASE PROCEDURE & MANAGEMENT 
18.1  
18.2  
18.3  
18.4 
18.5  
18.6  
18.7  
18.8  
- Introduction 
- Purchase Methods 
- Purchase Procedure 
-Tender Quotation Through Paper Advertisement 
- Procurement Plan 
- From Whom Should Purchase be Made 
- Tender Fees & Performance bond 
- Procedures Relating to Consultation Services 
CHAPTER – 19 - BUDGET & BUDGETARY CONTROL 
- Introduction - Budget 
- Budgetary Control 
- Budget Centres 
- Accounting Records 
- Budget Period 
- Organization for Budgetary Control 
- Budget Manual 
- Formulation of Budget 
- Process of Approval of Budget Allocation 
19.1  
19.2  
19.3  
19.4  
19.5  
19.6  
19.7  
19.8  
19.9  
19.10   - Budget Variance, Analysis & Reporting 
19.11   - Budget Monitoring & Control 
19.12 
- Long Term Budget of PKSF 
19.13   - Functions of Budget Committee 
CHAPTER – 20 - COMPLIANCE OF GOVERNMENTS, TAX & VAT RULES & OTHER LAWS 
P/7 
20.1  
20.2  
- Over View 
- Compliance Reporting 
CHAPTER – 21 – RAO FUND MANAGEMENT & ACCOUNTING 
21.1 
21.2 
21.3  
21.4  
21.5  
21.6  
21.7  
21.8  
- Introduction 
- Regional Audit Offices (RAO) Controlling Officer 
- RAO Bank Account 
- RAO Petty Cash Fund 
- RAO Cash Payment Procedures & Its' Approval 
- RAO Cheque Payment Procedures & Its' Approval 
- Maintenance of Records by RAO 
- RAO Reporting to PKSF Head Office 
CHAPTER – 22 – FUND - LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT 
- Introduction and Overview 
- Objectives 
- Policy of Investment 
- Depositable Fund 
- Strategy for determining surplus fund 
- Internal & External Laws to be followed 
- Scope of Area of fund utilization 
- Principles of Fund Utilization 
- Selection of Banks/Financial Institutions 
22.1 
22.2  
22.3  
22.4  
22.5  
22.6  
22.7  
22.8  
22.9  
22.10   - Maintenance of FDR 
22.11   - Management of the fund 
CHAPTER – 23 – AUDIT ARRANGEMENTS 
23.1  
23.2  
23.3  
23.4  
23.5  
23.6  
23.7  
23.8  
- Introduction 
- Purpose & Objective Auditing 
- Types of PKSF Auditing 
- PKSF Pre-Auditing 
- PKSF Internal Auditing 
- PKSF External Auditing 
- PKSF External Auditing of POs 
- POs Internal Auditing by PKSF 
139-140 
141-147 
148-156 
157-163 
P/8 
164-170 
CHAPTER – 24 – DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY  
24.1 - Introduction 
24.2 - Objective 
24.3 - Procedures for Obtaining Payment Approval 
24.4 - Procedures for Approved Payments 
24.5 - Cheque Signatories 
24.6 - Expenditures 
24.7 - Loan Disbursement 
24.8 - Purchase Committee (1) 
24.9 - Purchase Committee (2) 
24.10 - Imprest Petty Cash System 
24.11 - Delegation of Authority 
CHAPTER – 25 - FINANCIAL DOCUMENTS PRESERVATION & MANUAL MAINTENANCE  
25.1  
25.2  
25.3  
- Preservation of Financial Documents 
- Periodic Review of Management Control System 
- Amendment of the Manual  
CHAPTER – 26 – CHART OF ACCOUNTS 
26.1  
26.2  
26.3 
26.4 
26.5  
26.6  
26.7  
- Introduction 
- Characteristics of Chart of Accounts 
- Coding Structure of Chart of Accounts 
- Application of Code Numbers 
- Necessary Steps to Prepare Chart of Accounts 
- Coding System of Accounts 
- Changes and Amendments of Accounting Codes 
CHAPTER – 27 - ACCOUNTS FORMS, REGISTER & BOOKS 
27.1  
27.2  
- Accounts Form (From No. 101 – 120) 
- Accounts Registers & Books (Registers No. 201 –209) 
171-173 
174-200 
201-223 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER - 1 
P/9 
---------------------------------------------------------------   
1.1 - About PKSF 
1.2 - Preamble 
1.3 – Financial Accounting Objectives 
1.4 – Accounting and Auditing Requirements 
1.5 – Accounting Offices 
1.6 - Accounting Year 
1.7 – Books of Accounts 
---------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1 - INTRODUCTION  
CHAPTER - 1 
INTRODUCTION 
P/10 
1.1 – About PKSF: 
A) - Legal Form: 
Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF) is an association not for profit registered under 
the  Companies  Act  1994  (the  then  enforced  Companies  Act  1913).  The  PKSF  was 
incorporated in Bangladesh on May 1990. 
B) - Nature of Activities: 
Palli  Karma-Sahayak  Foundation  (PKSF)  was  established  under  the  Government 
initiatives for undertaking activities throughout the country for alleviation of poverty of the 
landless and the assetless people. PKSF is presently carrying out its operations through 
various partner organizations (POs). Financial assistance is given to them for the purpose 
of on-lending the same to the landless and assetless people for generating their income 
and  employment  opportunities.  PKSF  as  an  apex  organization  to  provide  loans  to  the 
NGOs, which in turn would provide collateral free credit to their poor members. 
Two  major  programs  of  PKSF  are  -  (I)  -  Credit  Program  and  (II)  -  Institutional 
Development  Program.  PKSF  provides  loans  to  two  categories  of  POs  -  Organizations 
Operating  in  Small  Areas  (OOSA)  and  Big  Partner  Organizations  Operating  in  Large 
Areas (BIPOOL). PKSF charges concessional service charges on POs depending on the 
size  of  loan  taken.  PKSF  also  provides  advisory  services  and  training  to  NGOs  for 
enhancing  their  institutional  capacity.  Apart  form  core  program,  PKSF  operates  some 
other  programs  such  as  (I)  -  ADB  funded  Participatory  Livestock  Development  Project 
(PLDP),  (II)  - Integrated Food Assisted Development Project (IFADEP-1) funded "DAW" 
under  VGD  Programme,  (III)  -  Jamuna  Multipurpose  Bridge  Authority  Project  (JMBA) 
funded Training, Employment & Income Generation Programme, (IV) - South West Flood 
Damage  Rehabilitation  Loan  Program 
-  Sundarban  Bio-Diversity 
Conservative Project and etc. 
(SRLP), 
(V) 
Since the PKSF is registered as an association not for profit under the Companies Act, It 
transfers its' surplus of income over expenditure to the capital fund account every year.  
1.2 – Preamble: 
This  manual  is  the  essence  of  a  sound  financial  management  and  effective  accounting 
administration  of  the  organization.  The  intent  of  this  manual  is  to  provide  written 
guidelines  to  all  concerned  with  a  view  to  facilitate  proper  financial  control  on  overall 
operational  activities  of  the  organization.  It  is  endeavored  that  this  manual  will  be  great 
assistance  in  fulfilling  the  requirements  of the financial discipline and bringing uniformity 
and cohesion amongst the different areas of the financial management.  
A smooth, sound and sophisticated accounting system is a pre-condition for an effective 
and  meaningful  financial  management.  The  basic  requirement  for  ensuring  a  good  and 
beneficial financial management is to establish a system with a well defines procedure so 
that  the  accounting  records  are  maintained  accurately  and  the  financial  statements  are 
prepared  on  time.  It  is  obvious  that  a  foolproof  accounting  system  is  needed  first  for 
attaining the benefits of the financial management. 
P/11 
It is important indeed that PKSF may expect to prepare and receive financial statements 
of  the  funds  so  utilized  and  disbursed  to  its'  partner  organizations  and  also  itself. 
Therefore,  to  enable  the  accounts’  personnel  to  prepare  useful  and  accurate  financial 
reports it has developed a standardized financial recording system that will help to ensure 
the correctly, timely and regular basis financial reporting. The purpose of introducing the 
accounting manual is: 
  To  implement  an  appropriate  accounting  system  as  per  the  Generally  Accepted 
Accounting  Principles  (GAAP)  in  all  sphere  of  the  financial  transactions  & 
activities of the organization; 
  To ensure the application of International Accounting Standards (IAS); 
  To ensure the over all coverage of the requirements of the Companies Act 1994; 
  To  ensure  the  full  coverage  of  taxation  aspects  of  the  organization  as  per  the 
rules & regulations of the Income Tax Ordinance 1984 and VAT Act 1991; 
  And in turn to help the management not only in establishing an effective control 
over the financial transactions & activities; and 
  Also to avail a positive support in administering the overall activities of PKSF. 
1.3 – Financial Accounting Objectives: 
The objectives of maintaining accounts of PKSF are to provide: 
a)  To  maintain  an  utmost  sound  financial  regularity  &  discipline  in  all  level  of  financial 
management of PKSF activities; 
b)  Transparency and accountability should be achieved through better implementation of 
effective  financial  management  control  system  and  accordingly  better  preparation  & 
presentation  of  the  organization's  financial  statements  following  the  international 
standards. 
c)  Full disclosure of the operating cost / expenses of the organization. 
d)  Accounting records that can serve as the basis of ascertaining the implementation of 
plan  and  budget,  preparing  future  plan  of operation and budgets, and for evaluating 
plan and budget demands and proposals. 
e)  Financial  information  needed  for  monitoring  expenditure  and  for  exercising  effective 
management control of operations of the organization. 
f)  Reliable  information  for  report  purposes,  which  will  serve  the  requirement  of  GOB, 
PKSF  Internal  Management,  Donors,  Internal  Audit,  External  Audit,  Investigation, 
Assessment, Review and other relevant agencies. 
g)  Periodical  statement  and  report  to  PKSF  management  and  other  related  offices  as 
required by the management. 
h)  To strengthen internal control techniques & polices, internal check, better mechanism 
to  improve  financial  accountability,  ensure  the  accuracy  of  the  financial  reports  and 
maintain a methodical recording of financial transactions. 
1.4 – Accounting and Auditing Requirements: 
P/12 
Sound financial management is a vital to PKSF success. Amongst others, sound financial 
management  will  help  PKSF  to  perform  efficiently  by  reducing  in-progress  delays  or 
bottlenecks, speeding disbursements and facilitate monitoring.  
The  accounting  and  auditing  requirements  that  are  obliged  to  comply  with  are  outlined 
below:  
A - Accounting Requirements: 
PKSF accounts must be maintained in accordance with accounting practices that 
are  generally  recognized  by  the  international  accounting  community.  Such 
practice,  one  adopted  should  be  consistently  followed.  The  accounting  records 
should be maintained in a manner that is transparent and auditable and financial 
statements produced must reflect a clear link to the books of accounts. 
B - Auditing Requirements: 
The  broad  aim  of  PKSF  audit  is  to  safeguard  the  interest  of  the  GOB  /  Donor 
Agencies  /  other  related  bodies  and  PKSF  itself  and  promote  transparency  and 
accountability,  along  with  sound  economic  and  financial  management  practices 
across the PKSF. Towards that broad aim, the objectives of auditing are to give 
an independent assessment of: 
  Whether  the  financial  statements  shows  a  true  and  fair  view  of  the  financial 
position of the PKSF and its income and expenditures for the year in question and 
have  been  properly  prepared 
in  accordance  with  appropriate  rules  and 
regulations and following the international accounting standards; 
  The  adequacy  of  the  PKSF's  arrangements  to  secure  economy,  efficiency  and 
effectiveness in the use of the resources; 
  The adequacy of the PKSF's financial management systems; 
  The  adequacy  of  the  PKSF's  arrangements  for  preventing  and  detecting  fraud, 
corruption and the internal control framework generally; 
  The  adequacy  of  the  PKSF's  arrangements  for  ensuring  the  legality  of 
transactions that might have a financial consequence; 
  The adequacy of the PKSF's arrangements for collecting, collating and recording 
accounting  data  and  publishing  financial  statements  and  reports  pursuant  to 
appropriate rules and regulations and as per internationally accepted standards.  
P/13 
1.5 - Accounting Offices:  
o 
In Head Office - 
Chief  of  Finance  &  Accounts  will  be  in  charge  of  the  Finance  & 
Accounts  Department  of  Head  Office  who  remains  directly 
responsible to the General Manager Administration of all financial 
and  accounting  functions  &  activities  of  Head  Office  and 
Regional Audit offices.  
o 
In Regional Audit Offices - 
Manager  (Audit)  will  be  in  charge  of  the  Finance  &  Accounts 
functions  who  remains  directly  responsible  to  the  Chief  of 
Finance  &  Accounts  for  financial  and  accounting  functions  & 
activities  of  Regional  Audit  offices  and  for  other  internal  audit 
functions  /  activities  of  POs  directly  responsible  to  Deputy 
General Manager (Audit) posted in head office. 
1.6 – Accounting Year: 
PKSF shall use July to June as their planning year, accounting year as well as fiscal year. 
Uniformity in the planning period, accounting year and fiscal year is deemed necessary for 
proper planning and monitoring purposes. 
1.7 – Books of Accounts: 
PKSF  shall  maintained  all  books  of  accounts  based  on  the  following  requirements, 
guidelines, instructions, rules and regulations as per the: 
(a)  Financial and Accounting Manual of PKSF; 
(b)  Rules of the PKSF Accounting Code;  
(c)  Requirements of the International Accounting Standards (IAS); 
(d)  Contents of the Companies Act 1994; 
(e)  Requirements of the Income Tax Ordinance 1984; 
(f)  Guidelines of the Value Added Tax Act 1991; 
(g)  PKSF's different policies approved by the Governing Board of PKSF; 
(h)  Requirements of the Donor Agencies; 
(i)  And  such  other  books  of  accounts  as  required,  circulated  and  instructed  by  the 
Management of PKSF from time to time. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 2 
P/14 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
2.1 - Background 
2.2 - Basis of Accounting 
2.3 - Accounting Responsibility 
2.4 - Accounting Policies of PKSF 
2.5 - Accounting Assumptions of PKSF 
2.6 - Characteristics of Financial Transactions & Statements 
2.7 - Procedure for Recording Transactions 
2.7.1- Money receipts & recording thereof 
2.7.2 - Payment made in cash / cheque & recording thereof 
2.8 - Preparation of daily cash and bank balance statement 
2.9 - Passing Adjusting Journal and Closing entries 
2.10 - Preparation of Trial Balance 
2.11 - Reporting of Accounting Offices 
2.12 - Activity Chart of transactions & their documentation 
2.13 - Financial Accounting Flow Chart 
------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 2 - ACCOUNTING SYSTEM 
CHAPTER - 2 
ACCOUNTING SYSTEM 
2.1 - Background: 
P/15 
Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF) is an organization with the objectives to act as 
the apex body to provide loans to the NGOs (Partner Organizations) which in turn provide 
collateral  free  credit  to  their  poor  members.  Its  funding  depends  on  from  government, 
IDA, donors agencies and assistance and also on its own income. The money has to be 
expended in line with the budget that has to be properly and adequately documented and 
authenticated.  PKSF  will  ensure  that  all  financial  transactions  created  /  made  in 
connection  to  the  activities  /  operation  of  the  organization  have  to  be  systematically, 
properly, accurately and timely recorded in the books of accounts of PKSF. 
That  is  why  systematic  recording  of  financial  transactions  and  timely  reporting  to 
interested groups as mentioned above is essential through preparation and presentation 
of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Main 
objective  of  adopting  the  manual  is  to  provide  a  systematic  &  acceptable  basis  of 
maintaining accounts and sound financial management procedures. 
2.2 - Basis of Accounting: 
Accounts of PKSF should be maintained on acceptable basis, that is, all income actually 
received are to be considered as income and all expenditure / payments, actually made 
are  to  be  taken  as  expenditure,  with  a  few  book  adjustments  for  stock  &  stores, 
advances,  prepayments,  outstanding  expenses,  depreciation,  accrued 
income, 
receivables, etc.  
As  such  accrual  basis  of  accounting  is  being  pursued.  The  organization  shall  apply, 
adopt,  follow  and  implement  the  guidelines  /  instructions  of  the  International  Accounting 
Standards (IASs) for all purposes of accounting. 
2.3 - Accounting responsibility: 
Finance  &  Accounts  Section  is  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  to  ensure  the  proper 
maintenance  of  the  books  of  accounts  of  the  organization.  Timely  and  accurate 
presentation  of  the  financial  reports  is the prime job of the accounts personnel in PKSF 
head office.  
The  Finance  &  Accounts  Department  will  ensure  the  authenticity  &  recording  for  all 
payments  and  also  responsible  for  recording  of  all  receipts  on  time.  They  will  supervise 
the  effective  implementation  of  the  internal  control  devices  &  assist  the  management  in 
attaining  financial  management.  The  head  of  the  Finance  &  Accounts  Department  is 
responsible  to  preserve  all  books  of  accounts  &  supporting  accounting  records  in  a 
systematic  manner.  Management  will  make  job/duty  allocations  to  the  staff  members  of 
finance/accounts section & ensure smooth function of the section. 
P/16 
As  a  measure  of  management  safe-guard,  the  required  coverage  and  appropriate 
precautions must be exercised for handling of cash, handling of store materials, carrying 
cash from and to bank and preservation of cheque books and over all financial discipline 
of the PKSF.  
Any staff member of PKSF who signs or countersigns in any primary documents, books of 
original  entries,  books  of  final  entries  and  reporting  etc.  is  personally,  officially  and 
professionally  responsible  for  their  completeness,  correctness  &  for  the  facts  as  stated 
there  in  so  far  as  it  is  his  /  her  duty  to  know  or  to  extent  to  which  he  /  she  may  be 
responsible or expected to be aware of them. 
2.4 - Accounting Policies of PKSF: 
Accounting  system,  selection  and  application  of  accounting  policies  and  presentation  of 
financial statement of PKSF shall be in conformity with the internal accounting standards. 
Accounting  policies  of  PKSF  encompass  the  principles,  bases,  conventions,  rules  and 
procedures  adapted  by  PKSF  management  in  preparing  and  presenting  financial 
statements by using best management judgment in the circumstances of the organization 
are best suited to present properly its financial position and the results of its operations. 
PKSF shall uses its judgment in selecting and applying its accounting policies keeping in 
view the following: 
  The  requirements  and  guidelines  in  International  Accounting  Standards  dealing 
with similar and related issues; 
  The  definitions,  recognitions  and  measurement  criteria  for  assets,  liabilities, 
incomes  and  expenses  set  out  in  the  International  Accounting  Standards 
Committee (IASC) framework; and 
  Pronouncements  of  other  standards  setting  bodies  and  accepted  policies,  but 
only to the extent, that these are consistent with the above.  
Four  considerations  shall  govern  the  selection  and  application  of  the  appropriate 
accounting policies and the preparation of the financial statements of PKSF. These are: 
I.  Prudence -  
Uncertainties  inevitably  surrounded  many  transactions.  This  shall  be 
recognized by prudence in preparing financial statements.   
II.  Substance - 
Financial  transactions  and  other  events  shall  be  accounted  for  and 
presented  in  accordance  with  their  substance  and  financial  reality  and 
merely with their legal form. 
III.  Materiality - 
Financial  statement  shall  be  disclosed  all  items  which  are  material 
enough to effect evaluation or decisions. 
IV.  Neutral - 
Financial transactions shall be neutral and shall be free from bias. 
Accounting policies of PKSF are listed below: 
1)  Accounting Convention - Basis of Preparation: 
P/17 
  Financial  statements  shall  be  prepared  under  historical  cost  convention  and  in 
in 
the 
accordance  with 
Bangladesh  and  where  relevant  with  presentational  requirements  of 
Companies Act, 1994; 
International  Accounting  Standards  as  adapted 
the 
  All  activities  included  in  the  accounts  shall  be  continuing  in  nature  that  is  the 
financial statements prepared on going concern basis; 
  Financial  transactions  shall  be  accounted  for  and  presented  in  accordance  with 
their substance and financial reality and not merely with their legal form; 
  Comparative figures shall be stated in the financial statements; 
  The  disclosures  in  the  financial  statements,  in  all  material  respects,  are  in 
accordance with International Accounting Standards. 
2)  Currencies: 
  All  PKSF's  assets, 
liabilities,  capital 
fund, 
income  and  expenditure  are 
denominated in terms of the Taka, the local currencies; 
  Hence, PKSF is not subject to foreign currency risk. 
3)  Fixed Assets: 
  Fixed assets shall be stated at cost less accumulated depreciation; 
  Fixed  assets  valuation  bases  used  for  determining  the  amounts  at  which 
depreciable assets shall be stated in the financial statements; 
  Maintenance  and  repairs  are  charged  to  the  statement  of  income  when 
expenditure incurred and improvements are capitalized. Land in not depreciated;  
  The  gross  amount  of  depreciable  assets  and 
the  related  accumulated 
depreciation shall be disclosed in the financial statements; 
  An item shall be recognized as an asset when it is probable that future economic 
benefits associated with the asset shall flow to the organization. The cost of the 
asset to the organization can be measured reliably. 
  An item of property, plant and equipment that qualify for recognition as an asset is 
initially been measured at its cost.  
  The component of cost is purchase price plus all other costs of bringing the asset 
to working condition.  
  The  policies  in  recognition,  valuation  &  revaluation  of  property,  plant  and 
equipment should not be contradictory to the IAS 16. 
  The assets are accounted for in the following classes: 
P/18 
(a)  Land: Land is recorded at the price paid for the land to the GOB. The other 
expenses  for  acquiring  the  land  are  added  to  the  cost.  The  other  expenses 
are: Stamp fee, Registration fee, Government tax, Legal fee, Other expenses 
(b)  Building:  Valued  at  cost  plus  all  other  relevant  expenses  up  to  the  point  of 
bringing  it  to  the  usable  condition.  It  is  recorded  at  the  amount  of  cash  or 
cash  equivalents.  The  building  is  shown  in  the  balance  sheet  at  cost  less 
accumulated depreciation. The following cost are considered: (i) - The cost of 
floating  tender  for  selecting  -  Designer,  Contractor,  Personnel,  Material, 
Other;  (ii)  -  Material  costs;  (iii)  -  Labor  cost;  (iv)  -  Consultants’  fee;  (v)  - 
Design fee; (vi) - Supervision; (vii) - Guard; (viii) - Utility cost; (ix) - Other. 
(c)  Machinery:  Machinery  is  acquired  at  cost  that  can  be  measured  reliably.  All 
other  expenses  to  bring  the  machinery  to  the  working  condition  are 
considered.  
(d)  Motor  Vehicles:  Shown  in  the  balance  sheet  at  cost  less  accumulated 
depreciation. The other related expenses are added to the cost for making it 
fit for running in the road. Among the other costs that can be recognized over 
its  purchase  price  are  the  following:  (i)  -  Registration  cost;  (ii)  -  First  time 
checking and inspecting expenses. 
(e)  Furniture and fixture: Are recorded at the amount of cash or cash equivalents 
paid or the fair value of the consecration given to acquire them at the time of 
their  acquisition.  These  are  shown  at  cost  less  accumulated  depreciation  in 
the balance sheet.  
(f)  Office  equipment:  Are  recorded  at  the  amount  of  cash  or  cash  equivalents 
paid or the fair value of the consecration given to acquire them at the time of 
their  acquisition.  These  are  shown  at  cost  less  accumulated  depreciation  in 
the balance sheet. 
(g)  Others: On the basis of the chart of accounts. 
4)  Depreciation on Fixed Assets: 
P/19 
  Depreciation shall be charged on fixed assets on reducing balance method; 
  Depreciation  on  fixed  assets  additions  shall  be  charged  from  the  date  of  the 
acquisition under reducing balance method; 
  Depreciation for the period shall be charged to income statement for the period; 
  Depreciation method selected shall be applied consistently from period to period; 
  The  selection  of  allocation  and  estimation  of  the  useful  life  of  a  depreciable 
assets  shall  be  the  matter  of  Judgment  of  PKSF  management  considering  the 
expected physical wear and tear 
  Accumulated depreciation shall be disclosed in the financial statement; 
  A  reconciliation  of  additions,  disposals,  amount  of  depreciation  and  other 
movements shall be given in the financial statements; 
  The rate of depreciation on each class of asset shall be follows: 
Category of assets 
Rate of Depreciation 
Building  
Tin Shed 
Semi Building 
Transports & Vehicles 
Office Equipments 
Furniture 
Library Books 
Carpet & Drapery 
Crockeries & Cutleries 
Deep Tube-well  
Electric Generator 
Fire Fighting Equipments 
Power Substation 
10% 
20% 
15% 
20% 
20% 
10% 
10% 
20% 
30% 
15% 
5)  Revenue Recognition: 
  Service  charges  shall  be  calculated  in  accordance  with  the  loan  agreement 
between PKSF and its partner organizations (POs); 
  Service  charges  shall  be  charged  as  per  PKSF  policy  depending  on  the  loan 
volume to the loans to POs under core program and other projects of PKFS; 
  Service charges on project loan to POs  (borrowers of PKSF) shall be accounted 
for on accrual basis; 
P/20 
  Service charge shall not be accrued on POs whose loans are more than 29 days 
in arrears with respect to the payment of service charges or principal or both; 
  Service charge on regular loan - loans where no amounts are overdue, as at the 
end of the reporting period, shall be recognized as income; 
  Service charges shall be disclosed separately in the financial statements in order 
to give a better understanding of the composition;  
 
Interest income from short-term investment / deposits shall be accounted for on 
accrual basis; 
  Grants for expenses to the extent of the amount for the year shall be recognized 
as an income during the year; 
  All other incomes shall be accounted for on accrual basis; 
  Any  other  /  miscellaneous  income  shall  be  accounted  for  on  realized  basis  / 
actual basis that shall be disclosed in the financial statements; 
  All  items  of  income  recognized  in  a  period  by  PKSF  shall  be  included  in  the 
determination of the net surplus or deficit for that period; 
  The nature and amount of each extraordinary item shall be separately accounted 
for and disclosed in the financial statements; 
  Revenue is recognized by PKSF when it is probable that future economic benefits 
shall flow to the organization and these benefits can be measured reliably. 
6)  Recognition of Grants & Accounting for Government Assistance: 
  Grants for expenses shall be recognized as deferred income to the extend of the 
amount of subsequent years and for equity as capital fund; 
  Amount  equal  to  current  years'  depreciation  under  grant  for  assets  shall  be 
recognized  as  income.  Rest  /  carrying  amount  of  the  relevant  assets  shall  be 
accounted for as grant for assets; 
  Government  grant  shall  not  be  recognized  until  there  shall  be  reasonable 
assurance that the PKSF shall comply with the conditions attaching to it, and that 
the grant shall be received; 
  The  nature  and  extent  of  government  grants  recognized  shall  be  disclosed 
adequately in financial statements; 
P/21 
7)  Borrowing Cost: 
  Borrowing costs shall be interest and other costs incurred by PKSF in connection 
with the borrowing of funds; 
  Borrowing costs shall be recognized as an expenses in the period in which they 
are incurred; 
  Borrowing costs shall be accounted for on accrual basis; 
  The  nature  and  extent  of  borrowing  costs  recognized  shall  be  disclosed 
adequately in the financial statements; 
8)  Employees Retirement Benefit Plans: 
  Employees' retirement benefit plans shall be adequately disclosed in the financial 
statement of PKSF in respect to plans and to the following: Description of plans, 
Number  of  participants  received  benefits,  Employers'  contribution,  Employees 
contribution, Investment incomes and administrative expenses. 
  Provision for the employers' contribution to the Contributory Provident Fund shall 
be made as per rules of the Contributory Provident Fund Scheme; 
  Required amount against provision for gratuity shall be invested in the bank with a 
view to timely payment of gratuity to the staff members of PKSF;   
  Premium for Group Insurance Coverage for its employees shall be accounted for 
annually; 
  Cost  of  providing  retirement  benefit  shall  be  recognized  as  an  expense  in  the 
period during which the services are rendered; 
9)  Taxation: 
  At  present,  provision  for  income  tax  is  not  required  to  make  in  the  financial 
statements as PKSF has been exempted from income tax; 
10) Capital Fund: 
  The  origin  of  the  capital  fund  is  the  receipts  of  the  grants  made  by  the 
Government of Bangladesh; 
  The accretion of capital fund shall be the transfer of each yeas' surplus of income 
over expenditures of PKSF; 
  Capital fund is restricted to be exclusively used for the purpose of PKSF only and 
the surplus of income over expenditures cannot be distributed as dividend to its 
members. 
P/22 
11) Loan to Partner Organizations:  
  The  loan  given  to  the  partner  organizations  (POs)  of  PKSF  for  micro-finance  to 
the poor for poverty alleviation shall be shown at loan amount (Gross value).  
  The total loan shall be classified according to the policy of PKSF.  
  Provision shall be made in the accounts for Bad and Doubtful Debts.  
  Detailed movement of the provision shall be disclosed in the financial statement. 
12) Loan to Partner Organizations for Capacity Building:  
  Loan to the Partner Organizations shall be given subject to the budget provision.  
  Loan shall be operated according to the policy of the PKSF. 
13) Loan Classification and Provisioning Policy:  
  Considerations  for  loan  classification:  At  first  -  In  determining  the  level  of  the 
provisions  required  on  the  loan  amount  to  the  borrowers  (POs),  PKSF 
management has considered a number of factors that are as follows: 
  The debt service - Payment record; 
  Sub-sector assessment - Acceptability, profitability & competition; 
  Comparative evaluation of borrower - Sector average, position & status; 
  The  borrower's  financials  -  Dependability,  liquidity,  income  generation, 
cash flows & leverage; 
  The  borrower's  governance  /  management  -  Capability,  experience, 
quality, integrity, professionalism, controls, commitment; and 
  The  borrower'  s  viability  -  Risks,  operational  status,  financial  strength, 
cost recovery. 
Second  consideration  for  loan  classification:  In  determining  the  level  of  the 
provisions  required  on  the  loan  amount  to  the  borrowers  (POs),  PKSF 
management  shall  consider  another  factor  that  the  number  of  days  in  arrear  of 
the loans to POs. 
The results of the application of the different factors in assessing the borrower's 
loan  quality  shall  be  the  classification  of  loans  to  POs  into  five  internationally 
accepted categories; 
  Loans to Partner Organizations (POs - the borrowers of PKSF) shall be classified 
in the following five internationally-accepted categories: 
Days in Arrears  
Loan Classification / Quality 
P/23 
Current (No arrears) 
1 to 30 days arrears 
Standard 
Watch-list 
31 to 180 days arrears 
Sub-standard 
181 to 350 days arrears  
Over 350 days arrears 
Doubtful 
Loss 
  After  determining  the  classification  of  loans  to  POs,  provisions  are  then  set  up 
based on the following guidelines: 
Days in Arrears  
Loan Classification / Quality 
Required Provisions 
Current (No arrears) 
Standard 
1 to 30 days arrears  Watch-list 
31 to 180 days arrears  Sub-standard 
181 to 350 days arrears Doubtful 
Over 350 days arrears  Loss 
2% 
5% 
20% 
75% 
100% 
  Provisions  for  doubtful  and  bad  debts  are  made,  having  regard  to  both  the 
general and specific risk.  
  General Provisions - 
o  The  general  elements  of  the  provisions  relates  to 
those  loan  losses  that,  although  not  yet  specifically 
identified,  are  known  from  experience  to  be present 
at any year-end in the loan portfolio. 
  Specific Provisions - 
o  The  potential 
losses  not  specifically 
identified 
(general  provisions  for  "standard"  loans)  in  the 
portfolio  are  recognized  as  an  expense  in  the 
statement of income and expenditure and separately 
shown  in  Balance  Sheet  as  Debt  Management 
Reserve on loan. 
o  The  specific  elements  of  the  provisions  relates  to 
that,  have  been  specifically 
those 
identified as problematic, doubtful or bad. 
losses 
loan 
o  The  potential  losses  which  have  been  specifically 
identified  (specific  provisions  for  "watch-list",  "sub-
standard", "doubtful" and "loss" loans) in the portfolio 
are  recognized  as  an  expense  in  income  statement 
and  separately  shown  in  Balance  Sheet  as  Debt 
Management Reserve on loan. 
P/24 
 
  Methodology for Loan Classification and Provisioning 
Matrix Methodology 
a)  The matrix methodology takes in to account different factors in assessing the quality of a 
loan,  notably,  the  borrower’s  payment  record  and  financials.  In  addition,  the  matrix 
methodology considers the borrower’s sub-sector, its relative standing in the sub-sector, 
governance and management, and viability. The application of these various elements in 
assessing  the  loan  quality  involves  the  use  of  five  loan  classification  categories: 
“standard” or “pass” “watch-list” or “special mention”, “substandard”, “doubtful”, and “loss”. 
The discussion below provides a broad conceptual description of the situations attendant 
to these classifications. 
b)  The credits, which are considered “standard”, do not exhibit credit weaknesses that might 
jeopardize collection of the debt in the manner agreed to upon the loan’s inception. Such 
credits  are  properly  structured  so  that  repayment  is  effected  in  a  timely  and  realistic 
manner  and  are  otherwise  sound  in  every  respect.  In  essence,  they  are good credits to 
good borrowers. 
c)  Loans  under  the  “watch-list”  category  show  no  signs  of  potential  default.  However,  the 
borrower is vulnerable to structural economic/financial changes or there are certain minor, 
unsatisfactory aspects to the loans. These loans require closer monitoring than “standard” 
loans. 
d)  A “ substandard” loan is one, which has a well – defined credit weakness, or weaknesses, 
which  jeopardize(s)  the  servicing  of  the  debt.  The  sound  net worth or payment ability of 
the  borrower  inadequately  protects  it.  Substandard  credits  are  characterized  by  the 
distinct  possibility  that  the  lender  will  sustain  some  loss  if  the  credit  weakness  is  not 
corrected. Loss potential, while existing in the aggregate amount of substandard assets, 
does not have to exist in individual assets classified substandard. The loan of a borrower 
that relies heavily on grant income or subsidies, which are uncertain over after a period of 
time,  to  cover  its  operating  costs  and  debt  servicing  obligations  could  at  best  be 
considered substandard. 
e)  A substandard borrower is also one, which lacks adequate cash flow to service or repay 
its currently maturing debts. This credit weakness may be determined from an actual lack 
of performance or it may be concluded on a prospective basis through an analysis of the 
enterprise’s financial statements. In some instances, borrowers may appear to perform on 
their  debts  but  in  fact  do  not.  It  is  through  the  capitalization  or  refinancing  or  interest, 
which is due and unpaid that the loan appears current. Substandard assets might include 
loans to borrowers which are fundamentally viable but which require a moderate degree 
of restructuring in their operations to improve efficiency and profitability, a more conducive 
operating  environment,  and  a  stretching  out  or  change  in  the  mix  of  their  liabilities.  The 
objectives of restructuring would be to improve the borrowers’ operations so that they are 
more  efficient,  more  competitive,  and  sufficiently  profitable  to  adequately  service  their 
debts and provide a reasonable return on capital. In effect, the credit weaknesses in such 
borrowers  are,  to  a  very  large  degree,  controllable  and  correctable  over  the  short-term 
with a minimum of external intervention. 
f)  A “doubtful” loan has all the weaknesses inherent in one classified substandard with the 
added  characteristic  that  the  weaknesses  make  collection  or  liquidation  in  full,  on  the 
basis  of  currently  existing  facts,  conditions  and  values,  highly  questionable  and 
improbable. One example of a doubtful asset is a loan which exhibits the characteristics 
of a substandard asset but which is also seriously past due and inadequately protected by 
the realizable value of any collateral pledged. 
P/25 
g)  The  definition  of  a  doubtful  loan  should  be  extended  to  those  borrowers,  which  are 
fundamentally  viable,  but  require  significant  restructuring  of  their  operations  and  debt 
relief or forgiveness to remove the massive overhand of obligations they owe. 
h)  Loans  are  classified  as  “loss”  or  uncollectible  and  of  such  little  value  that  there 
continuance  as  sound  assets  is  not  warranted.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  loan  has 
absolutely  no  recovery  or  salvage  value,  but  rather  it  is  not  practical  or  desire-able  to 
defer  writing  off  this  basically  worthless  asset  even  though  partial  recovery  may  be 
affected in the future. Assets considered, as loss would include loans to those borrowers, 
which are not viable in the short–term under any reasonable circumstances. 
i)  The  matrix  methodology,  shown  in  Appendix-B-I,  provides  a  systematic  basis  for 
classifying loans based on a host of factors. The column on “sub-sector”, while applicable 
to lenders, which service different sub-sectors, is ignored in applying the matrix to PKSF’s 
loan classification. It is assumed PKSF is a wholesale lender providing credits to relatively 
homogeneous retail lending institutions. In using the matrix, the auditor would determine 
in which “boxes” the loan would fall. The “box” depicting the worst situation would be the 
basis for the loan classification.  
j)  Once the loan classification is determined, the required provisions could be computed by 
multiplying the percentage provisions required under the classification by the outstanding 
loan amount. 
k)  The  “Big  Five”  international  accounting  firms,  in  collaboration  with  multilateral  financial 
institutions, have utilized a matrix methodology in determining the loan classification and 
provisioning required of financial institutions operating in different parts of the world. 
Annex-B-1 
Methodology for PKSF Loan Classification and Provisioning 
Borrower 
Sub-sector 
Financials 
Payment Record 
Classif./Tre
atment 
“Standard”: 
2% 
“Watch List” 
: 
5% 
“Substanda
rd”: 20% 
Punctual, no lates  
High account 
turnover 
Delays <90 days  
Occasional 
overdrafts 
High ave. payables 
Medium turnover 
Minor contract 
breach on payables 
Past due >90<180 
days 
Recurrent overdrafts 
Low account turnover 
Contract breach on 
payables>90 days 
Weak loan 
documentation 
Acceptable 
adequate 
demand 
Adequate 
profitability 
Minimal 
competition 
Some questions 
Income 
decreasing 
Competition 
increasing  
Price competition 
up 
Operating costs 
up 
Volatile 
Weak co. under 
pressure 
Income down  
Liberalization 
risk 
Administered 
prices (interest 
rates) 
Above sector 
average 
Strong 
competitive 
position 
Good 
products and 
market 
Within 
sector’s 
average 
Some 
competitive 
weaknesses 
Under sector’s 
average 
Defined 
competitive 
problems 
P/26 
Viability 
No significant 
risks 
Governance/Managem
ent 
Capable/qualified 
No doubt of integrity 
Clear strategic vision 
Very professional 
Good control/MIS  
Good external credit 
Profitable 
Liquid 
Sufficient cash 
flow(CF) 
Low leverage (LV) 
Profitable 
Acceptable liquidity 
Moderate leverage 
CF<operating 
costs+replacement 
of assets 
Capable/qualified  
No doubt of integrity 
Some strategic 
problems 
Improving control/MIS 
Committed governing 
body & managers 
Weak, low capacity 
Shallow experience 
Questionable integrity 
No strategic vision 
Weak controls/MIS 
Governance 
Income low to zero 
Low liquidity 
High leverage 
Weak cash flow 
(CF) 
CF<P+I  
Viability dependent 
on grant income  
Increased 
Will survive 
problems 
Has strength to 
cope 
New capital 
available if 
needed 
No major labor 
issue 
Reliant on 
financing 
Questionable 
owner support 
New marketing 
needed 
Latent future risks 
Minor labor 
excesses 
Working capital mask 
problems 
       conflicts  
Weak external audit 
“Doubtful” 
     75% 
“Loss”: 
100% 
Past due >180 days 
Permanent 
overdrafts 
Contract breach on 
payables> 180 days 
Renewals capitalize 
interest 
Poor legal 
documentation 
Past due>365 days 
New loans despite 
operational losses 
Patently inadequate 
evidence of loan 
Non-interest 
bearing loans 
Poor earning = 
or <zero  
Acute price 
competition 
High risk of 
liberalization 
Operation 
restructuring 
needed  
Political prices 
(interest rates) 
Dying  
Structural 
weaknesses 
Anachronistic 
Well below 
sector average 
Serious 
competition 
problem 
Urgent need to 
modernize 
Losing markets  
Product 
problems 
Over-extended 
Lower quartile 
Uncompetitive 
Weak products 
Marginal role 
Operational losses 
Illiquid 
Selling assets to survive 
CF<interest service 
Excessive leverage 
Inadequate payment source 
Increased WC hides 
operating losses 
Poor  
Incompetent-hiding 
Uncooperative, 
hostile  
Doubts on integrity  
Lack of control/MIS 
No source of new 
capital 
Poor external audit 
High losses 
Selling assets at losses 
Acute CF & leverage 
problems 
CF<gen. & adm. Costs 
No identifiable repayment 
sources(except liquidation) 
Very poor  
Cannot be trusted 
Incompetent and 
desperate 
Chance of fraud 
Non-existent 
governance 
Basic 
problem is 
financial 
Products 
and market 
can recover 
Operational 
problems  
Major labor 
excess 
Require debt 
relief 
Deep 
product 
restructuring 
No full cost 
recovery 
Extremely 
questionable 
Should be 
liquidated 
Should be 
fragmented 
P/27 
14) Accounting of Expenses:  
  All expenses shall be accounted for as on accrual basis. Under the accrual basis 
of accounting, transactions and events shall be recognized when they occur (and 
not  as  cash  or  its  equivalent  is  paid)  and  shall  be  recorded  in  the  accounting 
records  and  reported  in  the  financial  statements  of  the  periods  to  which  they 
relate.  Expenses  shall  be  recognized  in the income statement on the basis of a 
direct association between the costs incurred and the earning of specific items of 
income (matching). 
15) Materiality and Aggregation:  
  Each  material  item  that  is  enough  to  effect  evaluation  or  decision  shall  be 
presented  separately  in  PKSF  financial  statement.  Immaterial  amounts  are 
aggregated  with  the  amounts  of  similar  nature  or  function  and  need  not  be 
presented separately.  
  Financial  statements  result  from  processing  large  quantities  of  transactions, 
which are structured by being aggregated into groups according to their nature or 
function.  The  final  stage  in  the  process  of  aggregation  and  classification  is  the 
presentation of condensed and classified data, which form line items either on the 
face  of  the  financial  statements  or  in  the  notes.  If  a  line  item  is  not  individually 
material, it shall be aggregated with other items either on the face of the balance 
sheet  or  in  notes.  An  item  that  is  not  sufficiently  material  to  warrant  separate 
presentation on the face of financial statements may nevertheless be sufficiently 
material that it should be presented separately in the notes.      
  Materiality  depends  on  the  size  and  nature  of  the  item  judged  in  the  particular 
circumstances  of  its  omission.  In  deciding  whether  an  item  or  an  aggregate  of 
items is material, the nature and the size of the item shall be evaluated together. 
Depending on the circumstances, either the nature or the size of the item could 
be  the  determining  factor.  For  example,  individual  assets  with  the  same  nature 
and function shall be aggregated even if the individual amounts are large. Large 
items which in nature or function shall be presented separately.    
16) Offsetting:  
  PKSF's assets and liabilities shall not be offset except when offsetting is required 
or permitted by any International Accounting Standard.  
 
 
Items of income and expenditure shall be setoff when an International Accounting 
Standard requires or permitted. 
It  is  important  that  both  assets  and  liabilities,  and  income  and  expenses,  when 
material are reported separately. Offsetting in either income statement or balance 
sheet, except when offsetting reflects the substance of the transaction or event, 
detracts from the ability of users to understand the transactions undertaken and 
to assess the future cash flows of the organization. The reporting of assets net of 
valuation allowances for example doubtful debts allowances on receivables is not 
offsetting. Transaction which do not generate revenue but which are incidental to 
the main revenue generating activities. The results of such transactions or event, 
by netting any income with related expenses arising on the same transaction.  
  For  example:  Gains  and  losses  on  the  disposal  of  non-current assets, including 
investments and operating assets, are reported by deducting from the proceeds 
on disposal the carrying amount of the assets and related selling expenses; 
2.5 - Accounting Assumptions of PKSF: 
Following are the accounting assumptions of PKSF to be followed: 
a)  Going Concern: 
P/28 
b)  Consistency: 
When  preparing  the  financial  statements,  PKSF  shall  make  an 
assessment  of  an  enterprise's  ability  to  continue  as  a  going 
concern. 
The  presentation  and  classification  of  financial  items  in  the 
financial  statements  shall  be  retained  from  one  period  to  next 
period unless; 
i) - A significant change in the organization. 
ii) - A change in presentation is required by an IAS. 
c)  Accrual: 
PKSF  shall  prepare  its  financial  statements,  except  for  cash 
flows information, under the accrual basis of accounting. 
2.6 - Characteristics of Financial Transactions & Statements: 
The financial transactions and the financial statements of PKSF shall have the following 
characteristics: 
1)  Understandability; 
2)  Relevance; 
3)  Reliability; 
4)  Faithful presentation; 
5)  Substance over form; 
6)  Neutrality; 
7)  Prudence; 
8)  Completeness; 
9)  Comparability. 
2.7 - Procedure for Recording Transactions: 
2.7.1- Money receipts and recording thereof: 
The  organization  receives  its  fund  from  the  Government  (own  resources  and  lent  from 
IDA credit) as loan in the form of cheque / draft and through Special Accounts subject to 
the  terms  of  the  Development  Credit  Agreement  between  the  Government  and  IDA  & 
Subsidiary  Loan  Agreement.  The  other  sources  of  the  funds  are  service  charges,  bank 
interest  earned,  income  from  training,  sale  of  waste  &  scraps  materials,  other 
miscellaneous  incomes  etc.  Repayment  of  Loans  to  POs  with  service  charges  is  to  be 
received by the organization regularly. 
Money  Receipts  (as  per  computerized  form)  are  to  be  prepared  and  issued  to  the 
concerned  parties  /  customers  on  receipt  of  any  fund  and  income  by  the  organization. 
Money receipts must be numbered. 
P/29 
Money Receipt shall be prepared in tree (3) copies, original receipt goes to the payer, the 
second  copy  will  be  attached  with  the  credit  voucher  and  third  copy  will  be  in the file or 
reserve copy. Money receipt shall be checked and then placed it for recording it the Cash 
Scroll  Book  through  computer  and  at  the  day  end  cash  scroll  is  checked  with  physical 
cash and duly signed by cashier cash officer, and then kept it in vault by joint custodian. 
All  receipts  (cash,  cheques,  demand  draft,  pay  order  etc.)  shall  be  deposited  at  the 
earliest  opportunity,  in  the  bank  by  filling  in  the  pay-in-slips,  after  due  verification  and 
approval  and  then  recorded  it  in  the  Cash  Journal  Register  in  the  computer  through 
preparing cash journal - credit voucher. 
2.7.2 - Payment made in cash / by cheque and recording thereof: 
All payments made by cash or cheque shall be processed through the payment vouchers 
(Cash Journal - Debit Voucher) and posted in the credit side of the Cash Journal Register 
that  will  be  debited  to  the  appropriate  head  of  accounts.  All  payment  vouchers  must  be 
supported  by  the  documentary  evidences  such  as  requisition  /  indent,  quotation, 
comparative  statement,  purchase  committee  resolution,  purchase  order,  challan,  bills, 
cash  memo,  job  completion  certificate  etc.  and  duly  approved  by  the  authorized 
personnel.  Upon  receipt  a  bill,  the  Finance  and  Accounts  Section  will verify the relevant 
documents to justify the payment and prepare a voucher to process the payment subject 
to the clearance of the pre-audit cell.  
Payment  in  cash  should  be  restricted  to  the  limit  and  cases  as  are  narrated  and 
earmarked in the delegation of authority. 
Generally  all  payments  will  be  made  by  cheque  and  that  should  be  crossed  before 
handing over the same to the payee. Neither a blank nor a bearer cheque should ever be 
signed by the organization. The cheque must bear the name of the payee, date of issue, 
amount in both figures and words. While signing the cheque, an initial should be given on 
the  counter-part  of  the  cheque  where  the  cheque  particulars  will  be  recorded  in  a 
condensed manner.  
Cheque  books  should  always  be  kept  under  lock  &  key  under  safe  custody  of  the 
authorized custodians. Canceled cheque should be retained with chequebooks & corners 
thereof  torn  off  as  a  measure  of  safeguarding  against  any  misuse,  in  future.  When 
disbursing  amounts,  Person  responsible  for  payment  (as  per  job/duty  allocation)  should 
obtain the signature of the payee or his/her authorized representative, acknowledgment of 
receipt of cheque or cash as the case may be. When approving a payment, all supporting 
vouchers  or  documents  must  be  canceled  (by  affixing  a  rubber  stamp  worded  "PAID 
AND CANCELED") to minimize the risk of a double payment subsequently being made 
by mistake or manipulation.   
2.8 - Preparation of daily cash and bank balance statement: 
Daily cash & bank balance statement usually contains the following data & information: 
A - Bank account balance of different banks; 
B - Cash in hand; 
C - Advance slip (IOU-Temporary Loan) balance (If any);  
Cashier and Cash Officer (F/A) will check & sign this statement at the end of the day as 
per format. 
P/30 
2.9 - Passing Adjusting Journal and Closing entries: 
  Adjustment  entries  for  stores,  advances,  prepayments,  outstanding  expenses, 
accrued  income,  receivables  and  depreciation  shall  be  made  as  and  when  required 
through journal vouchers.  
  All  rectification,  transfers  and  adjustments  and  non-cash  transactions  are  to  be 
processed through journal voucher. 
  The adjusting journals will be prepared by the Assistant Manager Finance (AMF), duly 
checked  Finance  Manger  (FM),  certified  by  the  Chief  of  Finance  &  Accounts  and 
approved  by  the  competent  authority.  The  posted  /  entered  the  same  in  to  the 
computer software. 
  The journal vouchers will be filled in a chronological order.  
2.10 - Preparation of Trial Balance: 
  The ledger accounts shall be balanced on transaction basis to prepare trial balance. 
Consolidated Accounts, Project Accounts and Fund Accounts to be drawn to ensure 
the  arithmetical  accuracy  of  the  entries  made  in  the  Cash  Journal  Register  and 
Ledgers Accounts. 
  Trial  balance  will  be  the  base  document  to  prepare  the  Income  &  Expenditure 
Account, Balance Sheet, Cash Flow Statements and all other financial statements as 
required by management.  
2.11 - Reporting of Accounting Office: 
Accounting office shall close the accounts at the last transaction day of the month. This 
closing includes: 
A - Closing of Books and Accounts: 
  Closing of Cash Journal Register - Cash and Bank balance; 
  Balancing of General Control Ledger; 
  Balancing of all Project, Fund, Subsidiary & Sub-subsidiary Ledgers. 
  Balancing of all Loan Ledgers 
  Balancing and updating of all kinds of registers. 
  Cash and bank balance confirmation; 
  Bank reconciliation statements preparation; 
B - Preparation Financial Statements: 
  Preparation of Trail Balance; 
  Preparation of monthly Income & Expenditure Account; 
  Preparation of monthly Balance Sheet; 
P/31 
  Preparation of all necessary schedules and break up of figure; 
  Preparation of Cash flow statement as per International Accounting Standard-7. 
  Notes  to  Accounts  with  full  disclosure  requirements  of  adequate  &  correct 
presentation of Financial Statements as per International Accounting Standards; 
  Yearly  basis  loan  classification  statements  and  loan  loss  provision  statements 
following the Matrix method for the loans to POs;  
 
Interpretation of Financial Statements; 
  Budget Monitoring & Budget Variance Analysis; 
  Preparation of Project Financial Statements as per Guidelines of Donor; 
  Donor-wise statement of utilization against a fund would be prepared on the basis 
of the financing agreement. Reports would assist management with comparison 
of actual cost with budgeted cost promptly and accurately. 
Accounting office shall prepare the complete set of accounts – financial statements by the 
20th of the next month at the latest and submitted to the Managing Director. 
2.12 - Activity Chart of transactions & their documentation: 
Activity  Chart  of  the  total  financial  accounting  system  of  the  organization  has  been 
outlined as below: 
ACTIVITY CHART 
Activity   
Form to be used 
Frequency 
1-Transactions – cash or non-cash 
2-Adequcy of documents of transactions 
3-Approval of transactions 
4-Payment vouchers – Cash Journal 
5-Payee’s acknowledgement   
6-Receipt vouchers  - Cash Journal 
7-Posting to cash journal register 
8-Balancing of cash journal voucher 
9-Posting & balancing to bank accounts ledger 
10-Preparation of daily cash & bank balance statements 
11-Preparation of bank reconciliation statements   
As and when it takes place 
For each transaction 
For each transaction 
For each transaction 
For each transaction 
For each transaction 
Daily basis 
Daily basis 
Daily basis 
Daily basis 
Monthly basis 
12-Journal vouchers 
13-Adequacy of documents of journal voucher 
14-Posting to control general ledger 
15-Posting to project ledgers   
16-Posting to fund ledger 
17-Posting to budget register  
18-Balancing of all ledgers 
19-Posting to fixed assets register 
20-Posting to stock register 
21-Balancing of stock register 
22-Posting & balancing of advance register 
23-Posting and balancing of loans register 
24-Posting & balancing of all payable registers 
25-Posting & balancing of all subsidiary ledgers 
P/32 
Daily, as &  when takes place 
For each transaction  
Daily basis 
Daily, as & when takes place 
Daily basis 
Daily basis 
Daily basis 
As & when it takes place 
As & when it takes place 
Daily basis 
As & when it takes place 
As & when it takes place 
As & when it takes place 
As & when it takes place 
26-Posting & balancing of all sub subsidiary ledgers & registers 
As & when it takes place 
27-Preparation of trial balance 
28-Preparation of income statements of all projects 
29-Preparation of consolidated income statements of PKSF  
30-Preparation of balance sheets of all projects 
31-Preparation of consolidated balance sheets of PKSF 
32-Preparation of cash flow statements of all projects and PKSF 
33-Preparation of notes to accounts of all projects and PKSF 
Monthly basis 
Monthly basis 
Yearly basis 
Monthly basis 
Yearly basis 
Monthly basis 
Monthly basis 
34-Preparation of accounts statements/schedules of all projects and PKSF 
Monthly basis 
35-Preparation of cash custody certificates of all projects and PKSF 
Monthly basis 
36-Obtain bank balance confirmation certificates - all projects and PKSF 
Monthly basis 
37-Obtain Loan balance confirmation certificates from POS - all projects 
Monthly basis 
P/33 
2.13 - Financial Accounting Flow Chart: 
PKSF financial accounting system flow chart has been given as below: 
Flow Chart of Financial Accounting 
Financial Transactions 
Cash / Bank transactions 
Non-cash transactions 
Receipt transactions 
Payment transactions 
Depreciation & 
Adjustment of 
Assets 
Provision for         Provisions for         
revenue expenses 
capital expense 
Cash Journal 
Journal Voucher 
Cash Journal Register 
 Control General Ledger 
Project Ledger 
Fund Ledger 
Subsidiary Ledger   
Subsidiary Ledger   
Subsidiary Ledger 
Trial Balance 
Trial Balance 
Trial Balance 
Income Statement  Balance Sheet 
Income Statement  Balance Sheet  
Income Statement  Balance Sheet 
Cash Flow Statement 
Cash Flow Statement 
Cash Flow Statement 
Notes to Accounts   
Notes to Accounts   
Notes to Accounts 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 3 
P/34 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
3.1 - Introduction 
3.2 – Cash Journal – Debit / Payment Voucher  
3.3 – Cash Journal – Credit / Receipts Voucher  
3.4 – Journal Voucher–Adjustments/Non Cash Transactions 
3.5 – Cash Journal Register 
3.6 – Main / Control General Ledger 
3.7 – Project Ledger 
3.8 – Money Receipts 
3.9 – Subsidiary Ledger 
3.10 – Store Ledger 
3.11 – Bank Reconciliation Statement  
3.12 – Formats to be used  
3.13 – Erasing & overwriting prohibited 
3.14 – Conclusion 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 3 – ACCOUNTING FORMS, VOUCHERS & RECORDING BOOKS 
CHAPTER – 3 
ACCOUNTING FORMS, VOUCHERS AND RECORDING BOOKS 
P/35 
3.1 - Introduction: 
In  general,  the  following  accounting  forms  and  recording  books  could  possibly  be  kept 
and  maintained  by  PKSF.  These  accounting  forms  and  recording  books  would  be  used 
for  documentation  of  various  records,  analysis  and  interpretation  of  daily  financial 
transactions  of  PKSF  in  terms  of  cash  and  accrual  basis.  Utilities  and  characteristics  of 
different forms and recording books are described here in details for smooth functioning 
of  processing  the  every  day  financial  transactions  of  PKSF  head  office and its Regional 
Audit offices in systematically. 
3.2 – Cash Journal – Debit / Payment Voucher: 
Voucher  is  the  primary  source  of  information  to  the  accounting  process.  Vouchers  are 
prepared  on  the  basis  of  invoice  or  memorandum  that  serves  as  evidence  of  a 
transaction.  As  soon  as  cash  and  bank  payment  transaction  is  completed,  it  has  to  be 
recorded  in  Cash  Journal  –  Debit  /  Payment  Voucher.  To  record  the  cash  and  bank 
transactions,  it  is  the  primary  and  main  evidence  of  processing  transactions  of  PKSF 
head office and its Regional Audit offices.  
Debit – Cash Journal: 
In  case  of  cash  /  bank  expenses  or  payments  or  discharging  of  liabilities,  it  has  to  be 
recorded through Debit – Cash Journal. Debit / Payment vouchers shall be submitted for 
approval  together  with  all  supporting  documents.  Only  duly  approved  vouchers  can  be 
posted to the books of accounts. 
The specimen format of Cash Journal is given in Form No. - 101 
3.3 – Cash Journal – Credit / Receipts Voucher: 
As  soon  as  cash  and  bank  receipt  or  income  transaction  is  completed,  it  has  to  be 
recorded in Cash Journal – Credit / Receipt Voucher. To record the cash and bank receipt 
transactions,  it  is  the  primary  and  main  evidence  of  processing  transactions  of  PKSF 
head office and its Regional Audit offices.  
Credit – Cash Journal: 
In case of cash / bank receipts or incomes, it has to be recorded through Credit – Cash 
Journal.  Credit  /  Receipts  vouchers  shall  be  submitted  for  approval  together  with  all 
supporting  documents.  Only  duly  approved  vouchers  can  be  posted  to  the  books  of 
accounts. 
The specimen format of Cash Journal is given in Form No. - 102 
3.4 – Journal Voucher – For Adjustments / Non Cash Transactions: 
Journal vouchers need to be prepared in order to reconcile different combinations of inter 
related  accounts.  Besides,  transactions  of  some  non-cash  items  will  also  be  made 
through the preparation of Journal Voucher.   
Preparation of journal voucher is generally necessary to record the posting of all financial 
transactions that are generally categorized as below: 
P/36 
  Depreciation of all fixed assets; 
  Provision created for the capital expenditures; 
  Provision created for the revenue expenditures; 
  All sorts of adjustment in inventory accounting; 
  All sorts of adjustment of advances; 
  All sorts of income receivables; 
  Provision created for the loan losses;   
  To accounts for all sorts of accrued liabilities; 
  Accounting of deduction of security deposit, Income Tax, & VAT 
  All sorts of rectification entries for appropriate corrections; 
  Other transactions not covered by any other vouchers. 
Journal  vouchers  shall  be  submitted  for  verification  to  the  Manager  Finance  (FM)  and 
then  for  approval  to  the  Deputy  General  Manager  (DGM),  together  with  all  supporting 
documents. Only duly approved journal vouchers can be posted to the books of accounts. 
The specimen format of Journal Voucher is given in Form No. - 103 
3.5 – Cash Journal Register: 
PKSF account section shall maintain double-column Cash Journal Register. All cash and 
bank transactions will be recorded in the respective columns of cash and banks of cash 
journal register on daily basis in computer.  
Cash  debit  journal  will  be  recorded  on  the  expenditure  /  payments  side  and  cash  credit 
journal  will  be  recorded  on  the  receipt  side  of  the  cash  journal  register  chronologically. 
Cash journal register must be balanced after daily operations are being completed. After 
balancing the cash journal, the balance amount will be physically verified and there after 
both  accounts  officer  and  cashier  will  put  their  signatures  acknowledging  the  above 
balance as found correct. Thus, it is the primary and main book of the PKSF that will give 
an accurate picture of the cash item transactions in a particular time. 
This will be a computerized form – R-201. 
3.6 – Control General Ledger: 
The  control  general  ledger  is  the  control  book  to  summaries  all  financial  transactions 
(cash  items  and  non-cash  items  transactions)  of  PKSF  in  accounts  head  and  accounts 
code  wise  for  easy  preparation  of  financial  statements.  Recording  of  all  the  daily 
expenses  and  income  transactions  will  be  made  in  the  control  general  ledger  through 
computer. All transactions in cash journal register and through journal vouchers will have 
to be recorded in control general ledger under different accounting heads and codes.  
P/37 
This will be a computerized form. 
3.7 – Project Ledger: 
PKSF  executes  various  projects  simultaneously.  Project  accounts  are  separate  sets  of 
books.  So,  it  is  essential  to  keep  separate  records  for  all  transactions  as  per  their 
connection to different projects since the sources of funds are not same. To ensure the 
project wise recording, the all project wise financial transactions VIZ, cash and non-cash 
items  will  have  to  be  accumulated  in  accounts  head  and  accounts  code  by  opening  of 
project ledger sheet in necessary.  
This will be a computerized form. 
3.8 – Money Receipts: 
Money Receipt is a computerized form, shall be used for the following transactions: 
  Receipt of funds; 
  Receipts of service charges and loans repayments amount from POs; 
  Sale proceeds of wastage and scrap materials; 
  Sale proceeds of assets & dead stock; 
  Fees and subscriptions; 
  Received from other sources; 
  All other receipts. 
3.9 – Subsidiary Ledger: 
Subsidiary  ledger  is  the  secondary  control  book  to  summaries  all  financial  transactions 
(cash items and non-cash items transactions) of PKSF in accounts head & code wise for 
detail  presentation  of  the  control  general  ledger.  Detail  recording  of  the  daily  expenses 
and  income  transactions  will  be  made  in  this  ledger.  All  transactions  in  cash  journal 
register  and  through  journal  vouchers  will  have  to  be  recorded  in  this  ledger  under 
different accounting sub-heads and sub-codes.  
This will be a computerized form – R-202. 
3.10 – Store Ledger: 
Store  ledger  shall  be  maintained  for  all  materials  purchased  -  whether  for  works  or  for 
store or for sale. A separate folio or set of folios shall be opened for each stock group. All 
stock items placed in store or issued out of store should be recorded in the store ledger 
individually.  All stock items in store shall be inventoried at June 30 each year positively. 
All types of store ledgers shall be up-to-date at all times and balanced at the end of each 
month. 
P/38 
3.11 – Bank Reconciliation Statement:  
The bank statement providing all details of bank transactions should be obtained from the 
bank  by  the  5th  of  the  following  month  and  scrutinize the transactions recorded in bank 
statement and reconcile with the Cash Journal Register.  
Bank reconciliation statement should be prepared by the tenth day of the following month. 
If the account section with the balance as per bank statement for reconciliation purpose, 
all cheques deposited but not credited by bank should be added, and cheques issued but 
not cashed be deducted. 
Appropriate  reconciliation  would  also  be  required  for  bank  charges,  which  are  generally 
accounted for only on receipt of bank statements. 
The  official  designated  for  verification  should  review  the  completed  bank  reconciliation 
statement very carefully. 
The specimen format of Bank Reconciliation Statement is given in Form No. - 107 
3.12 – Formats to be Used: 
The organization will also use the following formats in the prescribed forms designing in 
connection  to  recording,  posting,  documenting,  as  evidences,  finalizing  all  financial 
transactions and preparing & presenting financial statements of PKSF: 
  Advance slip / IOU form; 
  Requisition of fund / indent form; 
  Store materials requisition form; 
  Purchase requisition form; 
  Schedule of comparative statement form; 
  Purchase order form; 
  Goods receipt & inspection note form; 
  Conveyance bill form; 
  Travel expenses and allowance bill form; 
  Log book sheet; 
  Travel request from; 
  Overtime request form; 
  Annual accounts statements form; 
  Accounts schedules form; 
  Staff advances statements form; 
  Accounts payable statements form; 
  Accrued liabilities statements form; 
  Physical inventory statements form; 
  Trail balance statements from; 
 
  Balance sheet statements form; 
  Cash flow statement form; 
  Cash certificates form; 
  Bank confirmation certificates form; 
  Cash Scroll Book form 
Income & expenditure accounts form; 
P/39 
3.13 – Erasing & overwriting prohibited:  
Erasure  and  overwriting  of  entries  once  made  in  the  cash  journal  register,  ledgers  and 
other registers are strictly prohibited. If a mistake is discovered, it should be corrected by 
drawing the pen through the incorrect entry and inserting the correct one in between the 
lines.  Every  such  correction  should  be  attested  by  the  officer  /  cashier  /  AMF  with  his 
dated initials. 
3.14 – Conclusion:  
The above mention forms and registers are important documents. So, proper care must 
be taken of these registers. Special attention should also be paid so that the entries to the 
forms and register are made as carefully as possible and deletion.  
Over  writing  or  tearing  of  page  with  wrong  entries  should  be  avoided.  If  an  entry  in  the 
form / register is found to be erroneous, then initials should be given after inserting correct 
data deleting the previous one.  
Eraser,  vanishing  liquid  /  fluid  should  never  be  used  to  rectify  a  wrong  entry.  Data 
transferred from certain column or space of original source will have to be recorded in the 
respective column or page of the register.  
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 4  
P/40 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
4.1 – Instructions to write up Cash Journal 
4.2 – Instructions to write up Journal Voucher 
4.3 – Instructions to write up Cash Journal Register 
4.4 – Instructions to write up Control General Ledger 
4.5 –Instruction to write up Bank Reconciliation Statement  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
4–WRITING PROCEDURE OF FORMS, VOUCHERS & RECORDING BOOKS 
CHAPTER – 4 
P/41 
WRITING PROCEDURE OF FORMS, VOUCHERS & RECORDING BOOKS 
4.1 – Instructions to write up Cash Journal:(Debit & Credit Vouchers) 
  At  first,  mention  project  /  fund  name  for  which  the  concerned  cash  journal  will  be 
prepared; 
  And  then,  voucher  number  will  be  set-forth  chronologically  relating  to  the  date  of 
incurring the financial transactions. 
  Put the date of preparation of cash journal. 
  Name  the  bank  account  from  which  payment  is  to  be  made  and  receipt  will 
accumulate. 
 
 Mode of payment will have to be mentioned. i.e. cash or cheque in payment voucher. 
  Mode of receipt will be mentioned cash or cheque wise in case of receipt voucher. 
 
It  is  compulsory  to  write  down  the  cheque  number  for  better  get  control  over  bank 
payments and receipts; 
  Exchange rate of the date of happening the transactions to be mentioned for foreign 
currency conversion purpose; 
  Accounts head and code from the chart of accounts has to be clearly specified in the 
voucher format both debit and credit sides. Other wise, summarization of ledger is not 
accurately possible in computer software. 
  Being implementation of internal check system, it is compulsory to write up the Taka 
amount in words in cash journal format correctly. 
  Narration  of  the  occurring  of  the  financial  transaction  shall  be  written  in  legible  way 
that shall be easily understood by all concern. 
  Before  posting,  the  cash  journal  shall  be  checked  compulsorily.  Posting  of  cash 
journal  in  the  cash  journal  register  through  computer  software  will  be  clearly 
earmarked with the words “YES or NO” along with the signature and also mention the 
date  of  posting.  Control  general  ledger,  project  ledger,  loan  ledger,  subsidiary  and 
sub-subsidiary ledger positing automatically generated in the computer software.   
  Finally,  cash  journal  will  be  printed  out  in  hardcopy,  signed  by  the  prepared  by, 
checked by and approved by. 
4.2 – Instructions to write up Journal Voucher: 
P/42 
  First point is that to note the project / fund name for which journal has been prepared; 
  Then, put the journal voucher number in the format; 
  Date of preparation of journal voucher is compulsory to write down; 
  Accounts  head  and  accounts  codes  from  chart  of  accounts  to  be  accurately 
mentioned  in  the  journal  voucher  form  with  debit  and  credit  amount.  Then,  totaled 
both the sides. 
  Being implementation of internal check system it is compulsory to write up the Taka 
amount in words correctly in the journal voucher format. 
 
In  narration  column,  the  causes  of  making  the  journal  voucher  will  be  highlighted  in 
details with putting references. 
  Finally,  journal  voucher  will  be  signed  by  who  prepared  it  and  checked  it  and  then 
placed to DGM (Finance / Accounts) for final approval. 
  Posting  of  non-cash  transactions  in  ledgers  should  be  clearly  earmarked  by  putting 
the “YES or NO” with date of posting in journal voucher format. 
4.3 – Instructions to write up Cash Journal Register: 
  Cash Journal Register is a computer software generated format.  
  Computer  generated  cash  journal  register  has  two  sides  for  recording  of  cash 
journals – 
o  Credit journals will be recorded in “Receipts” side (denotes "+"); and 
o  Debit journals will be recorded in “Payment” side (denotes "-"). 
Format is same for recording in both sides (credit and debit). 
  Cash Journal both debit and credit shall be posted in the Cash Journal Register that 
is a computer software generated format.  
  Finally, cash journal register will be printed out in hardcopy & check the followings: 
  At  first,  dates  of  the  cash  journal  register.  This  will  be the date of debit and 
credit  journals  date  and  sequence  of  writing  up  the  date  is  always  be 
maintained accurately. 
  Then, voucher number from cash journal of debit and credit shall be written 
so correctly to attain the goal of internal check and control. 
  Particular  column  whether  recorded  as  the  details  of  nature  of  expense. 
Whether accounts head and codes column recorded similar to the accounts 
head and codes that are written in cash journal.  
P/43 
  Then,  check  the  Taka  amount  separately  for  cash  payment  and  receipt  in 
cash column & for bank payment and receipt in bank column.  
  Then  check  the  total  figure  in  receipt  and  payment  side  of  cash  and  bank 
columns respectively.  
  Check balancing amount after deducting total payments from total receipt. 
  Finally,  accounts  personnel  will  sign  cash  journal  register  after  detail  checking  and 
verification of vouchers posting & balancing with the close of every day's recording. 
4.4 – Instructions to write up Control General Ledger: 
  Control General ledger is also a computer software generated format. 
  The Debit and Credit of Control General Ledger will be automatically posted through 
computer  software  simultaneously  at  the  time  of  inputting  the  posting  of  debit  and 
credit of Cash Journals and Journal Vouchers in the computer. 
  Finally, cash journal register & journal voucher register will be printed out in hardcopy 
and checked the followings: 
  Firstly, to check accounts head and code very carefully & accurately.  
  Check the correct date from cash journal and journal vouchers.  
  Check  the  debit  and  credit  column  Taka  amount  whether  recorded  as  per 
accounts head and code debit & credit basis from cash and journal voucher.  
  Then,  check  the  balance  amount  whether  found  out  by  balancing  debit  & 
credit figure in line by line. 
  Finally,  marking of debit and credit balances accurately and signed the cash journal 
register and journal voucher register who checked these. 
4.5 – Instruction to write up Bank Reconciliation Statement: 
  First  the  balance  as  per  Cash  Journal  Register  for  reconciliation  purpose  in 
reconciliation statement. 
  Then, added all cheques issued but not presented in bank for payment. 
  Then, deducted all cheques deposited in bank but not collected by bank. 
  Then,  added  all  cheques  collected  by  bank  but  not  entered/recorded  in  to  Cash 
Journal Register. 
  Then, added bank interest credited in bank statement but not entered/recorded in to 
Cash Journal Register. 
  Then,  deducted  all  cheques  cashed  by  bank  but  not  entered  into  Cash  Journal 
Register. 
  Then,  deducted  all  bank  charges  &  commission  debited  in  bank  statement  but  not 
entered in to Cash Journal Register. 
  Then, deducted clearing return by bank. 
  The  official  designated 
for  verification  should 
review 
the  completed  bank 
reconciliation statement very carefully. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 5 
P/44 
--------------------------------------------------------------- 
5.1 - Types of Registers  
5.2 - Fixed Assets Register 
5.3 - Salary and Payroll Register 
5.4 - Cheque Issue Register 
5.5 - Cheque/DD/PO Receipt Register 
5.6 - VAT & Income Tax Register 
5.7 - Advance Slip / IOU Register 
5.8 - Budget Register 
--------------------------------------------------------------- 
 5 - MAINTENANCE OF REGISTERS 
CHAPTER – 5 
MAINTENANCE OF REGISTERS 
P/45 
5.1 - Types of Registers: 
Accounting  offices  of  PKSF  shall  maintain  the  following  register  to  record  the  financial 
transactions and its related information: 
  Fixed Assets Register 
  Salary and Payroll Register 
  Cheque Issue Register 
  Cheque/DD/PO Receipt Register 
  VAT & Income Tax Register 
  Advance Slip / IOU Register 
  Budget Register 
  Tour Register 
5.2 - Fixed Assets Register: 
All fixed assets acquired / sales / disposal shall be recorded in as per the format given for 
the Fixed Assets Register (as per format - Register No. - 203). A separate folio or set of 
folios shall be opened for each asset group. All fixed assets on hand shall be recorded in 
the fixed assets register individually. The register shall be kept up to date at all times and 
balanced at the end of each month.  
The  fixed  assets  shall  be  physically  verified  at  the  end  of  each  half  year  and  results 
should  be  reconciled  with  the  fixed  assets  register  and  short  /  excess,  if  any,  shall  be 
adjusted  in  the  books  of  accounts  and  Fixed  Assets  Register  with  the  approval  of  the 
competent authority of PKSF. Sold, disposed of and damaged asset must be recorded in 
the  appropriate  column  of  the  Register.  Depreciation on fixed assets will be recorded in 
the fixed assets register in appropriate column. 
5.3 - Salary & Payroll Register: 
PKSF  Head  Office  and  its  Regional  Audit  office  shall  maintain  a  sheet/register 
(computerized)  for  payment  of  monthly  salaries  to  the  staff  members  (as  per  format  - 
Register No. - 204). All employees should be encouraged to receive their salary through 
their  individual  bank  account  or  through  cheques.  This  will  reduce  the  risk  of  handling 
cash.  
5.4 - Cheque Issue Registers: 
To  establish  an  effective  internal  control  mechanism,  cheque  issue  register  shall  be 
effectively  maintained.  Register  to  be  maintained  for  recording  cheques  for  persons  / 
organizations  to  whom  cheques  are  issued,  date,  amount,  indicating  payment  date, 
cheque  nos.,  purposes  of  payment,  bank  branch  upon  which  cheques  are  drawn. 
Separate  cheque  issue  register  shall  be  opened  for  individual  bank  account.  Cheque 
signatories shall sign the register. Register shall always be signed by a senior level officer 
of accounts’ section & shall be checked by another personnel. (As per format - Register 
No. - 205) 
P/46 
5.5 - Cheque/DD/PO Receipt Registers: 
To  establish  an  effective  internal  control  mechanism  a  cheque  &  demand  draft  receipt 
register  shall  be  effectively  maintained.  This  register  to  be  maintained  for  recording 
cheques  for  persons  /  organizations  to  whom  cheques  &  demand  drafts  are  received, 
date and amount, indicating receipt date, cheque nos., purposes of receipt, bank branch 
upon which cheques and demand drafts are received.  
This register shall always be signed by a senior level officer of accounts’ section and shall 
be checked by another personnel. (As per format - Register No. - 206) 
5.6 - VAT & Income Tax Register: 
VAT  &  Income  Tax  register    (As  per  format  -  Register  No.  -  207)  shall  always  be 
maintained  by  PKSF 
from 
suppliers/consultants  and  income  tax  deductions  from  the  suppliers  &  consultants  and 
deducted  amount  are  duly  been  deposited  to  the  Government  fund  through  treasury 
challan as per rules and regulations as made in this context by the Income Tax Ordinance 
1984.  
the  VAT  collections/deductions 
to  control  over 
5.7 - Advance Slip / IOU Register: 
IOU / Advance Slip register (as per format - Register No. - 208) shall be maintained by the 
PKSF Head Office and its Regional Audit office to record the Taka amount given as IOU / 
as  by  Advance  Slip  and  to  record  the  Taka  amount  adjusted  /  refunded  by  the  staff 
members  of  the  organization  only  for  emergency  purposes  or  making  expenses  of  very 
small amount.  
5.8 - Budget Register: 
A budget register (computerized R-209) shall be maintained always in an updated manner 
by  the  accounts  personnel  to  control  the  expenditure  in  any  particular  head.  Before 
confirming  the  payment,  budget  should  be  checked  and  verified  and  this  is  why  the 
budget register should be maintained regularly and correctly. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 6 
P/47 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
6.1 - Finance & Accounts Activities 
6.2 - Treasury, Bills and Salary Activities 
6.3 - General Accounting, Ledger & Final Account Activities 
6.4 - Loan to POs Accounting Activities 
6.5 - Budgeting, Tax, Internal & External Reporting Activity 
6.6 - Job Description of Finance & Accounts Section 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 6 – FINANCE & ACCOUNTS ACTIVITIES & JOB DESCRIPTION  
P/48 
CHAPTER – 6 
FINANCE & ACCOUNTS ACTIVITIES & JOB DESCRIPTION  
6.1 – Finance & Accounts Activities: 
PKSF finance and accounts activities can be subdivided into four main specialized ways 
for the sack of better handling of its entire operations / functions VIZ: 
  Treasury, bills and salary activities; 
  General accounting, ledger & final accounts activities; 
  Loan to POs accounting activities; 
  Budgeting, tax and internal & external reporting activities. 
The details of the above activities are highlighted as follows: 
6.2 – Treasury, Bills and Salary Activities: 
  Handling of cash floats – All receipts and payments by cash and bank accounts; 
  Payment of various expense bills in cash or on cheque after proper examination and 
pre-auditing of these bills being done; 
  To exercise control over all banking transactions; 
  Withdrawal  of  necessary  amount  of  cash  from  banks  to  carry  out  daily  cash 
transactions; 
  Preparation of cash requisition statement on need basis; 
  Proper,  accurate  and  up  dated  writing  of  double  column  cash  book  (Cash  Scroll 
Book) and daily balancing; 
  Reconciliation of cash balance with physical balance of cash; 
  Preparation of IOU slip and file the duplicate for control and internal cheek; 
  Preparation & checking of advance forms and their reporting; 
  Debit & credit vouchers preparation through cash journal – only the approved ones; 
  Preparation of cash & bank payments and receipts summary as per accounts heads 
and code on monthly basis; 
  Preparation  of 
journal  vouchers 
transactions as and when needed; 
for  adjustments,  rectification  and 
for  other 
  All types of correspondences with the banks; 
  Collections of bank statements – accounts wise; 
  Collections of bank confirmation statements from all banks on monthly basis; 
  Maintaining of bank accounts register / ledgers; 
  Preparation of bank reconciliation statement for all bank accounts on monthly basis; 
P/49 
  Preparation of daily cash and bank balance statements; 
  Arrangement of transfer of funds from DOSA; 
  TA / DA bills checking with rules; 
  Budget provisions verifications and recordings; 
  Process of salary and bonus payments to staff members; 
  Preparation  of  bank  advice  for  salary  payments  with  details  list  of  individuals  net 
salary payable; 
  Documentation of recording the all sorts of deductions of salary; 
  Processing  all  sorts  of  internal  bills,  their  documentation,  authentication,  approval, 
payments and recording accordingly; 
  Processing  all  sorts  of  external  bills  (bills  of  contractors,  suppliers  and  other  third 
parties),  their  documentation,  relevancy,  authentication,  approval,  payments  and 
recording accordingly; 
6.3 – General Accounting, Ledger & Final Accounts Activities: 
  Preparation,  checking  and  verification  of  Journal  vouchers  for  all  non  cash 
transactions; 
  Posting  of  approved  journal  vouchers  (non-cash)  in  computer  accounting  software 
daily and when ready for recording; 
  Posting  of  all  cash  and  bank  transactions  through  cash  journal  in  Cash  Journal 
Register daily and when ready for recording; 
  Posting and balancing in all types of registers and sub - subsidiary registers on timely, 
properly and accurately; 
  Maintenance of separate fixed assets register for each projects and funds. 
  Posting and balancing in fixed assets register. 
  Depreciation calculations all fixed and other assets which are depreciable assets;  
  Preparation  of  fixed  assets  schedules  with  showing  their  depreciation  and  written 
down value; 
  Preparation of Project-wise Trial Balance; 
  Preparation of consolidated Trial Balance as a whole; 
P/50 
  Preparation of Project-wise Income Statements. 
  Preparation of consolidated Income Statements; 
  Preparation of Project-wise Balance Sheet; 
  Preparation of consolidated Balance Sheet; 
  Preparation  all  related  project-wise  and  consolidated  accounts  schedules  and 
statements; 
  Preparation  of  project-wise  and  consolidated  Notes  to  the  Accounts  /  Financial 
Statements; 
  Preparation  of  statements  for  adoption  of  accounting  policies  as  adopted  by 
management in preparing financial statements of PKSF; 
  Finally, to confirm that the preparation of financial statements / accounts of PKSF and 
its projects are prepared as per the requirements and disclosure requirements of the 
International Accounting Standards (IASs) as adopted in Bangladesh; 
6.4 – Loans to POs Accounting Activities: 
  Preparation  of  all  service  charges  against  loans  to  POs  related  statements  to  be 
needed  by  the  preparation  of  income  statements  in  presenting  the  financial 
statements; 
  Maintenance of separate Loans to POs register for all POs; 
  Updating of posting in Loans to POs registers and their balancing in timely manner; 
  Preparation  of  service  charges  cash  journal  and  their  documentation  &  recording 
properly; 
  Preparation  of  service  charges  journal  vouchers  and  their  documents  &  recording 
properly; 
  Preparation  of  aging  schedules  of  loans  to  POs  and  necessary  flow  up  regarding 
realization and adjustments; 
  Maintenance of all related documents, papers, agreement, deeds with the POs; 
  Maintenance of disbursement records, their recording in the loan register and update 
the documentation. 
  Maintenance of recovery / collection records, their recording in the loan register and 
update the documentation; 
  Preparation of loan classification statements to the loans to POs as per internationally 
accepted policy guidelines; 
  Preparation of provision for loan loss statements as per classified loan statement to 
the Loans to POs as per internationally accepted guidelines;  
6.5 – Budgeting, Tax and Internal & External Reporting Activity: 
P/51 
  Budget  and  budgeting  functions  –  preparation  of  budgets  for  new  and  all  existing 
offices of PKSF; 
  Collection of information & data in connection to formulation of budget for all offices; 
  Processing, editing and reviewing the collecting information and data in connection to 
formulation of budget for all offices of PKSF; 
  Setting of standards in relation to the formulation of budget for all offices of PKSF; 
  Formulation of budget for all offices of PKSF; 
  Maintenance of budget registers in all offices of PKSF as per requirements; 
  Preparation of budget monitoring statements; 
  Preparation of variance statements; 
  Analysis of variances; 
  Assessment of actual results with the budgeted ones and if any deviation found, then 
to pinpoint the actual causes 
  To  take  necessary  steps  to  eradicate  or  minimize  this  deviation  in  future  through 
more realistic budget preparation and / or better performance; 
  To  give  necessary  guidelines  &  advice  in  order  to  rectify  those  anomalies/mistakes 
that have been pinpointed by the internal auditors in their periodic audit reports; 
  All correspondences to the Tax authority; 
  All correspondences to the VAT authority; 
  Filling of tax returns of the staff members of the organization whose are taxable; 
  Processing of tax assessments; 
  Maintenance  of  tax  deductions  register  for  the  staff  members,  suppliers  and  for 
others who are related; 
  Deposit  of  money  to  Bangladesh  Bank  through  Challan  of  the  deducted  amount  as 
advance tax from staff members and outsides parties; 
 
Internal reporting to the management for decision making relating to the information 
of accounts and finance as and when needed; 
  External  reporting  of  financial  accounting  to  funding  agencies  on  the  basis  of  their 
requirements or in accordance with the conditions previously agreed with them; 
 
In addition to the above functions, this branch provide all other accounts and finance 
related information for Management Information System (MIS) reporting purpose; 
  All types of correspondences to the Government; 
  All  types  of  correspondences  to  the  loan  given  agencies  relating  to  the  relevant 
matters of accounts and finance; 
P/52 
Leave 
Substitute 
Manager 
(F/A) 
6.6 - Job Description of Finance & Accounting Section: 
Designation & 
Name 
1.  DGM 
-
(Finance  & 
Accounts) 
Works / Duties 
a)  Overall charge of Finance and Accounts Section of PKSF; 
b)  Preparation of Annual Budget of PKSF; 
c)  Expenditure Control; 
d)  Management of IDA fund, withdrawal its and repayment to Government 
and  IDA;  Keeping  DOSA  and  Reconciling  with  Bangladesh  Bank 
Statement, Keeping IDA accounts and reconciling with IDA statement, 
repayment schedule preparation;   
e)  Verification  of  income  and  expenditure  of  PKSF  and  passing  of  credit, 
debit and journal vouchers; 
Internal Audit and giving cooperation in conducting External Audit. 
f) 
g)  Fund management: Preparation of quarterly projection, contacting banks 
and negotiating rate for investment; 
h)  Handling  files  and  keeping  register  for  short  term  investments  of  the 
temporary idle funds; 
i)  Ensure proper preparation of cheques, DD, Pay-order etc. as per order 
of  the  competent  authority  &  place  them  to  signatories  for  their 
signature; 
j)  Other duties as assigned by PKSF; 
k)  National  Budget 
requirement, 
corresponding with the ministry & follow up for budget inclusion, getting 
budget copy; 
related  work,  estimating 
fund 
l)  Finance  related  work  with  the  Ministry,  Informing  budget  variation, 
getting  authorization  for  fund  release  from  Bangladesh  Bank  after 
producing signature cards etc. 
He will report directly to General Manager (Administration) 
2.  Manager  (F 
& A) 
a)  Overall supervision Finance and Accounts section of PKSF; 
b)  He will coordinate the works of the staff members describe in serial 3 to 
DGM 
& A) 
(F 
12;  
c)  He will ensure: 
(I)  -  the  proper  maintenance  of  general  cash  book,  ledgers  and  all  other 
accounts related books; 
(II)  -  the  correctness  of  Debit  &  Journal  Vouchers  &  present  them  to  the 
DGM (F/A) for approval; 
(III) - proper preparation of cheques as per order of the competent authority; 
(IV) - the maintenance of Provident Fund Account; 
(V) - the matter relating to income tax; 
(VI) - the matter relating to Register of Joint Stock Companies & Firms; 
(VII) - the works relating to final settlement of the staff members;   
d)  Assist  DGM  (F/A)  in  preparation  of  annual  budget  of  PKSF  and 
expenditure control; 
e)  Preparation  of  final  Accounts  &  Statements  and  presenting  monthly 
accounts to DGM (F/A) by 20th of next month; 
f)  Keeping document and books ready for internal & external audit; 
g)  Keeping separate accounts for USAID; 
h)  Clear  outstanding  entries  in  Bank  reconciliation.  Foreign  Tour  bill 
counter signing; 
Joint Custodian of valuables & confidential document, agreements etc.; 
i) 
j)  Joint keeper of loan agreements; 
k)  Other  works  as  assigned  by  the  DGM  (F&A)  or  by  the 
Management of PKSF; 
He will report to DGM (F&A). 
P/53 
Assistant 
Manager 
(F&A) 
3. Manager (F 
& A)-2 
a)  Supervision of accounting for BIPOOL POs and other projects; 
b)  Proper  maintenance  of  accounts  relating  to  POs  under  BIPOOL  & 
keeping separate relevant documents from those of POs under OOSA;  
c)  Works relating to incoming DD / Cheques / Pay order etc. 
(I)  -  Ensure  timely  deposit  of  incoming  DD,  Cheques,  Pay  order  etc.  to 
concerned bank account of PKSF; 
(II) - Verification of DD receipt register & repayment card; 
(III) - Verification of all credit vouchers; 
(IV) - Settlement of returned DD, cheques, Pay order etc.; 
d)  Keeping  separate  accounts  of  ADB  funded  "PLDP",  JMBA  funded 
TEIGP",  IFADEP-1  funded  "DAW"  under  VGD  Programme  and  of  their 
project including replenishment of fund from ADB; 
e)  Ensure  proper  transactions  at  reception  relating  to  sales  of  various 
publications form etc; 
f)  Final  verification  of  T/A  bills  of  the  staff  members  &  placed  them  to 
concerned authority for approval; 
g)  Ensure proper preparation of salary & bonus statements, salary & bonus 
transfer advice; 
h)  Assist Manager (F/A)-1 in preparation of final accounts statements and 
other important works; 
Joint custodian of valuables and confidential document, agreement etc; 
Joint Keeper of loan agreements; 
i) 
j) 
k)  Works  directly  assigned  by  the  DGM  (F/A)  or  by  the  management  of 
PKSF; 
l)  Works related to fixed assets inventory; 
He will report to the DGM (F&A). 
4.  Assistant 
Manager 
(F&A) 
a)  Verification of debit & journal vouchers present them to Manager (F/A); 
b)  Preparation of day to day adjusting vouchers; 
c)  Preparation  of  vouchers  for  banks  interest  on  STD  &  Savings  Account 
Officer 
(F&A) 
and for bank charges, commission etc; 
d)  Ensure proper & regular posting of the vouchers; 
e)  Verification of posting of all types of vouchers & take corrective measure 
if required; 
f)  Preparation  of  salary  statements,  festival  bonus  statements,  salary  & 
bonus transfer advice; 
g)  Review 
the  bank  reconciliation  statements  and 
take  necessary 
corrective measures; 
h)  Reconcile  the  accounts  information  with  those  of  MIS  and  take 
necessary action; 
i)  Maintenance of Provident Fund Accounts; 
j)  Works relating to final settlement of the staff members; 
k)  Matters relating to Joint Stock Companies & Firms; 
l)  Matters relating to income tax; 
m)  Other Works as assigned by Manager (F&A) & any other works directly 
assigned by the DGM (F&A) or by the Management of PKSF; 
He will report to the Manager (F&A). 
P/54 
Assistant 
Grade  -  1  
(F&A) 
5. 
(F/A) -1 
Officer 
a)  Loan  disbursement  as  per  prescribed  system,  verification  of  loan 
agreements & maintenance of loan disbursement register; 
b)  Other payments through cheques; 
c)  Assist in preparing of salary statements, festival bonus statements, 
salary & bonus transfer advice; 
d)  Maintenance of Provident Fund Accounts; 
e)  Preparation  of  cheques  as  per  order  of  the  provident  fund 
competent authority & maintenance of related books; 
f)  To prepare adjusting vouchers for T/A bills; 
g)  Computer works for correspondence purpose; 
h)  Other  works  as  assigned  by  the  Manager  (F&A)  or  by  Assistant 
Manager  (F&A)  &  any  other  works  directly  assigned  by  the  DGM 
(F&A) or by the Management of PKSF; 
i)  Keeping loan agreements. 
He will report to the Manager (F&A)-1 
6. 
(F&A) - 2 
Officer 
a)  Preparation of Cheques as per order of the competent Authority; 
b)  Making  payment  of  taxes  including  tax  deducted  at  sources,  PF 
Contribution etc. 
Assistant 
Grade - 1 
(F&A) - 1 
7.  Assistant 
Grade 
-  1 
(F&A) 
c)  Preparation of debit vouchers for payment through cheques; 
d)  Assist Manager (F&A) for handling various files; 
e)  Supervision of cash transactions; 
f)  Preparation of adjustment vouchers against bills of the parties; 
g)  Verification of T/A bill of the officers from the level of Managers and 
places & placed them to Manager (F& A)-1for final verification; 
h)  Verification of foreign tour bills and place them to Manager (F&A)-1 
for final verification; 
i)  Assist Managers (F&A) in preparing of final accounts & statements; 
j)  Other  Works  as  assigned  by  the  Manager  (F&A)  or  by  Assistant 
Manager  (F&A)  &  any  other  works  directly  assigned  by  the  DGM 
(F&A) or by the Management of PKSF; 
He will report to the Manager (F&A)-1. 
a)  Works  relating  to  incoming  DD  /  Cheques  /  Pay  order  under  core 
program: 
 (I) - Receipt of incoming DD, Cheques, Pay order etc. from reception & entry 
made to the DD receipt register & in the repayment card; 
(II)  -  Identify  each  and  every  receipt  with  allotment  number,  installment 
number,  project,  area  and  identifying  as  to  different  types  of  ID  loan  to 
principal  and  service  charge.  Recording  the  receipts  in  register,  credit 
vouchers  and  in  cards  and  depositing  the  collections  in  related  bank 
accounts; 
(III) - Timely deposit the incoming DD, Cheques, PO etc. to concerned bank 
account of the PKSF; 
(IV) - Issue of cash memo for realization of loan installment & other receipts; 
(V) - Works related to return of DD, Cheques and PO etc; 
b)  Preparation of credit vouchers for the sale proceeds of publications, 
Forms etc. at the reception; 
c)  Other works as assigned by the Manager (F&A) or by the Assistant 
Manager  (F&A)  &  any  other  works  directly  assigned  by  the  DGM 
(F&A) or by the Management of PKSF. 
He will report to Manager (F&A)-2. 
Officer  
(F&A) 
P/55 
Officer 
(F&A) 
8.  Assistant 
-  1 
Grade 
(F&A) 
a)  Works relating to incoming DD / Cheques / Pay order under various 
projects: 
(I) - Receipt of incoming DD, Cheques, Pay order etc. from reception & entry 
made to the DD receipt register & in the repayment card; 
(III) - Timely deposit the incoming DD, Cheques, PO etc. to concerned bank 
account of the PKSF; 
(IV) - Issue of cash memo for realization of loan installment; 
(V) - Works related to return of DD, Cheques and PO etc; 
b)  Preparation  of  credit  vouchers  for incoming DD, Cheques, PO etc. 
for core program & other projects; 
c)  Verification  of  T/A  bill  of  the  employees  up  to  the  level  of  Deputy 
Managers  and  place  &  placed  them  to  Manager  (F&  A)-2for  final 
verification; 
d)  Tour bill register maintenance; 
e)  Other works as assigned by the Manager (F&A) or by the Assistant 
Manager  (F&A)  &  any  other  works  directly  assigned  by  the  DGM 
(F&A) or by the Management of PKSF. 
He will report to the Manager (F&A)-2. 
Cashier, 
9. 
Assistant 
Grade 
(F&A) 
-  2 
a)  Works as cashier; 
b)  Preparation of cash debit and cash credit vouchers 
c)  Preparation of cash memo for incoming DD, Cheques, Pay order etc. & 
Assistant 
Grade-1 
(F&A) 
other receipt through cash; 
d)  Other  work  as  assigned  by  the  Manager  (F&A),  or  by  the  Assistant 
Manager  (F&A)  Officer  (F&A)-2  &  any  other works directly assigned by 
the DGM (F&A) or by the Management of PKSF. 
He will report to the Assistant Manager (F&A)& Officer (F&A)-2. 
10.  Assistant 
Grade-2 
a)  Works as computer operator of the Finance & Accounts Section; 
b)  Keeping  record  of  all  accounts  related  books  /  register  &  files  of  the 
Finance & Accounts Section 
c)  Other  work  as  assigned  by  the  Manager  (F&A),  or  by  the  Assistant 
Manager (F&A) & any other works directly assigned by the DGM (F&A) 
or by the Management of PKSF; 
He will report to the Manager (F&A)-1 and Assistant Manager (F&A). 
(Assistant 
Grade-1 
(F&A) 
Office 
11. 
Worker 
Grade-2 
a)  Deposit the DD, P.O, cheques etc. into Bank A/C of PKSF & Payment of 
bills to different offices as per order of the Finance & Accounts Section; 
b)  Carryout any other order of the Finance & Accounts  
Section or by the Management of PKSF. 
12. 
Office 
Worker Grade 
- 2 
a)  Keeping safely the vouchers folders; 
b)  Going to different banks and ministry with letters etc; 
c)  Carryout any other order of the Finance & Accounts 
Section or by the Management of PKSF. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 7 
P/56 
----------------------------------------------------- 
7.1 - Duration of Cash Transaction 
7.2 - Closing of Accounts 
7.3 - Daily Cash Holding Limit 
7.4 – Handling of Cash 
7.5 - Cash Scroll 
7.6 - Cash Security  
7.7 - Receipt in Cash Section 
7.8 – Perry Cash 
7.9 - Cash Deposited into Bank 
---------------------------------------------------- 
 7 - CASH MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES 
CHAPTER - 7 
CASH MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES 
P/57 
7.1 - Duration of Cash Transaction: 
In  order  to  complete  writing  of  Cash  Scroll  Books  and  their  posting  in  the Cash Journal 
Register through computer, daily cash transactions shall be closed at least two (2) hours 
before the close of the office. 
7.2 - Closing of Accounts: 
Each day, all cash receipts & payments shall be entered into the Cash Journal Register 
and it should be closed daily. Cash Officer (F&A) shall check and verify the cash balance 
and Cash Journal Register at the end of each day and duly signed. Manager (F&A) and 
DGM (F&A) shall verify the cash balance and verify the Cash Journal Register at the end 
of each month and signed duly. 
7.3 - Daily Cash Holding Limit: 
The  management  may  prescribe  money  limits  for  cash  in  hand  in  the  head  office  and 
Regional  Audit  Offices.  When  such  limits  are  prescribed,  cash  in  hand  must  not  be 
exceeded that limit. 
Only cashier, cash officer (F&A) jointly shall be responsible to hold liquid cash. Cash shall 
be  drawn  from  bank  to  meet  the  daily  cash  expenses.  Requirement  of  cash  shall  be 
intimated through Money Requisition [as per format]. Such requisition shall be received by 
accounts at least five (5) hours before the closing of banking hour. Required cash may be 
drawn from the bank on requisition.  
However,  after  disbursement  &  receipt  the  cashier,  cash  officer  (F&A)  jointly  may  hold 
liquid  cash  to  the  extent  of  Taka  50,000  (Fifty  Thousand)  in  head  office  level  and  Taka 
40,000 (Forty thousand) in Regional audit office level by Manager and any officer of that 
office as decided by the Managing Director. 
Other  than  above,  in  no  cases,  the  office  liquid  money  will  be  in  the  hand  of  any  staff 
member  of  the  organization  unless  other  wise  permitted  by  the  management.  The 
adoption  of  the  principle  of  transacting  cash  business  through  bank  is  to  keep  to  the 
minimum the actual cash handling in the cash section. 
7.4 – Handling of Cash: 
Office money should be kept in secured strong iron safe. The cash safe should be double 
locked.  One  set  of  key  shall  be  kept  with  the  Cash  Officer  (F&A)  and  the  other  set  will 
remain with the Manager (F&A). Persons handing the cash should be covered by fidelity 
insurance in addition to cash security to be provided by them. 
Cash Officer and Manager (F&A) who is responsible for the safe and security of money 
must satisfy themselves that the iron safe is free from defects. If a defect is detected or if 
there  is  even  a  doubt  that  the  keys  or  their  duplicates  are  missing,  immediately 
arrangement should be made for their replacement under intimation to head of finance & 
accounts. 
P/58 
7.5 - Cash Scroll: 
Cash shall remain in the custody of finance and accounts department. At the end of each 
day after making all transactions cashier, Cash Officer shall count the cash physically and 
record  on  a  cash  count  sheet  and  shall  confirm  the  balance  with  the  Cash  Journal 
Register balance. For cash scroll specific designed format will be used. 
7.6 - Cash Security:  
While carrying office cash (liquid money) from the bank (for withdrawn purposes) and to 
the  bank  (for  deposition  purposes),  vehicles  shall  have  to  be  used  and  security  guard 
shall have to be provided at its best level by the management.  
PKSF  management  should  arrange  for  insurance  to  cover  the  risk  of  carrying  and 
deposition of liquid cash. 
7.7 - Receipt in Cash Section: 
No money should be received from any person without issuing proper receipt which inter-
alia will state the name of person from whom it has been received, amount both in figure 
and words, purposes for which it has been received etc.  
The  money  receipt  should  be  in  the  prescribed  form.  These  forms  shall  be  printed  in 
number, bound book forms, kept in safe custody and properly accounted for.  
Normally  cashier  shall  receive  the  cash  by  giving  money  receipt  duly  signed  by  Cash 
Officer  (F&A).  The  receipt  will  be  prepared  in  triplicate,  the  original  will  be  issued to the 
depositor, the duplicate copy will be kept with voucher & triplicate copy will be retained for 
record and audit verification.  
Signature  of  the  depositor  must  be  obtained  on  counterfoil  of  the  money  receipt.  Over 
writing & erasing is strictly prohibited and not allowed.  
7.8 - Petty Cash: 
Petty cash is maintained on imprest petty system with a limit of Taka 100,000 (One lac) 
only. Taka one lac balance shall be maintained in cash up to Taka 50,000 (fifty thousand) 
only, plus up to Taka 50,000 (fifty thousand) only, in IOU slips and advances. Each IOU 
slip  should  be  adjusted  with  in  eight  (8)  working  days  and  any  advances  with  in  20 
working days. 
The  cashier,  AMF  &  MF  jointly  shall  maintain  an  imprest  fund  for  an  amount  of  Taka 
100,000 (One Lac) for PKSF Head Office in Dhaka to defray the petty expenses. The limit 
of amount for each transaction is Taka 5,000 (five thousand) from this fund and voucher 
is required to prepare for this purpose. 
The Manager and one designated officer shall maintain an imprest fund for an amount of 
Taka 40,000 (Forty thousand) for Regional Office to defray the petty expenses. The limit 
of amount for each transaction is up to Taka 3,000 (Three thousand) from this fund and 
voucher is required to prepare for this purpose. 
P/59 
The  cashier  will  disburse  the  amount  on  the  basis  of  the  approval  as  outlined  in  the 
financial  power  of  PKSF  on  the  concerned  bill  or  payment  claim  paper  after  due 
verification  and  authentication  and  pre-audit.  This  will  off-load  the  main  Cash  Journal 
Register with the transaction volume for the day-to-day expenses of petty amounts. 
In  head  office,  the  cashier  will  request  the  replenishment  of  the  fund  by  preparing  a 
statement  of  the  incurred  expenditure  by  showing  the  date  of  payment,  accounts  head 
and  the  amount  paid  on  approval  of  the  Chief  of  Finance  &  Accounts  and  MFA. 
Replenishment  request  should  be  processed  when  80%  of  the  allocated  fund  will  be 
exhausted. 
A  short  period  financing  for  emergent  but  small  amount  office  expenses,  viz.  staff 
advance  for  traveling,  conveyance,  entertainment,  postage,  telephone  bill,  gas  bill, 
electricity bill, etc. can be allowed from this petty cash to the employees concerned, but 
the expenditure voucher must be submitted by the following working day and the IOU (as 
per format) should be approved duly. 
7.9 - Cash Deposited in to Bank: 
The cashier, cash officer and Manager (F&A) will make sure of the deposition of the cash 
and  cheque  collected  daily  in  to  bank  and  recorded  the  transaction  immediately  in  the 
Cash Journal Register. 
The  Cash  Officer  will  prepare  the  pay-in  slip.  The  Manager  (F&A)  and  DGM  (F&A)  will 
make best arrangement to send the money in the bank. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 8 
P/60 
--------------------------------------------------------------- 
8.1 – General 
8.2 - Procedure of Opening Bank Account 
8.3 - Chapter Office Bank Accounts 
8.4 - Operation of Bank Accounts 
8.5 – Signatories Details 
8.6. - Cheque Counterfoil 
8.7 - Cancellation of cheques 
8.8 - Canceled Cheques 
8.9 - Cheque Issue & Receive Register 
8.10- Cheque, D. Draft & PO Receipt Register 
8.11 - Payment from Bank 
8.12-Withdrawal of Cash from Bank 
8.13 - Bank statement and Bank Certificate 
8.14 - Bank Reconciliation Statement 
8.15 - Ordering of New Cheque book 
8.16 - Safety to Cheque Books 
8.17 – Receipts of Cheque / Drafts 
8.18 – Dishonour of Cheques 
8.19 – Payment for Lost Cheques 
------------------------------------------------------------- 
 8 - BANK ACCOUNTS OPERATION MANAGEMENT 
CHAPTER - 8  
BANK ACCOUNTS OPERATION MANAGEMENT 
P/61 
8.1 – General: 
All funds (received) shall be paid into the PKSF's accounts with the bankers of the PKSF 
and shall not be withdrawn except by cheque signed by the Managing Director, or by such 
officer of the PKSF as may be duly empowered in this behalf by the Managing Director or 
the  Governing  Body.  All  receipts  of  money  through  cheque  /  draft  /  pay  order  /  transfer 
advice,  bank  account  shall  be  debited  and  relevant source / liability / income account is 
credited. Cheque / Draft / Pay order shall be deposited into bank through deposit slip of 
the  bank.  General  principle  of  PKSF  is  that  to  encourage  all  concern  to  make  /  receive 
payments through banks. 
8.2 - Procedure of Opening Bank Account: 
As per Articles of Association of the PKSF -  
  "All properties of the PKSF, movable and immovable shall vest in the PKSF and 
shall be administered by the Managing Director, on behalf of the PKSF within the 
parameters  set  by  the  PKSF  in  its  General  Meeting  or  otherwise  as  directed  by 
the Governing Body".   
  Unless  other  wise  authorized  by  the  Governing  Body,  the  Chairman  or  the 
Managing Director of the PKSF, no new account in the name of the PKSF shall 
be opened. 
Thus, the bank accounts PKSF shall be operated in accordance with the provision of the 
above  Articles  of  Association  of  the  organization.  The  organization,  as  envisaged  in  the 
Articles  of  Association,  shall  open  bank  accounts  (projects  /  otherwise)  in  any  bank  for 
each project separately by taking resolution in the Governing Body.  
Bank  account  may  be  opened  for  each  fund  /  project  /  which  shall  be  interest  bearing 
unless otherwise specified in the letter of agreement or Memorandum Of Understanding 
(MOU) of donor or fund agencies. 
8.3 - Regional Audit Offices (Outside Dhaka) Bank Accounts: 
PKSF, as envisaged in the Articles of Association, shall open Regional Audit Office bank 
accounts  in  any  schedule  bank  in  the  Regional  Office  areas  separately  by  taking 
resolution in the Governing Body of PKSF.  
Fund  transfer  will  be  made  only  after receiving the fund requisition request and monthly 
expenditure statement by head office and its approval by the person as per the delegated 
authority of PKSF head office.  
Bank account may be opened which shall be interest bearing unless otherwise specified 
by head office. 
8.4 - Operation of Bank Accounts: 
P/62 
For  operating  the  bank  accounts  of  the  PKSF  Head  Office  and  Regional  Audit  Offices, 
authority from the Governing Body of PKSF that Managing Director in favour of Governing 
Body,  or  such  other  officers  by  designation  of  the  PKSF  as  may  be  duly  empowered  in 
this behalf by the Managing Director, to sign cheques. Such intimation to the banks is to 
be issued from the head office centrally by enclosing the resolution of operating the bank 
accounts taken in this context by PKSF management. 
All the PKSF's banks accounts shall be operated as per the guidelines of the "Delegation 
of Financial Authority" - approved by the PKSF Governing Body.  
All the payments through bank must be authorized by joint signatories i.e. 
1 - Principal signatory and 
2 - A co-signatory 
For  all  kinds  of  transactions  except  where  "Delegation  of  Financial  Authority"  applies 
PKSF's Managing Director shall be the principal signatory and co-signatory can be any of 
the officials as mentioned below: 
1 - General Manager (Admin.), or 
2 - Deputy Managing Director (O), or 
3 - Deputy Managing Director (B) 
Managing  Director  has  the  authority  to  make  any  changes,  amendments  in  the  bank 
signatory powers of the concerned PKSF's officials. 
8.5 – Signatories Details: 
Details of cheque signatories for operating the bank accounts will be kept confidentially in 
Finance  and  Accounts  Department  under  safe  custody.  It  includes  name,  designation, 
specimen signature and initials, validity date. When signatories are included / deleted, list 
should be placed to substitute previous one. 
8.6. - Cheque Counterfoil: 
While issuing cheques, it is remembered that counterfoil of cheque shall also be filled in & 
put the date of issue, name of payees, initials of the cheque signatories, amount in Taka 
and words in brief. 
8.7 - Cancellation of cheques: 
If any cheque issued but not presented for collection by the payee within six month from 
the  date  of  issue,  the  cheque  shall  be  automatically  canceled.  Accordingly,  the  finance 
and accounts department shall give reversal entry in the Bank Book and keep a note in 
the bank reconciliation statement. Any loss or theft of the cheque / chequebook must be 
informed to the concerned bank management at earliest possible time. 
P/63 
8.8 - Canceled Cheques: 
The  word  "CANCELED"  shall  be  written  in  the  counterfoil  as  well  as  on  the  face  of  the 
cheque when a cheque is required to be canceled. 
8.9 - Cheque Issue Register: 
Cheque Issue Register shall be maintained for each bank account separately in a book in 
the prescribed manner. 
8.10 - Demand Draft, Cheque & Pay-order Receipt Register: 
Demand Draft (DD), Cheque & Pay-Order Receipt Register shall be maintained for each 
bank account separately in a book in the prescribed manner. 
8.11 - Payment from Bank: 
Any  payment  exceeding  Taka  5,000  (five  thousand)  shall  be  made  through  an  account 
payee cheque and payment less than Taka 5,000 (five thousand) may be made by cash 
from the cash in hand in head office level. 
8.12 - Withdrawal of Cash from Bank: 
For withdrawal of money (Liquid Cash) from the bank account for working cash or for any 
operational expenses, a requisition for fund must be prepared for approval in accordance 
with the delegated authority and withdrawal of cash from bank shall be in accordance with 
the  guidelines  of  "Delegation  of  Financial  Authority".    When  cash  to  be withdrawn, cash 
cheques should denote "Account Payee Cancelled". 
Accounts personnel shall always keep in mind that the maximum closing cash balance in 
hand should not exceed Taka 50,000 after the day transaction in PKSF Head Office and 
Taka 40,000 in Regional Audit Offices. 
8.13 - Bank Statement and Bank Certificate: 
Collection  of  monthly  bank  statements  along  with  Bank  Certificates  confirming  bank 
balances  on  monthly  basis  and  relevant  advice  from  bank  shall  be  the  responsibility  of 
Finance and Accounts Department. 
8.14 - Bank Reconciliation Statement: 
After receiving the monthly bank statement, the bank balance shown in that statement as 
of last day of the month must be reconciled with the balance shown in the cash book on 
the same day by preparing a bank reconciliation statement.  
Bank  reconciliation  statements  shall  be  prepared  by  Cash  Officer  duly  checked  by 
Assistant  Manager  (F/A)  and  Internal  Audit  Department  and  shall  be  submitted  for 
approval of the Manager (F/A) and DGM (F&A).  
The bank charge or interest detected to be not incorporate earlier in the cashbook should 
be entered in the cashbook by preparing a voucher to this effect.  
Any  deposit  /  interest,  payment  or  cheques  not  record  in  the  bank  accounts  or  bank 
statement shall be reconciled by adding or deducting from the closing balance as shown 
by the bank statement.  
A reversal entry should be processed for canceling the cheque issue entry if the cheque is 
found not presented within its validity period. Any difference should be thoroughly checked 
and investigated with the bank. 
P/64 
8.15 - Ordering of New Cheque book: 
Respective Cash Officer with the approval of Manager (F/A) and DGM (F&A) shall initiate 
for ordering new chequebook when the cheque leaf reaches the order shed attached with 
the chequebook.  
While receiving new chequebook from bank respective Cash Officer (F&A) shall count the 
cheque leaf and satisfy himself that the numbers of cheque leaves are found in order. 
8.16 - Safety to Cheque Books: 
Finance  and  Accounts  Department  shall  be  the  custodian  of  chequebook  and  shall 
ensure that chequebooks are preserved safety. To be kept under lock (safe volt) and key 
by the Cash Officer and Manager (F&A) designated for this. 
Fraud,  defalcation  and  misappropriation  of  public  moneys  are  largely  attributed  to 
inadequate  measures  taken  by  the  authorized  officers  for  the  safety  and  security  of  the 
bank chequebooks and bank pass books etc.  
The officers authorized to sign and / or entrusted with the custody of the cheques / pass 
books will be he held personally liable for losses due to laxity or their parts for the safe-
keeping and security of these books. 
8.17 – Receipts of Cheque / Demand Drafts Pay-Order: 
Cheques / demand drafts / pay-orders received in payment of dues cannot, however be 
admitted till they are cleaned from the bank. Final money receipt in printed forms shall not 
be granted till the cheques are en-cashed and proceeds credited to account.  
A certificate of receipt quoting the number and the date of cheque tendered or a receipt 
with the following remarks may be given: 
 “Issued subject to collection of proceeds’’ 
Cheques  /  drafts  /  cash  received  in  the  cash  section  must  be  deposited  in  to  the  bank 
without any delay, preferably on the same day, that are received. 
Delay  in  deposit  involves  question  of  safety  and  security  and  sometimes  may  result  in 
non-realization of the amount of the cheque. 
8.18 – Dishonour of Cheques: 
In the event cheques being dishonoured by the bank on presentation the fact mentioning 
the  causes  of  dishonour,  should  be  reported  at  once  to  the  drawer  of  the  cheque  with 
demand  for  immediate  payment  and  mean  while  the  entry  in  the  books  of  accounts 
should be reversed.  
P/65 
8.19 – Payment for Lost Cheques: 
If a cheque is reported lost, contract should at once be made with the bank on which the 
cheque  was  drawn.  The  bank  should  be  informed  /  instructed  to  stop  payment  on  that 
cheque.  
Fresh cheque may be issued only after obtaining non-payment certificate from the bank.  
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 9 
P/66 
----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
9.1 – Introduction and Concept 
9.2 - Internal Control Categories 
9.3 - Classification of Control Procedures 
9.4 - Internal Check System 
9.5 - Payment Management 
9.6 - Payment to Partner Organizations (PO) 
9.7 - Payment for Services 
9.8 - Payment of Salaries 
9.9 - Management of Receipts 
9.10 – Staff Advance and its' Liquidation 
9.11 - Physical Inventory Counting & Checking 
9.12 - Internal Audit - Pre-Audit 
9.13 - Preservation of Accounting Records 
----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 9 - INTERNAL CONTROL 
P/67 
CHAPTER - 9 
INTERNAL CONTROL 
9.1 – Introduction and Concept: 
The internal control system is inevitable for an organization to control its financial matters 
as well as to maintain the continuity and accuracy in the arena of its financial affairs. With 
a  view  to  maintain  an  effective  and  efficient  work  flow  in  all  sphere  of  transaction 
procedures,  it  is  essential  to  segregate  a  specific  job  in different segments and make a 
meaningful  division  of  labour  to  accomplish  that  task.  Some  important  elements  of  the 
internal control device are narrated below: 
  The organization plan with particular reference to the allocation of staff function; 
  Authorization, recording and custody procedures including internal check; 
  Managerial supervision and reviews including audit.  
An  internal  control  system  is  defined  as  the  whole  network  of  systems  established  to 
provide  reasonable  assurance  that  PKSF  objectives  will  be  achieved,  with  particular 
reference to: 
  The effectiveness of operations; 
  The economical and efficient use of resources; 
  Compliance with applicable policies, procedures, laws and regulations; 
  The safeguarding of assets and interests from losses of all kinds; 
  The integrity and reliability of information, accounts and date; 
These embraces the concepts of effectiveness, value for money, compliance, irregularity, 
The manual sets out to achieve is to promote an 
inconsistency and financial controls. 
understanding  of  what  constitutes  good  practice  in  respect  of  nurturing  a  robust  control 
environment.  It  highlights  the  role  of  management  in  ensuring  adequate  systems  of 
internal control are in place at strategic and operational levels.  
9.2 – Internal Control Categories: 
There are broadly eight categories of internal controls. The acronym "SOAP MAPS" can 
be used to categorized the controls as follows: 
1 - Segregation of duties - Roles and responsibilities should be clearly defined. 
2 - Organizational structures - Appropriate organization structures should be exists. 
3 - Authorization & Approval - Appropriate authorization & approval procedures should be 
well introduced. 
4 - Physical Safeguard - Appropriate physical safeguard should be established. 
5  -  Management  review  &  Monitoring  -  Financial  and  other  performance  should  be 
monitored regularly. 
6  -  Accounting  &  Arithmetical  -  Appropriate  accounting  and  arithmetical  procedures 
should be operated. 
7 - Personnel arrangements - Appropriate personnel arrangement should be exist. 
8 - Supervision - Appropriate supervision procedures should be exist.  
9.3 - Classification of Control Procedures: 
P/68 
1 - Management Controls: These are detective in nature and encompass the high-level 
supervision  and  review.  For  example  -  Management  review  of  exception  reports, 
performance against budgets etc. 
2  -  Organizational  Controls:  These  are  both  detective  and  preventive  in  nature  and 
include  well-defined  responsibilities  and  the  segregation  of  functions  such  transactions 
initiating, processing and recording. 
3 - Authorization Controls: These are preventive in nature. Good authorization controls 
will  be  specific  about  who  can  approve  what,  the  extent  of  checking  required  before 
approval and how the check should be evidenced. 
4 - Operational Controls: These are either detective or preventive in nature. It includes 
sequence checking to provide assurance on the completeness of numbered documents, 
comparison of one set of documents to another (e.g. purchase order to invoice). 
5 - Access Controls: These are detective in nature and includes control over access to 
assets  and  accounting  records  through  simple  physical  measures  such  as  locks  and 
safes and procedural controls such as controls over petty cash issue. 
9.4 - Internal Check System: 
The  absolute  and  independent  control  of  one  person  in  the  financial  transaction  may 
create the opportunity of fund misappropriation. As such, to safeguard the interest of the 
organization, adequate control over financial transaction, internal check system is a must. 
The function of accounts department should be designed in such a way that the job done 
by one person is automatically checked by another and thus minimizing the possibility of 
fraud  or  irregularities.  The  job  distribution  of  the  personnel  of  finance  &  accounts 
department of PKSF head office shall be arranged in such a way that a person handling 
cash  and  posting  Cash  Scroll  Book  shall  not  be  given  the  responsibility  of  preparing 
vouchers,  writing  of  cheques  and  posting  Cash  Journal  Register  &  General  Ledger 
through computer.  
It is therefore, recommended that: 
  Cashier  &  Cash  Officer  shall  be  engaged  for  receipts  and  payments  of  cash, 
maintenance of physical cash and writing of Cash Scroll Book.  
  Writing  of  various  vouchers,  like  transfer  vouchers,  cash  payment  voucher,  cheque 
payment voucher, money receipts, writing of cheque should be done by other person 
in finance and accounts section. 
  The person who has no connection of maintaining cash and voucher preparation shall 
do posting in computer and other registers. 
  The Manager (F&A) shall be responsible for the preparation of monthly trail balance, 
income statements and balance sheet, cash flow statements, notes to accounts. 
  The DMG (F&A) shall be responsible for the preparation of reports to the Managing 
Director, Government & fund giving agencies as the case may be. 
9.5 - Payment Management: 
P/69 
Before  making  payment  in  connection  to  all  bills  /  vouchers  for  expenses  of  the 
organization shall be duly checked by finance & accounts section and shall be pre-audited 
as per rules and regulations of PKSF in this context and shall be finally approved by the 
competent authority as per the delegation of financial authority of the PKSF.  
No payment shall be made without the prior approval of the above authority as narrated. 
The bills and the invoice for payment shall be canceled by affixing the stamp "Paid" and 
shall  be  dated.  The  payment  voucher  should  always  have  the  supporting  documents  in 
original  as  its  attachments.  All  sums  of  money  expended  by  the  organization  shall  be 
recorded  in  books  of  accounts  and  there  should  be  systematic  procedures  of  payment 
that can ensure: 
a)  Payment is made within the budget amount; 
b)  Payment is made for organization; 
c)  Payment is made properly to the right person; 
d)  Vouchers are prepared correctly to record transaction in Cash Journal Register; 
e)  Expenditures have genuine supporting documents; 
f)  Documents are duly valid, authenticated & appropriate for the purposes; 
g)  Payment shall be authorized and approved by competent authority. 
Before  making  payment  either  in  cash  or  cheque,  person  responsible  to  make  the 
payment  is  to  be  ensured  that  payment  vouchers  have  been  prepared,  checked  and 
approved.  Accounts  shall  prepare  payment  vouchers  and  shall  be  supported  by 
documents like: 
  Cash Memo / Bill 
  Challan 
 
Indent 
  Purchase order 
  Money receipts 
  Comparative statement 
  Purchase committee resolution 
  Job completion certificate 
  Telephone bill, electric bill, rent bill etc. 
  And any other document that are required.  
  Approval of tour program along with tour plan; 
  Air / Bus / Train / Launch tickets; 
  Entitlement  of  class,  Per-diem  &  DA  according  to  grade  as  specified  in  the 
service rules. 
Accounting offices shall keep the payment vouchers in chronological order. Each financial 
year  shall  maintain  a  serial  number  beginning  from  01.  Accounting  office  shall  file  the 
vouching  along  with  all  supporting  documents.  All  vouchers  and  supporting  documents 
shall be preserved for a minimum period of twelve (12) years.  
A - Cash Payment System: 
  Maximum  up  to  Taka  5,000  can  be  paid  from  petty  cash.  All  payments  above 
Taka 5,000 are preferably be made through cheques; 
P/70 
  All  payments  shall  be  prior  approved.  Before  the  payment  is  made,  the  related 
person  raises notes for the expenditure explaining the necessity of the payment 
to the departmental head in a proper file. If the payment seems necessary, then 
the file is forwarded to the competent authority who approve the payment; 
  After the expenditure is incurred, the supporting are raised in the file;  
  The file is sent to the Internal Audit Department for pre-auditing purpose; 
  The file is sent to the proper authority for payment approval; 
  Payment  is  made  on  producing  the  proper  authorization  and  supported  voucher 
to  the  cashier  who  makes  the  payment  keeping  recipient’s  signature  on  the 
voucher; 
  The payment is entered in the cash scroll.  
Cash handling - 
  Cash  is  maintained  on  imprest  system.  The  imprest  amount  depends  on  the 
decision  of  the  management.  At  present  the  imprest  amount  is  Taka  100,000 
(Taka one lac), 50% of the imprest i.e., Taka 50,000 can be used against IOU for 
emergency purchase / payments against prior payments approval; 
  Cash is kept in the Joint custody of two Managers (F&A). In case of leave of one 
Manager,  Assistant  Manager  or  any  other  officer  approved  by  the  authority  will 
take the charge of the custody; 
  The vault is kept in Joint Custody. 
 Cash Recording - 
  Vouchers  are  punched  in  computer  software  by  Assistant  Grade-2  at  the  day’s 
end; 
  Cash  &  Cheque  Summary  (CCS)  for  the  day  is  produced  next  morning  that  is 
checked by Assistant Manager (F&A) as regard to correctness of punching;  
  CCS along with vouchers are checked & signed by the Internal Audit;  
  Payments are posted to the ledger by computer. 
Custody & Safeguarding of cash - 
  Cash scroll is balanced by cashier;  
  Physical cash is counted by Assistant Grade-2 & Officer (F&A) at day end;  
  Cash scroll is signed by both Assistant Grade-2 and Officer (F&A);  
  Kept at safe-custodian by two designated officers of Finance & Accounts. 
B - Cheque Payment Procedure: 
  Requisition from the respective department for expenditure is raised and sent for 
approval of proper and competent authority;  
P/71 
  Expenditure  is  approved  in  file  by  the  proper  authority  recommended  by 
appropriate purchase committee;  
  Advertisement in national dailies for quotation is published; tenders are received; 
comparative  statement  is  prepared  and  placed  before  the  purchase  committee; 
supplier selection is made by one of the two committees; printed order for supply 
is sent; Delivery Note is received; Material Receiving & Inspection Report (MRIR) 
is raised and invoice is received;  
 
Invoice  is  raised  in  the  file  along  with  all  the  papers  and  documents  to  Internal 
Audit for verification for pre-audit purpose; 
  File moves to the proper person capable of authorizing the payment;  
  Then file goes to Finance and Accounts Section for payment;  
 
Invoice  is  checked  again  by  Manager  (F&A)  and  Officer  (F&A),  voucher  is 
prepared, cheque is prepared, recorded in the bank register;  
  Cheque is checked by Manager (F&A) and DGM (F&A) - counter signed in bank 
register and cheque counterfoil;  
  Cheque  along  with  all  the  documents  in  the  file  goes  to  one  of  the  co-signatory 
and  then  to  the  principal  signatory  for  signature  who  signs  the  cheque  and 
countersigns the register;  
  Cheque is given to the proper person on getting receipt and after recording in the 
cheque issue register. 
Cheque handling: 
Joint custodian; 
Joint Signatory as per delegation of authority; 
 
 
  Pages are counted at the day end; 
  Kept in safe. 
9.6 - Payment to Partner Organizations (PO): 
 
Inspection of Partner Organization (PO) by Dealing Officers (DO) before 
disbursement of loan is done; 
  DO reports in prescribed form and puts up in file if all the criteria are fulfilled. File 
goes  to  Supervising  Officer  (SO)  and  then  to  Deputy  Managing  Director  (DMD) 
(operation) who finally sends the file to Managing Director.  
  Managing  Director  being  satisfied  about  the  PO’s  performance  places  the 
proposal to the Governing Board where approves the loan.  
  A Loan Installment Payment Requisition (LIPR) is raised by the DO in the file that 
goes  to  SO  and  finally  to  MD  via  DMD.  They  all  except  MD  sign  the  LIPR  and 
send  it  including  copy  of  relevant  attested  note  sheet  to  Finance  and  Accounts 
Section for Cheque payment; 
  Officer  (F&A)  verifies  the  form  in  respect  of  all  the  information  in  the  LIPR.  He 
checks; 
P/72 
o 
If the name of the PO has been written properly; 
o  Previous payments have been mentioned properly; 
o  Sanction of the Board; 
o  Resolution of the board; 
o  Conditions in the resolution if any; 
o  Copy of the note sheet to see the approval of MD; 
o  And  or  any  condition  for  the  payment  –  fills  up  a  portion  of  the form for 
cheque signature approval-records the payment in specific sheet against 
the  resolution  for  loan  sanction-cheque  is  written-recorded  in  bank 
register-prepares the payment voucher and 
  Then forwards to Manager (F/A) and thereafter to DGM (F/A) for verification. MF 
&  DGM  (F/A)  verifies  the  documents  and  the  cheque  is  prepared,  they  sign  the 
LIPR, registers and records and send those to the signatories for signature.  
  The joint signatories sign the cheque, register and LIPR. The cheque is recorded 
in  Cheque  Disbursement  Register  at  the  time  of  disbursement  on  receipt  of 
properly executed Loan Agreement (LA). 
  LIPR is kept in FA in custody and recorded in a separate register. 
9.7 - Payment for Services: 
Payment for services shall require the followings: 
  Requisition / Indent; 
  Resolution of the Governing Body if needed; 
  Approval of Managing Director; 
  Agreement / Deed of contract; 
  Assignment letter which should include TOR; 
  Assignment completion certificate 
9.8 - Payment of Salaries: 
Payment of salaries of PKSF staff members shall be made through bank transfer advice 
or  cheque.  Each  employee  shall  open  a  bank  account  in  his  own  name  with  the  same 
bank  where  PKSF  maintains  its  account  and  accounts  number shall be intimated to the 
Finance & Accounts Section.  
Accounting office shall issue transfer advise letter to the bank for total amount of monthly 
salary  payable  to  credit  the  individual  account  of  each  staff  member  with  the  amount 
written against each individual.  
The  accounting  offices  shall  maintain  a  salary  register,  which  shall  be  prepared,  every 
month.  
P/73 
Salary register shall be prepared considering the following points: 
a)  Name and designation; 
b)  Number of working days - as per attendance register; 
c) 
d)  Leave without pay; 
e)  Other deductions like Advance, Tax, etc.; 
Increment, Promotion, Suspension, Transfer order / instruction; 
All the staff members working at different offices of PKSF will be paid their salaries after 
the 25th day of the month.  
9.9 - Management of Receipts: 
Source of receipts of the organization may be as follows: 
  Receipts of grants from GOB; 
  Receipts of loan from GOB; 
  Receipts of repayment of loan from POs; 
  Receipt service charge from POs; 
  Sale of wastage; 
  Bank interest earned; 
  Miscellaneous income and etc. 
(a)  Grants  are  received  by  the  organization  from  government  and  different  donor 
agencies  against  different  projects  /  programs  by  cheque,  after  signing  a  letter  of 
agreement between the parties mentioned above and recipients authorized official. In 
the event the authorized official is not available to collect each installment cheque, the 
officer or staff member designated to collect in cheque must have a letter signed by 
the  authorized  official,  authorizing  him  /  her  to  collect  the  cheque.  Funds  may  be 
provided in one or more installments. Grants received must be entered in receipt side 
of  the  Cash  Journal  Register,  loan  register,  grant  register  and  deposited  the  same 
into interest bearing bank account. 
(b)  Interest  earned  on  the  amount  of  fund  kept  in  the  bank  shall  be  treated  as  income 
and entered in the receipt side of the cash journal register. 
(c)  Income,  which  cannot  be  classified  on  any  above  group,  shall  be  treated  as 
miscellaneous income & entered in the receipt side of the Cash Journal Register. 
Each  receipt  shall  be  acknowledged  either  through  acknowledgment  letter  or  a  Money 
Receipt.  Cashier  shall  prepare  receipt  voucher  for  daily  receipt  of  money  &  a  copy  of 
acknowledgment letter / money receipt shall be attached to receipt voucher and indicating 
its head of account according to Chart of Accounts. 
A - Cash Receipts System: 
  Every  employee  of  PKSF  shall  be  personally  responsible  for  the  money  that 
passes  through  his  hand  and  for  the  prompt  record  of  receipts  in  the  manner 
prescribed below. All money, not banked, shall be kept in a strong safe;  
P/74 
  All receipts, other than cash drawn from bank for payments, must be deposited to 
bank intact preferably on the same day or positively on the next morning;  
  Cash  shall  be  received  by  the  cashier  or  by  any  other  person  deputed  by  the 
management in his / her absence;  
  Money Receipt (MR) must be issued immediately on receipt of cash. The cashier 
will  enter  the  receipt  in  Financial  Management  System  (FMS)  in  the  computer 
from where Money Receipt will be generated in the printer;   
  MR is to be checked and signed by an officer (F&A) and be issued to the payer;  
  The receipt is recorded in cash scroll;  
  Credit voucher will be generated in the FMS that will be checked by the Manager 
(F/A) and countersigned by DGM (F&A);  
  Credit Voucher is posted in the FMS in the computer at the day end;  
  Cash  scroll  will  be  checked  with  physical  cash  and  signed  by  Cashier,  Officer 
(F&A) at the day end;  
  Cash will be kept in vault by the joint custodian as designated. 
B - Cheque Receipts System: 
  Mail  will  be  opened  at  the  reception  by  a  responsible  officer  who  will  enter  the 
checks/drafts/pay  order  etc.  received  in  FMS  and  the  Cheques/drafts/POs/DDs 
will be handed over to Finance and Accounts Section;  
  Concern  person  will  enter  the  instruments  (Cheques/draft/PO/DD)  in  a  register. 
He / they will check the advice sent with the instruments by tallying with PO cards 
as  to  the  loan  number,  installment  number,  principal,  service  charge  and  by 
tallying with the advice and the instruments. He will check the entries made by the 
reception  desk  in  the  FMS  and  will  correct  the  mistake  if  any.  The  system  will 
accept the transaction on accepting by concern staff member;  
  He will sort the instruments according to the PO nature, Loan nature, Project-wise 
and  will  prepare  pay-in-slips  and  will  arrange  to  deposit  those  instruments  in 
respective bank accounts;  
  The credit voucher will be generated by the FMS automatically;  
  He  will  enter  the  receipts  in  the  project-wise  individual  PO  cards  by  allotment 
number, installment number of the allotment;  
  He will then prepare pay-in-slips which is checked by Assistant Garde-1 and will 
send the instruments to banks on the same day. Assistant Grade-1 will check the 
pay-in-slips  again  after  depositing  whether  those  were  properly  received  by  the 
banks. 
P/75 
Dishonored / returned cheques:  
  Dishonored / returned instruments will be received by Assistant Grade-1; 
  He will check the reasons for dishonor and will put up the case in a file that will go 
to the DGM (F&A) via Manager (F&A);  
  The  dishonored  instruments  will  then  be  sent  to  the  respective  PO  with  a 
forwarding  letter  stating  the  reasons  of  dishonor  and  asking  them  to  send  the 
instrument back after correction or to send a fresh instrument with in seven days;  
  Copy of the letter will be given to the Supervising Officer (SO) for information and 
necessary action;  
  Assistant Grade-1 will check the position daily and will follow up the cases. 
9.10 – Staff Advance and its' Liquidation: 
Advance  against  any  operational  cost  shall  be  initiated  on  Money  Requisition  and  the 
delegated authority will approve such advance.  
Approved  advance  requisition  form  shall  be  sent  to  the  accounts  which  will  be  checked 
the  particulars  therein  and  then  payment  voucher  shall  be  prepared  by  the  accounts  & 
shall disburse the amount of advance after obtaining the signature of the recipient.  
Any  advances  to  staff  members  may  be  made  on  specific  requirement  with  the  written 
approval of the competent authority as delegation of authority. 
Any  payment  to staff as advance should be adjusted and replenished at regular interval 
on  submission  of  bills  /  vouchers  to  the  account  section  and  must  be  adjusted  within 
twenty (20) days of completion of the requirement. 
9.11 - Physical Inventory Counting and Checking: 
The status or existence of any organization is mainly determined by the volume of funds / 
property that are owned by the organization. Considering the same it is one of the prime 
responsibilities of an organization to protect / safeguard resources / property. PKSF has 
been implementing various programs / projects throughout the country by its own offices 
and  resource  are  thereby  granted  /  allocated  to  the  said  offices.  There  are  lists  of 
resources so far been sent to different corner of the country. 
PKSF shall follow the noted steps in verifying / checking the validity of all the resources at 
its disposal. 
  A  committee  comprising  at  least  two  (2)  members  shall  be  formed.  The  said 
committee  shall  do  a  feasibility  study  /  checking  of  all  the  resources  once  in  each 
year. 
  Committee  shall  examine  all  of  the  resources  in  light  of  the  lists  prepared  by 
Administration Department. 
  The committee shall submit the feasibility report as per stipulated date and time. 
  Required  adjustment  of  any  inconsistency  shall  be  made  having  approval  from  the 
management as per delegated authority. 
P/76 
9.12 - Internal Audit - Pre-Audit: 
To  safe  guard  the  financial  &  accounting  system  from  frequent  mistakes,  frauds  and 
misappropriations, the internal audit is needed as follows - 
  Pre - auditing system should be introduced at any level in head office. 
  Keep  constant  watch  on  records  of  financial  transaction  and  to  safeguard  the 
organization from fraud. 
  Keep updated accounts of the projects / programs / head office / Rangpur office. 
  To establish strong financial discipline in the organization 
  To  enable  and  aware  the  accounts  personnel  to  perform  their  duties  with  earnest 
sincerity and efficiently. 
The  internal  audit  department  should  be  headed  by  a  senior  management  position  and 
have  several  audit  officers  working  under  him  as  per  need  of  the  organization.  The 
internal audit department will work independently and should be reported to the Managing 
Director.  
All financial and accounting activities of the particular accounting year of PKSF should be 
audited  with  in  the  fifth  month  of  the  following  accounting  year.  Moreover,  the  internal 
department will constantly review the all activities of all projects / programs.  
9.13 - Preservation of Accounting Records: 
  All of the documents / records related to financial transaction shall be preserved for a 
period of twelve years. 
 
In  case  of  project  documents  /  records  related  to  financial  transaction  shall  be 
preserved at least for three phases including the current phase of the project. But by 
no way any of the documents of the previous phases can be burnt out. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 10 
P/77 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
10.1 - Concept 
10.2 – Introduction 
10.3 – Safe Custody of Fixed assets 
10.4 – Procurement of Fixed Assets  
10.5 – Fixed Assets Registration 
10.6 – Classification of Fixed Assets 
10.7 - Identification of Fixed Assets 
10.8 – Depreciation & their Accounting 
10.9 – Sale of Fixed Assets 
10.10 – Accounting of Fixed Assets 
10.11 – Fixed Assets Register  
10.12 – Instruction to Write up Fixed Assets Register 
10.13-Physical Counting of Fixed Assets & Reporting 
10.14 – Damage, Loss & Destruction, & Insurance 
10.15 – Use of Fixed Assets on Payment or Lending 
10.16–Scrapping, Condemnation & Write-off of Assets 
---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 10 - FIXED ASSETS & DEPRECIATION ACCOUNTING  
P/78 
CHAPTER – 10 
FIXED ASSETS AND DEPRECIATION ACCOUNTING 
10.1 – Concept: 
Fixed  assets  have  the  fundamental  characteristics  that  they  are  held  with  the  object  of 
earning  revenue  and  not  for  the  purpose  of  sale  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business. 
Depreciable  assets  are  assets  that  are  expect  to  be  used  during  more  than  one 
accounting period have limited useful life and are held by the organization for use in the 
production  or  supply  of  goods  and  services  or  for  rental  to  others  or  for  administrative 
purposes. Note that land generally has an indefinite life and is therefore not depreciable 
asset as defined above. Buildings are however different. Buildings do have a definite life 
and  are  therefore  depreciable  assets.  Thus,  for  accounting  purposes  the  value  of  land 
and buildings should be segregated. The land should be maintained in the accounts with 
out depreciation. Building on other hand should be depreciated. 
10.2 – Introduction: 
The assets purchased / procured by PKSF could be termed as fixed assets, the expected 
life or duration of which are relatively longer period. The importance of proper accounting, 
maintenance and evaluation of current conditions and or expected remaining life of fixed 
assets cannot be over emphasized.  
Unit  price  of  any  asset  is  at  least  Taka  1000  (One  Thousand)  only  will  be  regarded  as 
fixed asset of PKSF. For all that any item is below worth Taka 1000 (One Thousand) only 
but  durable  for  many  years  will  not  be  capitalized.  This  definition  will  hold  good  to  all 
purchase items and items received as donation.  
For this reason, proper register and accounting books are to be maintained in head office 
and  also  in  Regional  Audit  Offices  to  fully  account  for  fixed  assets  in  their  possession. 
Where  fixed  assets  are  procured,  it  will  be  necessary  to  keep  an  accurate  account  of 
such assets for physical control and inventory. 
10.3 – Safe Custody of Fixed Assets: 
Every offices of PKSF shall designate a staff member for maintaining the records of fixed 
assets and their movements and safe custody. Assets issued to various offices of PKSF 
shall remain in the safe custody of themselves and therefore they will be responsible for 
management of assets. 
10.4 – Procurement of Fixed Assets: 
Fixed assets can only be procured by PKSF head office centrally for its own use and for 
its Regional Audit Office. Regional Audit Office may procure assets with the approval of 
head  office.  In  any  case,  purchase  or  procurement  should  always  follow  in  rules  & 
regulations  of  "Purchase  Policy"  made  and  constituted  in  this  regard.  To  procure  and 
purchase of fixed asset it should at least follows the under mentioned guidelines: 
  Prior approval is compulsorily needed of the respective authority; 
  Should follow the all rules and instructions of the purchase procedures as laid down in 
this context; 
P/79 
  Budgetary  provision  must  be  made  and  confirm  for  a  fixed  assets  item  before  its 
procurement can takes place; 
  Purchase of an assets will need the approval of Managing Director; 
  Requisition  from  the  user  and  need  of  use  should  be  clearly  identified  and  properly 
evaluated before placing the requisition of the concern asset purchased; 
  Approval  should  be  obtained  for  requisition  of  an  assets  in  accordance  with  the 
authorization of the organization;  
  Purchase requisition shall be raised by the department / person requiring the assets 
in a purchase requisition form;  
  Approval of Managing Director is a must in case of decision of purchase committee;  
  Manager  Administration  shall  approve  the  purchase  of  assets  up  to  Taka  1,000 
thousand);  
  DGM (F/A) shall approve the purchase of assets from Taka 1,001 to Taka 2,000; 
  General  Manager  (Administration)  shall  approve  the  purchase  of  assets  from  Taka 
2,001 to Taka 5,000;  
  Managing Director shall approve the purchase of assets more than Taka 5,000 up to 
Taka 20,000; 
  Purchase  Committee-1  will  recommend  purchase  of  assets  valued  above  Taka 
20,000 and final approval is given by Managing Director; 
  Purchase Committee-2 will recommend purchase of assets valued from Taka 20,001 
(twenty thousand and one) to Taka 500,000 (five lacs) and final approval is given by 
Managing Director; 
  For sole agent lone quotation is sufficient;  
  For numerous suppliers, purchase shall be through quotation by advertisement in at 
least two National Dailies;  
  Spot quotation or quotation is required for purchase through Purchase Committee-2;  
  At least three quotations are required;  
  Purchase over Taka 500,000 requires tender or quotation;  
  Pro-forma invoice is required in case of sole distributor;  
  Spot quotation / price collection by two officers / employees from at least three seller 
is required for purchase assets below Taka 20,000 for spot purchase;  
  Purchase under TA program of the World Bank requires the purchase procedures of 
the World Bank to be followed; 
P/80 
  Comparative price statement shall be prepared for quotations received;  
  Goods Received & Inspection Note should be prepared;  
  Fixed Assets Register to be up dated. 
 
In case of fixed assets being supplied by the head office to the Regional Audit offices, 
corresponding challan advice must be sent as soon as goods are being sent. If there 
is delay of getting those challans advice or the challan advice gets lost in the process, 
then  the  offices  should  have  to  collect  that  particulars  advice  from  head  office  by 
taking its own initiatives. 
10.5 – Fixed Assets Registration: 
Legal  registration  of  all  the  purchased  fixed  assets  shall  be  in  the  name  of  PKSF. 
Managing Director or authorized officer of PKSF on behalf of PKSF will sign in the deed / 
document related to registration. 
10.6 – Classification of Fixed Assets: 
Assets  valued  at  Taka  1,000  or  more  and  lasting  for  more  than  two  (2)  years  shall  be 
classified and entered in the assets register according to standard accounting practices. A 
proper record shall be maintained for all fixed assets whether procured or received from 
head  office.  The  records  of  assets  shall  be  maintained  using  the  accounting  codes  and 
heads as illustrated in common chart of accounts.  
10.7 – Identification of Fixed Assets: 
Identification  number  of  fixed  assets  is  a  compulsory  item  in  the  management  of  fixed 
assets  and  its  control  mechanism.  An  identification  number  for  each  category  of  fixed 
assets items should be assigned for easy identification of the assets. These identification 
numbers  should  be  written  on  each  item  and  the  numbers  should  be  indicated  on  the 
fixed assets register also for each fixed assets. 
In doing so the following continuity shall have to be maintained: 
  Name of PKSF; 
  One or two letters introducing the group viz., FR for furniture; 
  Two letters identifying the item viz., CH for chair; 
  Two letters identifying location of the assets for example, HO for Head office; 
  Three figures indicating serial number of same item such as 001,002,003 etc; 
  Last  figures  indicating  the  year  of  purchase  used  in  the  purchased  item,  for 
example, for Head Office: PKSF/FR/CH/HO/001/02. 
10.8 – Depreciation & their Accounting: 
Every asset has a certain life span that varies depending on the particular characteristics 
of  that  asset.  Dividing  the  purchase  value  of  an  asset  by  its  expected  economic  life  or 
duration  period  (in  years)  results in that asset’s yearly depreciation. Depreciation for the 
accounting  period  is  charged  to  income  either  directly  or  indirectly.  The  depreciation 
method  selected  should be applied consistently from the period to period unless altered 
circumstances justify a change.  
Depreciation  to  be  charged  on  fixed  assets  on  reducing  balance  method.  Special 
instructions are: 
  The rate of depreciation will be instructed / circulated from head office; 
  Depreciation of a fixed asset will have to be charged from the date of purchase; 
P/81 
10.9 – Sale of Fixed Assets: 
If  an  item  of  fixed  asset  gets  unusable,  broken,  obsolete,  or  no  longer  necessary,  then 
this item could be eligible for sold out subject to the approval from the Managing Director.  
To sale or disposal it should at least follows the under mentioned guidelines: 
  Administration Department (Logistics section) in head office will prepare a statement 
containing  all  unusable  fixed  assets  &  submit  it  to  the  Managing  Director  through 
DGM  &  GM.  He  will  then  place  it  to  purchase  committee  to  assess  the  need  of 
disposal; 
  Purchase Committee will then assess the need of sale of assets, repurchase of same 
assets,  feasibility  of  fund  etc,  and  final  recommendation  will  then  be  place  to 
Managing Director in the matter of sale; 
  Fixed  assets  could  be  sold  by  inviting  press  tender  (If  the  approximate  price  of 
disposable asset is above Taka 100,000) or taking comparative quotation rates (If the 
approximate  price  of  disposable  asset  is  below  Taka  100,000).  This  sale  however, 
could be made also through mutual negotiation by taking at least three (3) quotations 
to  avoid  undue  complications.  In  all  cases  the  asset  will  be  have  to  be  sold  to  the 
highest bidder; 
  Fixed  assets  are  usually  sold  through  the  PKSF  head  office;  Regional  Audit  office 
may only on special circumstances with the permission of Managing Director; 
  Only  approved  and  authenticated  sales  /  disposal  of  fixed  assets  compulsorily  shall 
be recorded and documented by doing accounting in books of accounts and concern 
fixed assets register accordingly. 
10.10 – Accounting of Fixed Assets: 
This has been considered in four ways – such as; 
  At the time of purchase / procurement; 
  At the time of sale / disposal;  
  At the time of write off; 
  At the time charging depreciation. 
A) - At the time of purchase / procurement: 
1) 
If  a  fixed  asset  (photocopier)  is  purchased  or  procured  by  the  head  office 
through making payment on cash / bank, then the journal entry in the books 
of accounts will be made through cash journal: 
P/82 
Debt 
- Fixed Assets  
- Office Equipment 
            - (General ledger Accounts Code) 
            - (Subsidiary ledger Accounts Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account -  
            - (General ledger Accounts Code) 
            - (Subsidiary ledger Accounts Code) 
This will be recorded in fixed assets register. 
2) 
If a fixed asset (photocopier) is purchased or procured by the head office on 
credit,  then  the  journal  entry  in  the  books  of  accounts  will  be  made  through 
journal voucher: 
Debt 
- Fixed Assets  
- Office Equipment 
            - (General ledger Accounts Code) 
            - (Subsidiary ledger Accounts Code) 
Credit 
- Accounts Payable 
- Accounts Payable - Suppliers 
            - (General ledger Accounts Code) 
            - (Subsidiary ledger Accounts Code) 
This  will  be  recorded  in  fixed  assets  register  and  accounts  payable  –  Suppliers 
subsidiary ledger and also in the registers.  
3) 
If a fixed asset (photocopier) is purchased or procured by the head office on 
credit and make payment to the supplier later on, then the journal entry in the 
books of accounts will be made through cash journal: 
Debit 
- Accounts Payable 
- Accounts Payable - Suppliers 
            - (General ledger Accounts Code) 
            - (Subsidiary ledger Accounts Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
            - (General ledger Accounts Code) 
            - (Subsidiary ledger Accounts Code) 
This will be recorded in accounts payable - supplier subsidiary ledger & also in registers.  
B) - At the time of sale / disposal: 
 
Journal entries to record the sale  / disposal of fixed assets are as follows; 
a - Sale of fixed assets: 
Debit - Fixed assets Sold Account 
Credit - Fixed Assets Account (Cost price) 
b - Sale price received: 
Debit - Cash / Bank Account 
Credit - Fixed Assets Sold Account (Sale price) 
c - For Accumulated Depreciation: 
Debit - Accumulated Depreciation of Fixed assets Account 
Credit - Fixed Assets Sold Account 
C) - At the time of write-off: 
 
Journal entries to record the write-off of fixed assets are as follows; 
P/83 
a - Write of fixed assets: 
Debit - Fixed assets Obsolete Account 
Credit - Fixed Assets Account (Cost price) 
b - For Accumulated Depreciation: 
Debit - Accumulated Depreciation of Fixed assets Account 
Credit - Fixed Assets Obsolete Account 
D) - At the time of charging depreciation. 
Through wear & tear, working lives of the fixed assets get shortened and gradual 
loss  of  their  workability  takes  place  depending,  of  course,  on  the  rate  of  usage. 
To  account  for  this  loss  /  damage,  depreciation  as  per  schedule  fixed  by 
management will have to be charged on fixed assets.  
Necessary  entries  through  journal  voucher  for  this  depreciation  charge  will  be: 
(Photocopier) 
Debit 
-Depreciation Expenses 
-Depreciation of Fixed Asset -  
  Office Equipment 
            - (General ledger Accounts Code) 
            - (Subsidiary ledger Accounts Code) 
Credit 
-Accumulated Dep. Fixed Assets  
- Accumu. Dep. Fixed Assets                       - (Subsidiary ledger Accounts Code) 
  Office Equipment 
            - (General ledger Accounts Code) 
It is worth mentioning here that the fixed assets will always have to be shown in the books 
of  accounts  at  the  original  cost.  At  the  time  of  preparing  final  accounts,  the  total 
accumulated  depreciation  is  to  be  deducted  from  the  cost  price  of  the  fixed  assets  in 
question and the result is to be shown as the net book value. 
10.11 – Fixed Assets Register: 
Obviously, fixed assets play an extremely important role in every organization. As a result 
there is an overgrowing need to maintain and up date various data and information with 
regard to these assets VIZ, the maintenance system, total numbers, total value, present 
conditions and location of all the fixed assets.  
Considering this requirement, it is felt very necessary to keep a separate register for fixed 
assets (As per Format- Register No. - 202). 
As soon as the procurement of fixed assets take place, various data related to that assets 
have  to  be  recorded  in  the  fixed  assets  register.  The  vouchers  prepared  (both  cash 
journals  and  journal  vouchers)  in  this  connection  will  indicate  where  and  how  the 
particulars are to be recorded in the fixed assets register. 
10.12 – Instruction to Write up Fixed Assets Register: 
A - First stage - Particulars and references of assets: 
P/84 
 
 
 
 
 
In column 1 put the date of acquisition of fixed assets purchased; 
In column 2 insert the references of cash journals or journal vouchers for the concern 
procurement / sale / adjustment; 
In column 3 put the quantity of assets; 
In column 4 put the unit price of the asset; 
In column 5 insert the cost price of the concern asset; 
B - Second stage – Value of assets: 
 
 
 
 
In column 6 insert opening balance value at cost price of the asset of particular year; 
In column 7 insert the Taka amount for additional purchase during the period; 
In column 8 put the Taka amount cost price of sale / disposal / adjustment of asset for 
the period; 
In column 9 find out the Taka amount of total balance by adding the column 6&7 and 
then deducting the column 8 from the results of adding; 
C – Third stage – Depreciation of assets: 
 
 
 
 
In column 10 insert opening accumulated depreciation of assets of particular period; 
In  column  11  insert  the  Taka  amount  of  depreciation  charges  during  the  period; 
Depreciation = [(Column 9 less column 10) multiply by rate of depreciation] 
In column 12 insert the Taka amount of any adjustment of depreciation; 
In column 13 find out the Taka amount of total balance of depreciation by adding the 
column 10 & 11 and then deducting the column 12 from the results of adding; 
D – Fourth stage – Written Down Value of assets: 
 
In column 14 find out the Taka amount of written down value of assets by deducting 
the column 13 from the column of 12. 
10.13 – Physical Counting of Fixed Assets & Reporting: 
Every  offices  of  PKSF  shall  make  a  provision  of  inspection  and  physical  verification  of 
assets, by the person not related with the record of assets, at least once in a year to find 
out  the  condition  of  moveable  and  immovable  assets.  All  assets  shall  be  inventoried  at 
June  closing  each  year  compulsorily.  Approved  inventory  sheet  shall  be  used  for  this 
purpose. The stock on hand per fixed assets register shall be verified against the physical 
counts and physical quality shall be recorded in the fixed assets register. 
10.14 – Damage, Loss & Destruction, and Insurance of Fixed Assets: 
Each  office  of  PKSF  shall  insure  that  proper  system  is  installed  to  prevent  assets  from 
being  damaged,  lost  or  destroyed.  Every  office  also  shall,  when  feasible,  insure  fixed 
assets against theft, pilferage or possible loss due to accident, fire or natural calamities. 
10.15 – Use of Fixed Assets on Payment: 
On  approval  of  management  of  PKSF  any  staff  member  of  PKSF  can  use  asset 
(particularly vehicles) of PKSF on payment through submitting a written application. 
10.16 – Scrapping, Condemnation & Write-off of Fixed Assets: 
A - Purpose: 
Write-off the assets from the books of accounts of PKSF if it is found that: 
P/85 
  Life of the assets are over; 
  Assets are discarded and disordered; 
  Assets are damaged, broken and not repairable; 
  Use and utility of assets are ended (non-useable); 
  Assets are declared obsolete and scraped; 
  Assets are lost; 
  Assets are theft and etc. 
B - Formation of Committees: 
i) - 
Inspection Committee -  Consists  of  three  (3)  members  -  One  from 
Administration  Department  and  others  two  outside  of  Administration 
Department  to  be  formed  in  Administration  Department  only  to  perform 
primary  inspection  in  connection  to  the  determination  of  saleable  and 
obsolete assets of PKSF and make their list; 
ii) - 
Condemnation  Committee  -  Two  Condemnation  Committees  shall  be 
formed like purchase committee.  
a - Condemnation Committee-1: To perform the activity in to connection 
to  the  declaration  of  saleable  and  obsolete  assets  of  PKSF  amounting 
above Taka 500,000; 
b - Condemnation Committee-2: To perform the activity in to connection 
to  the  declaration  of  saleable  and  obsolete  assets  of  PKSF  amounting 
from Taka 20,000 to Taka 500,000; 
To perform the activity in to connection to the declaration of saleable and 
obsolete  assets  of  PKSF  amounting  up  to  Taka  20,000  shall  be 
accomplished with the approval of MD as per policy; 
C - Procedures relating to write-off: 
  Physical  inspection  and  verification  of  assets  by  the  Inspection  Committee  of 
Administration Dept. once in a year shall be conducted to determine the physical 
existence  and  position  of  unusable  assets  as  outlined  in  above  and  prepare  a 
comprehensive  scrapping  report.  If  circumstance  permitted  /  arisen,  the 
scrapping report is to be prepared at any time of the year based on the findings 
that  assets  are  discarded,  disordered,  lost,  theft,  unusable,  damaged,  broken, 
life over, non-repairable, utility ended, obsolete; 
 
Inspection Committee after inspection shall prepare a detailed list of condemned 
goods  /  assets  with  their  present  position  and  placed  it  to  the  Condemnation 
Committee; 
  On  verification,  examination  and  detailed  review  of  the  list  prepared  by 
Inspection  Committee,  the  Condemnation  Committee  shall  finalize  the  list  of 
saleable  assets  and  list  of  obsolete  assets  and  submitted  the  same  with 
recommendation to the MD in regard to the declaration of saleable and obsolete 
assets. Next step shall be taken as per the decision of the MD;  
  Administration  Dept.  shall  then  take  the  initiative  to  place  the  file  for  final 
approval of proposal of write-off as per the decision; 
  MD shall approve any amount total depreciated value of the total obsolete assets 
of PKSF. 
P/86 
D - Scrapping and Condemnation Procedures: 
  Prepare  a  list  of  obsolete  assets  by  Adm.  Dept.  and  submitted  the  same  to 
Condemnation Committee; 
  On  due  verification  Condemnation  Committee  shall  then  prepare  a  list  of 
obsolete or disposable assets and accordingly recommended; 
  On verification and review, if it is found that the assets are lost, theft, not found  / 
available,  Administration  Dept.  may  take  appropriate  action  on  the  basis  of 
investigation and FIR may be lodged if found that assets are lost / theft; 
  On  verification,  if  it  found  that  the  assets  are  been  damaged  /  lost  by  the  staff 
members  of  PKSF  due  t  the  ground  of  negligence  of  duty,  Adm,  Dept.  may 
recommended  the  authority  for  recovery  of  loss  sustained  /  incurred  through   
fixing up the responsibility and liability in the context; 
In  determining  the  disposable  cost  of  the  assets  the  Condemnation  Committee 
shall consider the market price of the assets; 
 
E - Disposal Procedures: 
  All assets shall be disposed as per set rules of PKSF; 
  Value  of  condemned  assets  as  determined  by  the  Condemnation  Committee 
shall be considered as the lowest price in case of sale / disposal. Sale shall be 
made to the highest bidder. 
  15%  of  the  total  sale  value  shall  be  taken  as  security  money  and  shall  be 
collected  during  the  time  of  submission  of  tender  /  quotation.  Remaining  85% 
shall  be  received  before  receiving  the  sold  assets  by  the  purchaser.  If  the 
purchaser, not intended to receive the disposable assets with in the time frame 
as mentioned in the sale agreement/deed, 15% security money shall be lapsed. 
F - Adjustment of Disposed & Write-off Assets: 
  Disposal  of  assets  shall  be  done  immediately  after  declaration  of  assets 
 
disposed and condemned; 
If disposal value is more / less than the write-off value of the concerned assets, 
these shall be considered as income / loss of PKSF; 
  Admin.  Dept.  shall  submit  separate  proposal  to  the  MD  in  connection  to  the 
write-off of obsolete assets immediately after disposal of disposable assets; 
  Determine the loss /income of the obsolete assets; 
  Lost assets shall be eliminated from the fixed assets register; 
  Following  is  the  format  in  connection  to  the  submission  of  declaration  of  the 
obsolete and disposable assets of PKSF; 
Sl 
No. 
Description 
of Assets 
Quantity  Purchase 
Date 
Purchase 
Value 
Written  Down 
Value 
Remarks 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 11 
P/87 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
11.1 - Introduction 
11.2 – Salary Payment 
11.3 - Some Noteworthy Points with Regard to Payment 
11.4 – Attendance Register & Statement 
11.5 – Leave Statement 
11.6 – Procedures of Salary Payment 
11.7 – Timing of Salary Payment 
11.8 – Deduction from Salary 
11.9 - Overtime Management 
11.10 - Telephone 
11.11 - Accounting of Salary 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 11-COMPENSATION PACKAGE & ACCOUNTING 
P/88 
CHAPTER - 11 
COMPENSATION PACKAGE & ACCOUNITNG 
11.1 - Introduction: 
Policy  instructions,  payment  and  documentation  in  connection  to  the  compensation 
packages of staff members of PKSF shall be conducted, controlled and constituted as per 
the existing "Service Rules" of the PKSF that are in force and act.  
Expenditure on account of salary and allowances forms a major portion of the recurring or 
revenue expenditure of any large organization. This very fact, calls for the need of proper 
recording  system  as  well  as  controlling  mechanism  to  account  for  this  expenditure. 
Various  staff  related  activities  VIZ,  recruitment,  salary,  increment,  transfer,  promotion, 
termination, penalty imposition, salary deductions etc. are usually carried out by personnel 
department / administration department. 
11.2 – Salary Payment: 
In general, staffs are recruited by PKSF at certain salary level / scales. All particulars of 
staff members are notified to the head office finance & accounts department. Other staff 
related  information  such  as  staff  salary  increment,  salary  withholding,  loan  recovery 
through  installments  etc.  are  also  provided  by  the  personnel  department.  Payment  of 
salary and the preservation of all the data related to staff salaries are done by the finance 
and accounts. 
In case of Regional Auditing office, salary related matters, however, would be controlled 
by  head  office.  Other  wise  incidents  like  presenting  information  about  some  bogus  staff 
and  then  drawing  his  or  her  salary  might  take  place  or  at  least,  possibilities  of  similar 
incident to happen cannot be totally written off.  
11.3 – Some Noteworthy Points with Regard to Payment: 
The following matters need to be dealt with prior salary payment: 
  Up to date information regarding appointment or transfer of any staff member; 
  Proper maintenance of salary register; 
  Correct recording of all necessary data with regard to salaries and allowances to staff 
members; 
  Collection and preservation of particulars in respect of deduction made or to be made 
from salaries on different accounts; 
  Attendance register being properly maintained; 
 
Information  of  those  employees  who  have  resigned  or  have  been  terminated  or 
whose transfer orders have been issued are to be recorded in the salary register and 
that salary to be withheld accordingly; 
  Calculation of net salary after making all necessary additions or deductions correctly 
and appropriately.  
P/89 
11.4 – Attendance Register & Statement: 
  The  attendance  register  serves  as  the  supporting  document  in  the  preparation  of 
the  monthly  attendance 
salary  bills.  Administration  department  shall  provide 
statement to the Finance and Accounts Section.  
  This  register  will  also  help  towards  annual  budget  preparation  of  PKSF.  Apart  form 
this  it  creates  effective  pressure  on  the  staff  members  to  arrive  at  the  office  within 
stipulated time limit. 
  From organization’s point of view, the prime objective of this register, however, is to 
help the staff to attend office in time. So, attendance registers have to be maintained 
at all level offices of PKSF. 
11.5 – Leave Statement: 
It  is  essential  to  record  particulars  of  leave  in  order  to  prepare  salary  bills  by  accounts 
department easily and correctly. If any staff member of PKSF wants to go on leave, he / 
she  should  apply  in  a  prescribed  form  and  get  that  leave  application  approved  before 
actually leaving the workstation.  
The officer dealing with the leave register will record all particulars about leave of a staff, 
so that, up to date information of the person’s current leave position is readily available by 
Finance & Accounts Section. 
11.6 – Procedures of Salary Payment: 
All staff members have been advised to open a bank account and given the bank account 
number to accounts department at the time of joining in the PKSF.  
Bank  advice  has  been  prepared  by  the  accounts  department  to  transfer  the  individual 
salary  of  to  the  individual  staff  salary  account  in  bank  at  the  end  of  the  month  whose 
salary became due after approval of DGM (F&A), General Manger and Managing Director 
as per delegation of authority. 
11.7 – Timing of Salary Payment: 
All the staff members working at head office will be paid their salaries after 25th day of a 
month. Preparation of the salary bills should preferably be started from the fourth week of 
the  month  so  as  to  make  sure  that  payment  is  made  in  time.  If  the  salary  bills  are  not 
prepared  in  advance,  last  minute  rush  in  trying  to  complete  the  bills  might  result  in 
occurrence of all sorts of mistakes in the payment of salaries. 
11.8 – Deduction from Salary: 
Some staff members may well be taken advances either to carry out official duties. Out of 
these advance payments, some are adjusted against bills submitted and the rest will have 
to  be  adjusted  against  salaries  of  the  respective  staff.  Contribution  to  provident  fund, 
advances and other deductible items shall be deducted from salaries and allowances. 
P/90 
11.9 - Overtime Management: 
Payment of overtime should be discouraged in all respects. But in special circumstances 
the management may give over time to employees who have worked beyond office hours. 
In such case a prior approval for overtime must be taken from the appropriate authority. 
The overtime of a staff will be guided by following overtime policy of PKSF. Overtime for 
which  payment  [As  per  format  Form  No.-112]  is  to  be  made  must  be  authorized  in 
advance.  On  the  form  indicate  the  reasons  for  the  overtime  work  and  the  estimated 
number  of  hours  overtime  as  well  as  the  period  of  days  will  be  needed  before  it  is 
completed. The form is dated and signed by the chief of the department / section and sent 
for approval to chief of personnel. 
11.10 - Telephone: 
Office  telephone  is  only  for  official  use.  Personal  call  is  entitled  for  meeting  emergency 
whose duration should be as short as possible. Personal trunk call / overseas call shall be 
entitled  only  on  payment  and  with  prior  approval.  Budget  allocation  for  head  office  and 
Regional audit office shall be monitored regularly. 
11.11 - Accounting of Salary: 
For  payment  /  transfer  of  net  salary  from  the  bank  account  of  PKSF  to  the  bank  of 
individual staff member after preparing bank advice and duly approved as per delegation 
of authority: 
A) – Preparation of cash journal for making payment of salary: 
Debit 
Credit  
- 
- 
Salary & Allowances – Net Salary 
Cash at Bank 
B) – Preparation of cash journal for making payment of PF deduction to PF Account: 
Debit  
Credit  
- 
- 
Contribution to Provident Fund Account 
Cash at Bank         
C) – 
Preparation of journal voucher for deduction of salary for telephone / fax / e-mail / 
car  use  /  petrol  bill  beyond  ceiling  /  telephone  bill  beyond  ceiling  /  staff  house 
building loan / staff house building loan interest: 
Debit  
- 
Credit     - 
Salary & Allowances - Deducted amount 
Telephone  /  fax  /  e-mail  /  car  use  /  petrol  bill  beyond  ceiling  / 
telephone  bill  beyond  ceiling  /  staff  house  building  loan  /  staff 
house building loan interest         
D) – Preparation of cash journal for making payment of staff Income Tax: 
Debit  
Credit  
- 
- 
Income Tax - Staff 
Cash at Bank         
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 12 
P/91 
------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
12.1 - Introduction 
12.2 – Types of Advances to be Allowed 
12.3 – Staff Advances Against Traveling 
12.4 – Staff Advances Against Purchase 
12.5 – Staff Advances Against Program Expenses 
12.6 – Third Party Advance Against House Rent 
12.7 - Third Party Advance Against Material Supplier 
12.8 - Third Party Advance Against Service Provider 
12.9 - Authorization of Advances 
12.10 - Internal Control In Advances Management 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 12 – ADVANCES, DEPOSITS, PREPAYMENTS & IT’S ACCOUNTING 
P/92 
CHAPTER – 12 
ADVANCES, DEPOSITS, PREPAYMENTS & IT’S ACCOUNTING 
12.1 – Introduction: 
To fulfill different projects / programs and normal activities of PKSF it becomes essential 
to procure goods and services from different persons or organizations at different points 
in time and in doing so, advance payment need to be made from time to time. Depending 
on  the  particular  situation,  these  advance  payments  at  times  are  made  directly to some 
outside person or organizations as well as PKSF's own staff members in some cases. 
12.2 – Types of Advances to be Allowed: 
Mainly categorized in two: 
  Advance to staff members – these are commonly known as temporary advances 
and long term loans: 
  Advance against travelling expenses; 
  Advance against purchase of goods; 
  Advance against program expenses; 
  Advance against house building loan. 
  Advance to third parties 
  Advance against house rent; 
  Advance to materials suppliers / contractors; 
  Advance to service providers; 
12.3 – Staff Advances - Against Traveling: 
PKSF  staffs  members  are  frequently  travel  to  different  areas  of  the  country  and  also 
outside the country for official purposes. The staff members are entitled to take advances 
to  bear  the  transportation  and  traveling  expenses.  Allowances  for  traveling  inside  and 
outside the country will be entitled by staff member as per the rules and regulations of the 
"Service Rules" of PKSF that are in force and act on. 
General conditions are as follows: 
Following conditions govern the sanction of temporary cash advances against traveling: 
  Advance should preferably given to permanent staff members; 
  No second advance will be paid unless the previous advance is adjusted fully; 
  To be paid only against approved tour; 
  Must be adjusted with in twenty (20) days from the date of payment; 
 
If  a  staff  member  to  whom  an  advance  has  been  made  fails  to  submit  bills  / 
accounts  supported  by  vouchers  for  adjustment  with  in  stipulated  time,  total 
amount of advance will be deducted from his / her salary account till the accounts 
of advance are finalized with out any intimation to concerned person. 
P/93 
The accounting of the advances, their adjustment against submission of bills, payment of 
extra amount and deduction of salary for non submission of bills against advance    will be 
made in due care and timely manner. 
Accounting of advances and its' adjustment against submission of bills, payments of extra 
amounts & receipt of unspent amount will be as follows: 
A - 
Journal  entries  through  preparation  of  Cash  Journal  relating  to  the  traveling 
advance payment of PO audit to Mr. X is as below: 
Debt 
- Advance against Evaluation & Monitoring 
- Advance to Mr. X  (Name of person) 
Credit 
              - HO Bank Account 
- Cash At Bank 
(Only for advance amount given to Mr. X) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
B - 
If  the  advance  is  adjusted  on  submission  of  approved  bills,  then  the  following 
Journal Voucher will be prepared: 
Debit 
             - Audit Expenses - PO  
- Evaluation & Monitoring Expenses - 
(General ledger Code) 
- 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
              - Advance to Mr. X  
- Advance against Evaluation & Monitoring 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of advance given to Mr. X) 
C - 
If the actual bills approved more than advance taken amount then, for payment of 
excess amount to Mr. X, the following Cash Journal will be prepared: 
Debit 
             - Audit Expenses - PO  
- Evaluation & Monitoring Expenses  
Credit  
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
- 
- 
- 
-  
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for excess payment of Taka amount to Mr. X against audit expenses of PO) 
D - 
If  the  actual  bills  approved  less  than  advance  taken  amount  then,  for  receipt  of 
balance amount from Mr. X, the following Cash Journal will be prepared: 
Debit  
- Cash In Hand 
- HO Bank Account 
Credit 
              - Advance to Mr. X  
- Advance against Evaluation & Monitoring 
- 
-  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only  for  receipt  of  balance  Taka  amount  from  Mr.  X  against  audit  expenses of 
PO) 
12.4 – Staff Advances - Against Purchase: 
P/94 
To  carry  out  the  routine  duties  and  activities  related  to  different  projects  /  programs  of 
PKSF head office and Regional Audit office, all sorts of goods and materials need to be 
procured.  Out  of  these  materials,  some  are  purchases  through the staff members while 
others directly through out side parties / suppliers. 
General  conditions  are  as  follows:  Following  conditions  govern  the  sanction  of  cash 
advances against purchases of goods: 
  That the stores are immediately and urgently required; 
  That time at disposal does not permit purchase by open or selected tender; 
  That delay in procurement would involve loss; 
  That no second advance is given till the previous advance is fully accounted for 
and the balance, if any refunded to cash; 
 
  That  purchases  be  completed  and  account  rendered  with  in  three  (3)  days  of 
drawl  of  the  advance  and  the  balance,  if  any  be  refunded  in  cash  immediately 
after purchase; 
In making the purchase basic principles of purchase policy shall be always kept in 
consideration and view; 
If  a  staff  member  to  whom  an  advance  has  been  made,  fails  to  submit  bills  / 
accounts  supported  by  vouchers  for  adjustment  with  in  the  stipulated  time,  the 
total amount of advance will be deducted from his salary account till the accounts 
of  advances  are  finalized  with  out  given  any  intimation  to  concerned  staff 
member. 
 
Accounting  of  advances,  their  adjustment  against  submission  of  bills,  payment  of  extra 
amount  and  deduction  for  non-submission  of  bills  against  advance  will  be  made  in  due 
care and timely manner. 
Accounting  of  advances  and  its'  adjustment  against  submission  of  bills  &  payments  of 
extra amounts will be as follows: 
A - 
Journal  entries  through  preparation  of  Cash  Journal  relating  to  the  advance 
payment for purchase of printing & stationery to Mr. Y is as below: 
Debt 
- Advance against Administrative Expenses  - 
- 
- Advance to Mr. Y  (Name of person) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
              - HO Cash In Hand 
- Cash At Bank 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for advance amount given to Mr. Y). 
B - 
If  the  advance  is  adjusted  on  submission  of  approved  bills,  then  the  following 
Journal Voucher will be prepared: 
Debit 
             - Printing & Stationery Expenses 
- Administrative Expenses   
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
              - Advance to Mr. Y  
- Advance against Administrative Expenses  - 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of advance given to Mr. Y) 
P/95 
C - 
If the actual bills approved more than advance taken amount then, for payment of 
excess amount to Mr. Y, the following Cash Journal will be prepared: 
Debit 
             - Printing & Stationery Expenses 
- Administrative Expenses   
Credit  
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
- 
- 
- 
-  
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for excess payment of Taka amount to Mr. Y against purchase of printing & 
stationery expenses). 
D - 
If  the  actual  bills  approved  less  than  advance  taken  amount  then,  for  receipt  of 
balance amount from Mr. Y, the following Cash Journal will be prepared: 
Debit  
- Cash In Hand 
- HO Cash In Hand 
Credit 
              - Advance to Mr. Y  
- Advance against Administrative 
- 
-  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for receipt of balance Taka amount from Mr. Y against purchase of printing 
& stationery expenses). 
12.5 – Staff Advances - Against Program Expenses: 
To  carry  out  the  program  activities  related  to  different  projects  and  programs  of  PKSF, 
some expenses are need to be paid out to the staff members of PKSF in the form of liquid 
cash  on  the  same  date  as  the  expenses  as  incurred  for  smooth  completion  of  the 
activities find no other alternative as the situation arises. 
General conditions are as follows: Following conditions govern the sanction of temporary 
cash advances against program expenses: 
  Section / departmental heads' approval is needed before advance; 
  That time at disposal does not permit purchase by open or selected tender; 
  That delay in procurement would involve loss; 
  That the payments from advance amount involves larges quantity but in a small 
form on each quantity; 
  That no second advance is given till the previous advance is fully accounted for 
and the balance, if any refunded to cash; 
  That advances should be compulsorily adjusted / settled with in twenty (20) days 
of drawl of advance and the balances, if any should be refunded accordingly. In 
no  circumstances  the  office  liquid  cash  will  be  lying  in  the  hands  of  the  staff 
members  of  PKSF.  Thus,  after  making  the  payment  of  the  related  program 
expenses by the person whom advance has been taken, the remaining balance 
of  liquid  cash  amount  should  compulsorily  refunded  /  deposited  to  the  cash 
section of finance and accounts.  
In making the payment basic principles of payment policy shall be always kept in 
consideration and view; 
If  a  staff  member  to  whom  an  advance  has  been  made,  fails  to  submit  bills  / 
accounts  supported  by  vouchers  for  adjustment  with  in  stipulated  time,  the  total 
amount  of  advance  will  be  deducted  from  his  salary  account  till the accounts of 
advance are finalized with out given any intimation to concerned staff member. 
 
 
P/96 
Accounting  of  advances,  their  adjustment  against  submission  of  bills,  payment  of  extra 
amount  and  deduction  for  non-submission  of  bills  against  advance  will  be  made  in  due 
care and timely manner. 
Accounting  of  advances  and  its'  adjustment  against  submission  of  bills  &  payments  of 
extra amounts will be as follows: 
A - 
Journal  entries  through  preparation  of  Cash  Journal  relating  to  the  advance 
payment to Mr. Z for seminar & workshop expenses for Institutional Development 
& Capacity Building is as below: 
Debt 
- Advance against Inst. Dev. & Cap. Building - 
- 
- Advance to Mr. Z  (Name of person) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
              - HO Cash In Hand 
- Cash At Bank 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for advance amount given to Mr. Z). 
B - 
If  the  advance  is  adjusted  on  submission  of  approved  bills,  then  the  following 
Journal Voucher will be prepared: 
Debit 
             - Seminar & Workshop 
- Institutional Dev. & Capacity Building 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
              - Advance to Mr. Z  
- Advance against Inst. Dev. & Cap. Building - 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of advance given to Mr. Z) 
C - 
If the actual bills approved more than advance taken amount then, for payment of 
excess amount to Mr. Z, the following Cash Journal will be prepared: 
Debit 
             - Seminar & Workshop 
- Institutional Dev. & Capacity Building 
Credit  
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
- 
- 
- 
-  
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for excess payment of Taka amount to Mr. Z against expenses of seminar 
& workshop for Institutional Development & Capacity Building) 
D - 
If  the  actual  bills  approved  less  than  advance  taken  amount  then,  for  receipt  of 
balance amount from Mr. Z, the following Cash Journal will be prepared: 
Debit  
- Cash In Hand 
- HO Cash In Hand 
- 
-  
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
              - Advance to Mr. Z  
- Advance against Inst. Dev. & Cap. Building - 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for receipt of balance Taka amount from Mr. Z against expenses of seminar 
& workshop for Institutional Development & Capacity Building) 
12.6 – Third Party Advance Against House Rent: 
P/97 
This  is  called  as prepaid rent. In case of rental of houses for official purposes by PKSF 
Head Office and Regional Audit Offices, the following procedures are applicable: 
  Rental  of  a  house  is  initiated  upon  contractual  agreement  between  PKSF  and  the 
owner of the house; 
  Any  authorized  officer  on  behalf  of  PKSF  can  carry  out  the initial formalities prior to 
rental of house and then signed the agreement on behalf of PKSF; 
  After agreement is done, the house owner may be given advance against office rent 
as per terms and conditions of that agreement; 
  Adjustment  of  advances  shall  be  clearly  stated  in  the  agreement  and  account 
department  should  have  a  copy  of  that  agreement  and  accordingly  adjusted  the 
advance amount. 
Accounting  of  advances  &  their  adjustment  against  submission  of  bills  will  be  made 
regularly. This advance will have to be adjusted as per terms & conditions.  
Accounting  of  advances  and  its'  adjustment  against  submission  of  monthly  rent  bills will 
be as follows: 
A - 
Journal  entries  through  preparation  of  Cash  Journal  relating  to  the  advance 
payment for office rent expenses is as below: 
Debt  
- Advance against Occupancy Expenses 
- Advance House Rent 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
              - 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
B - 
This  advance  will  have  to  be  adjusted  as  per  terms  and  conditions.  If  the  advance  is 
adjusted  on  submission  of  monthly  rent  bills,  then  the  following  Journal  Voucher  will  be 
prepared: 
Debit 
- Occupancy Expenses 
- House Rent Expenses  
Credit 
- Advance against Occupancy Expenses 
- Advance House Rent 
- 
- 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
12.7 – Third Party Advance Against Material Suppliers / Contractors: 
Advances  to  suppliers  against  material  supplies  /  contractors  are  generally  discouraged 
and every endeavour shall be made to maintain a system under which no payments are 
made  except  for  works  actually  done.  Following  are  the  cases  where  advances  can  be 
given: 
P/98 
 
If  the  contractual  agreement  permits,  advances  shall  be  made  as  per  clause  of  the 
agreement;  
  Section / departmental heads' approval is needed before advance; 
 
In  all  other  cases,  only  with  the  sanction  of  the  Managing  Director,  which  may,  in 
exceptional circumstances, authorize such advances as may be deemed necessary, 
taking  the  proper  precautions  against  loss  and  for  preventing  the  system  from 
becoming general or continuing longer than is absolutely essential. 
  Accounting  of  advances  &  their  adjustment  against  submission  of  bills will be made 
on regular basis. This advance will have to be adjusted as per terms & conditions of 
the agreement; 
  For payment of the submitted bill of the supplier / contractor: Noted that; 
o 
o 
If the bill amount of the supplier exceeds the taxable limit for deduction of tax 
at  source  at  the  time  of  payment  as  per  the  Income  Tax  Ordinance  1984, 
then  it  should  be  compulsory  to  deduct  tax  at  the  rates  applicable  to  this 
payment of the bill. 
If the bill amount of supplier is subject to VAT deducted at source at the time 
of payment as per the VAT Act 1991, then it should be compulsory to deduct 
VAT at the rates applicable to this payment of the bill. 
o  Finally, the deducted (TAX & VAT) amount from the supplier’s bill should be 
deposited to the Government through treasury challan with in the date (with in 
7  days  from  the  date  of  such  deduction)  as  specified  in  the  Income  Tax 
Rules.  
Accounting  of  advances  and  its'  adjustment  against  submission  of  bills  &  payments  of 
extra amounts will be as follows: 
A - 
Journal  entries  through  preparation  of  Cash  Journal  relating  to  the  advance 
payment  to  supplier  (Rangs  Industries  Ltd.)  against  purchase  of  spare  parts  for 
car of PKSF is as below: 
Debt 
- Advance against Administrative Expenses  - 
- 
- Advance to Rangs Industries Ltd.   
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
              - 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
B - 
This  advance  will  have  to  be  adjusted  as  per  the  terms  and  conditions.  At  the  time 
adjustment of advance on submission of bill, If the bill amount of the supplier exceeds the 
taxable  limit  for  deduction  of  tax  at  source  as  per  Income  Tax  Ordinance  1984,  then  it 
should be compulsory to deduct tax at the rates applicable to this payment of the bill and 
then, payments to supplier. 
P/99 
(I)  -  First  of  all,  prepare  a  Journal  Voucher  for  deduction  of  tax  amount  from  the  gross 
amount of suppliers bill:  
Debit 
- Administrative Expenses   
- Car Maintenance 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit  
- 
- Liabilities For Other Finance 
- Income Tax Deducted At Source-Suppliers - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only the tax deducted amount at source) 
(II) - Secondly, prepare a Journal Voucher for adjustment of advance amount: 
Debit 
- Administrative Expenses   
- Car Maintenance 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Advance against Administrative Expenses  - 
- 
- Advance to Rangs Industries Ltd.   
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(III) - Then, prepare Cash Journal for payment of rest amount (final bill is more than the 
advance amount) after deduction of tax amount: 
Debit 
- Administrative Expenses   
- Car Maintenance 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
              - 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only the excess amount after adjustment of advance amount and tax deducted at source 
amount).  
(IV)  -  Finally,  prepare  the  Cash  Journal  for  deposition  of  tax  deduction  amount  from 
supplier's bill to the Government Treasury through treasury challan: 
Debit  
- Liabilities For Other Finance 
- 
- Income Tax Deducted At Source-Suppliers - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
              - 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only the tax deducted amount at source) 
12.8 – Third Party Advance Against Service Providers: 
Advances  to  consultant  for  providing  services  are,  however,  permitted  in  the  following 
cases: 
  As per contractual agreement with the consultants / consulting firm & organization.  
  Cases, in which, in the interest of works, it is absolutely necessary to make advance; 
P/100 
 
In  all  other  cases,  only  with  the  sanction  of  the  Managing  Director,  which  may,  in 
exceptional circumstances, authorize such advances as may be deemed necessary, 
taking  the  proper  precautions  against  loss  and  for  preventing  the  system  from 
becoming general or continuing longer than is absolutely essential. 
Accounting  of  advances  &  their  adjustment  against  submission  of  bills  will  be  made  on 
regular  basis.  Advance  will  be  adjusted  as  per  terms  &  conditions  with  the  service 
provider. 
For payment of other part of submitted bills of consultant. Noted that: 
 
 
If the bill amount of consultant exceeds the taxable limit for deduction of tax at source 
at  the  time  of  payment  as  per  the  Income  Tax  Ordinance  1984,  then  it  should  be 
compulsory to deduct tax at the rates applicable to this payment of the bill. 
If the bill amount of the consultant is subject to VAT deducted at source at the time of 
payment as per the VAT Act 1991, then it should be compulsory to deduct VAT at the 
rates applicable to this payment of the bill. 
  Finally,  the  deducted  (TAX  &  VAT)  amount  from  the  consultant’s  bill  should  be 
deposited to the Government through treasury challan with in the date (with in 7 days 
from the date of such deduction) as specified in the Income Tax Rules. 
Accounting  of  advances  and  its'  adjustment  against  submission  of  bills  &  payments  of 
extra amounts will be as follows: 
A - 
Journal  entries  through  preparation  of  Cash  Journal  relating  to  the  advance 
payment to consultants (IBCS Primex) against consultancy in PKSF is as below: 
Debit 
- Institutional Dev. & Capacity Building 
- Advance to IBCS Primex  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
              - 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
B - 
This  advance  will  have  to  be  adjusted  as  per  the  terms  and  conditions.  At  the  time 
adjustment  of  advance  on  submission  of  bill,  If  the  bill  amount  of  the  service  provider 
exceeds  the  taxable  limit  for  deduction  of  tax  at  source  as  per  Income  Tax  Ordinance 
1984, then it should be compulsory to deduct tax at the rates applicable to this payment 
of the bill and then, payments to service provider. 
(I)  -  First  of  all,  prepare  a  Journal  Voucher  for  deduction  of  tax  amount  from  the  gross 
amount of service provider's bill:  
Debit 
- 
- Institutional Dev. & Capacity Building 
             - Consultants Service at PKSK Head Office  - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit  
- Liabilities For Other Finance 
- 
- Income Tax Deducted At Source-Ser. Pro.  - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only the tax deducted amount at source) 
P/101 
(II) - Secondly, prepare a Journal Voucher for adjustment of advance amount: 
Debit 
- 
- Institutional Dev. & Capacity Building 
             - Consultants Service at PKSK Head Office  - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
              - Advance to IBCS Primex   
- Advance against Inst. Dev. & Cap. Building - 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only the advance amount adjustment)  
(III) - Then, prepare Cash Journal for payment of rest amount (final bill is more than the 
advance amount) after deduction of tax amount: 
Debit 
- 
             - Consultants Service at PKSK Head Office  - 
- Institutional Develop. & Capacity Building 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
              - 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only the excess amount after adjustment of advance amount and tax deducted at source 
amount).  
(IV)  -  Finally,  prepare  the  Cash  Journal  for  deposition  of  tax  deduction  amount  from 
service provider's bill to the Government Treasury through treasury challan: 
Debit  
- Liabilities For Other Finance 
- 
- Income Tax Deducted At Source-Ser. Pro.  - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
              - 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only the tax deducted amount at source) 
12.9 - Authorization of Advances: 
The authorization of advances shall be made in the following ways; 
  Prior approval from the Managing Director is compulsory for outside advances in 
cases  of  "advance  against  third  party  for  material  supplies",  "advance  against 
service  providers",  "advance  against  rent"  and  "advance  against  traveling  - 
outside the country". 
  Prior  approval  from  the  Managing  Director  is  compulsory  for  staff  advances  in 
case of "advance against house building loan".  
  Prior approval from the concern authority is compulsory for staff advances in case 
of "advance against traveling - in the country". 
12.10 - Internal Control in Advance Management & Accounting: 
P/102 
PKSF  management  should  establish  a  proper  internal  control  system  in  such  a  manner 
that: 
  One transaction of advance in never been completed without passing through the 
hands  of  at  least  three  officials  (preparation,  authentication  and  financial 
clearance); 
  Before authorization of adjustment of advances proper documentation, evidences 
and  finally  authenticity  should  be  proved  appropriately  and  accurately  with  due 
care; 
  The  authorities  and  responsibilities  of  various  officials  have  to  be  arranged  in 
such a way that the person who authenticating the advances, who authorizing the 
advances, who documented & recorded the advances, the person who receives 
the advances is always be different. 
Internal control in connection to operational steps of advances:  
o  Advances will be initiated on advance requisition form. 
o  The advance will be approved as per delegated authority. 
o  The  advances  requisition  form  will  then  be  handed  over  to  the  Finance 
and Accounts section to check the particulars therein. 
o  Accounts Section will prepare payment voucher and checked the same. 
o  Cash Section will then make payment after obtaining receiver's signature. 
o  Accounts section will make the cash entry in the cash Scroll. 
  Staff  advances  will  be  adjusted  with  in  twenty  (20)  days  from  the  payment  of 
advances. 
  Maximum limit of advance shall be received by the staff members of PKSF is not 
exceeding the limited as outlined by the "Service Rules" of the PKSF in case of 
staff advance for traveling cost. 
  Other  advances  will  be  adjusted  as  per  PKSF's  Service  Rules  and  related 
Contract Agreement basis. 
  Expenses incurred will subsequently be approved as per policy and guidelines. 
  On approval of the bills, accounts section will make the payment voucher / journal 
voucher / received voucher as the case may be.  
  Finance & Accounts Section will make entry in the computer and updated the all 
ledgers. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 13 
P/103 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
13.1 - Lending Policy - Introduction 
13.2 - Accounting of Loan to POs 
13.3 - Accounting of Recovery of loan to POs 
13.4 - Accounting of Recovery of Service Charge on Loan to POs 
13.5 - Accounting of Accrual of Service Charge on Loan to POs 
13.6 - Accounting of Overdue Service Charge on Loan to POs 
13.7 - Accounting of Loan Loss Provision 
13.8 - Records & Documentation of Loan to POs 
13.9 - Internal Control in Loan Disbursement Process 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 13 - ACCOUNTING & RECORDING OF LOAN TO POs 
CHAPTER - 13 
ACCOUNTING & RECORDING OF LOAN TO POs 
P/104 
13.1 - Lending Policy - Introduction: 
The  broad  objective  of  "lending  Policy"  of  PKSF  is  to  sponsor,  promote  and  provide 
various forms of assistance including financial, institutional, advisory and training to Non-
Government, Semi-Government and Government Organizations, voluntary agencies and 
societies,  local  government  bodies,  institutions  and  groups  of  individuals  (named  as 
Partner Organizations or POs) undertaking activities with a view to generating income and 
/ or employment opportunities and alleviating poverty in conformity with the objects of, an 
in a manner approved by the PKSF. This provides key aspects of PKSF's lending policies 
and procedures, as approved by its Governing Body from time to time. 
13.2 - Accounting of Loan to POs: 
Presentation of loans to POs to the PKSF financial statement shall be shown as its gross 
amount. The presentation of "Loans to Partner Organization" (POs) shall be as follows: 
A - 
B - 
Non Current (Due beyond a year) 
Current (Due with in a year)  
PKSF  has  given  loan  to  POs  as  per  installment  basis  through  Draft  or  Cheques  to  the 
concerned POs as the case may be.  
Accounting of loan given to POs (Name of PO is ABC) [Rural Micro-credit to PO's under 
OOSA] will be journalized through making Cash Journal in the following way: 
Debit 
- Rural Micro-credit to PO's under OOSA 
- ABC (Name of PO)  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
              - 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of loan given to ABC - PO) 
13.3 - Accounting of Recovery of loan to POs: 
PKSF recovers its loan to POs as per installment basis through receiving Demand Draft 
or Cheques or Pay-Order from the concerned POs as the case may be.  
Accounting of loan recovery from POs (name of PO is ABC) against loan to POs [Rural 
Micro-credit to PO's under OOSA] will be journalized through making Cash Journal in the 
following way: 
Debit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
              - 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Rural Micro-credit to PO's under OOSA 
- ABC (Name of PO)  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of loan realized from ABC - PO) 
13.4 - Accounting of Recovery of Service Charge on Loan to POs: 
P/105 
PKSF  recovers  its'  service  charge  from  POs  calculated  as  per  rate  agreed  upon  in  the 
loan agreement on loan to POs on installment basis through receiving Demand Draft or 
Cheques or Pay-Order from the concerned POs as the case may be.  
Accounting  of  service  charge  recovery  from  POs  (name  of  PO  is  ABC)  against  loan  to 
POs  [Rural  Micro-credit  to  PO's  under  OOSA]  will  be  journalized  through  making  Cash 
Journal in the following way: 
Debit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
              - 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Service Charge Under RMC - OOSA 
- ABC (Name of PO)  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of service charge realized from ABC - PO) 
13.5 - Accounting of Accrual of Service Charge on Loan to POs: 
PKSF  accrue  its'  service  charges  on  loan  to  POs  as  per  policy  instruction  calculated 
based on rates agreed upon in the loan agreement with the POs as the case may be.  
Accounting of service charges accrual but not due from POs (name of PO is XYZ) against 
loan to POs [Rural Micro-credit to PO's under OOSA] will be journalized through making 
Journal Voucher in the following way: 
Debit 
- Accrued Service Charge RMC - OOSA        - 
              - 
- XYZ (Name of PO) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Service Charge Under RMC - OOSA 
- XYZ (Name of PO)  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of accrued service charge but not due from XYZ - PO) 
13.6 - Accounting of Overdue Service Charge on Loan to POs: 
Overdue service charges on loan to POs accounted for separately.  
Accounting of over due service charge from POs (name of PO is NM) against loan to POs 
[Rural  Micro-credit  to  PO's  under  OOSA]  will  be  journalized  through  making  Journal 
Voucher in the following way: 
Debit 
- Overdue Service Charge RMC - OOSA       - 
              - 
- NM (Name of PO) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Service Charge Under RMC - OOSA 
- NM (Name of PO)  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of overdue service charge from NM - PO) 
13.7 - Accounting of Loan Loss Provision: 
P/106 
The  amount  of  accumulated  provision  made  for  the  doubtful  loans  calculated  as  loan 
classification  and  provisioning  policy  of  PKSF  shall  be  shown  as  liability  item  of  the 
balance sheet and debt management charges for the year shall be shown as an expense 
in the income statement.  
Accounting  of  loan  loss  provision  on  loan  to  POs  -  OOSA  will  be  journalized  through 
making Journal Voucher in the following way: 
Debit 
- Debt Management Charges for Core Program- 
- D M Charges - Core Program 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Debt Management Reserve on Loan to  
  POs - OOSA 
- Loan Component  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of debt management reserve) 
13.8 - Records & Documentation of Loan to POs: 
  Loan ledgers shall be maintained in finance and accounts section, Disbursement 
and  repayment  of  loan  shall  be  immediately  documented  evidently,  recorded 
authentically  and  posted  correctly  in  the  ledgers  as  and  when  they  take  places 
and updated the ledgers regularly; 
  Monthly  reconciliation  by  the  finance  and  accounts  shall  be  conducted  with 
figures of the MIS of the total loan outstanding, disbursements and recovery and 
prepare  the  reconciliation  statement  for  the  unmatched  balances  of  accounting 
ledgers; 
  Overdue  statement  of  loan  outstanding  (as  per  format)  shall  be  prepared  on 
monthly basis regularly and also by MIS Section; 
  Loan  classification  statements  (as  per  format)  shall  be  prepared  yearly  basis 
following the guidelines as stated in the policy - Matrix Methodology; 
  Loan loss provision statement or calculation sheet (as per format) to be prepared 
based  on  loan  classifications  statements  following  the  instruction  &  guidelines 
made in this regard; 
  Separate  statement  to  be  prepared  for  the  "Renegotiated  Loans"  and  Nor-
performing Loans" as per statement (as per format) designed in this context. 
13.9 - Internal Control in Loan Disbursement Process: 
On getting the approval for payment on the file, a cheque requisition giving details of the 
board sanction, mode of payment etc, shall be prepared by the Desk Officer (Operations) 
approved DMD (Operations) asking the Finance and Accounts Department to prepare the 
cheque. File shall be moved to Supervising Officer and Deputy Managing Director (DMD-
Operations)  for  their  signatures.  The  cheque  requisition  along  with  other  related 
necessary  papers  to  process  the  loan  disbursement  to  POs  shall  then,  given  to  the 
Finance and Accounts Department for preparing cheque in favour of the POs.  
P/107 
Cheque requisition goes to Officer (F&A), to see if any condition is given in the requisition 
if  followed.  He  then  brings  out  the  resolution  file  and  check  that  requisition  agrees  with 
what is mentioned in the resolution. Then, he attaches a copy of the file note approving 
the  payment  with  the  voucher  made  for  payment.  He  puts  the  cheque  number  and 
amount paid on the face of the resolution marking the payment. 
Then,  Officer  (F&A)  prepares  the  cheque  recording  the  payment  in  Cheque  Payment 
Register and on Customer Loan Card. The cheque, cheque register, resolution of minutes 
file  and  the  voucher  then  sent  to  the  Manager  (F&A)  who  check  that  the  cheque  is 
prepared properly and all formalities regarding payment is maintained. Then, he signs on 
the counter foil of the cheque, cheque payment register, on the cheque requisition and on 
the resolution of minutes and also voucher prepared for this. 
After  verification  and  signing  by  Manager  (F&A),  the  whole  set  then  sent  to  the  DGM 
(F&A) who again checks in the same way and sends those to the cheque signatories as 
per  delegation  of  authority.  On  signing  the  cheque  by  the  authorized  personnel  and  file 
return  to  Finance  and  Accounts  Department  for  delivery  of  cheque  to  the  concern  PO 
through concern Desk Officer of Operation Department. 
Finance and Accounts Department then handed over the cheque to the concerned officer 
for delivering to the PO recording the same in the cheque disbursement register and the 
PO  card.  The  deeds  are  entered  in  Deed  Register  where  DO  and  AM  signs.  Deed  of 
agreements along with other papers is kept in safe custody under the joint custodians. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 14 
P/108 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
14.1 - Definitions 
14.2 - Application of IAS - Government Grants Accounting 
14.3 - Accounting of Government Grants 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 14 - GOVERNMENT GRANTS & IT'S ACCOUNTING 
 CHAPTER – 14 
GOVERNMENT GRANTS & IT'S ACCOUNTING 
P/109 
14.1 – Definitions: 
(I) - Government Grants - 
Government  grants  are  assistance  by  government  or  other  agencies  in  the  form  of 
transfers of resources to PKSF in compliance with certain conditions relating to operating 
activities of PKSF. 
(II) - Grants Related to Assts -  
Grants  related  to  assets  are  grants  whose  primary  condition  is  that  PKSF  qualifying  for 
them  shall  purchase  or  acquire  long-term  assets.  Subsidiary  conditions  may  also  be 
attached restricting the type or location of the assets or the periods during which they are 
to be acquired or held. 
(III) - Grants Related to Income - 
Grants related to income are government grants other than those related to assets. 
14.2 - Application of IAS - Government Grants Accounting: 
International  Accounting  Standard  IAS  -  20  -  "Accounting  for  Government  Grants  and 
Disclosure  of  Government  Assistance"  shall  be  applied  in  accounting  for,  and  in  the 
disclosure of, government grants received by PKSF and in the disclosure of other forms 
of government assistance. 
Recognition  of  Government  Grants  &  Accounting  for  Government  Assistance  by  PKSF 
shall be as follows: 
(a) - Recognition of Government Grants: 
  Government  grants  shall  not  be  recognized  until  there  shall  be  reasonable 
assurance that: 
(I) - The PKSF shall comply with the conditions attaching to it; and 
(II) - The grant shall be received. 
Government grants shall be recognized as income over the periods necessary to match 
them with related costs which, PKSF are intended to compensate, on a systematic basis.  
(b) - Accounting of Government Grants: 
(I)  -  Grant  for  current  year's  revenue  expenses  shall  be  recognized  as  grant 
income under other income account; 
(II) - Government grants for expenses shall be recognized as deferred income to 
the extend of the amount of subsequent years and for equity as capital fund; 
(III) - Amount equal to current years' depreciation under grant for assets shall be 
recognized  as  income.  Rest  /  carrying  amount  of  the  relevant  assets  shall  be 
accounted for as grant for assets; 
(c) - Disclosure of Government Grants in financial statements of PKSF: 
(I) - The accounting policy adopted for government grants, including the methods 
of presentation adopted; 
(II)  -  The  nature and extent of government grants recognized shall be disclosed 
adequately; 
P/110 
14.3 - Accounting of Government Grants: 
Following accounting procedures / systems shall be followed by PKSF to the Government 
Grants:  
(A) - Accounting against revenue expenditures: 
(I) - When revenue expenditures incurred and paid by PKSF: 
Debit 
- Relevant Revenue Expenditure        
- Relevant Expenditure 
- 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of revenue expenditures paid) 
(II) - When expenditures reimbursed by Government that paid by PKSF: 
Debit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account  
Credit 
- Other Income 
- Grant Under Project   
- 
- 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of revenue expenditures reimbursed by Government) 
(III) - For accrual of expenditures (not received with in particular year): 
Debit 
- Grants Receivables  
- Receivable Under Project 
Credit 
- Other Income 
- Grant Under Project   
- 
- 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of revenue expenditures not yet received with in particular year) 
(IV) - When grants received in advance: 
Debit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account  
Credit 
- Deferred Income 
- Deferred Income Under Project  
- 
- 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of revenue expenditures received in advance) 
P/111 
(V)  -  Revenue  expenditure  paid  in  advance  for  subsequent  year  but  the  eligible 
reimbursement did not received in the year in which advance is paid: 
Debit 
- Grant Receivable Account  
- Receivable Under Project 
Credit 
- Other Income 
- Grant Under Project  
- 
- 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(B) - Accounting against capital expenditures: 
(I) - When capital expenditures incurred and paid by PKSF: 
Debit 
- Relevant Fixed Assets Account        
- Relevant Fixed Assets 
- 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of capital expenditures paid) 
(II) - When capital expenditures reimbursed by Government that paid by PKSF: 
Debit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account  
Credit 
- Grant for Assts   
- Grant for Asset Under Project   
- 
- 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of capital expenditures reimbursed by Government) 
(III) - For accrual of capital expenditures (not received with in particular year): 
Debit 
- Grants Receivables  
- Grant Receivable Under Project 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Grant for Assets  
- Grant for Assets Under Project 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
- 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of capital expenditures not yet received with in particular year) 
(IV) - When grants received in advance: 
Debit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account  
Credit 
- Deferred Income 
- Deferred Income Under Project  
- 
- 
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of capital expenditures received in advance) 
(V) - For depreciation of the assets: 
Debit 
- Depreciation of Fixed Assets 
- 
- Depreciation of Fixed Asset Under Project  - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- 
- Provision for Depreciation on Fixed Asset 
- Provision for Dep. on F. Asset Under Project- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of depreciation of fixed assets for the particular period) 
P/112 
(VI) - For adjustment of proportionate depreciation against grants for assets: 
Debit 
- Grant for Assets  
- Grant for Assets Under Project 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
- 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Other Income 
- Grant Under Project   
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for equivalent Taka amount of yearly proportionate depreciation of fixed asset) 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 15 
P/113 
--------------------------------------------------------------- 
15.1 - Definitions 
15.2 - Recognition of Liabilities 
15.3 - Accounting of Liabilities 
15.4 - Application of IAS - Borrowing Costs 
15.5 - Accounting of Borrowing Costs 
-------------------------------------------------------------- 
 15 - ACCOUNTING OF LIABILITIES & BORROWING COSTS 
 CHAPTER – 15 
ACCOUNTING OF LIABILITIES & BORROWING COSTS 
P/114 
15.1 – Definitions: 
(I) - Liabilities - 
One of the elements directly related to the measurement of financial position of PKSF is 
liability.  Liability  is  a  obligation  of  the  organization  arising  as  a  result  of  past events and 
from which future economic benefits are expected to flow to the organization. 
An  essential  characteristic  of  a  liability  is  that  the  organization  has  an  obligation.  An 
obligation is a duty or responsibility to act or perform in a certain way. Obligations may be 
legally  enforceable  as  a  consequence  of  a  binding  contract  or  statutory  requirement.  A 
distinction needs to be drawn between a present obligation and a future commitment. A 
decision by the management of the organization to acquire assets in future does not, of 
itself, give rise to a present obligation. An obligation normally arises only when the asset is 
delivered  or  the  organization  enters  into  an  irrecoverable  agreement  to  acquire  the 
assets. Example of liabilities resulting from past transactions or past events is the receipt 
of loan results in an obligation to repay the loan with interest.  
(II) - Borrowing Costs - 
Borrowing  costs  are  interest  and  other  costs  incurred  by  PKSF  in  connection  with  the 
borrowing of funds. 
15.2 – Recognition of Liabilities: 
A  liability  is  recognized  in  the  balance  sheet  when  it  is  probable  that  an  outflow  of 
resources  embodying  economic  benefits  will  result  from  the  settlement  of  an  obligation 
and  the  amount  at  which  the  settlement  will  take  place  can  be  measured  reliably. 
Recognition of liabilities entails recognition of related assets or expenses. 
15.3 - Accounting of Liabilities: 
Generally, PKSF classified its' liabilities into two major categories as follows: 
(I) - Current Liabilities 
(II) - Long Term Liabilities 
Following accounting procedures / systems shall be followed by PKSF to accounting its' 
obligation / liabilities:  
(A) - Current Liabilities: 
(I) - For accrual of expenses (Accrual of liabilities for expenses): 
Debit 
- Relevant Revenue Expenditure        
- Relevant Expenditure 
- 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Other Liabilities   
- Provision for Expenses  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of accrued expenditures not yet paid) 
P/115 
(II) - For payment of liabilities: 
Debit 
- Other Liabilities   
- Provision for Expenses  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
- 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount paid against liabilities) 
(B) - Long Term Liabilities: 
(I) - For receipt of long-term loan under different projects: 
Debit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
- 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Long Term Loan Account  
- Loan Under Project 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
- 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of long term loan received under project) 
(II) - For payment of long term loan: 
Debit 
- Long Term Loan Account  
- Loan Under Project 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
- 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
- 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount paid against long term loan) 
(C) - Gratuity Fund: 
(III) - For accrual of gratuity expenses: 
Debit 
- Salaries, Allowances & Other Facilities        - 
              - 
- Gratuity 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Provision for Gratuity  
- Name of the Employee  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of accrued expenditures not yet paid for gratuity) 
(II) - For payment of gratuity: 
Debit 
- Provision for Gratuity 
- Name of the Employee  
- 
- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
- 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount paid against gratuity) 
15.4 - Application of IAS - Borrowing Costs Accounting: 
P/116 
International  Accounting  Standard  IAS  -  23  -  "Accounting  for  Borrowing  Costs"  shall  be 
applied  in  accounting  for  borrowing  costs  of  PKSF.  Recognition  of  borrowing  costs  & 
Accounting for borrowing costs by PKSF shall be as follows: 
(a) - Recognition of borrowing costs: 
o  Borrowing  costs  shall  be  recognized  as  an  expenses  in  the  period  in 
which they are incurred;  
(b) - Accounting of borrowing costs: 
o  Borrowing  costs  shall  be  interest  and  other  costs  incurred  by  PKSF  in 
connection with the borrowing of funds; 
o  Borrowing costs shall be accounted for on accrual basis; 
(c) - Disclosure of borrowing costs in financial statements of PKSF: 
o  The  nature  and  extent  of  borrowing  costs  recognized shall be disclosed 
adequately in the financial statements; 
o  The accounting policy adopted for borrowing costs; 
15.5 - Accounting of Borrowing Costs: 
Following accounting procedures / systems shall be followed by PKSF to accounting its' 
borrowing costs:  
(A) - Accounting for interest on loan: 
(I) - For accrual of interest expenses on loan: 
Debit 
- Interest On Loan 
- Interest On Loan Under Projects 
- 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- 
- Interest Payable On Loan - Current 
- Interest Payable On Loan U. Pro. - Current - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Interest Payable On Loan - Non-Current 
- 
- Interest Payable On Loan U. P Non-Current- 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount of accrual of interest expenditure on loan) 
(II) - For payment of interest on loan: 
Debit 
- Interest Payable On Loan - Current 
- 
- Interest Payable On Loan U. Pro. - Current - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
Credit 
- Cash At Bank 
- HO Bank Account 
- 
              - 
(General ledger Code) 
(Subsidiary ledger Code) 
(Only for Taka amount paid against interest on loan) 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 16 
P/117 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
16.1 – Introduction 
16.2 – Application International Accounting Standards 
16.3 – Adoption of Accounting Policies as per IAS 
16.4 – Disclosure of Accounting Policies as per IAS 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
16-APPLICATION OF INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS   
CHAPTER – 16 
P/118 
APPLICATION OF INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS 
16.1 – Introduction: 
Here, it will be better to give an overview of the meaning and objective of the International 
Accounting Standards (IAS). 
The  International  Accounting  Standard  (IAS)  are  issued  by  the  International  Accounting 
Standards  Committee  (IASC)  to  bring  world  -  wide  “harmonization  in  the  Generally 
Accepted  Accounting  Principles  (GAAP),  so  that  financial  statements,  as  the  bases  for 
investment, credit and similar decision", standards (subject to local adaptation), which are 
meant for mandatory application wherever adopted. 
International Accounting Standards are designed to achieve improvement in the degree of 
uniformity in accounting principles and disclosures and thereby effective harmonization in 
financial  reporting  of  the  concerned  entities.  Each  IAS  covers  accounting  standards 
(recognition and measurement related) and reporting standards (disclosure related). 
Though accounting standards are generally similar, the reporting or disclosure standards 
may vary significantly from entity to entity and country to country, because of differences 
in corporate objectives and economic, socio-political environments. Hence, realization of 
disclosures  is  essential  for  achieving  national  and  international  harmonization  in 
accounting practices and presentation. 
16.2 – Application of International Accounting Standards: 
While  preparing  the  financial  statements  of  PKSF,  it  always  to  follow  the  internationally 
generally  accepted  accounting  principles  and  accounting  standards  issued  by  the 
International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) considering the local adoption. 
The preparation of financial statements and adoption & application of accounting policies 
of  PKSF  should  be  identical  and  as  per  the  requirements  of  International  Accounting 
Standards  (IASs)  as  adopted  in  Bangladesh.  The  financial  statements  such  as  balance 
sheet,  income  statements,  cash  flow  statements,  disclosure  of  accounting  policies  are 
being  prepared  based  on  various  important  assumptions,  concepts,  principles  and 
conventions as per International Standard. 
The  management  of the PKSF is responsible for the preparation and presentation of its 
financial statement as per International Accounting Standards (IAS-1). 
Financial statements shall present fairly the financial position, financial performance and 
cash  flows  of  PKSF.  The  appropriate  application  of  International  Accounting  Standards, 
with  additional  disclosure  when  necessary,  results,  in  virtually  all  circumstances,  in 
financial statements that achieve a fair presentation.   
The following International Accounting Standards (IAS) shall be applicable in preparation 
and presentation of PKSF financial statements: 
Sl. No.  Number of IAS Name of IAS  
P/119 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
IAS-1 
IAS-2 
IAS-7 
IAS-8 
Presentation of Financial Statements 
Inventories 
Cash Flow Statements 
Net Profit or Loss for the Period, Fundamental Errors &  
Changes in Accounting Policies 
IAS-10   
Events After the Balance Sheet Date 
IAS-16   
Property, Plant & Equipment 
IAS-18   
Revenue Recognition 
IAS-19   
Employee Benefits 
IAS-20   
Accounting Government Grants & Disclosure of Govt. Assist. 
IAS-23   
Borrowing Costs 
IAS-30   
Disclosure in the Financial Statements of Banks & 
Similar Financial Institutions   
16.3 – Adoption of Accounting Policy As per IAS:  
Accounting  policies  are  the  specific  principles,  bases,  conventions,  rules  and  practices 
adopted by PKSF in preparing and presenting financial statement. 
Management of PKSF shall select and apply its' accounting policies in such a way, so that 
the financial statements comply with all the requirements of each applicable International 
Accounting Standard.  
16.4 – Disclosure of Accounting Policies As per IAS:  
As per the requirement of the International Accounting Standards (IAS-1), the preparation 
of disclosure requirement statements of accounting policies adopted to prepare financial 
statements  in  the  organization  as  an  integral  part  of  the  financial  statements  is 
compulsory. 
This  is  why  PKSF  has  to  prepare  disclosure  requirements  statements  of  accounting 
policies for its consolidated statements in head office centrally. 
Each accounting policies of the PKSF should be disclosed that is necessary for a proper 
understanding  of  the  financial  statements.  A  specific  accounting  policy  should  be 
disclosed,  where  disclosure  would  assist  users  in  understanding  the  way  in  which 
financial transactions and events are reflected in the reported performance and financial 
position. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 17 
P/120 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
17.1 - Introduction 
17.2 - Finalization of Monthly Financial Statements 
17.3 - Income Statements 
17.4 - The Balance Sheet 
17.5 - Cash Flow Statements 
17.6 - Notes to Accounts 
17.7 - Subsidiary Ledger Accounts Statement 
17.8 - Accounts Schedules & Statements 
17.9 - Interpretation of Accounts – Ratios Analysis 
17.10 - Other Reporting through Accounts Maintenance 
17.11 - Budgeting 
17.12 - Computerization of Accounts 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
17 - PREPARATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  
P/121 
CHAPTER - 17 
PREPARATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
17.1 – Introduction: 
The financial statements of the PKSF shall be finalized (prepared and presented) through 
inserting the all disclosures requirements of the accounts as per International Accounting 
Standards  (IAS)  for  each  calendar  month.  Usually  each  month  accounts  shall  be 
completed by third week of the next month. At the end of each month, the chief of finance 
and accounts shall prepare and submit monthly financial report to the Managing Director 
of PKSF. 
including 
financial  statements  of 
At the end of the fiscal year, the chief of finance and accounts shall prepare the Annual 
full  disclosures 
Report 
requirements  of  the  accounts  as  per  International  Accounting  Standards  (IAS)  duly 
audited and submit the same to the General Body through Managing Director. Financial 
statements  also  show  the  results  of  management's  stewardship  of  the  resources 
entrusted to it. 
the  organization  with 
17.2 – Finalization of Monthly Financial Statements: 
At  the  end  of  each  month  balancing  of  all  records  of  accounts,  control  general  ledgers, 
subsidiary ledgers and registers shall be carried out attentively and completed & updated 
accurately  in  all  offices  of  PKSF.  Then  go  for  finalization  of  monthly  basis  accounts  / 
financial statements of PKSF. The stages to complete the preparation of final accounts of 
PKSF are as follows: 
  Preparation of trial balance; 
  Preparation of income statements - Projects, funds and PKSF as a whole; 
  Preparation of balance sheets - Projects, funds and PKSF as a whole; 
  Preparation of cash flow statements - Projects, funds and PKSF as a whole; 
  Preparation of notes to accounts - Projects, funds and PKSF as a whole; 
  Preparation of all schedules & statements - Projects, funds and PKSF as a whole; 
  Preparation of significant accounting policies adopted to prepare accounts; 
  Preparation  of  all  explanatory  notes  to  accounts  -  Projects,  funds  and  PKSF  as  a 
whole; 
  Preparation of ratio analysis statements; 
  Preparation of budget variance analysis statements; 
17.3 - Income Statements: 
As  a  process  of  preparation  of  periodical  financial  statements,  PKSF  shall  have  to 
prepare income statements to show the excess / shortage of expenditure over income for 
a  particular  period  monthly  /  quarterly  /  yearly  basis.  It  is  required  to  be  essential  to 
prepare  the  income  statement  on  monthly  basis  for  all  the  offices  including  head  office 
and a consolidated income statement of PKSF. To prepare the income statement: 
  All revenue incomes balances of ledger accounts to be accumulated as per individual 
accounts  head  and  codes  in  income  side  and  all  revenue  expenditures  balances  of 
ledger  accounts  to  be  accumulated  as  per  individual  accounts  head  and  codes  in 
expenditure side; 
P/122 
  Then totaled the both sides (income and expenditure); 
  The  difference  amount  (excess  or  shortage)  to  be  find  out  by  balancing  the  total 
balance of both sides; 
  Payments  against  advance  or  prepayments  and  the  capital  expenses  should not be 
included  in  this  account.  This  type  of  expenses  should  be  treated  as  items  to  be 
shown in the balance sheet; 
  The  surplus  or  deficit  as  shown  by  this  account  shall  be  transferred  to  the  balance 
sheet as capital fund; 
  The depreciation charges relating to fixed assets and the provision for loan losses will 
be shown in the income statements. 
  All  revenue  nature  income  and  expenditure  relating  to  the  reporting  period  will  be 
reflected in this account irrespective of the status whether income received or not and 
the expenditure paid or not. 
17.4 - The Balance Sheet: 
The balance sheet portrays the state of assets and liabilities of the organization as on a 
particular  day.  So,  to  depict  the  over  all  financial  position  of  the  organization,  it  is 
compulsory  to  draw  up  a  balance  sheet (As per Format) for PKSF at closing day of the 
financial  year.  To  facilitate  the  easy  accounting  for  PKSF,  monthly  basis  preparation  of 
balance sheet is acute to be needed. Besides, it is also needed to prepare balance sheet 
for all offices. 
a)  The balance sheet shall have to be prepared on the basis of the ledger balances; 
b)  For this purpose, all assets & property will be classified in one side and all liabilities & 
equities will be classified in other sides of balance sheet; 
c)  Then after, totaled both the sides and examine whether the sum of equity and liability 
side agrees with the sum of property and assets side of balances sheet.  
d)  So, the equation for balance sheet stands as below: 
Balance sheet = Equity & liabilities – Property & Assets. 
e)  Excess  of  income  over  expenditure  [surplus]  or  excess  of  expenditure  over  income 
[deficit] is to be adjusted against equity – as retained earning in balance sheet. 
f)  The  ultimate  effects  of  the  adjustments  relating  to  advances,  prepayments  and 
outstanding expenses and depreciation shall be shown in the balance sheet. 
g)  Details of fixed assets should be shown either in a schedule to be annexed with the 
balance sheet. 
17.5 – Cash Flow Statements: 
As  per  the  requirement  of  the  International  Accounting  Standards  (IASs-1  &  7),  the 
preparation  of  cash  flow  statements  of  the  organization  is  compulsory.  This  why  PKSF 
has  to  prepare  Cash  Flow  statements  for  its  all  offices  and  consolidated  statements  in 
head office also. The cash flow statement has to be prepared as per format. 
P/123 
17.6 – Notes to Accounts: 
As  per  the  requirement  of  the  International  Accounting  Standards  (IASs-1),  the 
preparation  of  notes  to  accounts  as  an  integral  part  of  the  financial  statements  of  the 
organization  is  compulsory.  This  is  why  PKSF  has  to  prepare  notes  to  accounts 
statements for its all offices & consolidated statements in head office. 
17.7 - Subsidiary Ledger Accounts Statement: 
To  support  the  balance  sheet,  income  statement  and  cash  flow  statements  of  PKSF  is 
compulsory  to  prepare  the  statements  of  all  subsidiary  ledger  accounts  balances  of  a 
particular  period  –  monthly,  quarterly  &  yearly  as  required  for  explanation.  This  will  be 
prepared as per the specified format by all offices. 
17.8 - Accounts Schedules & Statements: 
To  support  the  balance  sheet,  income  statement  and  cash  flow  statements  of  PKSF  is 
compulsory  to  prepare  the  schedules  &  statements  of balance sheet, income statement 
and  cash  flow  statement  items  of  a  particular  period  –  monthly,  quarterly  &  yearly  as 
required for explanation. This will be prepared as per the specified format by all offices.  
All  sorts  of  statements  and  schedules  to  be  prepared  as  and  when  needed  to  clarify 
financial  statements  -  such  as  fixed  assets  schedules,  depreciation  schedules,  stock 
statements,  prepaid  expenses  statements,  inter  office  transactions  statements,  cash 
custody  certificate,  bank  balance  confirmation  certificates,  detail  break  up  of  sales  & 
purchases, cash budget, budget variance analysis and etc. 
17.9 - Interpretation of Accounts – Ratio Analysis: 
Ratio analysis statement as whole of PKSF is compulsory to prepare at a particular period 
–  monthly,  quarterly  &  yearly  as  required  for  interpretation  of  the  financial  statements  is 
necessary  to  measure  the  rate  of  performances  in  different  sector  of  the  organization. 
The  achievement  in  different  sectors  of  PKSF  will  be  evaluated  through  finding  out  the 
calculation of certain ratio as delineated by the management.  
17.10 - Other Reporting through Accounts Maintenance: 
I - Accounts Maintenance: 
PKSF  accounts  are  developed  in  a  computer-software  -  whole  thing  is  a 
computerized  one.  The  modern  concepts  and  system  of  accounts  keeping  are 
followed in PKSF. 
II - Preparing other reports: 
  Loan & fund position; 
  Loan disbursement to POs; 
  Loan recovery of POs; 
  Service charge recovery from POs; 
  Net Loan disbursement summary of POs; 
  DOSA - Accounts statements - IDA reporting; 
  Other reports as per management requirement; 
P/124 
  Daily Transaction Report; 
  General Ledger at different options; 
  Cash and Bank Summary; 
  Journal Voucher Summary; 
  Demand Draft register; 
  Other information as and when required. 
III - Providing management information - As and when required. 
17.11 – Budgeting: 
I - Annual Budget Preparation: 
  Annual Budget shall be prepared for the next year at the end of the current year 
and shall be placed at the board for approval; 
  The budget shall be placed and approved in the Annual General Meeting. 
II - Long Term Budget (LTB): 
Shall be prepared as & when required by the management to foresee the future; 
LTB shall also be prepared to see the trend at different scenario. 
17.12 - Computerization of Accounts: 
The  accounting  system  of  PKSF  has  been  computerized.  A  well  designed  accounting 
software  has  been  introduced  in  the  organization  to  record  the  day  to  day  financial 
transactions in such a way that a best presentation of the PKSF financial statements has 
been  prepared  which  following  the  all  requirements,  guidelines  and  disclosures  of 
International Accounting Standards (IASs). 
To facilitate the whole accounting system and to prepare all financial statements of PKSF 
based  on  the  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  required  as  per  the  International 
Accounting  Standards  processed  through  the  newly  introduced  accounting  software,  a 
best commonly applicable chart of accounts adhere to record all financial transactions of 
the organization at all level linking with the budget line items of PKSF has been developed 
in this context.  
Newly  developed  accounting  software  of  PKSF  considers  location  wise  (means  PKSF 
head office in Dhaka and all other Regional Audit offices through out the country) financial 
transactions  recording  and  their  preparation  of  related financial statements. Moreover, it 
also  considered  to  record  all  financial  transactions  of  project  program  wise,  program 
activity wise and finally expense nature wise all financial transactions of all level of PKSF. 
This would assist PKSF to record information conveniently and produce various financial 
statements and reports accurately and timely in regular basis. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 18 
P/125 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
18.1 - Introduction 
18.2 - Purchase Methods 
18.3 - Purchase Procedure 
18.4 - Tender Quotation Through Paper Advertisement 
18.5 - Procurement Plan 
18.6 - From Whom Should Purchase be Made 
18.7 - Tender Fees & Performance Bond 
18.8 - Procedures Relating to Consultation Services 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
18 - PURCHASE PROCEDURE & MANAGEMENT 
P/126 
CHAPTER - 18 
PURCHASE PROCEDURE & MANAGEMENT 
18.1 - Introduction: 
All  types  of  purchases  and  procurements  of  head  office  and  regional  audit  offices  of 
PKSF should be made as per the procedures and guidelines narrated here in below. All 
procurement must be on fair competitive basis and a competitive price is made for goods 
and services. In order to implement the purchase procedures effectively, it is necessary to 
set up an efficient purchase unit under the administrative department. The staff members 
(may be changed from time to time) responsible for purchase should: 
  Have considerable experience in buying;  
  Have organizing ability; 
  Have ability to negotiate; 
  Be reliable, dependable and honest; 
  Have broad base technical ability; 
18.2 - Purchase Methods: 
Generally following two methods will exist: 
I.  Strictly by Requirement: 
II.  Group Purchase: 
Purchases will be made only when need and the 
purchase unit should have up-to date knowledge 
of all reliable sources. 
Purchase will be made in groups that are placing 
one order for a number of small orders. 
18.3 - Purchase Procedure: 
Following  procedures  and  guidelines  have  to  be  followed  to  ensure  fair  and  competitive 
price, offers should be made to genuine dealers or suppliers through tender or quotation: 
I.  Purchase Requisition: 
  This includes fixed assets, routine purchase, casual purchase etc. Administrative 
department  shall  send  request  to  different  department  /  section  to  send  their 
requisition  for  purchase  of  bulk  item.  Administration  Dept.  shall  also  arrange  to 
obtain budget from finance and accounts department to ensure primarily that the 
purchases are within the budget allocation. 
  Purchase  requisition  indicating  budgetary  sanction  or  block  allocation  is  to  be 
initiated  by  user  department, vetted by the concerned head. Requisition is to be 
made in duplicate. The person requisitioning retains one copy and the other copy 
is forwarded to the Administration Dept. 
  Other than that Annual / Half Yearly / Quarterly bulk purchase all requisitions for 
regular  weekly  purchase  shall  have  to  be  submitted  by  different  Department  / 
Section to Administration Department. 
P/127 
  After  careful  scrutiny  of  the  requisitions  submitted  by  different  department  / 
section,  Administration  Dept.  shall  take  the  initiative  to  process  the  file  and 
necessary prior approval from the line authority as per authorization procedures. 
  After  careful  scrutiny  of  the  requisitions  submitted  by  different  department  / 
section,  Administration  Dept. shall prepare indent & send the same to purchase 
committee  for  review  /  recommendation  if  purchase  cost  value  is  Taka  20,000 
(Twenty thousand) and above. 
 
If  purchase  formalities  are  under  the  jurisdiction  of  purchase  committee  -  the 
necessity of purchases shall duly approved by the Managing Director. 
  Purchase  proposal  together  with  quotation  /  offer  shall  be  placed  to  Purchase 
Committee. 
II.  Purchase Committee: 
  There shall be two purchase committees (PC) to be constituted by the Managing 
Director to conduct purchase related activities. 
  The committee may be consisted of minimum 4-5 members or as decided by the 
Management. At least three (3) members should always be available at the time 
of approving any purchase.  
  All the purchases value exceeding Taka 20,000 are to be handled and maintained 
by purchase committee. 
  The  purchase  committee  shall  reserve  the  right  to  accept  or  reject  any  or  all 
quotation / tenders with proper justification. 
  Purchase committee shall verify the quotation and the comparative statement and 
then recommend to Managing Director for approval.  
  Purchase  Committee-2:  To  perform  the  activity  in  connection  to  the  purchase 
goods from Taka 20,001 up to Taka 5,00,000; 
  Purchase Committee-1: To perform the activity in connection to the purchase of 
goods amounting to above Taka 5,00,000. 
  When a particular item is purely of proprietary in nature, irrespective of the value 
of the purchase, single tender inquiry is to be used directly to the manufacturer or 
their  authorized  agents.  On  scrutiny,  the  purchase  committee  shall  place  the 
recommendation of purchase to Managing Director. 
 
 
If the suppliers' organization / source is more than one, purchase shall be made 
on  competitive  price  basis  through  making  necessary  inquiry  or  through  inviting 
Tender / Quotation / Offer at least two national newspapers / dailies.  
In  case  of  quotation  /  tender  purchase,  at  least  three  (3)  quotation  /  tender  will 
have  to  be  collected  /  submitted  from  the  different  shop's  /  suppliers.  Then,  on 
scrutiny, the purchase committee shall place the recommendation of purchase to 
Managing Director. 
P/128 
III.  Way of Purchase - Selection / Identification of Suppliers: 
A - General Purchase: 
  Administration  Dept.  can  purchase  when  purchase  requisition  involves  below 
Taka 20,000 (Twenty Thousand) with the approval of Managing Director. 
 
In this case, at least three (3) quotations will have to be collected / submitted from 
the different shop's / suppliers. 
  Administration Dept. shall nominate / select two personnel of PKSF for collection 
of quotations.  
  Then,  on  scrutiny,  Administration  Dept.  shall  place  the  recommendation  of 
purchase to Managing Director. 
  Administration  Dept.  shall  purchase  the  daily  supplies  /  canteen  materials  from 
the market by a survey to ascertain the prevailing competitive pricing.  
B - Spot Quotation Purchase: 
 
If the purchase volume exceeding 20,000 (Twenty Thousand) but not more than 
Taka  500,000  (Five  Lacs),  purchase  will  be  made  through  collecting  spot 
quotations or sealed quotations. 
  Written quotation at least from three suppliers, if not possible, at least from three 
sources  with  name,  address  and  telephone  number,  to  justify  the  market  and 
those quotations need to be preserved with the relevant accounting record. 
  Purchase formalities should be approved by the purchase committee-2. 
C - Purchase From Selected Suppliers: 
 
If purchase volume exceeds Taka 20,000 (Twenty Thousand) but not more than 
Taka  500,000  (Five  Lacs),  purchase  will  be  made  through  circulating  sealed 
tender notice to the reputed suppliers. 
  Enlistment  of  suppliers  will  be  as  per  the  norms  and  rules  of  the  purchase 
procedures duly approved by Managing Director. 
  At least from three sources, to justify the market and those quotations need to be 
preserved with the relevant accounting record. 
  Purchase formalities should be approved by the purchase committee-2. 
D - Purchase Through Press Tender: 
P/129 
 
If purchase volume involves more than Taka 500,000 (Five Lacs) and the goods 
are of non-proprietary in nature, purchase shall be made through sealed tender / 
quotation  inviting  by  at  least  two  dailies  national  newspaper  having  reasonably 
wide circulation and circulation in the notice board. 
  At least from three sources, to justify the market and those quotations need to be 
preserved with the relevant accounting record. 
  Purchase formalities should be approved by the purchase committee-1. 
E - Purchase From Single Suppliers: 
  When a particular item is purely of proprietary in nature, irrespective of the value 
of the purchase, single tender inquiry is to be used directly to the manufacturer or 
their authorized agents. 
  Purchase formalities should be approved by the purchase committee-1. 
IV.  Purchase Under TA Program: 
  All purchases in respect of TA Program of Donor Agencies, shall be performed / 
constituted  as  per  the  circulated  /  instructed  rules  and  regulations  of  the  Donor 
Agencies made in this context to the PKSF. 
V.  Purchase Approval: 
Following officers of PKSF, have been given the power of authority to approve / authorize 
the goods purchases: 
  Manager (Administration) shall approve purchase/expense amounting up to Taka 
1,000  (One  Thousand).  For  non-recurring  goods  whether  price  verification  is 
made or not, he shall taken the approval of higher authority in case of approval of 
Purchase Requisition. 
  Deputy General Manager (F/A) shall approve purchase/expense from Taka 1,001 
to 2,000. 
  General  Manager  (Administration)  shall  approve  purchase/expense  more  than 
Taka 2,000 (Two Thousand) and not exceeding Taka 5,000 (Five Thousand). 
  Managing  Director  shall  approve  purchase  any  amount  exceeding  Taka  5,000 
(Five Thousand). 
 
 
 
If  purchase  cost  amounting  to  Taka  20,000  (Twenty  Thousand),  purchase 
committee recommendation shall be needed. 
In  case  of  purchase  amounting  to  Taka  20,000  (Twenty  Thousand)  and  not 
exceeding  Taka  500,000  (Five  Lacs),  purchase  committee  -  2  shall  make  the 
recommendation regarding purchase to the Managing Director. 
In  case  of  purchase  amounting  more  than  Taka  500,000  (Five  Lacs),  purchase 
committee-1  shall  make  the  recommendation  regarding  purchase  to  the 
Managing Director. 
VI.  Comparative Statement Preparation: 
P/130 
  Manager  (Administration)  shall  prepare  the  comparative  statement  of  the  prices 
quoted by supplier/dealer & shall send it to the Managing Director for approval. 
  Purchase committee shall prepare a comparative statement of the prices quoted 
by  supplier  /  dealer  and  shall  declared  the lowest bidder as selected supplier. If 
the lowest bidder has not been declared as selected supplier, detail explanation 
of the reason shall be narrated / cited in the comparative statement. 
  Details of the purchase recommendation mentioning the budget provision shall be 
written  in  a  presentation  form  or  minutes  and  the  same  shall  be  duly  signed  by 
the  president  /  chairman  and  members  of  the  purchase  committee  and  then, 
presented the minutes / presentation to the Managing Director for approval   
VII.  Purchase Work Order: 
  On  getting  the  approval  of  purchase,  purchase  price  and  the  supplier  by  the 
Managing  Director,  an  authorized  officer  (Manager Administration) shall prepare 
the Purchase Order for procurement of goods or a contract for services.  
  Administration Dept. shall issue the work order to supplier mentioning all term & 
conditions  and  details  goods  specifications  and  copies  of  such  work  order  shall 
be sent to stores & accounts department and one retain with the administration.  
  While  rewarding  a  purchase  order  against  the  available  bids,  the  consideration 
should equally be emphasized on price and quality. The price can be negotiated, 
but  the  quality  cannot  be compromised at any circumstance. The negotiation is, 
however, discouraged and it may be applied only when the situation will make it 
unavoidable and must be handled jointly by the purchase committee.  
  While  rewarding  a  purchase  order,  conditions  regarding  the  income  tax,  value 
added  tax,  sales  tax  and  other  related  matters  should  always  be  in  properly 
inserted and clearly stated about the status of payment. 
  Purchase  committee  should  consider  only  the  responsive  bids,  which  meets 
booth the desired quality and competitive price level.  
  Repeat purchase order or purchase through negotiation is not allowed. Exception 
to  this  must  be  justified  with  reasonable  grounds  and  may  be  considered  only 
once a while to face emergency with the approval of Managing Director. 
Purchase order should include the following points 
  All materials shall be supplied as per order. 
  All  materials  shall  have  to  be  supplied  within  the  time  as  stipulated  in  the 
order, if not order shall be treated as canceled. 
  Damaged  or  inferior  quality  or not as per specification of the order shall not 
be received. 
  Short in quantity of material shall not be received. 
  Tax, VAT & other Taxes will be clearly stated. 
  Payment will be made through Account payee cheque. 
  Printed bills along with the Challan shall have to be submitted to the office. 
  Money Receipt to be submitted when the bill is paid. 
VIII.  Quality Control & Purchase Receipt: 
P/131 
  Quality  of  the  purchase  goods  should  always  be  maintained  at  all  level.  While 
receiving and storing the materials it should be done in presence of storekeeper, 
and one account's personnel.  
  After receiving the necessary supply of items it should be certified by a competent 
person regarding the quality of the condition of the goods supplied.  
  Stores  shall  receive  the  goods,  if  delivered  within  the  stipulated  time  and 
according to specification. 
  Damaged,  broken,  inferior  quality  and  goods  not  as  per  the  specification  of  the 
order should not be received at any circumstances.  
  A  quality  control  report  mentioning  the  quality  &  quantity  of  goods,  other 
conditions  of  supplies  and  finally  remarks  by  the  competent  authority  should  be 
always  be  contained  /  inserted  in  the  Goods  Received  and  Inspection  Report 
(GRIR). 
  Copy  of  the  Goods  Received  and  Inspection  Report  shall  be  sent  to  accounts 
department,  one  copy  to  administration  department  and  one  copy  to  be  kept  by 
the store 
  Storekeeper makes the record in the stock register and duly mentioned in the bill 
form of recording the goods in the stock register. 
IX.  Purchase Payment: 
  All  papers  and  documents  with  regard  to  purchase  like  requisitions,  indent, 
quotation  /  tender,  comparative  statement,  approval of purchase committee and 
Managing Director, challan / bill, money receipt, purchase order, goods received 
and inspection report shall be made available with the payment vouchers. 
  Suppliers' bills in connection to process for making payment shall submit their all 
kinds of purchase bill to the Administration Department. 
  After  receiving  the  suppliers'  bill, Administration Dept. shall check and verify the 
bill following the instructions: 
o  At  first  verify  through  comparing  the  similarity  of  the  goods ordered and 
bill amount with the purchase order; 
o  Whether  goods  (quantity,  size,  &  other  specifications)  are  received  as 
mentioned in bill shall be checked and verified through comparing the bill 
and goods received & inspection report prepared in this connection; 
o  Whether the value of goods and related discount (if allowed) mentioned 
in  the  bill  shall  be  checked  and  verified  through  comparing  the  bill  and 
purchase order and quotation; 
o  To check the calculations of bill whether correct or not; 
o  To check the Government Tax, VAT, etc. are duly paid and deducted.  
P/132 
  After  verification  of  bill,  certify  the  bill  in  signing  for  making  payment  with 
mentioning  the  amount  by  narrating  all  references  by  the  bill  examiner  of  the 
administration dept. 
  Then  Manager  (Administration)  shall  place  the file by initiating note sheet to the 
line authority in connection to the approval of payment of purchase; 
  On getting the approval of payment of purchase, then sent the file to Finance and 
accounts Department. 
  Before making the payment to the suppliers against their bill Manager (F/A) shall 
also  check  the  bill,  material-receiving  report,  purchase  order.  All  kinds  of 
purchase must be within the approved budget. 
  Then,  accounts  department  shall  arrange  for  issue  of  cheque.  Payment  to  the 
supplier against their bill exceeding Taka 5,000 shall be made by Account Payee 
cheque only. 
  For any discrepancies or error, Accounts Section will bring these to the notice of 
the Sanctioning Authority. 
  Approval  of  purchase  and  their  payment  shall  always  be  followed  by  the 
delegation of authority. 
X.  Settlement of Dispute: 
  Settlement of dispute for any inconvenience or for any unwanted event regarding 
the purchase shall be settled down through the decision of the Managing Director 
and shall be treated as final decision. 
18.4 – Tender Quotation Through Newspaper Advertisement: 
The flowing principles shall be followed: 
  This shall be done through in newspaper advertisement; 
  On  the  date  of  paper  advertisement  or  before  tender,  papers  with  necessary 
schedules  shall  be  sent  to  cash  section  of  finance  and  account  dept.  on  due 
acknowledgement. The cash section will then enter the particulars in a register; 
  Each tender sold will bear the signature and seal of Manager Finance; 
  On closing date remaining tender documents will be counted by cash section and put 
them under custody with necessary remarks by the Manager Finance; 
  On opening of tender only tenders bearing seal and signature of authorized officer of 
administration dept. will be taken into consideration; 
  On opening of tender members of committee will sign all tender documents & papers; 
  A separate tender register will be maintained where in all particulars be recorded and 
a  comparative  statement  prepared.  The  comparative  statement  and  the  register  will 
be signed by all the members of the committee with specific recommendation; 
 
In case, the lowest tender is not accepted, the reasons for non-acceptance shall be 
recorded in writing. 
  On  approval  of  the  recommendation  of  the  committee  by  the  appropriate  authority 
necessary supply order / work order shall be issued. 
P/133 
18.5 - Procurement Plan: 
PKSF  as  far  as  possible  should  prepare  a  commodity  procurement  plan  soon  after  the 
annual budget is approved. This is particularly important in case of commodities normally 
not available in the project area and those requiring heavy financial investment.  
In case of daily consumable items, it is necessary to estimate the quarterly requirement in 
order to avail the benefits of bulk purchase and, procure them on quarterly basis. 
18.6 - From Whom Should Purchase be Made: 
Procurement  of  goods  and  services  shall be made from reliable suppliers to ensure the 
supply of goods and services in time and at a competitive price.  
A supplier firm should satisfy the following conditions: 
  That is a bonafied business concern; 
  That it is registered with income Tax authority or VAT authority; 
  That it holds valid trade license; 
  That it was never blacklisted before by the organization; 
  That it's past records and performance with the organization are satisfactory; 
18.7 - Tender Fees & Performance Bond: 
  PKSF shall charge appropriate fees for tender forms & schedules.  
 
In  certain  cases  PKSF  with  the  approval  of  Managing  Director  may  ask  the 
supplier to deposit some percentage of the contract amount as performance bond 
and any other deposits as required by regulations in Bangladesh. 
18.8 - Procedures relating to Consultation Services: 
 
If  the  PKSF  is  required  to  avail  the  specialist  consultation  services  such  as 
development  of  systems,  engineering,  training,  monitoring,  and  evaluations, 
proposals should be invited through “tender” or “request for proposal on quality & 
cost  basis”  in  accordance  with  terms  of  reference  (TOR)  from  persons, 
companies  or  firms  experienced  in  the  related  subject  and  appointed  through 
negotiation; 
  Work order will be issued accordingly. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 19 
P/134 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
19.1 - Introduction - Budget 
19.2 - Budgetary Control 
19.3 - Budget Centres 
19.4 – Accounting Records 
19.5 - Budget Period 
19.6 – Organization for Budgetary Control 
19.7 - Budget Manual 
19.8 – Formulation of Budget 
19.9 – Budget Variance, Analysis & Reporting 
19.10 – Budget Monitoring & Control 
19.11- Approval Process of Budget Allocation 
19.12 - Long Term Budget of PKSF 
19.13 - Functions of Budget Committee 
----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
19 – BUDGET & BUDGETARY CONTROL 
CHAPTER – 19 
BUDGET & BUDGETARY CONTROL 
P/135 
19.1 – Introduction - Budget: 
Generally, budget means a statement of forecasted incomes or funds and expenditures of 
an organization at a particular specified time. A budget is not or should not be the same 
as  a  forecast.  A  forecast  is  a  statement  of  what  is  expected  to  happen.  Where  as  a 
budget is a statement of what it is reasonable to believe can be made to happen.  
Thus,  PKSF's  budget  is  “a  financial  and/or  quantitative  statement  prepared  &  approved 
prior  to  a  defined  period  of  time  of  the  policy  to  be  pursued  during  that  period  for  the 
purpose of attaining a given objective. It includes incomes, expenditures and the funds. 
19.2 - Budgetary Control: 
Budgetary control is the establishment of PKSF's budgets relating to the responsibilities of 
executives to the requirements of a policy and the continuous comparison of actual with 
budgeted  results  either  to  secure  by  individual  action,  the  objective  of  that  policy  or  to 
provide a basis for revision. 
It  is apparent that a system of budgetary control provides the mechanism for controlling 
costs  and  revenues.  Budgetary  control  is  people  oriented.  It  highlights  the  variance 
occurring  in  the  various  areas  of  an  organization  for  which  the  departmental  heads  are 
responsible. Thus, PKSF management has to establish budgetary control techniques for 
its' head office and all regional auditing offices. 
19.3 - Budget Centres: 
A budget is a location, person, item or a group of items for which costs are ascertained 
and  used  for  the  purpose  of  cost  control.  In  PKSF  wherever  possible  budget  centres 
should be identified with the responsibilities of particular executives. A group of computer 
machines under a supervisor may be a budget centres and all costs like payrolls, running 
expenses,  maintenance,  etc.  may  be  his  direct  responsibility.  A  well-defined  budget 
centre is an essential pre-requisite for any system of budgetary control. 
19.4 – Accounting Records: 
Periodically,  the  accounting  records  of  PKSF  must  be  able  to  highlights  the  variances 
from  budgets.  It  is,  therefore,  important  the  PKSF's  accounting  heads  must  be 
comprehensive.  At  the  same  time,  both  financial  accounts  and  the  budget  expenditure 
must be identical otherwise variances could not be ascertained. 
19.5 - Budget Period: 
A budget period is the length of time for which a budget is prepared and operated. There 
is  no  set  rule  as  to  what  should  be  the  budget  period.  Usually,  master  budgets  are 
prepared for one year because it coincides with the financial accounting year of PKSF. 
19.6 – Organization for Budgetary Control: 
P/136 
A  senior  executive  of  accounts,  commonly  designated  as  budget  controller  or  budget 
officer,  usually  heads  the  budgetary  control  department.  Another  variant  is  the 
establishment of a budget committee.  
The functions of the budget committee will interalia, be as follows: 
  Receive,  scrutinize, 
revise  and  approve  budgets  prepared  by 
the  various 
departments; 
  Receive budget reports periodically comparing actual figures against those budgeted. 
  Analyze  variances  with  a  view  to  locating  responsibilities  and  finding  those  ways  to 
prevent their re-occurrence. 
  Periodically, reappraise the budgeted figures for revision, if any.  
19.7 - Budget Manual: 
The budget manual is a schedule or document that lays down the budgeting organization 
and operational procedures.  
The main contents of a PKSF's budget manual are: 
 
Introduction – Short narrative explaining principles of the budgetary control system. 
  Responsibilities and duties: The nature and extent of responsibilities and duties of all 
operational executives. 
  Procedures: The manner in which each functional budget is to be drawn up, the time 
schedule for submission. 
  Specimen forms and reports: Budget report forms must be standardized. 
  Accounting classification: Accounting heads and codes must be clearly stated.  
  Budget period: Length of period must also be clearly stated. 
  Reporting  schedules  -  detail  schedules  must  be  drawn  stating  the  time  for 
submission. 
19.8 – Formulation of Budget: 
Preparation  of  budgets  for  the  head  office  and  all  regional  auditing  offices  begins 
immediately  after  receiving  specific  instructions  from  the  budget  controller  or  budget 
committee.  A  program  is  drawn  up  stating  the  persons  or  departments  responsible  for 
preparation  and  formulation  of  specific  budgets,  person  to  whom  they  must  be  handed 
over & the timetable for their preparation. Usually such a program is contained in budget 
manual.  
Then, prepare the budgets by the departmental heads of the PKSF Head Office. Regional 
Auditing  Offices  of  PKSF  shall  also  be  requested  to  submit  their  budget  to  the  budget 
committee.  
Then, discussion meeting of the budget committee will be held to finalize the budget for all 
offices of PKSF.  
Then,  finally  agreed  the  budget  approved  by  the  Governing  Body  and  distributed  the 
approved budget copy to the all concern offices for use. 
P/137 
While formulating the budget, the following three factors shall be considered by all offices 
of PKSF: 
  To analyze the past trend of the specific budget heads; 
  To  determine  the  present  conditions  and  anticipated  future  conditions  of  the 
relevant budget heads; 
  To quantify through applying the specific rates in some cases of budget heads. 
While  formulating  the  budget,  a  workshop  on  draft  budgets  may  be  held  at  PKSF  head 
office to review the overall budget for the year in order to exchange views and deliberate 
on  problems  and  solutions.  This  feels  that  cross-fertilization  of  ideas  between  staff 
members of PKSF will achieve the objectives at hand. 
19.9 – Process of Approval of Budget Allocation: 
(a)  All  allocation  of  both  capital  and  revenue  expenditures  of  projects  /  programs  / 
regional auditing offices will be approved by the head office; 
(b)  All  projects  /  departments  /  all  regional  auditing  offices  shall  submit  the  budget 
allocation to the head office in the month of March of every year; 
(c)  Detail  work  sheets  &  calculation  sheets  must  be  accompanied  with  prepared 
budget allocation; 
(d)  If the offices are anticipating any new heads of expenditure, then separate budget 
proposal shall be submitted by the concern offices; 
19.10 – Budget Variance, Analysis & Reporting: 
Budget variance can be found out by the differences between budgeted figure and actual 
figure. In budgetary control cycle it is in third stage.  
First stage is agreed the budget and the second stage is incurred the expenditure.  
Difference  between two stages is known as budget variance. Two aspects will be come 
out  from  the  analysis  of  budget  variance  –  these  are  termed  as  favourable  and 
unfavourable.  A  standard  form  has  to  be  used  by  PKSF's  Finance  and  Accounts 
Department  to  find  out  the  budget variance. Comparison of budgets and actual shall be 
done in form of variance report.  
The report should also clarify the reasons for major variances, which shall be marked as 
either  "controllable"  or  "  Uncontrollable".  Controllable  variance  would  indicate  that 
variance could be brought under control by efficient management. Uncontrollable variance 
occurs  due  to  exceptional  circumstance  hence  this  is  not  an  indicator  of  management 
performance.  There  may  be  cases  where  variances  occurred  due  to  poor  budgeting. 
Theses factor should be noted for next year budget preparation. 
The  variance  report  shall  be  reviewed  by  the  Chief  of  Finance  and  Accounts  and 
submitted to the Managing Director. Variance report shall be a more arithmetic exercise. 
The  concentration  shall  be  on  identifying  problems  encountered  enabling  worse  able 
solutions. Variance indicating departmental chiefs performance shall be taken as input in 
the staff appraisal system.     
P/138 
19.11 – Budget Monitoring & Control: 
Generally budget shall be monitored in quarterly basis. Specific format must be used for 
the  purpose  of  monitoring  of  budget  of  any  offices  /  departments  /  projects  of  PKSF.  
Budget  monitoring  statement  must  be  prepared  and  send  it  to  Finance  and  Accounts 
Department of head office on regular basis.  
Required  information  to  be  inserted  very  carefully  in  monitoring  statement.  The  main 
purpose of budget monitoring is to control the expenditure and to develop the necessary 
& appropriate techniques & mechanisms how to control the expenditure. 
19.12 – Long Term Budget of PKSF: 
It is to be prepared by the Finance & Accounts Department: 
  As and when required by the management to foresee the future; 
  Also prepared to see the trend at different scenario. 
19.13 – Functions of Budget Committee: 
  Preparation of budgets for PKSF as a whole; 
  Collection of information and data in connection to formulation of budget; 
  Processing, editing and reviewing the collected information and data in connection to 
formulation of budgets; 
  Setting of standards in relation to the formulation of budgets; 
  Formulation of budgets and budget workshop; 
  Maintenance of budget registers as per requirements; 
  Preparation of budget monitoring statements; 
  Preparation of variance statements; 
  Analysis of variances and report preparation; 
  Assessment  of  actual  results  with  the  budgeted  ones  and  if  any  deviation  is  found, 
then to pinpoint the actual causes; 
  To take the necessary steps to eradicate or minimize the deviations in future through 
a more realistic budget preparations and /or better performance; 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 20 
P/139 
------------------------------------------ 
20.1 – Over view 
20.2 – Compliance Reporting 
------------------------------------------ 
20 - COMPLIANCE OF GOVERNMENT, TAX, VAT& OTHER LAWS 
CHAPTER – 20 
P/140 
COMPLIANCE OF GOVERNMENT, TAX, VAT & OTHER LAWS 
20.1 – Over View: 
PKSF head office and it's Regional Auditing office concerned shall have to follow / abide 
by  the  concerned  rules,  regulations  and  financial  &  accounting  implementations  of  the 
Government, Tax authority, Value Added Tax (VAT) authority and all other laws that are 
prevailing in the country and compliance thereon. 
20.2 – Compliance Reporting: 
PKSF  shall  select,  adopt,  apply  and  implement  all  relevant  financial  management 
techniques, accounting system, procedures, methods and maintain all books of accounts 
based on the following requirements, guidelines, instructions, rules and regulations: 
(a)  - 
As  per  the  rules  and  regulations,  instructions,  policies,  guidelines, 
circulars, manuals and office order of the PKSF management issued and 
circulated on any matters time to time; 
(b)  - 
As per the requirements of the Income Tax Ordinance 1984; 
(c)  - 
As per the guidelines of the Value Added Tax Act 1991; 
(d)  - 
As per the requirements of the International Accounting Standards (IAS); 
(e)  - 
As per the requirements of the International Standards of Auditing (ISA); 
(f)  - 
And, such other books of accounts as required, circulated and instructed 
by the management of PKSF from time to time. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 21 
P/141 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
21.1 - Introduction 
21.2 - Regional Audit Offices (RAO) Controlling Officer 
21.3 - RAO Bank Account 
21.4 - RAO Petty Cash Fund 
21.5 - RAO Cash Payment Procedures & Its' Approval 
21.6 - RAO Cheque Payment Procedures & Its' Approval 
21.7 - Maintenance of Records by RAO 
21.8 - RAO Reporting to PKSF Head Office 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 21 - RAO FUND MANAGEMENT & ACCOUNTING   
CHAPTER – 21  
RAO FUND MANAGEMENT & ACCOUNTING 
P/142 
21.1 – Introduction: 
Regional Auditing Office (RAO): 
Regional  audit  office means the office of PKSF established / set-up with an objective to 
conduct the audit (internal audit) of the financial activities of the PKSF fund of the Partner 
Organizations (POs) of PKSF through out the country.  
This office of PKSF has no executive power, and shall be fully controlled, managed and 
directed under the rules and regulations of PKSF head office in Dhaka. 
21.2 – RAO Controlling Officer: 
An officer of PKSF, nominated and designated by PKSF head office management, as a 
controlling officer / supervising officer / officer in charge, shall be held responsible for the 
overall  management  of  the  RAO  and  conduct  the  overall  activities  of  the  RAO  in 
connection to the set purposes / objectives following the instructions and directions of the 
PKSF  head  office  management  issued  time  to  time  through  the  Administration 
Department of PKSF.  
The officer of PKSF, designated, as a controlling officer of RAO shall be held liable and 
responsible for all activities performed in the RAO to the PKSF head office management 
for each and every respect. 
21.3 – RAO Bank Account: 
To perform and mitigate all the banking activities, functions and financial transactions of 
the RAO as far as possible, shall open a bank account (specifically STD Bank Account) 
preferably with a nationalized commercial bank in the name of PKSF (organization but not 
in the name of RAO), where the RAO is located / situated.  
Bank  account  shall  be  operated  by  any  two  of  the  four  Senior  Officers  of  PKSF  Head 
Office.  
Chequebooks  shall  be  kept  in  head  office  of  PKSF  at  Dhaka  in  Finance  and  Accounts 
Department.  
Fund shall be placed / transferred from the bank account of PKSF head office in Dhaka 
through  cross  cheque  /  DD  /  bank  transfer  to  the  STD  bank  account  opened  in  RAO 
office.  
The  balance  of  the  STD  bank  account  as  fund  balance  shall  in  no  case  be  exceeding 
amounting to Taka 200,000 (Two lac). 
Any amount from any sources including the principal loan and service charge of POs shall 
not be received / deposited in any circumstances in the RAO STD bank account.  
21.4 – RAO Petty Cash Fund: 
P/143 
Taka 40,000 (Forty thousand) shall be the maximum limit of petty cash fund of the RAO. 
This amount of money shall be given as advance to the controlling officer of RAO as petty 
cash advance of the RAO.  
A  bank  account  (named  as  current  account)  shall  be  opened  in  the  name  of  controlling 
officer  of  RAO  in  the  same  bank  where  the  PKSF  STD  bank  account  is  opened 
exclusively to operate only for the petty cash expenses of the RAO as per set rules and 
guidelines of the PKSF.  
No other personal / others receipts and payments shall be allowed or strictly prohibited on 
/ from this bank account. 
TA/DA  expenses,  local  conveyance,  postage  expenses,  office  maintenance  expenses, 
overtime  expenses,  entertainment  expenses  etc.  and  other  daily  expenses  of  the  RAO, 
shall be paid out as cash from this petty cash fund kept by controlling officer of the RAO 
on primary approval of the controlling officer. Controlling officer of the RAO shall treat this 
primary approval of payment of expenses as temporary approval. 
The  controlling  officer  RAO  shall  request  the  replenishment  of  the  petty  cash  fund  by 
preparing  a  statement  of  the  incurred  and  paid  expenditure  by  showing  the  date  of 
payment,  name  of  payee,  accounts  head  and  the  amount  paid  on  approval  of  the 
controlling  officer  of  RAO  with  vouchers  and  all  supporting  documentary  evidences. 
Replenishment  request  shall  be  processed  and  sent  to  head  office  when  80%  of  the 
allocated fund (petty cash fund) will be exhausted.  
On  getting  the  final  approval  of  the  head  office  (as  per  normal  procedures  followed  in 
connection to the authentication, authorization and final approval of expenses as outlined 
for  PKSF  head  office),  PKSF  head  office  shall  reimburse  the  amount  to  the  controlling 
officer directly to his bank account.  
If any expenses not approved by PKSF head office, controlling officer of the RAO shall be 
held  liable  and  responsible  for  the  bill  amount  not  approved  and  replenishment  will  be 
made by PKSF head office after deducting the not approved bill amount in this respect.   
21.5 – RAO Cash Payment Procedures & Its' Approval: 
As a norm, the approval procedures of expenses in PKSF head office is generally shall be 
followed as the accepted rules and regulations in case of all regional auditing offices.  
Following  are  the  guidelines  for  payment  procedures  and  its'  approval  from  petty  cash 
fund kept by controlling officer of the RAO: 
I - TA/DA Advance: 
TA/DA  advance  to  the  staff  members  shall  be  paid  out  from  petty  cash  fund 
following the guidelines of the PKSF Service Rules on approval of the controlling 
officer  of  the  RAO.  Before  making  the  payment,  tour  program  shall  be  duly 
approved. 
II - TA/DA Bill adjustment / payment: 
P/144 
TA/DA advance adjustment (all steps from submission to bill payment) to the staff 
members shall be made following the guidelines of the PKSF Service Rules. On 
submission  of  TA/DA  bill,  controlling  officer  of  RAO  shall  verify,  check, 
authenticate the bill and temporary approval of the same make the payment after 
adjustment. To claim TA/DA bill against traveling, if any staff member of the RAO 
travel more than 10 K.M. from the territory of the RAO where it is located, it shall 
be taken into consideration as traveling for this purpose. 
III - Cash payment of the other expenses: 
Only following expenses can be paid out as cash from petty cash fund kept under 
the  controlling  officer  of  the  RAO  -  Local  conveyance,  printing  &  printing 
expenses,  office  repair  &  maintenance,  electricity  /  water  /  gas  bill,  overtime  bill 
and entertainment bill & etc. 
Cash  payment  for  other  expenses  (within  budget)  can  be  made  not  more  that 
Taka  1,000  (One  thousand)  for  each  case,  from  petty  cash  fund  as  temporary 
approval of the head of RAO and final approval will be given at head office level 
during the time of replenishment of petty cash fund. 
Cash  payment  for  other  expenses  (within  budget)  can  be  made  for  more  than 
Taka  1,000  (One  thousand)  but  not  exceeding  Taka  2,000  (Two  thousand)  for 
each  case,  from  petty  cash  fund  by  the  head  of  RAO  after  taking  necessary 
approval  of  the  head  office  before  making  the  expenditure  mentioning  the  valid 
reason  and  final  approval  will  be  given  at  head  office  level  during  the  time  of 
replenishment of petty cash fund. 
A  -  Local  conveyance  -  Always  try  to  avoid  local  travel.  On  necessity  local 
conveyance shall be paid from petty cash fund subject to approval of controlling 
officer of RAO. 
B - Printing & stationery - If necessary, can be purchase and paid from petty cash 
fund subject to approval of controlling officer. 
C  -  Office  repair  &  maintenance  -  If  necessary,  (out  of  rent  agreement)  can  be 
paid from petty cash fund subject to approval of controlling officer. 
D  -  Electricity/water/gas  bill  -  If  necessary,  (out  of  rent  agreement)  can  be  paid 
from petty cash fund subject to approval of controlling officer. 
E - Entertainment expenses - Present staff members of the RAO are entitled to 
have  tea  in  morning  and  afternoon  time.  Expenses  of  daily  tea  can  be  paid  out 
from petty cash fund. Entertainment of PKSF guest and staff member of PKSF if 
necessary, shall be allowed on monthly basis up to Taka 400 and paid from petty 
cash fund subject to approval of controlling officer. 
G  -  Overtime  bill  -  Shall  be  paid  from  petty  cash  fund  on  approval  of  the 
controlling officer following guidelines as per PKSF Service Rules. 
21.6 – RAO Cheque Payment Procedures & Its' Approval: 
P/145 
Following  expenses  shall  be  paid  out  as  cheque  from  RAO  bank  account  -  Salary  & 
allowances,  Festival  bonus,  Office  rent,  Telephone  &  fax  bill,  Lunch  coupon  bill  of  staff 
members, Fixed assets, other expenses as determined by PKSF head office & etc. 
If other expenses amount incurred more than Taka 2,000 (Two thousand) for each case, 
payment shall compulsorily be made through cheque from the RAO bank account. In no 
case, the payment shall be made from petty cash fund.  
In  this  case,  each  transaction  shall  be  sent  to  head  office  for  approval  before  making 
payment.  
PKSF  head  office  shall  make  the  payment  by  issuing  account  payee  cheque  to  the  bill 
receiver  through  the  RAO  bank  account  after  auditing  and  head  office  approval  of  the 
same. 
In other cases, payment and approval shall be in following way: 
  Salary, allowances & festival bonus: 
After preparation of the salary, allowances and bonus statement (as per format) of the 
staff  members of the RAO, PKSF head office process the approval and payment of 
the same as per practice for the staff members of the head office staff members.  
Then,  bank  transfer  advice  in  connection  to  the  payment  of  individual  salary  of  the 
staff members of the RAO shall then be issued drawn up on the bank account. 
  Office rent: 
Office  rent  of  the  RAO  shall  be  paid  through  issuing  cross  cheque  in  favour  of  the 
landlord  on  request  of  the  RAO  with  office  rent  bill  and  approval  from  head  office. 
Cross cheque in connection to the payment of rent shall then be issued drawn up on 
the bank account of the RAO.  
Cheque  sent  to  RAO  in  the  name  of  the  landlord  from  PKSF  finance  and  accounts 
department.  Controlling  officer  of  the  RAO  handed  over  the  cheque  to  the  landlord 
after receiving the money receipt / acknowledgment receipt.  
Photocopy of the money receipt shall be kept by RAO and the original shall be sent to 
PKSF head office. 
  Lunch coupon bill of the staff members: 
A  statement  as  per  prescribed  format  mentioning  the  date  and  time  of  the  staff 
members of the RAO duly singed by the controlling officer shall be sent to PKSF head 
office requesting for payment and approval.  
Noted that payment of such coupon bill shall only be made to the staff member of the 
RAO for the full day attendance of the concern staff member.  
P/146 
On approval of PKSF head office, cross cheques/transfer advice in connection to the 
payment of individual lunch coupon bill of the staff members of the RAO shall then be 
issued drawn up on the bank account of the RAO and then sent to RAO in the name 
of the controlling officer from PKSF finance and accounts department by attaching a 
statement.  
On receipt of the cheques, the statement shall be duly signed by controlling officer of 
the RAO and sent back the same to PKSF head office. All cheques shall be recorded 
in  the  cheque  register  and  then,  make  payment  to  the  staff  members  of  the  RAO 
maintaining all formalities. 
  Fixed asset purchase: 
Generally,  purchase  of  fixed  assets  by  the  RAO  is  restricted.  If  necessary,  on 
demand, furniture, fixtures office equipment electric fan and etc. shall be purchased 
on  submitting  the  requisition  and  prior  approval  of  the  PKSF  head  office.  Purchase 
shall be made strictly following the PKSF purchase procedures that are in force.  
On  procurement  of  the  fixed  assets  by  collecting  at  least  three  spot  quotation 
accompanying by two officers as nominated by the controlling officer of the RAO and 
duly  approved  by  the  controlling  officer  sent  the  bill  to  head  office  for  final  approval 
and its' payment.  
On  approval  of  head  office,  cross  cheques  in  connection  to  the  payment  of  fixed 
assets of the RAO shall then be issued drawn up on the bank account of the RAO in 
favour of the supplier and sent the same to RAO in the name of the controlling officer 
from  PKSF  finance  and  accounts  department.  On  receiving  the  cheque,  the 
controlling  officer  of  the  RAO  handed  over  the  cheque  to  the  supplier  and  collect 
money  receipt.  Photocopy  of  the  money  receipt  shall  be  kept  by  the  RAO  and  the 
original copy shall be sent to head office.  
Fixed asset register shall be updated immediately after purchase. 
21.7 – Maintenance of Records by RAO: 
The controlling officer of the RAO shall be held liable and responsible for maintaining the 
following  records,  ledgers  and  register  as  per  designed  format  for  documentation  all 
financial activities as a management control: 
  Stock register for printing and stationery; 
  Fixed assets register for fixed assets; 
  Cheque register; 
  Attendance register; 
  TA/DA advance register; 
  Other registers if necessary or as directed by PKSF head office; 
  Petty cashbook & ledger books. 
21.8 – RAO Reporting to PKSF Head Office: 
1 - Replenishment of RAO Fund: 
P/147 
The  controlling  officer  RAO  shall  request  the  replenishment  of  the  petty  cash  fund  by 
preparing  a  statement  of  the  incurred  and  paid  expenditure  by  showing  the  date  of 
payment,  name  of  payee,  accounts  head  and  the  amount  paid  on  approval  of  the 
controlling officer of RAO with vouchers and all supporting documentary evidences.  
Replenishment  request  shall  be  processed  and  sent  to  head  office  when  80%  of  the 
allocated fund (petty cash fund) will be exhausted.  
Following are the statements to be sent to PKSF head office: 
  Petty Cash Payment Statement - Duly signed by controlling officer of RAO; 
  Cheque Disbursement Statements - Duly signed by controlling officer of RAO; 
  Bank Statement - RAO bank account statement - collected from bank. 
2 - Monthly Statement: 
Following  are  the  statements  to  be  sent  to  PKSF  head  office  with  in  7  days  of  the  next 
month: 
  Lunch Coupon Statement - Duly signed by controlling officer of RAO; 
  Attendance Report / statement - Duly signed by controlling officer of RAO; 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 22 
P/148 
--------------------------------------------------------------- 
22.1- Introduction and Overview 
22.2 - Objectives 
22.3 – Policy of Investment 
22.4 - Depositable Fund 
22.5 - Strategy for determining surplus fund 
22.6- Internal & External Laws to be followed 
22.7 - Scope of Area of fund utilization 
22.8 - Principles of Fund Utilization 
22.9-Selection of Banks/Financial Institution 
22.10 - Maintenance of FDR 
22.11 - Management of the fund 
--------------------------------------------------------------- 
 22 - FUND - LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT 
P/149 
CHAPTER - 22 
FUND LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT 
22.1 - Introduction and Overview:   
Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF) is an apex funding agency to sponsor, promote 
and  provide  various  forms  of  assistance  including  financial,  institutional,  advisory  and 
training  to  non-government,  semi  government  and  government  organizations,  voluntary 
agencies  and  societies,  local  government  bodies  and  institutions  undertaking  activities 
with a view to generate income and / or employment opportunities and alleviating poverty 
in conformity with the objectives of, and in a manner approved by the Foundation.  
Proper management of PKSF fund is an essential for attaining objectives of PKSF as well 
as attaining self-sufficiency. It is therefore essential to have appropriate policies of PKSF 
for proper utilization of its fund.  
Capable  General  Body  and  Government  Body,  efficient  management  and  staff  of  the 
Foundation  is  the  basis  of Foundation’s good reputation. Fund management of PKSF is 
closely supervised which helped PKSF in developing a base for itself. Need for a “Liquidity 
Management  Policy”  was  being  felt  to  ensure  efficient  fund  management  and  to  ensure 
transparency in operating the fund consistent to the major objectives of PKSF. 
22.2 - Objectives:  
  To  ensure  the  liquidity  of  the  Foundation  in  all  times,  so  that  PKSF  has  sufficient 
liquidity in conducting the normal course of its business.  
  The  objective  of  this  policy  is  to  ensure  proper  management  of  the  liquid  fund  that 
arises during day-to-day transactions of PKSF by keeping the fund in interest bearing 
accounts like FDR or otherwise for creating a strong base which would help in tiding 
up of difficult funds for a certain period before an investment is made.  
22.3 – Policy of Investment:  
  The  aim  of  liquidity  management  is  to  maximize  the  earning  of  PKSF  by timely and 
properly  depositing  the  surplus  fund  of  the organization to interest bearing accounts 
and other forms of deposits of various terms.  
  To ensure that PKSF invests surplus funds in designated securities only e.g., bonds, 
treasury bills, savings certificates, FDRs etc. which typically safe from being doubtful 
of recovery. 
  Ensure  that  the  deposit  is  made  to  the  best  yielding  securities  and  deposits,  after 
giving due considering to risk and the rate involved. 
  Ensure  participating  in  call  money  market,  as  and  when  situation  and  opportunity 
permits with in the scheduled banks and other non-banking financial institutions. 
 
 If investment policy permits, ensure safe investments are made in the secondary and 
primary market.   
22.4 - Depositable Fund: 
P/150 
  The Governing Body of PKSF may decide to fix a certain percentage of its liabilities 
as fund to be kept compulsorily with an A-class bank if it so thinks necessary.  
  Foundation may decide to deposit a portion of its surplus cash for amortizing its loan. 
In  normal  circumstance  when  sufficient  fund  is  available  to  meet  up  the  liabilities, 
normal procedure of making general deposit can be followed to avail the opportunity 
of market inflation, demand etc.  
  The mid-term projection of the Foundation as well as the short-term projection can be 
helpful in detecting the fund required on the loan amortization date and available fund 
position on that date. These projections should be drawn and observed very carefully 
and routinely.      
  Sometimes  PKSF  may  need  to  give  security  deposit  to  the  gas,  electricity,  and 
telephone  authorities  for  taking  connections.  If  acceptable  to  these  utility  service 
providers,  security  deposits  may  be  given  in  the  form  of  fixed  deposit  receipts  or  in 
the form of savings certificates to the authorities.  
  The excess fund during a given period may be kept in the form of fixed deposit.  
  Funds for special purpose, like gratuity fund, provident fund etc., can be kept in fixed 
deposits.  
22.5 - Strategy for Determining Surplus Fund: 
  Month-wise  disbursement  plan  for  partner  organizations  (PO) has to be prepared at 
the beginning of each year. The plan has to be checked each month to find out the 
variation.  The  monthly  variations  of  the  actual  to  be  the  plan  to  be  adjusted  in  the 
flexible manner.   
  Month-wise  repayment  schedule  of  the  POs  has  to  be  prepared  at  the  beginning  of 
the  year.  Any  variation  to  the  plan  has  to  be  adjusted  at  the  beginning  of  the  next 
month. In preparing the repayment schedule care to be taken to consider the deferred 
payments.  
  Month-wise expenditure schedule to be prepared along with the revenue expenditure, 
the  capital  expenditure  also  has  to  be  reckoned.  Any  special  type  of  exceptional 
payments like flood loan, HRD implementation or any other contingent liability, which 
may occur to be forecasted.  
  Month-wise  receivable  has  to  be  prepared.  FDR  maturating  on  months  along  with 
other receivable has to be considered. 
  Government grant or loan, IDA grant or loan or grant and loan of any other funder will 
influence the figure in any month. FDR maturity for the months can be obtained from 
the FDR database to be reflected in the schedule.    
P/151 
  Month  wise  cash  flow  statement  is  to  be  prepared.  2-3  months’  cash  requirement 
shall  have  to  be  kept  in  liquid  form.  Those  amounts  can  be  deposited  in  STD 
accounts.  
The excess amounts may be kept in various forms of deposits and investment pattern 
as follows: 
  7 days call notice deposit 
  Treasury bills of various terms 
  3 months FDR 
  6 months FDR 
  12 months FDR 
  Over 12 months FDR  
  Call money market  
  Government Bonds 
  Other type of instruments under the regulations of Bangladesh Bank. 
  The  Cash  flow  statement,  for  at  least  3  months,  will  show  if  any  deposit  in  the  first 
month will affect the liquidity in the subsequent two months. Cash flow over the next 
three months will determine the proportion of deposits in these types of instruments.  
 
If  investment  policy  permits,  investments  can  also  be  made  in  shares  in  primary 
market, which can be liquidated within six months from the date of investment.   
  Provided investment policy permits, with due care and investment advice, investment 
can  also  be  made  in  secondary  market.  Which  can  be  liquidated  at  any  time. 
Transaction cost and other risks associated with the market should be judged before 
any investment in secondary market is made.  
22.6 - Internal & External Laws to be Followed: 
A - Internal Laws: 
Internal  Laws  of  the  Foundation  has  to  be  followed  in  case  of  keeping  funds  in  fixed 
deposit.  This  is  to  affirm  that  the  investment  to  be  made  as  per  the  policy  of  the 
Foundation and that it follows the other rules. It must ensure that deposit shall not lodged 
to any risk institution just for the sake of high interest / return.  
The following points may be highlighted in this regard:  
  To  see  that  the  deposit  does  not  contradict  to  the  Memorandum  and  Articles  of 
Association the Foundation.  
  To see that Governing Body / General Body permits such deposit. 
  To follow the normal ethics and norms. 
B - External Laws to be followed: 
In  keeping  the surplus fund in fixed deposit, care has to be taken to see that the laws / 
rules  of  the  government  and  /  or  of  the  other  bodies  have  been  followed.  The  following 
laws / rules may be cited: 
P/152 
  To follow the Acts / Laws or circular of the Government.  
  To follow the Banking Companies Act.  
  To follow the Income Tax Act of Bangladesh. 
  To follow the Companies Act.  
  To follow Bangladesh Bank Circular(s) and guidelines. 
22.7 - Scope of Area of Fund Utilization: 
A - Long Term Fund Utilization: 
A.1 - Criteria:  
  The fund that Foundation wants to keep for over 4 years are termed as 
Long Term Fund.  
A.2 - Purposes: The major purposes for depositing in Long Term are: 
  To provide fund for the purpose of amortization of Long Term Loans.  
  To provide funds for the purpose of replacement of Fixed Assets. 
  To utilize extra fund revealed from Long Term Plan. 
  For proper utilization of Gratuity Fund and other funds. 
A.3 - Area of utilization of fund in long term:  
  The deposit in long term should be preferably in Fixed Deposits of Banks 
& of Specialized Financial Institutions including Government Bonds.  
B - Mid Term Fund Utilization: 
B.1 - Criteria: 
  Deposits that are over 1 year but up to 4 years are termed as Mid Term 
Deposits. Excess fund that can be realized from the Mid Term Plan can 
be utilized in fixed deposits with in that term. 
B.2 - Purposes: 
  Mid Term Deposits may be used for the purpose of amortization of Long 
Term  Loans  that  has  to  be  repaid  during  the  period  of  1  to  4  years. 
However,  when  there  is  sufficient  fund  available  to  the  Foundation, 
specific deposit for sinking fund may be avoided to avail the opportunity 
of market rise and for taking advantage of compounding. 
  Mid  term  deposits  may  be  made  for  the  purpose  of  creating  earmarked 
funds  for  the  purpose  of  replacement  of  Fixed  Assets  that  are  known 
certain terms. 
  Mid term deposits may be made for Revolving Loan Fund (RLF) that will 
start  after  a  definite  period  of  time.  As  for  example  RLF  for  institutional 
development which will start after the closing of a period. 
  Any  excess  fund  that  is  foreseen  from  the  mid-term  plan  can  be 
deposited under mid term deposit scheme. 
P/153 
B.3 - Area of Investment: 
  The utilization of fund in Mid Term should be preferably in Fixed Deposits 
with  Banks  and  with  Specialized  Financial  Institutes  (SFI),  Government 
Bonds and other securities. 
C - Short term Fund Utilization: 
C.1 - Criteria 
  The  funds  that  are  kept  with  a  bank  or  with  a  financial  institution  for  a 
period of 1 month to 1 year may be termed as Short Term Fund. 
C.2 - Purposes: The short-term deposit of fund is for the following uses: 
  Short Term Fund is for the purpose of amortization of Long Term Loans 
that has to be repaid within a period of 1 month to 1 year. 
  Short Term Fund may be for the purpose of replacement of Fixed Assets 
during the period of one year. 
  Any excess fund that is foreseen from the Monthly Cash Flow Statement 
may be kept in short-term deposits. 
C.3 - Areas of Short Term Fund Utilization: 
  Fixed Deposits of Banks & Financial Institutions for three to six months.  
  Short Term Deposits with Commercial Banks. 
  Savings Accounts of Commercial Banks. 
  Call money market 
22.8 - Principles of Fund Utilization: 
A - Fund Utilization Ratios:  
This is refers the ratio to which the fund will be invested in different category in different 
terms. 
B - Nature of Fund Utilization: 
In  deciding  the  ratio  of  fund  utilization  in  different  categories,  care  should  be  taken  to 
select  the  category  so  that  choosing  the  type  of  fund  utilization  can  maximize  interest. 
The  fund  requirement  may  vary  from  period  to  period  depending  on  the  cash  flow 
forecast.  If proportion or ratio is to be suggested, care should be taken so that the ratio 
is continuously revised so that cash need is reflected into the investment/deposit pattern.  
P/154 
Keeping the above in mind, in general terms, the following percentages may be taken in 
selecting the fund utilization sectors: 
  5% of surplus fund may be kept in Fixed Deposits with maturity of over 3 years 
or various Government Bonds. 
  10%  of  total  surplus  fund  may  be  kept  in  Fixed  Deposits  for  a  period  up  to  3 
years. 
  85%  surplus  fund  may  be  invested  in  Banks  and  Specialized  Financial 
Institutions as below: 
C - Period of deposit:   
  20% may be held in Term Deposit of one year’s maturity.  
  20% may be held in 6 months maturity Term Deposit. 
  10% may be held for Treasury Bills. 
  20% may be held in 3 months maturity Term Deposit. 
  30% may be held for investment in call Money Market. 
If  capital  market  instruments  (primary  and  secondary  shares,  commercial  papers, 
debentures) are allowed, then 15% of fund may be invested for period maturing between 
three to six months.  
D - Total Exposure: 
Given  the  number  of  commercial  banks  in  the  country,  total  exposures  in  any 
particular  bank  /  organization  should  not  exceed  10%  of  the  total  surplus  fund. 
But  in  case  where  the  banks  having  a  very  good  profile  and  in  case  of 
nationalized banks, this limit may be relaxed to 15%.  
The fund to be kept in various securities and deposits will be ascertained on the 
basis of past years’ fund utilization trend, merit of the bank and Bangladesh Bank 
circulars.  
22.9 - Selection of Banks / Financial Institutions: 
In selecting the Banks / SFIs for fund placement, vision should be extended beyond the 
normal selection guidelines. The following points may be taken care of: 
  The bank should be a reputed one. 
  The management of the bank should be good. 
  The bank holds regular Board meeting and Annual General Meeting. 
  Sector  of  investment  of  the  bank  may  be  considered  in  choosing  for  fund 
placement.  One  bank  may  invest  heavily  in  agricultural  sector  while  the  other 
may  invest  mainly  in  industrial  sector  while another bank in commercial sector. 
The risk of investment will be different in different sector.  
  The accounts of the Bank are drawn up regularly. 
  The  bank  should  be  computerized  one,  at  least  in  deposit,  cash  and  clearing 
section.   
P/155 
  The accounts of the Bank are drawn up as per IAS.  
  The accounts of the bank are audited by a reputed Audit Firm. 
  The Bank earns a profit.  
  Directors’  loan  from  the  Bank  is  within  the  limit  or  is  as  specified  by  the 
Bangladesh Bank.  
  The classified loan of the bank is over 12% of its total advances. 
  The bank provides for classified loan fully. 
  Earning per share, if available, is over Taka 30.  
  The rate of return to capital employed is good.  
  Different ratios in balance sheet can be calculated to detect the strength of the 
bank.  
  That there is no internal conflict between the directors.  
  That there is no court injunction on the management of the Bank. 
  The CAMEL rating of Bangladesh Bank is to be considered in selecting a Bank 
for placing the fund. The selected Bank should be within 3rd composite rating of 
Bangladesh Bank.   
  News  of  the  media  may  be  considered  in  knowing  the  inner  information  of  the 
bank. In fact the news appears in the newspaper disclosing the discrepancies of 
a bank bears more weight than the published accounts.  
22.10 - Maintenance of Deposit Register: 
  The  FDR  will  be  recorded  in  FDR  register.  The  register  folios  will  be  properly 
numbered.  The  name  of  the  bank  and  the  branch  where  the  fund  is  placed  will  be 
written  first.  Then,  FDR  number,  Date  of  purchase,  amount,  rate  of  interest  and 
period  will  have  to  be  recorded.  In  one  folio,  only  one  FDR  will  be  recorded.  For 
renewal, the same folio will be used recording the change of any condition.  
  The custodians will physically keep the FDR in the safe custody jointly. They will, from 
time to time, count the FDRs jointly with the Officer in charge of FDR, at least once in 
every month.   
  A computer-generated sheet of FDR will be produced which can be tallied physically 
with the FDRs.  
  A copy of the FDR will have to be kept immediately in the locker of the bank for safe 
documentation.   
P/156 
  Letter  to  be  issued  at  the  time  of  renewal  of  the  FDR  asking  the  Bank  to  send 
quotation for the rate they want to offer if they are interested in keeping the FDR. This 
process may be made over phone for convenience.  
  At  the  time  of  encashment,  a  letter  may  be  sent  to  the  bank  for  encashment  of  the 
FDR at least 7 days before the date. Otherwise the FDR can directly be produced to 
them for encashment.  
  For  renewal  a  letter  is  to  be  prepared  asking  the  bank  to  renew  the  FDR  at  their 
offered rate of interest. The renewal will be for the principal only and for the interest, 
the bank will be asked to issue an “account payee” pay order in favour of Palli Karma-
Sahayak  Foundation.  The  bank  account  of  PKSF  where  the  pay  order  is  to  deposit 
will  have  to  be  mentioned  in  the  letter.  The  amount  of  the pay order will have to be 
checked and be deposited to the main bank account of the Foundation.   
  The  banker  will  endorse  on  the  back  of the FDR as to the renewal, rate and period 
and will sign and seal the endorsement. 
 
If investment is made in other form of securities other than the FRDs, same type of 
recording, custodian and handling formalities will be followed. 
22.11 - Management of the Fund: 
The Managing Director is authorized to manage fund in the light of past experience and 
above guidelines.  
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 23 
P/157 
----------------------------------------------------- 
23.1 - Introduction 
23.2 - Purpose & Objective Auditing 
23.3 - Types of PKSF Auditing 
23.4 - PKSF Pre-Auditing 
23.5 - PKSF Internal Auditing 
23.6 - PKSF External Auditing 
23.7 - PKSF External Auditing of POs 
23.8 - POs Internal Auditing by PKSF 
---------------------------------------------------- 
 23 - AUDIT ARRANGEMENTS 
P/158 
CHAPTER - 23 
AUDIT ARRANGEMENTS 
23.1 - Introduction: 
With  the  intention  to  focus  and  to  attain  the  main  objectives  of  PKSF  and  as  a  part  of 
better  financial  management  control  and  compliance  with  the  Companies  Act,  1994, 
conduction of different types of auditing with the in house professional staffs and external 
professionals  of  the  financial,  accounting,  operational  and  management  activities  of  the 
PKSF  is  felt  necessary.  Thus,  auditing  is  always  considered  as  a  tool  or  mechanism  of 
financial  management  control.  The  objective  of  the  audit  is  to  enable  the  auditors  (both 
internal and external) to express a professional opinion as to the accuracy, correctness, 
authenticity, transparency, accountability, true and fairness of the financial position of the 
organization of a particular period. 
An  auditing  is  an  examination,  verification,  inspection,  review,  analysis,  interpretation, 
investigation,  checking  the  financial  transactions  of  the  organization  as  per  the 
international  auditing  standards  based  on  organizations'  policy,  procedures,  instructions, 
circulars, office orders, manual, guidelines, agreement, contract, deed, service rules, bills 
/ invoices / cash memos / challans / delivery order / work orders / requisitions / receiving 
report  /  money  receipts,  vouchers,  all  sorts  of  supporting  documentary  evidences, 
government  rules  and  regulations  (Income  tax,  VAT,  Companies  Act,  and  others  laws), 
internal  control  mechanism,  accounting  policy  as  per  the  generally  accepted  accounting 
principles,  accounting  records  and  documentation  as  per  the  requirements  of  the 
International Accounting standards with the view to pronounce an independent opinion.   
23.2 - Purpose and Objectives of Auditing: 
Purpose and objectives of PKSF auditing is enumerated as below: 
  To  see  whether  day  to  day  financial  transactions  of  PKSF  are  accounted  for 
systematically maintained as per approved designed format in timely manner; 
  To see whether financial transactions are done following through the organization 
policy and procedures made in this regard; 
  To  see  whether  all  financial  transactions  are  duly  been  authenticated  and 
authorized as per set rules of the organization; 
  To  see  whether  all  financial  transactions  are  properly  evident  with  necessary 
approved authenticated actual documents; 
  To see whether organization has following the government rules & regulations in 
all respect to process the day to day financial transactions in clean way; 
  To  see  whether  all  financial  transactions  have  been  processed,  authorized  and 
approved with adequate and valid supporting documents and evidences; 
P/159 
  To  see  whether  expenses  are  duly authenticated, authorized and approved with 
the line authority before making / incurring the expenses. 
  To see whether the expenses incurred are for the purposes of the organization; 
  To  see  whether  the  expenses  are  in  line  with  the  approved  budget  and  proper 
budget clearance has been duly taken before making the expenses;  
  To assess the adequacy of the financial management system of the organization; 
  To see whether goods and services are procured and purchased in accordance 
with the established policy and procedures; 
  To see the system of internal control - such as adequacy and effectiveness of the 
accounting, financial and operational controls, and need for any revision.  
  To  assess  the  level  of  compliance  with  established  policies,  plans  and 
procedures; 
  To  see  whether  the  financial  transactions  and  the  preparation  of  financial 
statements  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  consistently  applicable 
International Accounting Standards (IAS);     
23.3 - Types of PKSF Auditing: 
Following are the different types of auditing is to be organized and conducted in the PKSF 
at different times or simultaneously: 
I)  -  Pre-auditing:  Pre-auditing  of  all  daily  financial  transactions  incurred  in  PKSF  head 
office to be conducted by the trained personnel of in-house Internal Audit Department of 
PKSF. 
II) - Internal Auditing: Half-yearly basis auditing of all financial, accounting and operational 
activities  of  PKSF  to  be  conducted  by  the  trained  personnel  of  in  house  Internal  Audit 
Department of PKSF. 
III)  -  External  auditing  of  PKSF:  As  an  statutory  requirements  by  the  memorandum  & 
articles  of  association  of  PKSF  external  auditing  of  all  financial,  accounting  and 
operational  activities  of  PKSF  to  be  conducted  by  the  reputed  professional  Chartered 
Accountant  firms  of  the  country  in  each  financial  /  accounting  year  as  per  International 
Auditing Standards and International Accounting Standards.   
IV)  -  Auditing  (Internal)  of  POs:  Auditing  as  a  nature  of  internal  auditing  of  all  program, 
financial,  accounting,  operational  activities  of  PKSF  POs to be conducted by the trained 
personnel of in-house Internal Audit Department of PKSF. 
V)  -  External  auditing  of  POs:  As  a  decision  of  the  Governing  Body  in  Annual  General 
Meeting  of  PKSF  external  auditing  of  PKSF  fund's  or  overall  financial,  accounting  and 
operational  activities  of  POs  to  be  conducted  by  the  reputed  professional  Chartered 
Accountant  firms  of  the  country  in  each  financial  /  accounting  year  as  per  International 
Auditing Standards and International Accounting Standards.   
P/160 
VI)  -  Management  auditing  of  PKSF:  As  per  the  decision  of  the  General  Body  of  PKSF 
management auditing of all financial, accounting and operational activities of PKSF to be 
conducted  by  the  combination  of  the  staff  members  of  PKSF  as  selected  by  the  board 
and  professional  personnel  (in  rank  of  FCA)  of  any  reputed  professional  Chartered 
Accountant firm of the country of a particular financial / accounting period.   
VII)  -  Performance  auditing  of  PKSF:  As  per  the  decision  of  the  General  Body  of PKSF 
performance  auditing  of  all  financial,  accounting  and  operational  activities  of  PKSF  with 
object  to  measure  economy,  efficiency  and  effectiveness  /  value  for  money  to  be 
conducted  by  the  professional  personnel  of  reputed  professional  Chartered  Accountant 
firms of the country of a particular financial / accounting period. 
23.4 - PKSF Pre- Auditing: 
Pre-auditing  of  the  financial  transactions  is  necessary  in  PKSF.  Most  of  the  financial 
transactions of PKSF shall be pre-audited by the Internal Audit Department.  
At first, the expenses and the amount of expenses shall be duly approved and authorized 
by  the  line  authority  before  making  and  incurring  such  expenses  and  amount  of 
expenses. 
Then,  authenticate  the  expenses  with  the  bills/invoices/receipts/memos  and  related 
supporting  documentary  evidences  and  then  sent  the  files  to  the  Administration 
Department. 
Administration  Department  then  overview  the  documents  weather  all  formalities  have 
been  processed  in  connection  to  the  payments  and  doing  other  related  departmental 
formalities and sent the files to the Internal Audit Department. 
On  verification  and  examination  of  the  expenses  through  applying  substantive  test  and 
compliance test by the trained personnel of Pre-audit cell of the Internal Audit Department 
and then sent back the files to the Administration Department through affixed the seal of 
"Checked  and  found  correct"  which  are  eligible  for  payment.  If  pre-audit  cell  is  not 
satisfied  then  initiating  note  with  mentioning  the  reason  about  the  grounds  of  sent  back 
the files to the Administration Department. 
On getting the positive clearance of the pre-audit, administration department then process 
the file for necessary approval and authorization from the line authority of approving the 
expenses  and  then  sent  the  file  to  Finance  and  Accounts  Department  for  process  the 
payments of expenses.   
23.5 - PKSF Internal Auditing: 
To  safe  guard  the  financial  &  accounting  system  from  frequent  mistakes,  irregularities, 
inconsistencies, frauds and misappropriations, the internal audit is needed as follows - 
  Keep  constant  watch  on  records  of  financial  transaction  and  to  safeguard  the 
organization from fraud. 
  Keep  updated  accounts  of  the  projects  /  programs  /  head  office  /  regional  audit 
offices. 
P/161 
  To establish strong financial discipline in the organization in all level. 
  To  enable  and  aware  the  accounts  personnel  to  perform  their  duties  with  earnest 
sincerity and efficiently. 
  The Internal Audit Unit will be placed directly under the Managing Director. 
The  Internal  Audit  Unit  will  provide practical support and effective advice in ascertaining 
accuracy of the transactions and in planning & monitoring through budgetary control. This 
may involve playing the following key roles:- 
  The audit unit will ensure that all receipts are accounted for. 
  To ensure that no irregular payments have been made. 
  To ensure that all receipts and payments have been properly recorded. 
  To verify the cash in hand and at Bank. 
  To check that goods and services procured were properly ordered and received 
in proper system. 
  Assets that acquired are properly recorded and are in existence. 
  To prepare bank reconciliation statements on monthly basis. 
  To check the Financial accounting systems and how accurately financial and loan 
data is collected and processed. 
23.6 - PKSF External Auditing: 
The  annual  accounts  of  the  PKSF  shall  be  audited  by  GOB  registered  reputed  auditing 
firms for each fiscal year in accordance with the provisions of Memorandum and Articles 
of Association of the organization and as per the agreement with the loan giving agencies 
and donors. 
The management of the organization will develop Terms of Reference (TOR) at the time 
of appointment of auditors on which basis the statutory auditor will audit the accounts and 
prepare their reports.  
The  auditing  system  of  accounts  is  needed  in  order  to  establish  accountability  and 
transparency  of  the  transactions,  policy  development,  fund  utilization  and  its  accuracy 
confirmation  through  proper  testing  and  verification  of  transaction  by  third  party  with  an 
independent view. So, the following steps shall be involved in audit: 
a)  Within five months of the completion of the financial year / accounting year, 
audits shall be completed. 
b)  Approved audit firm is to be recruited by the PKSF management in AGM. 
c)  To place with them a Terms of Reference (TOR) regarding audit work. 
d)  Financial statement and management report is to be included in TOR. 
e)  Audit report is to be based on the applicable rules of GOB and ICAB. 
The  main  purpose  and  objective  of  external  auditing  is  to  enable  the  external  auditor to 
express  and  pronounce  a  professional  independent  opinion  on  the  financial  position  of 
PKSF  as  a  whole  as  at  June  30  of  each  financial  year.  External  auditors  have  to  be 
conducted in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISA).  
P/162 
External  auditors  have  to  prepare  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to  obtain  reasonable 
assurance  about  whether  the  financial  statements  are  free  from  material  misstatement. 
An  external  audit  includes  examining,  on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts 
and disclosures in the financial statements. An external audit also includes assessing the 
accounting  principles  used  and  significant  estimates  made  by  the  management,  as  well 
as evaluating the overall financial presentation.   
Opinion has to be express in following ways: 
"The  financial  statements  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respect,  the  financial 
position  of  PKSF  as  at  June  30  of  a  particular  year,  the  results  of  its  operations  and 
changes  in  its  cash  flows  for  the  year  then  ended  in  accordance  with  International 
Accounting Standards." 
23.7 - PKSF External Auditing of POs: 
Main  functions  of  external  auditor  will  be  to  examine  the  utilization  of  fund  received  from 
PKSF,  whether  proper  books  of  accounts  are  kept  by  POs,  whether  accounting  system 
maintained by them are clear and transparent and also to certify that the principal amount of 
loan or any part thereof have been utilized for the purpose for which it is given by PKSF. The 
audit shall be performed in accordance with International Standards of Auditing (or relevant 
national standards). 
The auditor will submit project wise separate report(s) in the form of letter or otherwise to 
the  Managing  Director  of  the  Foundation  to  cover  the  audit  /  review  of  POs'  portfolio 
quality  in  respect  of  both  POs'  overall  credit  program  and  that  financed  by  PKSF  and 
PKSF's general accounting practices, adequacy of MIS and internal audit control systems, 
adequacy of loan classification and provisioning policies, adequacy of loan recovery rates 
and overdue reported in quarterly reports and accuracy of statements of expenditure used 
for withdrawing funds from the relevant project(s). 
Reporting Requirements: 
A report in two parts / volumes, as indicated below, shall be prepared by the auditor covering 
the period of audit   
A  - 
Management Report 
B  - 
Financial Statements. 
Audit  Report  Regarding  PKSF's  Fund  /  Total  Micro-Credit  Fund  and 
A.  
Management Report 
Management report shall include observations and audit data on the following of the Partner 
Organizations: 
1.  
2.  
Accounting System. 
Accuracy in maintaining of Books of accounts as suggested by PKSF. 
3.   Utilization of fund received from PKSF (whether loans are properly distributed to the 
ultimate beneficiaries. 
4.  
A  summary  analysis  of  unspent  balance,  committed  loan  as  well  as  an  analysis  of 
faults and irregularities found in the audit. 
P/163 
System,  procedure  and  documentation  of  loan  disbursement  to  and  recovery  from 
beneficiaries. 
A summary analysis of outstanding position. 
System  of  internal  control  in  operation  particularly  in  respect  of  loan  operation 
management. 
An analysis of loan performance up to the last day of the period under audit showing: 
Repayable to PKSF up to 30-06- 
Principal 
: Taka. ...... 
Service Charge  : Taka. ...... 
Overdue Loan Repayable to PKSF on 30-06- 
Principal 
: Taka. ...... 
Service Charge  : Taka. ...... 
Subsequent repayment of overdue loan on 30-06- 
Principal 
: Taka. ...... 
Service Charge  : Taka. ...... 
Suggestion for improvement on administrations of funds. 
Audit Report Regarding PKSF's Fund and Financial Statements. 
5.  
6.  
7.  
8. 
9. 
B. 
The  Audit  Report  regarding  PKSF's  Fund  &  Statements  of  Accounts  shall  provide  a 
comprehensive  picture  of  Partner  Organizations.  The  auditor  shall  state  in  this  part  of  his 
report that: 
(i)  Whether  proper  books  of  accounts  have  been  maintained  by  the  POs  for  fund 
received from PKSF; 
(ii) Whether  Receipts  &  Payments  Accounts  have  include  all  the  transactions  of  the 
period under audit & whether such Receipts & Payment Accounts have been drawn up 
accurately & in agreement with the books of accounts maintained by POs; 
(iii) Findings on of Auditor. 
  The Report shall also include the following: 
(i)  Certified Financial Statements; 
(ii) A schedule of fixed assets as per format.  
23.8 - POs Internal Audit By PKSF: 
Terms of Reference for Internal Audit Cell of PKSF regarding Audit of POs 
The audit cell will audit the credit program of a PO once in every year.  For a new PO, audit 
will be conducted after one year of its enlistment as a PO of PKSF. The audit report is to be 
submitted to the Managing Director of PKSF within two weeks of completion of audit at PO 
level  with  recommendations  on  probable  remedial  measures.  Report  in  3  sections  as 
indicated below, shall be prepared covering the period of audit. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Management Report 
Audit Report and Accounts 
Field Inspection Report. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 24 
P/164 
------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
24.1 - Introduction 
24.2 - Objective 
24.3 - Procedures for Obtaining Payment Approval 
24.4 - Procedures for Approved Payments 
24.5 - Cheque Signatories 
24.6 - Expenditures 
24.7 - Loan Disbursement 
24.8 - Purchase Committee (1) 
24.9 - Purchase Committee (2) 
24.10 - Imprest Petty Cash System 
24.11 - Delegation of Authority 
----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 24 - DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY   
P/165 
CHAPTER - 24 
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY 
24.1 - Introduction: 
In order to mobilize and de-centralize the PKSF management in the best way, the PKSF 
Governing Body (GB) has approved the delegation of approval power, financial power and 
cheque signatories. To process the authorization and approval procedures in connection 
to  the  financial  expenses,  related  bill  vouchers  and  cheque  signatures  of  the  PKSF 
following the delegation of authority has been acted henceforth.    
24.2 - Objective: 
a.  PKSF’s operations has expanded over time. As a result administrative as well as financial 
obligations also risen to a great extent. Considering the practicality of day to day operation 
smoothly,  some  of 
the  administrative  and  cheque  signing  authority  has  been 
decentralized  as  per  “  Delegation  of  Financial  Authority”.  This  process  will  enhance 
management capability by ensuring internal control for accountability and transparency. 
b. 
If situation arises, MD may take necessary action in relevant matters after taking approval 
of the Board through circulation. 
c.  Any alternations and revisions of “Delegation of Financial Authority” may be made by the 
Governing Body after review. 
24.3 - Procedures for Obtaining Payment Approval: 
-  No payment can be made unless, a provision for the type of expenditure is included in the 
approved  budget.  Before  taking  approval  involving  financial  payments  budget  clearance 
must be obtained except day to day expenditure. 
-  When a current payment exceeds budget provision, payment must be approved by MD. 
- 
If  expenditures  exceed  total  approved  budget,  in  absolute  terms,  Boards  approval  is 
required for a revision of the budget. 
-  Funds  allocation  for  capital  expenditures  cannot  be  re-allocated  for  meeting  operating 
expenditures or vice-versa. 
-  For  payment  action,  all  bills  must  be  initiated  by  department  concerned  and  certified  by 
the  section  head/supervisor  and  approved  by  MD  except  where  delegation  of 
administrative power is applicable. 
24.4 - Procedures for Approved Payments: 
-  All  payments  above  Tk.  5,000  (five  thousand)  only  are  preferably  to  be  paid  through 
“Account Payee” cheques. 
-  When cash to be withdrawn, cash cheques should denote “Account Payee Cancelled”. 
-  Cheques issued for loan disbursement to POs should denote “Yourself for DD favouring 
..............................(Name of the PO)” or "Account Payee only" 
P/166 
24.5 - Cheque Signatories: 
a.  All the bank payments must be authorized by joint signatories i.e. 
1.  Principal signatory and 
2.  A cosignatory 
For all kinds of transactions except where “Delegation of Financial Authority” applies 
PKSF’s MD shall be the principal signatory and cosignatory can be any of the officials as 
mentioned below: 
1.  GM (Admin), or 
2.  2. DMD (O), or 
3.  3. DMD (B)  
MD has the authority to make any changes, amendments in the bank signatory powers of 
the concerned PKSF's officials. Cheque signatories are mentioned in following serial b, c, 
d & e as follows: 
b.  Where approved bill/payment amount exceed Taka 500,000 (Five lakh). 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
MD + GM (Admin) 
In absence of GM (Admin), MD + DMD (O) 
In absence of GM (Admin) and DMD (O), MD + DMD (B) 
c.  Where approved bill/payment amount does not exceed Taka 500,000 (Five lakh) and MD 
is in the office: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
GM (Admin) + DMD (O) 
In absence of DMD (O), GM (Admin) + DMD (B) 
In absence of GM (Admin), DMD (O) + DMD (B) 
In absence of GM (Admin) and DMD (O), MD + DMD (B) 
d.  Where approved bill/payment amount does not exceed Taka 500,000 (Five lakh) and MD 
is absent from the office: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
GM (Admin) + DMD (O) 
In absence of DMD (O), GM (Admin) + DMD (B) 
In absence of GM (Admin), DMD (O) + DMD (B) 
e.  For salary & festival bonus payment: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
MD + GM (Admin) 
In absence of GM (Admin), MD + DMD (O) 
In absence of GM (Admin) & DMD (O), MD + DMD (B) 
In absence of MD, GM (Admin) + DMD (O) 
In absence of MD & DMD (O), GM (Admin) + DMD (B) 
In absence of MD & DMD (B), GM (Admin) + DMD (O) 
f. 
If  for  any  reason,  MD,  GM  (Admin)  and  DMD  (O)  are  absent  with  Board’s  approval  by 
circulation,  MD  may  instruct  the  bank  beforehand,  so,  DMD  (B)  shall  be  principal 
signatory and DGM (F/A) shall be cosignatory, if needed. 
g. 
If  for  any  reason,  MD,  DMD  (O)  and  DMD  (B)  are  absent  with  Board’s  approval  by 
circulation,  MD  may  instruct  the  bank  beforehand,  so,  GM  (Admin)  shall  be  principal 
signatory and DGM (F/A) shall be cosignatory, if needed. 
P/167 
24.6 - Expenditures: 
Any kind of expenditures either revenue or capital in nature, above Taka 5,000 (five 
thousand) only, shall be approved by MD. 
As  the  volume  of  transactions  has  increased  “  Delegation  of  Financial  Authority”  has 
delegated authorities in the following manner: 
a.  When MD is absent from office, approval of salary payment is delegated. When MD 
is  absent,  DMD  (O)  shall  approve  the  salary  payment,  and  if,  MD,  DMD  (O)  are 
absent, DMD (B) shall approve the salary payment, If MD, DMD (O) and DMD (B) are 
absent, GM (Admin) shall approve the salary payment. Post facto approval is needed 
from MD when s/he is in the office. 
b.  Approval for payment of Festival bonus is same as 24.6(a) above. 
c.  GM (Admin) can approve expenditures Taka 2,001 to Taka 5,000 only. 
d.  DGM (F/A) can approve expenditures Taka 1,001 to Taka 2,000 only. 
e.  M (Admin) can approve urgent payments up to Taka 1000 (one thousand). 
f.  M  (Admin)  can  discharge  payments 
for  prior  approved 
expenditures.  The  balance  of  IOU  slips  at  the  closing  of  the  day  should  not  exceed 
Taka 50,000 (fifty thousand). 
IOU  slips 
through 
g.  Cashier can discharge cash for approved payments only e.g. approved tour plan and 
requisitions for advances and TA/DA etc. 
h.  Respective Division Heads shall approve tour plans and requisitions for advances up 
to Manager levels. 
i.  MD  shall  approve  local  tour  plans  and  requisitions  for  advances  from  AGM  to DMD 
levels. 
j.  MD’s tour plan with in Bangladesh are informed to the Chairman. 
k.  All foreign tours up to DMD level are approved by MD. 
l.  MD’s foreign tour are informed to the Chairman/Board. 
24.7 - Loan Disbursement: 
Any loan disbursement is recommended by the Loan Committee and MD approves loan 
disbursements  up  to  Taka  26,00,000  (Twenty-six  lacs)  cumulative  only.  Loan  sanction 
above  Taka  26,00,000  (twenty-six  lacs)  cumulative  only  are  approved by the Board and 
disbursement is to be approved by MD. 
Cheque  signing  authority  of  approved  loan  for  disbursement  up  to  Taka  5,00,000  (five 
lacs) only, has been delegated under “Delegation of Financial Authority”. 
24.8 - Purchase Committee (1): 
Purchase Committee-1 recommends purchases above Taka 5,00,000 (five lacs) only and 
final approval is given by MD. 
P/168 
24.9 - Purchase Committee (2): 
Purchase  Committee-2  recommends  purchases  from  Taka  20,000  (twenty  thousand)  to 
Taka 5,00,000 (five lacs) only and final approval is given by MD. 
24.10 - Imprest Petty Cash System: 
Petty  cash  in  maintained  in  imprest  system  with  a  limit  of  Taka 1,00,000 (one lac) only. 
Taka one lac balance shall be maintained in cash up to Taka 50,000 (fifty thousand) only, 
plus up to Taka 50,000 (fifty thousand) only, in IOU slips. 
Each IOU slip should be adjusted within eight working days and any advances within 20 
working days. 
Cash withdrawals requisitions are approved by MD. When MD is absent, DMD (O) shall 
approve the cash withdrawal requisition, and if, MD, DMD (O) are absent, DMD (B) shall 
approve the cash withdrawal requisitions. If MD, DMD (O) and DMD (B) are absent, GM 
(Admin) shall approve the cash withdrawal. In all the relevant cases, post facto approval 
is needed from MD when s/he is in the office. 
P/169 
24.11 – Delegation of Authority: 
DELEGATION OF FINANCIAL AUTHORITY 
(Approved by PKSF Governing Body) 
Nature 
Administrative 
Approval 
Remarks 
Expenditures 
Up to Taka 1,000 
M (Admin) 
  Emergency expenses payable from petty 
cash 
From Taka 1,001 to 
Taka 2,000 
From Taka 2,001 to 
Taka 5,000 
DGM (F/A) 
  Payable from petty cash or by cheque 
GM (Admin) 
  Payable from petty cash or by cheque 
Above Taka 5,000 
MD 
i) Payable to employee: through cash or 
cheque. 
ii) Payable to outsider: through Account 
payee cheque. 
TA/DA Local trip 
Up to Manager / 
equivalent levels 
From AGM - DMD 
levels 
MD 
Division Heads 
  Cashier can discharge cash for approved 
payments only. 
MD 
  Cashier can discharge cash for approved 
payments only. 
Chairman to be 
informed 
  Cashier can discharge cash for approved 
payments only.  
Foreign Tour Plan, TA/DA and Advances 
For all levels up to DMD 
MD 
For MD 
Chairman/Board to 
be informed 
Nature 
Administrative 
Approval 
Remarks 
Salary & Festival Bonus 
In MD’s presence 
i. 
MD 
------------------ 
ii  When MD is absent  
DMD (O) 
  Post facto approval should be taken from 
MD. 
P/170 
iii 
iv 
If MD and DMD (O) are 
absent 
If MD, DMD (O), DMD 
(B) are absent  
Loan disbursement 
i.  Up to Taka 26,00,000 
cumulative 
DMD (B) 
  Post facto approval should be taken from 
MD. 
GM (Admin) 
  Post facto approval should be taken from 
MD. 
MD on Loan 
Committee’s 
recommendations 
------------------ 
ii  Above Taka 
26,00,000 cumulative 
MD with GB’s 
Approval 
------------------- 
Investments 
i.  As per liquidity 
Management Manual 
MD, if necessary 
shall inform GB 
------------------ 
Explanations: 
(1)  For all kinds of transactions, except where “Delegation of Authority” applies, MD shall be 
the principal signatory and cosignatory can be GM (Admin), or DMD (O), or DMD (B). 
(2)  Absent means absent from office at least for a day due to leave or tour. 
(3)  Abbreviations:  MD  =  Managing  Director,  GB  =  Governing  Body,  GM  (Admin)=  General 
Manager  (Administration),  DMD  (O)  =  Deputy  Managing  Director  (OOSA),  DMD  (B)  = 
Deputy Managing Director (BIPOOL), DGM (F/A) = Deputy General Manager (Finance & 
Accounts), M (Admin) = Manager (Administration). 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 25 
P/171 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
25.1 - Preservation of Financial Documents 
25.2 - Periodic Review of Management Control System 
25.3 - Amendment of the Manual  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 25-FINANCIAL DOCUMENTS PRESERVATION & MANUAL MAINTENANCE   
CHAPTER - 25 
P/172 
FINANCIAL DOCUMENTS PRESERVATION & MANUAL MAINTENANCE 
25.1 - Preservation of Financial Documents: 
Financial documents include all books of accounts together with its supporting documents 
viz.,  the  money  receipts,  bills,  invoices,  cash  journals,  journal  vouchers,  ledgers, 
subsidiary ledgers, registers and other accounting records, documents & statements. 
In  addition,  loan  agreement  between  the  government,  funding  agencies  and  the 
organization,  Lease  Agreement,  all  financial  agreement,  contract  &  deed,  Loan 
Agreement  &  Repayment  Schedules  with  POs,  Rent  Agreement,  Bank  statements, 
cheque  books,  bank  deposit  slips,  all  documentary  evidences  to  financial  transactions, 
internal and external audit report and GOB letter of approval shall be counted as financial 
documents. 
Accounts department will keep all the above documents and files in a safe custody under 
lock and key.  
All  financial  documents  shall  be  preserved  at  least  twelve  years  time  and  may  be 
destroyed  thereafter  with  the  decision  from  the  Governing  Body  under  recommendation 
from a committee specially formed for this purpose. 
25.2 - Periodic Review of Management Control System: 
The financial and accounting system is intended as a guide for financial control of PKSF. 
The  procedures  as  recommended  in  this  manual  are  based  on  the  records  and 
information made available at the time of preparation of the system.  
However, the changing nature of circumstances demands periodic review of the existing 
system. Any proposed change or modification arising from such periodic reviews should 
not,  however,  be  incorporated  without  consultation  with  Governing  Body  and  also 
obtaining a prior approval of Governing Body.  
The Governing Body may amend the guidelines for the following purposes: 
 
 
If  need  arises  to  accommodate  relevant  rules  of  the  GOB  /  Grantor  concerning 
financial management system; 
If  the  Governing  Body  is  convinced  about  its  need  with  the  recommendation  of  the 
staff members of the organization for any amendment; 
  The Governing Body will review the financial guidelines after a reasonable time of its 
approval and take necessary steps for amendments if need arises. 
25.3 - Amendment of the Manual: 
P/173 
This  manual  is  approved  by  the  Governing  Body  and  as  such  considered  a  mandatory 
guideline for the overall financial and accounting management control of the organization, 
PKSF. Any amendment of this manual requires approval of the Governing Body, except 
for the chart of accounts part.  
The Chief of Finance and Accounts is empowered to modify and re-arrange the chart of 
accounts in order to cater to the needs of the organization. 
It  is  recommended  to  preserve  this  manual  in  a  loose-leaf  binder.  In  that  case,  the 
subsequent  amendments  will  be  easy  to  handle  and  cheap  to  execute.  Otherwise  the 
entire manual will require to be reprinted for any future amendment. 
Rigidity in financial management will enforce an effective accounting administration and a 
strong  financial  discipline  in  the  organization.  The  management,  therefore,  should  be 
cautions before considering any change in this manual. The amendment will, however, be 
essential  with  any  material  change  in  the  organizational  structure  or  with  the  new 
development in its financial activities. 
 CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 26 
P/174 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
26.1 - Introduction 
26.2 - Characteristics of Chart of Accounts 
26.3 - Coding Structure of Chart of Accounts 
26.4 - Application of Code Numbers 
26.5 - Necessary Steps to Prepare Chart of Accounts 
26.6 - Coding System of Accounts 
26.7 - Changes and Amendments of Accounting Codes 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 26 – CHART OF ACCOUNTS 
P/175 
 CHAPTER – 26 
CHART OF ACCOUNTS 
26.1 – Introduction: 
Palli  Karma-Sahayak  Foundation  (PKSF)  is  quite  a  large  organization  by  any  standard. 
Various  projects  /  programs  undertaken  by  PKSF  are  being  operated  simultaneously. 
These  projects  /  programs  differ  in  nature  and  in  length  of  duration.  Fund,  loan  and 
financial  support  being  received  are  earmarked  for  particular  projects  /  programs  by 
different government, funding agencies and organizations.  
Financial statements have to be prepared in complete form following the guidelines of the 
generally  accepted  accounting  principles  with  full  disclosure  requirements  of  the 
International  Accounting  Standards  by  the  PKSF  Head  Office  and  also  Regional  Audit 
Offices. 
PKSF has it’s different accounting offices in different part / places of the country. Thus, it 
is obvious for the organization to maintain uniformity in accounting heads of it’s own and 
in all over it’s all offices.  
Uniform accounting heads / uniform chart of accounts will given the ideal instructions to 
get compete set of financial statements from all the offices of PKSF in regular interval and 
hence,  a  well  designed  chart  of  accounts  is  necessarily  essential  for  PKSF  head  office 
and also for its' all offices. 
26.2 – Characteristics of Chart of Accounts: 
The characteristics of the chart of accounts of PKSF are outlined here in below: 
  All codes for different accounting heads in chart of accounts will consist of Thirteen (13) 
digits. 
  Specific project can be identified by the first two (2) digits represents as "Project Code". 
  Partner Organization (PO) status can be identified by the second two (2) digits represents 
as "PO Code". 
  Specific office can be identified by the third two (2) digits represents as "Location". 
  Fourth four (4) digits can identify the control general ledger as “Control Code". 
  The last three (3) digits can identify the nature of expense, income, asset & liability. It will 
indicate the particular accounting head that is actually meant for use. 
26.3 – Coding Structure of Chart of Accounts: 
P/176 
A nine character numeric coding structure is used for recording transactions.  
The basic arrangements of character grouping for the accounts are as under:  
  Coding arrangement for Assets, Liabilities, Income & Expenses Account 
Numeric 
00 
-------------------------| 
00 
  | 
  | 
--------------------------------------| 
00 
  | 
  | 
  | 
  | 
--------------------------------------------------| 
0000 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
--------------------------------------------------------------| 
000 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------| 
Project Code 
PO status 
Location Code 
Control Code 
Subsidiary Code   
Total numeric is thirteen (13). 
Here; 
  Project represents the Crore Program, PLDP, IFADEP, JMBA and etc. 
  PO status represents the BIPOOL, OOSA – Partner Organization of PKSF. 
  Location represents the PKSF Head Office, Regional Audit Offices. 
  Control code represents the control general ledger code. 
  Subsidiary code represents the subsidiary ledger code. 
The control general ledger codes (control code) are blocked-structured in groups 
as shown below: 
Type of Accounts 
Control General Ledger Codes  Subsidiary Ledger Code 
All Assets 
All Liabilities 
All Income 
All Expenses 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0001 to 0399 
0401 to 0899 
0901 to 0999 
1001 to 9999 
001 to 999 
001 to 999 
001 to 999 
001 to 999 
26.4 – Application of Code Numbers: 
  Code number application for Assets Account 
Account Head - Code number for an account with Janata Bank, Stamasjid Road, STD - 
36 at Head Office Core Program will be as - 01.01.01.0667.025 as explained below: 
P/177 
Numeric 
01 
-------------------------| 
PO status - Common 
Project Code - Core Program 
01 
  | 
  | 
--------------------------------------| 
025 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
Subsidiary Code - Janata Bank STD-36 ---------------------------------------------------------------------| 
0667 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
--------------------------------------------------------------| 
01 
  | 
  | 
  | 
  | 
--------------------------------------------------| 
Control Code - Cash At Banks 
Location Code - Head Office  
  Code number application for Liability Account 
Account Head - Code number for an account of IDA Loan Under SPAMFP of Head Office 
Core Program will be as 01.01.01.0124.002 as explained below: 
Numeric 
01 
-------------------------| 
PO status - Common 
Project Code - Core Program 
01 
  | 
  | 
--------------------------------------| 
0124 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
Control Code - Loan Under SPAMFP ------------------------------------------------------------| 
002 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
Subsidiary Code - IDA Loan Under SPAMFP ---------------------------------------------------------------| 
01 
  | 
  | 
  | 
  | 
--------------------------------------------------| 
Location Code - Head Office  
  Code number application for Income Account 
Account  Head  -  Code  number  for  an  account  of  Service  Charge  Under  RMC-OOSA  - 
Akota, at Head Office Core Program will be as 01.01.01.0901.067 as explained below: 
Numeric 
01 
PO status - OOSA 
-------------------------| 
Project Code - Core Program 
01 
  | 
  | 
--------------------------------------| 
0901 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
Control Code - Service Charge Under RMC-OOSA ------------------------------------------| 
067 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
Subsidiary Code - Service Charge Under RMC-OOSA Akota ------------------------------------------| 
01 
  | 
  | 
  | 
  | 
--------------------------------------------------| 
Location Code - Head Office  
  Code number application for Expense Account 
Account  Head  -  Code  number  for  an  account  of  Printing  &  Stationery  incurred  for  the 
Core Program OOSA at Head Office will be as 01.01.01.1759.001 
P/178 
Numeric 
01 
PO status - OOSA 
-------------------------| 
Project Code - Core Program 
02 
  | 
  | 
--------------------------------------| 
1759 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
   | 
Control Code - Printing & Stationery-OOSA ----------------------------------------------------| 
001 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
    | 
Subsidiary Code - Printing & Stationery-OOSA ------------------------------------------------------------| 
01 
  | 
  | 
  | 
  | 
--------------------------------------------------| 
Location Code - Head Office  
26.5 – Necessary Steps To Prepare Chart of Accounts: 
a)  Before preparing chart of accounts for PKSF, PKSF project codes will be selected at 
first.  
This project code could be arranged serially for different offices in following way; 
 Name of Projects    
  Core Program –  
  PLDP –  
 
IFADEP -  
  JMBA -   
 Accounting code 
01 
02 
03 
04 
b)  Second  step  to  prepare  the  chart  of  account  is  then  select  the  PO  (Partner 
Organization)  status  code  for  PKSF.  PO  status  code  could  be  arranged  in  following 
way; 
 Name of Projects    
 Accounting code 
  Common –  
  OOSA – 
  BIPOOL -  
01 
02 
03 
P/179 
c)  Third  step  to  prepare  the  chart  of  account  is  then  select  the  office  code  for  PKSF 
offices. Office code could be arranged in following way; 
 Name of Offices  
 Accounting code 
  PKSF Head Office –  
  Rangpur Audit Office –   
01 
02 
d)  Fourth step to prepare the chart of account is then selects the control general ledger 
code  for  broad  head  of  PKSF  assets,  liabilities,  incomes  and  expenses.  Control 
general ledger account code could be arranged as broad head for assets, liabilities, 
incomes and expenses of PKSF office in the following way; 
Type of Accounts 
Control General Ledger Codes 
All Assets 
All Liabilities 
All Income 
All Expenses 
= 
= 
= 
= 
0001 to 0399 
0401 to 0899 
0901 to 0999 
1001 to 9999 
e)  Fifth and final step to select separate accounting codes for subsidiary ledger account 
codes  of  control  general  ledger  codes  of  PKSF  assets,  liabilities,  income  and 
expenses. Subsidiary ledger account codes could be arranged in the following way; 
Type of Accounts 
Subsidiary Ledger Codes 
All Assets 
All Liabilities 
All Income 
All Expenses 
= 
= 
= 
= 
001 to 999 
001 to 999 
001 to 999 
001 to 999 
26.6 – Coding System of Accounts: 
PKSF  coding  system  of  accounts  has  been  classified  here  in  below  mainly  considering 
the control general ledger accounts codes and subsidiary ledger accounts codes. 
PKSF coding system of accounts has been enumerated as follows: 
26.7 – Changes and Amendments of Accounting Codes: 
P/200 
The accounting codes have been arranged in such a way so that if required these can be 
changed or expanded with the demand of changing situation arises for the purpose. E. g; 
Fixed accounting code numbers have been assigned for all types of assets and liabilities.  
Out  of  these  serial  numbers  of  accounting  codes,  some  have  not  been  allocated  to 
specific  accounting  head  as  yet.  These  unallocated  accounting  code  numbers  could  be 
used in future to accounts for any change or additions as demanded.  
Similarly,  there  are  some  accounting  code  numbers  under  recurring  expenditures  and 
incomes that are not yet attached to any specific item, can be used under circumstances 
needed.  
Usually,  if  some  new  Regional  Audit  Offices  are  started  by  PKSF,  then  the  accounting 
code  numbers  which  have  been  reserved  for  future  use  will  come  into  operation  after 
taking  into  account  the  characteristics  of  income  and  expenditure  items  of  the  new 
Regional Audit Offices. 
CONTENTS OF CHAPTER – 27 
P/201 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
27.1 - Accounting Forms (Form No. 101 - 120) 
27.2 - Accounting Registers & Books (Register No. 201-209)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 27 – ACCOUNTING FORMS, REGISTERS & BOOKS 
P/202 
 CHAPTER – 27 
ACCOUNTING FORMS, REGISTERS & BOOKS 
27.1 - Accounting Forms (Form No. 101 – 120): 
1 - Cash Journal 
2 - Journal Voucher  
3 – Petty Cash Advance Slip 
4 – Daily Cash Balance Statement  
5 – Daily Bank Balance Statement  
6 – Bank Account Reconciliation Statement  
7 - Conveyance Bill  
8 – Travel Form & Requisition for Cash against Travel Advance 
9 – Travel Expenses & Allowance Bill  
10 – Detail Statement of Traveling Bill  
11 – Description of Travel  
12 – Overtime Payment Form  
13 – Store / Purchase Requisition  
14 – Material Receiving & Inspection Report  
15 – Tour Bill Register 
16 – Movable / Immovable Fixed Assets Statement  
17 – Statement of Budget Controlling & Monitoring  
18 – Physical Inventory Statement - Assets  
19 – Statement of Short Term Deposit & Interest Receivables  
Form-101&102 
Form-103 
Form-104 
Form-105 
Form-106 
Form-107 
Form-108 
Form-109 
Form-110 
Form-111 
Form-112 
Form-113 
Form-114 
Form-115 
Form-116 
Form-117 
Form-118 
Form-119 
Form-120 
27.2 - Accounting Registers & Books (Register No. 201 - 209):  
1 - Cash Journal Register 
2 – Subsidiary Ledger 
3 – Fixed Assets Register 
4 – Salary Register 
5 – Cheque Issue Register  
6 – Cheque/DD/PO Receipt Register 
7 – VAT & Income Tax Register  
8 – Petty Cash Advance Slip Register 
9 – Budget Register  
P/223 
R-201 
R-202 
R-203 
R-204 
R-205 
R-206 
R-207 
R-208 
R-209 
Bangladesh
Rural Microenterprise Transformation Project
Project Design Report
Annex: RMTP Funds flow
Document Date:
30/07/2019
Project No.
2000002356
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
IFAD Loan
DA account Loan 
SAFE USD
PA account Loan of 
PMU/PKSF BDT
Subcomponent 1.5 Policy dialogue
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project 
Management 
Distributed digital ledger technology
E-commerce platform. 
Crowd-funding (fraternity funding) platform
Micro-enterprise ICT
Bank Accounts of 
Partner 
Organizations
Component 2: Financial Services
Subcomponent 2.1 Microfinance through POs
Component 1: Value Chain Enhancement
Sub-component 1.1 Organization
Sub-component 1.2 Technical and business services
Subcomponent 1.3 Value chain integration
Subcomponent 1.4 Enterprise strengthening
Bank Accounts Non-
Banking Financial 
Institutions (NBFIs)
Component 2: Financial Services
Subcomponent 2.2 Commercial finance through 
NBFIs
Component 1: Value Chain Enhancement
Subcomponent 1.5 Policy dialogue
Technical Assistance 
CO-FINANCING GRANT
Administration 
performed by IFAD
DA account Grant 
SAFE USD
PA account Grant of 
PMU/PKSF BDT
Bank Accounts of 
Partner 
Organizations
Component 1: Value Chain Enhancement
Sub-component 1.1 Organization
Sub-component 1.2 Technical and business services
Subcomponent 1.3 Value chain integration
Subcomponent 1.4 Enterprise strengthening
IFAD Grant
DA MoEWOE 
SAFE USD
PA account Loan of 
IU/MoEWOE BDT
Component 2: Financial Services
Sub-component 2.3 Optimal utilisation of 
remittances
