Bhutan
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
25 April 12 May 2022
Document Date:
14/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003935
6281-BT
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ADB                            
Asian Development Bank
ARP
ARDC
ASAP
BAFRA
BCC
CAHW
CARLEP
CLEAR
CSN
DAMC
DoL
DVPA
ECP
EI
EU
FAO
FCBL
FEBL
FG/FC
FNS
FSAPP
FY
FYP
GDP
GLOF
GGG
GNH
GNHC
HVC
IEC
IFAD
LED
LUC
ITC
MCC
MCH
MDD-W
MoAF
MoLHR
MoF
NCWC
NGEP
NNSAP
NWFP
UNDP
UNRC
Agriculture Resilience Plan
Agriculture Research Development Center
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (IFAD)
Bhutan Agriculture and Food Regulatory Authority
Behaviour Change Communication
Community Animal Health Worker
Commercial Agriculture & Resilient Livelihoods Enhancement Programme
Consolidated Livelihood Exercise for Analyzing Resilience
Country Strategy Note
Department of Agricultural Marketing and Cooperatives
Department of Livestock
Domestic Violence Prevention Act
Economic Contingency Plan
Empowerment Indicator
European Union
Food and Agriculture Organization
Food Corporation of Bhutan Ltd
Financial Education and Business Literacy
Farmer Group / Farmer Cooperative
Food and Nutrition Security Policy
Food Security and Agriculture Productivity Project
Fiscal Year
Five Year Plan
Gross Domestic Product
Glacial Lake Outburst Floods
Global Gender Gaps
Gross National Happiness
Gross National Happiness Commission
High Value Crop
Information, Education, Communication
International Fund for Agriculture Development
Low Emission Development
Land Use Certificate
International Trade Centre
Milk Chilling Centers
Maternal and Child Health
Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDD-W)
Ministry of Agriculture & Forests
Ministry of Labour and Human Resources
Ministry of Finance
National Commission for Women and Children
National Gender Equality Policy
National Nutrition Strategy and Action Plan
Non-wood Forest Products
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Resident Coordinator
UNRCO
United Nations Resident Coordinator’s Officer
PBAS
PMU
PPD
Performance-Based Allocation System
Project Management Unit
Policy and Planning Division
RAMCO                      
Regional Agricultural Marketing Cooperatives Office
REMP
RgoB
RLDC
RNR
SBC
SDG
SJ
SME
Renewable Energy Master Plan
Royal Government of Bhutan
Regional Livestock Development Center
Renewable Natural Resources
Social Behaviour Change
Sustainable Development Goal
Sanam Jabjorpa (community supporters for ARP implementation)
Small and Medium Enterprise
SO                              
Strategic Objective
TA
VAW
WB
WFP
YELP
Technical Assistance
Violence Against Women
World Bank
World Food Programme
Youth Engagement and Livelihood Program
In line with IFAD mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☑ Gender Transformative ☑ Youth Sensitive ☑ Nutrition Sensitive ☐ Persons with Disabilities ☐ Indigenous Peoples ☑
Climate Finance ☐ Adaptive Capacity
1/37
Executive Summary
The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MoAF) of the Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB) requested IFAD and WFP to prepare a
Concept Note for submission to the Sixth Call of the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP). On 6 December 2021,
GAFSP approved a USD 13 million grant for the Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture (BRECSA) concept note.
IFAD is co-financing the project with USD 8.935 million as a fully blended project. IFAD is the Supervising Entity for Investment and
the Lead Implementing Partner Agency, while WFP is the Supervising Entity for Technical Assistance and Implementation Support.
National Context:
Bhutan is a landlocked country with a land area of 38,394 km 2 and an estimated population of 787,501 in 2022. Bhutan´s main
economic growth is driven by the industrial sector, mainly hydropower, which contributed to 17.77% of the GDP[1] in 2020. The
agriculture sector however is currently the primary contributor to the economy and its contribution to GDP has increased from 14.78%
in 2010 to 19.23% in 2020. Bhutan’s economy was hit hard by the COVID-19 pandemic and experienced a GDP decrease in 2020 to
USD 3,130 per capita[2] as compared to USD 3,419 in 2019. The dependency on food imports led to major food insecurity in the
country as COVID-19 lockdown restrictions disrupted international supply chains, mainly affecting fresh produce distribution. As a
result, in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic, a key priority for the Government is rapid, yet sustainable economic recovery. To
achieve that, the challenge remains for Bhutan to expand its economic base, support the development of a robust private sector
capable of diversifying the economy and creating jobs, as well as make growth more inclusive, especially for unemployed youth and
women.
Poverty: Bhutan has achieved impressive gains in reducing poverty, although progress on shared prosperity has recently slowed.
The official national poverty rate declined significantly during 2007-17, from 23.2 percent to 8.2 percent. There is a substantial spatial
variation in poverty within the country with poverty being almost exclusively rural. Poverty rates vary widely by district (Dzongkhag).
While most districts have made steady progress in reducing poverty, as of 2017, it was still above 35 percent in Dagana and
Zhemgang. Some of the districts with relatively high poverty rates are also geographically remote, making access to services and
markets difficult. Most of the poor live in rural areas, are less educated, and work in agriculture.
Agriculture: The agriculture sector, comprising of farming, livestock and forestry, continues to be a major player in the country’s
economy. Subsistence farming is an integral part of the Bhutanese economy, with 69 percent of the total population living in rural
areas and dependent on agriculture. The sector employs 51 percent of the population. Bhutan relies on import of over 50% of its total
food consumption, especially cereals, fish and vegetables. It produces 61% of staple cereals consumed, and 47% of rice (WFP, Dec
2020). The average landholding in Bhutan is 3.7 acres (about 1.5 hectares). In 2019, agricultural landholdings in Bhutan covered a
total area of approximately 250,000 acres (100,000 ha), of which about three quarters were cultivated and a quarter (or 66,000 acres)
were under fallow. The main reasons for the high percentage of land under fallow are poor access to irrigation (34 percent), crop
damage due to wildlife (25 percent), and labour shortages (19 percent).
Nutrition: Although 98 percent of households in Bhutan are food secure, dietary diversity within Bhutanese households is inadequate.
Child malnutrition and mineral deficiencies persist, and the country faces an increase in obesity and chronic diseases among its
population. Targeting food security alone is insufficient for improving nutritional status. In order to improve nutritional outcomes, there
is a need to improve access to, and availability of, nutritious food to enhance dietary diversity through combining the income pathway
with (i) diversified food production (nutrition sensitive value chain), (ii) enhanced nutrition awareness and food habits, and (iii)
intensified linkages between local farmers and schools.
Climate Change: The principal climate risks for the project include: (i) higher intensity and variability of rainfall patterns leading to
increased risk of floods, particularly riverine flooding caused by heavy monsoon rains and glacial melt; (ii) periodic droughts due to
decrease of precipitation in dry season; (iii) increased incidences of new and existing pests and diseases; (iv) productivity and quality
declines due to temperature and heavy rains; (v) and disruption of agri-value chains due to damaged roads and infrastructure caused
by extreme climate events. Along with these, the predicted temperature increment has also some positive impacts on value chains
including: i) creating opportunities of new vegetable and crop varieties in higher altitude; ii) increasing yields and an extension of the
production seasons of vegetable and crops; and iii) favourable conditions for bees to collect more raw materials in extended
production seasons resulting in increased honey production. The use of the Consolidated Livelihood Exercise for Analyzing
Resilience (CLEAR) tool and Agriculture Resilience Plans (ARP) will enable the project to factor in climate resilience in value chain
selection, production and marketing interventions. BRECSA will also contribute to Bhutan´s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)
commitments (details in the SECAP Annex).
Women: Bhutan is ranked 130 out of 153 countries in the Global Gender Gap Report. Women in Bhutan perform 71 percent of
unpaid domestic care work, which is 2.5 times more than men and their contribution as a share of GDP is 11 percent, while men’s
contribution is 5 percent. The unemployment rate in Bhutan stood at 3.4% in 2018, with 4.2% women unemployed against 2.7% men.
The 2020 labour force survey of Bhutan highlights that 58.8 percent of women work in agriculture, forestry, and fishery, and that their
work burdens are particularly heavy with the addition of household and community work requirements as well as the outmigration of
men. Rural women are directly affected by the challenges associated with this sector in terms of low productivity, limited technology
adoption, labour shortages, and poor market access. The low literacy of Bhutanese women, particularly in rural areas, further limits
their access to information and markets. The proportion of female managers in cottage and small industries in all sectors is also
considerably lower, suggesting constraints on their entrepreneurial activities.
Youth: Interest of Bhutanese youth in agriculture remains low. Agriculture is widely seen as laborious and precarious, and
 unremunerative when compared to other employment opportunities. They are more attracted to modernization and new practices,
use of technology, and opportunities with quick return and relatively high earnings. The COVID-19 pandemic has however brought
about new prospects for agriculture in Bhutan and changed some perceptions of the sector. The scarcity of urban employment
opportunities left young people with no choice but to consider alternatives. With scarce opportunities in other sectors, agriculture has
become one of the most viable employment options and an increasingly attractive choice for many young people regardless of their
educational status.
2/37
Rationale and project targeting: BRECSA directly addresses systemic barriers in the agriculture sector, post-COVID-19 challenges
and priorities identified in Bhutan’s Renewable Natural Resources (RNR) Strategy 2030, the Food Self-sufficiency Policy, RNR
Marketing Policy 2018, RNR Marketing Strategy 2021, the Food Systems Summit Pathways recommendations, Transformation of
Agriculture through Crop Prioritisation 2022 (A strategy document for 2022-2027) and Bhutan’s COVID-19 Economic Recovery Plan.
BRECSA addresses the following common IFAD, WFP and GAFSP cross-cutting priorities: (i) gender and empowerment of women
and girls (SDG5); (ii) climate resilience (SDG13); (iii) improved nutritional outcomes by achieving national food and nutrition security
(SDG2); (iv) alleviating poverty (SDG1); (v) Create Decent Work and Economic Growth (8); and (vi) Reduce Inequality (SDG10).
BRECSA also prioritises youth engagement and vulnerable populations, such as households with differently abled persons and
women-headed households. Sixty percent of BRECSA beneficiaries are women, including a minimum of five percent women-headed
households and thirty percent are youth. Six hundred differently abled women, men and youth, constituting 25 percent of the
population of differently abled persons in the target Dzongkhags will benefit from BRECSA interventions. Moreover, IFAD’s
Empowerment Indicator will be included in the baseline survey to measure Intrinsic agency, Instrumental agency and Collective
agency to identify development obstacles and ensure empowerment and inclusion of women in the agricultural sector.
Project Goal and Objectives: The goal of BRECSA is to catalyze a 30% increase in resilient commercial agricultural production and
improve food and nutrition security in the 4 target Dzongkhags by 2030. The development objective is to transform smallholder
agriculture into inclusive and resilient agri-food systems that are increasingly profitable and food and nutrition secure. BRECSA will
target subsistence,  semi-commercial and commercial farmer households. The total direct beneficiaries of BRECSA interventions are
12,074 farmer households (47088 beneficiaries), out of which 60% will be women and 30% youth.
Geographic areas of intervention: The project will be implemented in the central and south-central Dzongkhags (Districts) of
Sarpang, Trongsa, Tsirang and Zhemgang. The four project Dzongkhags are administratively further divided into Gewogs (Wards)
and villages. There is a total of 37 Gewogs and 539 villages in the project target Dzongkhags. BRECSA will target all Gewogs within
these 4 Dzongkhags. Zhemgang, Sarpang and Trongsa are among the poorer Dzongkhags of Bhutan. The Dzongkhag of Tsirang,
contiguous to the three poorer Dzongkhags, has been selected for its high potential for the commercialization of agriculture
Value chain selection: The selection of value chains is based on agroecologically suitable commodities which have a comparative
commercial advantage, market potential and private sector interest. The selection also took into consideration the additional benefit to
youth and women, and household nutrition. The priority list of commodities includes: dairy, poultry, vegetables, mushrooms, ginger
and turmeric. Flexibility will be needed to allow additional value chains (honey, oilseeds, green tea and other non-wood forest
products (NWFPs)) to be included post the conclusion of the CLEAR analysis and formulation of ARPs, as new opportunities may
arise and adjustments may be required due to changing market dynamics. This targeted value chain approach, coupled with the
development of cluster hubs, will promote the emergence of new private sector operators and strengthen existing ones.
Project components: The project will be structured around three inter-connected technical components: Component 1: Resilient
production systems; Component 2: Strengthened value chain coordination and market linkages; Component 3: Innovative and
competitive agri-food sector. A fourth component will cover Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge
Management.  
Component 1: Resilient production Systems
Sub-component 1.1 - Consolidated Livelihood Exercise for Analyzing Resilience (CLEAR):
The “CLEAR” tool will be deployed to map out the spatial and temporal impacts of climate change and their anticipated impacts on
women and men smallholder farmers and rural communities with risks and impacts disaggregated by gender. This exercise will inform
how food security is affected by climate risks. The CLEAR diagnostics will enable climate resilient spatial and temporal planning for
placing commodities in their appropriate agroecological zone. Furthermore, it will facilitate identification of specific climate-resilient
infrastructure needs as a response to anticipated climate impacts and selected commodity value chains. The resulting analysis and
recommendations of CLEAR will guide the formulation of Gewog and Dzongkhag level ARPs.
Sub-component 1.2 - Gewog and Dzongkhag Agriculture Resilience Plans (ARPs):
Drawing on the analyses of the CLEAR exercise, ARPs will be developed for all Gewogs in the 4 target Dzongkhags. The Gewog
level ARPs will be aggregated to develop a Dzongkhag level ARP. The ARPs will be developed in a participatory manner bringing
together smallholder farmers, aggregators, traders, processors, potential investors, other value chain actors and relevant Gewog and
Dzongkhag personnel, ensuring fifty percent participation of women. Among other strategic elements, the ARPs will enable
downscaling the CLEAR analysis to identify the geographic and site-specific exposure and vulnerability to anticipated climate impacts
and to articulate the targeted support required for the 3 household groups (subsistence, semi-commercial and commercial). The
ARPs will include identification of resilient crop varieties, spatial and temporal planning of cropping zones per selected crop,
identification of agroecological practices, identification of suitable post-harvest management, logistics and  climate-resilient
infrastructure needs and value addition facilities, and other climate change adaptation measures (erosion control, flood / land-slide
protection, water-saving technologies, water harvesting and storage facilities etc.) as per the specificities of each Gewog. The ARPs
will provide the required information for developing tailored packages of agroecological production inputs, technologies and practices
that meet the needs of the 3 household groups. The ARP priorities will be integrated into the Gewog and Dzongkhag annual work
plan and budget and the activities relevant to BRECSA will be funded through the project together with RGoB, beneficiary and private
sector co-financing. It is expected that ARP priorities not funded by BRECSA will be picked up by the regular RGoB budget.
Furthermore, it is anticipated that PPD will present unfunded ARP priorities to other interested donors and NGOs working in the target
Dzongkhags for financing.
3/37
Sub-component 1.3 – Support to vulnerable groups to improve income and nutrition status:
Within the ARPs, a specific intervention package will be articulated for the subsistence group. Under this sub-component, the principle
of ‘leaving no one behind’ will be followed. In this regard, customized support will be provided to vulnerable households - including
women-headed households and households of persons with disabilities. Livelihood Investment Plans will be developed and
implemented through a process that enables participants to engage in critical self-reflection and setting of self-defined goals and
strategies. The project will improve the nutritional status of these households by promoting nutrition-sensitive agriculture interventions
such as, home gardens, small-scale poultry production, selected on-farm and off-farm activities, and awareness raising on food-based
nutrition. The project will also contribute to graduating these households from subsistence to semi-subsistence by providing them with
necessary production and post-harvest support, capacity building, inclusion in cooperatives and market linkages.
Sub-component 1.4 - Investment in commercial farming systems:
Under this sub-component, the creation of “Hubs” as production zones for the different BRECSA prime commodities will be
undertaken. The Hubs will be centered along main arteries and economic corridors and will be designed using permaculture farming
principles for promoting climate resilient agroecological farming. Neighbouring farmers will be organised into a network of Farmer
Groups or Cooperatives (FG/FCs) and linked to the Hubs. BRECSA will support the establishment of at least 4 youth-led Hubs per
Dzongkhag (16 in total). Each Hub will have a maximum of 10 youth, ideally an equal mix of male and female.  For operationalising
the above-described Hub and network model, a number of technical assistance (TA) activities will be undertaken to capacitate the
different actors engaged in commodity production. The TA will cover permaculture, financial education and business literacy (FEBL),
as well as strengthen the institutional capacities of farmer groups and cooperatives. The project will invest in enhancing productivity
of the following value chains, dairy, poultry, high value commodities (vegetables, ginger, turmeric, mushrooms, honey, etc.). To
support sustainable and climate-resilient farming systems, BRECSA will also invest in land and soil management, as well as in
climate-resilient productive infrastructure, including irrigation, fencing and greenhouses, among others.
Component 2: Strengthened Value Chain Coordination and Market Linkages
Sub-component 2.1 - Enhancing efficiency of value chain operations:
This sub-component will apply an integrated value chain approach, defining interventions in all value chain functions from input
supply, production, aggregation and storage, processing, to defining marketing channels, and export. BRECSA will support
agricultural commercialization within the established Hubs through funding of aggregation facilities, and on-site small-scale
processing facilities equipped with washing, grading, packing and storage. The Hubs will be supported with training and serve as a
Farmer Field School for the adjacent network of farmers for building knowledge on agroecological farming. Based on demand, the
Hubs will serve as an input distributor for provision of seed and vegetative planting material, bio-inputs, and minor tools to the farmer
network. The Hubs will also serve as an aggregation point for the farmer network to deliver their produce based on a guaranteed
minimum price and profit sharing. Additional processing and marketing facilities will also be supported and strategically located based
on the CLEAR analysis and Dzongkhag ARPs. All construction related to processing and marketing facilities will be preceeded with a
feasibility study, detailed supply chain and economic and financial analysis, and business plan.
Sub-Component 2.2 - Business linkages and multi-stakeholder platforms:
BRECSA will facilitate the establishment and functioning of sub-sector specific multi-stakeholder platforms (MSPs) to support
business development and commercialisation at Thimphu and Dzongkhag levels. These MSPs will bring together all relevant
stakeholders that engage in the agricultural sector including representatives of women and youth. The MSPs, in partnership with
relevant departments and agencies, will work to establish market linkages for farm produce for both the domestic and export markets.
MSPs will also engage in investment planning to attract potential financiers into the sector. Based on the initial value chain analysis
and defined investment strategies, a Strategic Investment Plan (SIP) will be prepared for each selected commodity. The SIP will
provide a framework for inviting farmers and their groups, entrepreneurs, the government, development projects, private investors and
service providers to co-invest in the project area, thus facilitating access to markets, knowledge, technology and capital for
smallholder rural farmers.
Component 3 – Innovative and competitive agri-food sector:
Sub-component 3.1 - Access to financial services:
This sub-component will enhance access to and usage of agricultural financial services and value chain financing for smallholder
farmers, farmer groups, cooperatives, aggregators, traders, processors and other value chain actors. The project will coordinate with
financial institutions to establish working relationships, generate understanding of the project’s approach for routing ‘matching grants’
based on a tri-partite arrangement between the project, financial institution and FG/FCs. Furthermore, BRECSA will support farm
households, FG/FCs and enterprises to improve their financial literacy, entrepreneurial skills and business knowledge to improve their
financial habits, financial discipline and investment decisions.
Sub-component 3.2 - Digital technologies to support marketing:
The project will assess existing farmer-support digital tools, their shortcomings and current needs of farmers for developing a user-
friendly tool/platform. The tool could tackle issues related to: (1) production and pricing in different locations, (2) commodity demand in
different markets, (3) transportation (to link farmers and traders with transport service providers for transporting produce), and (4) any
other functionalities under the above four areas identified during the assessment.
Sub-component 3.3 - Policy dialogue:
This sub-component will undertake policy dialogue to support the promotion of Brand Bhutan’s organic and high-value agri-food
products in regional and international markets. To this end, the Project will support the Bhutan Agriculture and Food Regulatory
Authority (BAFRA) in the development of a geographic indication (GI), as well as, provide needed investments for regulation,
standardization and certification. BRECSA will also work with the Department of Agriculture Marketing and Cooperatives (DAMC) to
revise the rules and regulations of the Cooperative Act and marketing guidelines and strategies that foster agri-food
commercialization.
4/37
Environment and social category and Climate risk classification: The proposed environmental and social category for BRECSA
is moderate, based on the SECAP screening tool. The Project will not impact on any sensitive areas or result in loss of natural habitat
and biodiversity. As per the SECAP screening tool, the climate risk category of the project is determined as moderate.
Project management and coordination:
The MoAF - and through the Policy and Planning Division (PPD) - will be the executing agency of the project and the formal
counterpart to IFAD and WFP. It will provide overall implementation support and oversight, policy guidance and direction, second
technical staff from the MoAF pool of civil servants for implementation, and provide technical backstopping through line departments
and agencies in the field. A Project Management Unit (PMU) will be established at the Agriculture Research and Development Center
(ARDC) Samteling in Sarpang. The PMU is the primary implementation arm of the project for delivery of all Gewog and Dzongkhag
level activities. The PMU will be led by a Project Director (PD) who will lead and oversee the overall implementation of the project at
the Gewog and Dzongkhag levels, including WFP technical assistance activities, and support the policy aspects of the project. He/she
will manage the PMU team for delivery against performance indicators. The PD will report to the PPD.
Project costs
Project costs by component and financier - (Thousands of United States dollars)
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
Bhutan is a landlocked country with a land area of 38,394 km 2 and an estimated population of 787,501 in 2022. Bhutan has
been a constitutional monarchysince 2008 and is famous for its unique philosophy - Gross National Happiness (GNH) - that
guides its development strategy and enables it to balance economic development with the preservation of its natural
environment and cultural traditions. Bhutan´s main economic growth is driven by the industrial sector, mainly hydropower, which
contributed to 17.77% of the GDP[3] in 2020. The agriculture sector however is currently the primary contributor to the economy
and its contribution to GDP has increased from 14.78% in 2010 to 19.23% in 2020.
Bhutan’s economy was hit hard by the COVID-19 pandemic and experienced a GDP decrease in 2020 to USD 3,130 per
capita[4] as compared to USD 3,419 in 2019. The economy contracted by 1.2 percent in FY20/21. Services sector output fell by
3.6 percent, as the tourism industry remained closed. The hydro sector supported industrial sector growth, while construction and
manufacturing were adversely affected by labor shortages and high input prices. On the demand side, private consumption
contracted due to domestic COVID-19 containment measures and lower incomes. Average inflation increased from 3.0 percent in
FY19/20 to 8.2 percent in FY20/21. In the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic, a key priority for the Government is rapid, yet
sustainable economic recovery. To achieve that, the challenge remains for Bhutan to expand its economic base, support the
development of a robust private sector capable of diversifying the economy and creating jobs, as well as make growth more
inclusive, especially for unemployed youth and women.[5]
3.
Being a landlocked country that is import dependent, the war in Ukraine has also taken its toll on Bhutan. The main impacts can
already be observed, especially in terms of fuel prices and the consequent impact on tourism and transport of goods. Prices of
other main commodities have also increased. Bhutan, for example, imports almost all its cooking oil from India, while India in turn
imports 90 per cent of its sunflower from Ukraine and Russia. The disruption in trade and speculation of shortage is driving prices
higher, which is having major repercussions on the poor and vulnerable.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
5/37
BRECSA is informed by the analysis undertaken during the preparation of Bhutan’s Pathways for the UN Food Systems Summit
2021, the RNR Strategy 2040 and its latest revision – RNR Strategy 2030 (final draft), specifically with regard to engagement of
the private sector. The main reasons for low engagement of the private sector include inefficient supply chains, lack of linkages
between value chain segments, lack of access to finance especially for value chain actors such as aggregators, transporters,
processors, and traders. These are key areas that BRECSA is focusing on. In particular, market development, youth and private
sector engagement, establishment of regional processing hubs for value addition of farm produce, and import substitution of
processed products will be undertaken to support the implementation of the RNR Strategy 2030.
Poverty: Bhutan has achieved impressive gains in reducing poverty, although progress on shared prosperity has recently
slowed. The official national poverty rate declined significantly during 2007-17, from 23.2 percent to 8.2 percent. Extreme poverty
($1.90 per day) has been almost eradicated. However, growth in per capita consumption of the bottom 40 percent slowed in the
five-year period ending in 2017 (2012-17), falling to 1.6 percent annually during that period, down from 6.5 percent annually
during the previous period of 2007-12. At the same time, per capita consumption for the entire population grew 2.3 percent in
2012-17. While most districts have made steady progress in reducing poverty, as of 2017, it was still above 35 percent in
Dagana and Zhemgang. Some of the districts with relatively high poverty rates are also geographically remote, making access to
services and markets difficult. Most of the poor live in rural areas, are less educated, and work in agriculture. In 2017 the urban
poverty rate was only 1.6 percent, in stark contrast to the 17.4 percent rate in rural areas, where over 90 percent of the poor live.
Almost 80 percent of the poor, compared to 60 percent of those not poor, have no education. About two-thirds of the heads of
poor households work in agriculture, compared to only about a third of non-poor household heads.[6]
Agriculture: The agriculture sector, comprising of farming, livestock and forestry, continues to be a major player in the country’s
economy. Subsistence farming is an integral part of the Bhutanese economy, with 69 percent of the total population living in rural
areas and dependent on agriculture. The sector employs 51 percent of the population[7]. Availability of arable land in Bhutan is a
key constraint to agricultural development. Of the total land area of the country, 71 percent is under forest cover, around 8% is
agricultural land (with only about three percent being cultivated), seven percent is under year-round snow and glaciers, and
meadows and pastures occupy four percent. The remaining land is barren, rocky or scrubland[8]. Bhutan relies on import of over
50% of its total food consumption, especially cereals, fish and vegetables. It produces 61% of staple cereals consumed, and 47%
of rice (WFP, Dec 2020). The dependency on food imports led to major food insecurity in the country as COVID-19 lockdown
restrictions disrupted international supply chains, mainly affecting fresh produce distribution[9]. The Food Corporation of Bhutan
Limited (FCBL) imports certain food grains and essential food items, operates wholesale and storage facilities, and distributes
food nationally. In remote areas where private shops are unavailable, FCBL also operates farm shops that sell essential items.
However, the bulk of food commodities produced nationally and those that are imported, are distributed and sold by private
commercial operators, albeit in an ad hoc manner.
In relation to agricultural inputs, the government’s main role is facilitation and provision of subsidies and incentives. The actual
distribution, selling and supplying of most inputs are done by private enterprises. There are no government operated network of
supply depots. Smallholder farms still face difficulties in getting adequate access to farm machinery, seeds, fertilizers and other
farm inputs. The draft RNR Strategy 2030 proposes establishing a dedicated one-stop ‘agri-solution outlet’ in every district
engaging interested private entities. Such outlets would provide all farm related inputs and machinery.
The key challenge for Bhutanese small-holder farmers are the limited yields resulting from water shortage, crop damage by wild
animals, low level of mechanization, labour shortages, limited post-harvest and processing facilities and inefficient linkages to
markets. As a response to COVID-19, the Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB) elaborated the Economic Contingency Plan
(ECP 2020), which prioritized the need to increase national food self-sufficiency. This led to an increase in production of a few
agriculture commodities and livestock products thus demonstrating the potential for scaling up.
The average landholding in Bhutan is 3.7 acres (about 1.5 hectares). In 2019, agricultural landholdings in Bhutan covered a total
area of approximately 250,000 acres (100,000 ha), of which about three quarters were cultivated and a quarter (or 66,000 acres)
were under fallow. The main reasons for the high percentage of land under fallow were poor access to irrigation (34 percent),
crop damage due to wildlife (25 percent), and labour shortages (19 percent)[10]. Low soil fertility, conversion to other land uses,
rotation practices and distance between the land and the home were also cited.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
10.
Nutrition: Bhutan is at the crossroad of a triple burden of malnutrition with undernutrition, micronutrient deficiencies, and
overweight/obesity. Although 98 percent of households in Bhutan are food secure, dietary diversity within Bhutanese households
is inadequate. Child malnutrition and mineral deficiencies persist, and the country faces an increase in obesity and chronic
diseases among its population. This indicates that food security is not enough for a healthy nutritional status. The traditional
Bhutanese diet mainly consists of cereals (predominantly rice) and the consumption of fruits and vegetables is low. Overall food
demand in Bhutan is expected to increase by 46 percent by 2025, compared to 2007. The demand will increase the most rapidly
for food taken outside the home, such as packed and processed food and sugary drinks, resulting in an additional increase in
overweight and obesity. Thus, targeting food security alone is insufficient for improving nutritional status. In order to improve
nutritional outcomes, there is a need to improve access to - and availability of – nutritious foods to enhance dietary diversity
through combining the income pathway with (i) diversified food production (nutrition sensitive value chain), (ii) enhanced nutrition
awareness and food habits, and (iii) intensified linkages between local farmers and schools.
11.
Climate Change: With a fragile mountainous ecosystem and high reliance on climate sensitive sectors such as hydropower and
agriculture, Bhutan’s economy is particularly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change[11]. Moreover, the country is
12.
13.
14.
15.
also exposed to hazards such as flash floods, including glacial lake outburst floods (GLOFs), forest fires, storms, and
landslides[12]. The impact of flooding on human health and livelihoods is expected to grow and could amount to 4% of GDP by
the 2030s (ADB). Major crops are mostly rainfed or dependent on rain charged spring waters and streams. A more erratic rainfall
pattern in the dry season has been directly impacting both availability and amount of irrigation water. Smallholders are facing
seasonal water shortage and the drying out of water sources is posing a further threat to agriculture and livestock[13]. Other
impacts of climate change include extreme conditions such as long spells of dry season, unusually heavy monsoon rains,
extreme hailstorm events, and outbreak of pest and disease incidences. The shift of agroecological zones altitudinally however
provides new opportunities. Most villages across Bhutan are highly vulnerable to climate impacts, and have low adaptive
capacity attributed to their limited resource base and precarious socio-economic status[14].
6/37
Women: According to the Global Gender Gap Report 2021, Bhutan is ranked 130 out of 153 countries (previously ranked 122 in
2018). Bhutan scored highly in key areas such as educational attainment, however with few women in parliament and ministerial
positions, Bhutan ranked low in political empowerment. In general, traditional beliefs have not restricted women’s involvement in
agriculture, household decision-making, and property inheritance, but their activities outside the community are less tolerated,
especially in rural areas. However, social perceptions and behavior related to gender-specific roles vary along regional lines, with
the patrilineal system dominant in southern areas. Powerful gender norms still dictate that child care and most household chores
are women’s responsibility. Women in Bhutan perform 71 percent of unpaid domestic care work, which is 2.5 times more than
men and their contribution as a share of GDP is 11 percent, while men’s contribution is 5 percent.[15]
The unemployment rate in Bhutan stood at 3.4% in 2018, with 4.2% women unemployed against 2.7% men. Overall, women’s
earnings average only about 75 percent of men’s, with some differences attributable to gaps in education and occupational
segregation. Women have much lower participation in regular paid employment (18.4% as compared to 33.0% for men) and a
more substantial engagement in the agricultural sector.[16] The 2020 labour force survey of Bhutan highlights that 58.8 percent of
women work in agriculture, and that their work burdens are particularly heavy with the addition of household and community work
requirements. Rural women are directly affected by the challenges associated with this sector in terms of low productivity, limited
technology adoption, labour shortages, and poor market access.
There is a rising trend of feminization of agriculture in Bhutan resulting from outmigration of men and male youth seeking off-farm
employment. Work burdens are particularly heavy for women given their responsibilities as the primary caregiver of the
household, manager of the farm, and engagement in community support work. The loss of soil fertility and forest degradation
have increased the time for fuelwood collection by women[17]. Furthermore, impact of climate change on production places
women in a precarious economic position. This translates into vulnerable livelihoods and high drudgery for women farmers. The
low literacy of Bhutanese women, particularly in rural areas, further limits their access to information and markets. BRECSA
seeks to address these specific challenges experienced by women through a number of interventions, such as access to to small
machinery and tools for agricultural and post-harvest processing, financial education and business literacy, and membership in
cooperatives, to name a few. 
Youth: Young people in Bhutan are widely considered as the backbone for future prosperity of the country.Bhutan´s population
is predominantly young, with 60% below the age of 25 years[18]. The literacy rate of youth between 15-24 years is estimated at
93% with the rate being lower for rural youth at 91% than it is for urban youth at 97%. The overall youth unemployment rate in
2021 was 20.9% and out of the total unemployed youth, about 38.6% were males and 61.4% were females. Youth
unemployment is almost double in urban areas (28.6%) compared to rural areas (15.8%).[19]  The most prominent causes of
unemployment among Bhutanese youth is the mismatch of supply and demand of skills, followed by the youths’ preference for
office jobs over physical and manual labour, limited absorption capacity in the job market, and lack of family support while
unemployed. Age, gender, skills, migration, disability, educational attainment, sector preference, and youths’ location in relation
to the Dzongkhag he/she resides are all significant factors in explaining the difference in youth unemployment in Bhutan[20].
Educated youth prefer to migrate to urban areas and civil service jobs are highly prized. It is difficult to attract educated youth to
take up conventional farming, as conventional farming is seen as a labour intensive and a physically demanding job without
secure and promising prospects[21]. Some of the reasons cited by young people for not taking up agriculture-related employment
are crop loss, lack of resources, parental pressure and relatively less access to technical and financial support. The views of
young people, especially those who have dropped out of the education stream as well as those who are unemployed in rural
areas, suggests that with adequate technical and financial support, mechanization of agriculture, regular mentoring, easing
access to finance and developing profitable, sustainable models of farming, agriculture can be made attractive to young
entrepreneurs. [22] An initial Youth Engagement Strategy was developed at design stage and will be further refined during start-
up. One of the key aims of BRECSA is to increase youth engagement in both on- and off-farm employment.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
16.
17.
BRECSA directly addresses systemic barriers in the agriculture sector, post-COVID recovery, and priorities identified in Bhutan’s
RNR Strategy 2030, the Food Self-sufficiency Policy, the Food Systems Summit Pathways document and Bhutan’s COVID-19
Economic Recovery Plan. These policies call for Bhutan to “Build Back Better” in ways that contribute to economic and social
recovery while also meeting the Country’s Nationally Determined Contributions under the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
The RGoB and IFAD have a partnership of over 40 years, which includes investments in 8 projects for a total cost of US$ 114.48
million, with over US$ 70 million of IFAD financing, benefiting around 122,000 households. IFAD is the most important
development partner of the Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB) in the Eastern Region. IFAD has worked with smallholder
farming communities in some of the most remote areas of the country and has a comparative advantage in helping them to
address some of their key challenges and constraints relevant to poverty reduction and agricultural development. The main
priorities that IFAD will address through the implementation of BRECSA include: enhancing agricultural productivity and creating
an enabling environment for smallholder commercialization; promoting youth involvement in the agricultural sector by facilitating
access to land and finance; development of youth agri-businesses; fostering opportunities for vulnerable households to improve
livelihoods and food and nutritional security; addressing the impacts of climate change; enhancing governance structures of
farmers and their groups and transform them into business entities capable of driving this transformation; as well as challenges
related to promoting internal and export marketing.
7/37
IFAD will adopt an inclusive value chain development approach to address the gap between producers, traders and consumers
that pose a challenge to the sustainability and resilience of Bhutan’s food and farming systems. The project will focus on creating
a competitive agri-business sector through enhancing productivity, access to markets, and fostering private sector enterprises,
especially to promote the inclusion of women and youth.
BRECSA promotes agroecological approaches and technologies to reduce food and nutritional insecurity and vulnerability of rural
communities to the anticipated impacts of climate change. Through the CLEAR tool and a participatory identification of current
and anticipated climate change impacts on local livelihoods, production systems, and markets, the project will enable
government, farmers, and private sector actors to develop tailored solutions that respond to farm level needs and market-access
related blockages. The project prioritizes investments in productive climate-resilient infrastructure that contributes to inclusive
food system transformation. Inadequate rural infrastructure leaves communities isolated, holds back food value chain
development, contributes to post-harvest food losses, and is associated with poverty and poor nutrition.
18.
19.
B. Lessons learned
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
BRECSA builds on lessons learned from the existing CARLEP project funded by IFAD, as well as learning from the GAFSP-
funded Food Security and Accelerated Poverty Reduction Project (FSAPP). CARLEP has further deepened support to the
commercialisation of agriculture through the enhancement of agroecological production systems, engagement of private sector,
establishment and strengthening of farmer groups, agricultural diversification, and increases in vegetable, milk and dairy
production. Some lessons learned from IFAD and other development partner projects are:
Targeting interventions: It is important to focus on interventions and programs that cover whole communities and larger number of
households. Providing support to only selected individual households within a small community may adversely affect social
cohesion. Furthermore, and despite gains made in the area of gender equality, rural women in Bhutan continue to carry a
disproportionate share of care work while engaging in commercial activities to supplement household income. There is a need to
understand the impact of challenges women and young girls face in public spaces in participation in decision-making and on
accessing opportunities. To address this, specifically tailored interventions should be developed, coupled with mentoring and
support to access decision-making forums, training, innovation and financial resources. Further collaboration should be explored
with CSOs and agencies working on women empowerment.
Marketing and Market Access: The biggest challenges facing the agri-food sector and the weakest link in the agri-food value
chain remains value addition and strengthening of marketing and market access. Learning from the example of Koufuku
International (a dairy processing company that has partnered with smallholder dairy producers supported by CARLEP), it is key
to invest in a centrally located “hub” to support aggregation, collection, processing, packaging, transport and distribution. For the
creation of these hubs, there is a need to: 1) conduct a feasibility study to guide the establishment of the hubs (e.g., define
catchment area, connection to FG/cooperatives, equipment needed etc.); 2) link those FG/cooperatives to those hubs; and 3)
design and plan for the operation and management of the hubs.
Youth engagement and enterprise development: In addition to the need of capacity enhancement and provision of access to land
and financial resources, Bhutanese youth have a negative view of rural farming life as being laborious, precarious and
economically unremunerated. Therefore, there is a need to bring about a paradigm shift in agriculture and affiliated businesses
through branding it as a commercially viable and technologically driven. Support to youth needs to be properly packaged with
training and skill development in commercial farming, basic entrepreneurship, and digital technologies as prerequisites. Youth
should be properly trained and mentored to become farm managers and entrepreneurs, managing activities such as aggregation,
processing, trading, marketing, etc. Youth should be provided with facilities to access land, training and finance – three of the
direst challenges they face while embarking on agri-food business initiatives.
Agroecology to enhance resilience: One promising approach to achieving food systems transformation is through the adoption of
agroecology. There are several lessons to build on from IFAD experiences in Bhutan and the region. CARLEP has supported
farmers in decreasing their vulnerability to climate change and reduce costs and dependency on external inputs through
permaculture farming and is bringing fallow lands back into production using both permaculture and regenerative agriculture
models. It has also formed youth cooperatives as a way to engage young people in the agriculture sector. BRECSA will build on
those lessons to further adopt agroecology as an integrated approach to sustainable food systems, benefiting small-scale
producers and rural vulnerable communities.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
25.
Project Goal and Objectives: GAFSP approved a USD 13 million grant for the Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder
Agriculture (BRECSA) concept note. IFAD is co-financing the project with USD 8.935 million as a fully blended project. IFAD is
the Supervising Entity for Investment and the Lead Implementing Partner Agency, while WFP is the Supervising Entity for
Technical Assistance and Implementation Support. The goal of BRECSA is to catalyze a 30% increase in resilient commercial
agricultural production and improve food and nutrition security in the 4 target Dzongkhags by 2030. The development objective is
to transform smallholder agriculture into inclusive and resilient agri-food systems that are increasingly profitable and food and
nutrition secure. BRECSA will facilitate the transformation of the agricultural sector in Bhutan through adopting a climate-resilient,
nutrition-sensitive, and commercial value-chain approach. BRECSA will focus on agroecological production, empowering farmer
and youth groups and cooperatives, investing in production and marketing infrastructure, introducing internationally recognized
food standards, and promoting an enabling financial, policy and innovative digital environment. BRECSA will target commercial,
semi-commercial and subsistence farmer households. The total direct beneficiaries of BRECSA interventions are 12,074 farmer
households (approximately 47,088 people), out of which 60% will be women and 30% youth.
8/37
Geographic areas of intervention: The project will be implemented in the central and south-central Dzongkhags (Districts) of
Sarpang, Trongsa, Tsirang and Zhemgang. The four project Dzongkhags are administratively further divided into Gewogs (Ward
– cluster of villages) and villages. There is a total of 37 Gewogs and 539 villages in the project target Dzongkhags. BRECSA will
target all Gewogs within the 4 Dzongkhags. Selection of target villages within Gewogs for production, marketing and other project
interventions will be undertaken at the implementation stage using the results from the CLEAR tool, the mapping exercise of
youth and fallow lands, and the ARPs. The infrastructure for supporting aggregation, processing, storage and marketing will be
located in Gewogs based on feasibility, marketing and investment studies, as well as, low exposure to climate shocks.
BRECSA’s four target Dzongkhags, Zhemgang, Sarpang, Trongsa and Tsirang, have been selected using the following criteria:
(i) demonstrated production potential in selected pro-poor commodities[23]; (ii) substantial youth demography and high poverty
levels; iii) availability of access roads and/or local markets; (iv) demonstrated interest and commitment of communities, farmer
groups and cooperatives for market-oriented production and the building of market linkages; and v) contiguity with CARLEP and
FSAPP Dzongkhags for leveraging climate resilient farming systems and value chains developed by these projects. Two of the
BRECSA target districts share a border with India, while one of them (Sarpang) has an airport to support commercialization.
Furthermore, Zhemgang, Sarpang and Trongsa are among the poorer Dzongkhags of Bhutan. Zhemgang has the second
highest poverty headcount (29.4) while Sarpang has the 4th highest number of rural poor among the 20 Dzongkhags. Trongsa
has the same poverty headcount as Sarpang (15.8%). The Dzongkhag of Tsirang, contiguous to the three poorer Dzongkhags,
has been selected for its high potential for the commercialization of agriculture.
Targeting strategy: BRECSA has a strong focus on social inclusion and addresses the following common IFAD, WFP and
GAFSP cross-cutting priorities:(i) gender and empowerment of women and girls; (ii) climate resilience; and (iii) improved
nutritional outcomes. In addition, the project is designed to be youth-sensitive and inclusive of vulnerable populations, such as
households with differently abled persons and women-headed households. The project will use a range of targeting mechanisms
to implement the project in a manner sensitive to the needs and constraints of smallholder farmers, women, youth agri-
entrepreneurs, value chain actors, and differently abled persons. In addition to potential for commercialisation, enhancing
household nutrition and the involvement of women and youth will be important considerations.
BRECSA will have a multi-dimensional targeting approach focusing on poverty alleviation and improved food and nutritional
security while boosting commercialization, strengthening value-chains and increasing the resilience of both poor small holder
farmers and commercially-oriented farmers. Direct targeting will be used to ensure social inclusion of women, youth and
vulnerable groups like women-headed households and persons with disability. Sixty percent of BRECSA beneficiaries will be
women, including a minimum of 5 percent women-headed households and 30 percent will be youth. Six hundred differently abled
women, men and youth, constituting 25% of the population of differently abled persons in the target districts will benefit from
BRECSA interventions.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
Table 1: BRECSA beneficiaries per Dzongkhag
32.
The government of Bhutan has criteria which it uses to classify households as subsistence households. The project will use this
criteria for targeting, and mirror the % of this classification within the target districts for targeting beneficiaries as per Table 2
below. However, the final selection of beneficiaries will be further refined based on the CLEAR exercise and the baseline study
findings[24], in consultation with the agriculture departments in the Dzongkhags. For some activities targeted at vulnerable
households - such as homestead gardens - those would be distributed equally per villages selected and community consultation
will be used to select beneficiary households.
9/37
33.
Social Inclusion Strategy: The social inclusion strategy of BRECSA focuses on improving well-being, increasing visibility, voice
and agency, reducing the burden of labour, expanding choices and control over productive assets to facilitate the empowerment
of marginalized groups.  It also focusses on building the capacity of implementers including government dhzokhag officials and
the officials of the MoAF to understand the spirit of social inclusion and implement the project in a way that is sensitive to the
needs and priorities of marginalized groups. The social inclusion of women, youth and vulnerable groups, including women,
youth, vulnerable women from women-headed households and differently abled persons will be ensured through focussing on
intrinsic, instrumental and collective agency, recogninzing that changes in any one of these dimensions impacts other
dimensions[25]. The overall targets for women are 60 percent of project beneficiaries and youth will be 30 percent of
beneficiaries.
34.
Table 3: Women’s Empowerment in BRECSA
35.
Value chain selection: A crucial part of the project approach and inclusion strategy is the sound selection of the pro-poor value
chains. The selection of priority commodities was based on: potential for inclusion and empowerment; additional benefit to poor
youth and women; opportunity to promote household nutrition;climate resilience; market demand and competitive advantage;
economic and financial analyses; and national priorities for poverty reduction and agricultural commercialisation. The priority list
of commodities includes: dairy, poultry, vegetables, mushrooms, ginger and turmeric. Flexibility will be needed to allow additional
value chains (oilseeds, green tea, honey and other NWFPs) to be included post the conclusion of the CLEAR analysis and
formulation of ARPs, as new opportunities may arise and adjustments may be required due to changing market dynamics.
36.
Farmer groups and market operators: There are 111 FGs and Coops operational in the target districts, accounting for almost
2800 members. Vegetable coops / FGs are the majority (41), followed by dairy coops (21). Dairy coops tend to have most
members (36 on average) [26].These groups are responsable for production, aggregation and marketing, and they provide
services to members in terms of input acquisition and production support services. The members of the poultry cooperatives are
relatively well organized and sell their products through their respective cooperatives. They also make bulk purchases of feed and
other inputs through the cooperative. Another example is FG/cooperatives supplying fresh produce to local schools through the
school feeding programme.
10/37
37.
The FG/cooperatives are increasingly responding to production based on market needs, and becoming further involed in
commodity export. Based on the selected target commodities / VCs, joint planning, Capacity Gap Analysis and Training Needs
Assessments will be carried out. Based on the results of these assessment, organisational and capacity strengthening will be
conducted for the selected cooperatives/groups. Training will include organisational management and leadership, enhanced
financial and market literacy, and entrepreneurial savviness.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
38.
Since BRECSA’s main aim it to support the transformation of the agricultural sector from subsistence farming to a more
commercial and sustainable/resilient sector, it is structured so that the first component focuses on enhancing resilient agricultural
production systems and improving productivity while leaving no-one behind; the second component is to help bring this
production to market and develop pro-poor market linkages; while the third component supports an enabling environment for a
more competitive and innovative commercial agricultural sector. Each component builds on the other resulting in three inter-
connected components: Component 1: Resilient production systems; Component 2: Strengthened value chain coordination and
market linkages; and Component 3: Innovative and competitive agri-food sector. The direct and indirect beneficiaries of the
different components is summarised in the Table 3 below:
39.
Table 4: Direct and Indirect Beneficiaries of the Project by Components and Sub-components
40.
Component 1: Resilient production Systems
41.
This component focuses on building resilient production systems based on a regenerative model that increases resilience to
climate and other shocks, and that contributes to food and nutrition security. Efforts will be taken to transition subsistence farmers
to semi-commercial, and semi-commercial farmers to more commercially oriented operations. This component will seek to
increase capacities, household food and nutrition security, women inclusion in the agriculture sector, assets, and income.
42.
Sub-component 1.1 - Consolidated Livelihood Exercise for Analyzing Resilience (CLEAR):
43.
44.
Under this sub-component, WFP’s “CLEAR” tool will be deployed to analyse longer-term changes in risk and vulnerability to
better understand impacts of climate change on livelihoods, food and nutrition security and broader livelihood vulnerabilities
disaggregated by gender. CLEAR considers climate related impacts, both in terms of extreme weather events and long-term
gradual changes (including shifting rainfall patterns, rising temperatures, etc.). The CLEAR will have a focus on value chains to
match commodities with the appropriate agro-ecological zone, as well as, for defining specific infrastructure needs to contend
with anticipated climate change impacts.
The CLEAR process is highly participatory. Based on identified needs, the analysis is tailored to address the country´s thematic
priorities (i.e., nutrition, migration, supply-chains, etc.) and the livelihoods and vulnerability assessments are oriented accordingly.
During the scoping phase, a Task Force (TF) will be established consisting of relevant stakeholders (including MoAF, GNHC,
Hydromet, NEC, etc.). The Implementation phase will involve defining baseline relationships between climate-related hazards,
food security and key livelihood activities. This is done by developing a Livelihood Zone Map at national, Dzongkhag and
community levels through consultation workshops (for all Gewogs). Group discussions are undertaken to understand dominant
livelihood activities, including how households access the food they eat and generate income, what changes have they observed
with regard to weather /climate/rainfall patterns/their environment over the past decade, root causes of vulnerability, how they are
coping with them and what are the main adaptation challenges. Climate change projections will be analyzed and scenarios of
anticipated climate change impacts on the agriculture sector for the next 50 years will be developed. The implementation phase
will be outsourced to a scientific partner who will undertake the zone mapping and interpretation of climate projections from the
perspective of food security and livelihoods. Using the latest climate models, the scientific partner will then identify the most likely
future climate scenarios and assess the potential impacts on livelihoods together with WFP climate experts. This phase will
involve 20 Dzongkhags and Gewog consultation workshops and community focus group discussions (sample of 2 communities
per Gewog). A more in-depth analysis of all Gewogs in the BRECSA target Dzongkhags will be undertaken.
11/37
45.
46.
This is followed by a validation phase which includes the development of adaptation options that need to be implemented to
reduce future impacts of climate change on food and nutrition systems, both at policy and programmatic levels. Through multi-
stakeholder workshops at national, Dzongkhag and Gewog levels, results will be presented, and barriers and recommendations
for adaptation options will be formulated.
Although designed for, and populated with information and data from the BRECSA target districts, the results of the CLEAR
exercise will have national relevance as findings and derived adaptation strategies can be extrapolated to similar agro-ecological
zones and comparative livelihoods in Bhutan, and can be further used by Bhutan in its Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDC). The CLEAR exercise will enhance the effectiveness and resilience of all BRECSA investments and indirectly benefits all
households living in rural areas in the 4 BRECSA target Dzongkhags. Furthermore, as its relevance extends beyond BRECSA,
the total number of indirect beneficiaries is significantly higher than the population in the 4 target Dzongkhags. The resulting
analysis of CLEAR will guide the formulation of Gewog and Dzongkhag level Agriculture Resilience Plans (ARPs).
47.
Sub-component 1.2 - Gewog and Dzongkhag Agriculture Resilience Plans (ARPs):
48.
49.
50.
Drawing on the analyses of the CLEAR exercise, ARPs will be developed for all 37 Gewogs in the 4 target Dzongkhags. The
Gewog level ARPs will be aggregated to develop a Dzongkhag level ARP. The ARPs will be developed in a participatory manner
bringing together smallholder farmers, aggregators, traders, processors, potential investors, other value chain actors and relevant
Gewog and Dzongkhag personnel with 50 percent participation of women. The downscaled CLEAR analysis will inform the ARPs
for identifying geographic and site-specific exposure and vulnerability to anticipated climate impacts and to articulate the targeted
support required for the 3 BRECSA target household groups (subsistence, semi-commercial and commercial) within each
Gewog. The ARPs will include spatial and temporal planning of cropping and livestock raising zones, identification of resilient
crop varieties, resilient livestock breeds, identification of site-specific agro-ecological practices, spatial planning and design of
climate-resilient infrastructure works and other climate change adaptation measures (erosion control, flood and/or land-slide
protection, water-saving technologies, water harvesting and storage facilities, disease prevention & control etc.) as per the
specificities of each Gewog. The ARPs will provide the required information for developing tailored packages of climate- sensitive
agricultural production inputs, technologies and practices that meet the needs of the 3 household groups with a focus on women
and youth.
The development of ARPs requires significant community mobilization to ensure that the target population is meaningfully
engaged in planning, implementation and monitoring of the identified priority interventions. Furthermore, longer-term engagement
with the farmers is required to ensure proper take-up of new approaches and technologies, effective group and cooperative
formation and operation, facilitation of logistics, market linkages, and field monitoring and data collection. Gender and youth-
sensitive facilitation will be provided to ensure inclusion and meaningful participation. As a practical means of addressing the
above challenges and needs, BRECSA will appoint a full-time ARP Coordinator within the Project Management Unit (PMU), as
well as establish a trained cadre of community supporters for ARP development and implementation, referred to as Sanam
Jabjorpa (SJ). At a minimum, there will be 1 Sanam Jabjorpa per Gewog (min 37) who will be tasked to work together with the
Gewog agriculture and livestock officers, and report to the ARP Officer in the PMU. The Sanam Jabjorpa will be selected from a
pool of graduates through a competitive process.
Technical assistance: The generation of the ARPs will be technically backstopped by WFP through specialists in agricultural
resilience/CC adaptation and agroecological planning specialists. WFP will also provide a 3-week training to the SJs in
consensus building and group cohesion, agroecology and permaculture, hygienic dairy production, Gender Equity and Social
Inclusion (GESI), food and nutrition security and nutrition-sensitive capacity building, financial education and business plan
development, and M&E. Follow up technical trainings will be provided over the course of the implementation period on production
of specific commodities (i.e. mushroom or honey) and other commercial aspects of farming (enterprise development for provision
of bio-inputs, post-harvest processing etc.). WFP will also provide training to the Dzongkhag agriculture and livestock officers and
Gewog staff to upgrade their skills and build a cohesive team with the SJs. Furthermore, in an effort to translate ARPs into action
WFP will strengthen the capacities of farmers to enable them to adopt new technologies and agroecological farming practices,
and increase their production in terms of quantity and quality to meet market demand. The ARPs will be re-assessed and, if
necessary, revised every 2-years.
51.
Sub-component 1.3 – Support to vulnerable groups to improve income and nutrition status:
52.
This sub-component will provide customized support to women, men and youth - including women-headed households and
households of differently abled persons - to improve their livelihoods, food and nutritional security and, where possible, facilitate
their integration into the value-chains supported by BRECSA.
53.
Activity 1.3.1: Livelihood Investment Plans
54.
In each Dzongkhag, the PMU – and mainly the Inclusion and Nutrition Officer and the Sanam Jabjorpa - will oversee the
finalization of the criteria for selection of the vulnerable households for livelihood support in consultation with the Dzongkhag,
agri-extension staff and communities. The 1,500 beneficiaries will be divided between the four Dzongkhags proportionate to the
population of the Dzongkhags and the targets for youth, women and differently abled persons.
55.
 Table 5: Distribution of Beneficiaries of Livelihood Investment Plans per Dzongkhag
12/37
56.
57.
The project will guide and mentor the beneficiaries through a four-month structured process to identify the livelihood investment
opportunity and develop a livelihood investment plan. In the process of developing a livelihood plan and mentoring visits, a
selection of GALS tools will be used to facilitate critical reflection on life choices, challenges and opportunities, gender dynamics
within the household. BRECSA will provide a grant of up to $500 as initial working capital to kick-start the income-generating
activity. The households will continue to be supported through mentoring visits for a minimum of eight months after the enterprise
has been started. A service provider will be contracted to design the eight Livelihood Investment Plan sessions and a format for
eight follow-up mentoring visits to be undertaken after the income-generating activity has been started. The service provider will
develop and design a training manual and other materials required by the Sanam Jabjorpa to conduct the household sessions.
The service provider will design and deliver the Training of Trainers (ToT) for the Sanam Jabjorpa. Residential 10-day ToTs will
be held in each Dzongkhag in year 2 of the project. The Sanam Jabjorpa in the Dzongkhags will be trained to conduct the
Livelihood Investment Plan sessions and provide mentoring support to the beneficiaries.
Eight Livelihood Investment sessions will be delivered fortnightly over a period of four months. The Livelihood Investment Plan
will be finalized at the end of this period and submitted to the PMU for approval and disbursement of the funds. Activities will
include supporting beneficiaries in the production of commercial commodities (poultry, dairy, vegetables including mushroom) as
well as with small-scale machinery and equipment for agro-processing and food preservation (pickling, drying, fermentation,
blanching, roasting, etc.) of micronutrient-rich foods and their safe and hygienic storage at the household level. The beneficiaries
will be linked to relevant training that is being provided by BRECSA and to relevant farmer groups and/or cooperatives functioning
in their area. BRECSA will support them in marketing their produce through the market support interventions (sub-component
2.1). Beneficiaries will have the option of pooling their investments, should a small group wish to do so. The Sanam Jabjorpa will
visit the beneficiaries assigned to them every month for the eight months after the enterprise has been started to provide
mentoring support to build confidence, encourage critical reflection on life choices through GALS tools and reinforce skills to
establish and sustain the enterprise.
58.
Activity 1.3.2: Nutrition-sensitive Agriculture Interventions
59.
60.
61.
As a part of nutrition-sensitive agriculture interventions, the project will seek to improve access to, and availability of, nutritious
foods to enhance diets. Diversification of food production through home gardens is an integral part of local food systems and the
agricultural landscape of Bhutan. Under this activity, around 3,166 subsistence smallholder households[27]will benefit from the
home garden support package and distribution of inputs worth USD 500 per household over a period of six years. Packages will
be customized based on the needs of the farmers. The PMU, supported by the decentralized services of the MoAF, will be
responsible for implementation, including mobilization, distribution of packages and capacity building of households. In order to
promote learning and exchange among fellow subsistence farmers, a minimum of two nutrition gardens will be developed as
demonstration sites within each Gewog to promote a sustainable model for food security and dietary diversity.
In terms of nutrition awareness and capacity building, the Sanam Jabjorpa and the relevant district officers will be provided with a
three-day hands-on residential training on food-based nutrition and effective communication techniques, followed by a refresher
training. Agriculture nutrition integrated training will be facilitated through the PMU Inclusion and Nutrition Officer, district
nutritionists within MoH, nutritionist within the country office of the WFP, and subject matter specialists on agriculture, farming,
livestock and Social Behaviour Change (SBC). The Sanam Jabjorpa will in turn provide nutrition education to farmer families to
improve their overall nutritional status for healthy and productive lives. The integrated agricultural nutrition awareness will be
rolled out to 21,600 project beneficiaries in the four target districts.
In order to improve the food and nutrition status of beneficiaries, the project will benefit from the knowledge generated by the
FSAPP GAFSP-supported project currently being implemented in Bhutan by the World Bank. The FSAPP Social Behaviour
Change (SBC) strategy (2019-2022) in the project target districts[28] emphasizes 9 behaviours[29] that need to be addressed as
key drivers of malnutrition. BRECSA will adapt this strategy to the project target districts by undertaking a study to examine
dietary diversity among four groups of women within BRECSA target districts: adolescent girls (15-17)[30], youth (18-35),
pregnant and lactating women, and other women in the reproductive age group (36 to 49) to explore the dynamics of food
availability, accessibility, affordability, and consumption in relation to the ten food groups and socio-economic activities these
women are involved in. The findings of this study will form a solid knowledge base to develop a detailed Social Behaviour
Change (SBC) Plan for BRECSA beneficiaries[31]. For the implementation of the Plan, BRECSA project will seek linkages and
complementarities with FSAPP, particularly for key nutrition messages promoted and Information, Education and Communication
(IEC) materials developed.
62.
13/37
To further improve nutritional practices, the project will support training of 6300 youth (boys and girls), 14,700 women and 600
people with disabilities (PWD). In separate groups, the Nutrition Officer and the Sanam Jabjorpa will provide youth and women
with key nutrition information to enhance household consumption and overall dietary improvement. Nutrition awareness and
information related to integrated homestead food production, cooking demonstrations on low-cost nutritious recipes from garden
produce, backyard farms, food combinations, and small-scale household level agro-processing aiming at enhancing
micronutrient content of foods, increasing shelf life and prolonged year-round food availability will be endorsed. The project will
also develop first-of-its-kind country-level nutrition-sensitive agriculture knowledge products inclusive of manuals, field-based
SBC materials and social media campaigns to create momentum around nutrition awareness. BRECSA will also assess the
minimum dietary diversity of women (MDD-W) at the beginning, mid-term, and end of the project as part of the baseline survey.
63.
Table 6: Total Beneficiaries of Nutrition Interventions*
64.
Activity 1.3.3 Readiness Support for Differently Abled Persons
65.
66.
The total number of differently abled persons in the project target Dzongkhags is 2,432. BRECSA will target 600 differently abled
persons, which comprises 25 percent of the total population of differently abled persons in the target districts. BRECSA will
ensure that within the target of 600 beneficiaries, the three groups of differently abled persons, mild, moderate and severe, are all
included. In selecting project beneficiaries, priority will be given to the poorer more vulnerable households, including women
headed households. A minimum of 50 percent of the differently abled persons will be women and thirty percent young women
and men between the ages of 18 to 35. The distribution of the target beneficiaries will be proportionate to the population of
differently abled persons in a Dzongkhag. The project will, where possible, engage the differently abled persons directly in
agriculture related income generating activities (Activity 1.3.1). In cases where the differently abled person herself/himself is not
able to engage in an income-generating activity, the caregivers will be engaged in an agri-related income-generating activity to
enable the household to generate more income and have better resources to take care of the differently abled persons.
A service provider (an organization specialized in working with differently abled persons) will be recruited to identify the target
beneficiaries in the four Dzongkhags, obtain their consent to participate in the project, and assess the need for assistive devices
or technologies required to enable the person to be more functional. The service provider will counsel and mentor the person and
their caregiver for a period of at least 6 months, providing life skills, self-care and management techniques and on-going support
to help the differently abled persons and the household reach a higher level of well-being. The differently abled persons and / or
the caregiver interested in pursuing income generating activities will be linked by the service provider to the SJs in the area. The
SJs will support nutrition awareness education and the PMU will provide the homestead with a garden kit to promote food and
nutritional diversity and security for the differently abled persons and their household. The service provider will be responsible for
organizing a total of eight Empowerment Forums for Differently Abled Persons. These will be organized in two rounds in each
Dzongkhag, in the third and sixth year of BRECSA. In each forum, 20 differently abled persons will be invited with their caregivers
to exchange lessons learnt, success stories and to dialogue with Dzongkhag officials about ways forward to enhance their
inclusion in livelihood opportunities. These forums will help to enhance the visibility and dignity of differently abled persons.
67.
Sub-component 1.4 - Investment in commercial farming systems
68.
This subcomponent focuses on enhancing the commercialisation of farming systems. Similar to the analysis done under the
CARLEP project, a geospatial fallow land and youth demography analysis is being undertaken to inform the BRECSA CLEAR
and ARP development process. This will enable the identification of high potential production zones (Hubs) which will be
centered along main arteries and economic corridors and designed using permaculture farming principles for promoting climate
resilient agroecological farming. Farmer Groups or Cooperatives (FG/FCs) will be organised and linked to the Hubs for facilitation
of commercial production, capacity building and input provision. This will enable engagement of a larger group of farmers who
would produce specific commodities in sufficient volumes for aggregation and commercialisation. BRECSA will support the
establishment of at least 4 youth-led Hubs per Dzongkhag (16 in total); each hub covering 1 – 2 Gewogs (up to 32). In support of
the hubs and surrounding farmer network, an ecosystem of enterprises will be established for provision of critical inputs (bio-
inputs) to facilitate increased production of marketable commodities. The Sanam Japjorba will play a critical role in mobilising the
young women and men, farmers and entrepreneurs for operationalising this Sub-component. The project will also support the
construction of critical infrastructure for ensuring optimal production and marketing (see also Subcomponent 2.1).
69.
Activity 1.4.1: TA for Climate Resilient Commercial Agriculture Production andBusinessManagement
70.
For operationalising the above-described Hub, a number of TA activities will be undertaken by the project to capacitate the
different actors engaged in commodity production. These TA activities include:
71.
72.
73.
14/37
Permaculture farming: In each Dzongkhag, four dynamic farmers (Lead Farmers) already practicing some level of diversified
farming will be identified. Similarly, young women and men and other farmers interested in adopting agroecological farming who
reside relatively close to the Lead Farmer will also be identified. A training on permaculture will be provided for both the Lead
Farmer and identified youth and farmers through a learning-by-doing approach on converting the Lead Farmer’s land into a
permaculture farm. This training will be delivered by a service provider recruited by the project. The second step will be the
amalgamation of some of the trained youth into FG/FCs for formation of the 16 Hubs. The youth FG/FCs will either be provided
land by the government within their locality, or the youth groups will enter into a long-term lease with land owners in their area
that have fallow land (a template legal agreement was developed under CARLEP). The permaculture service provider will guide
the youth in translating their knowledge gained from the Lead Farmer training into designing a fully functional permaculture farm.
The network of permaculture farms and Hubs will be linked to form a community of practice (COP) and connected via an online
app for remote supervision and intermittent support from the service provider for a period of 2 years. Exposure visits to
neighbouring country permaculture sites will be undertaken for lead farmers and Hub members. Model permaculture farms will
ideally be < 4 acres managed by lead farmers who are semi-commercial or commercial farmers, as well as youth groups, who
will have access to fallow land from the government. A fallow land and youth demography study has been undertaken for the
project area for pairing youth groups with available fallow lands. While the project will encourage farmers with relatively large
farm size to adopt permaculture technologies, there is no technical barrier to smaller landholdings also transitioning to
permaculture.
Financial education and business literacy:Financial education and business literacy (FEBL) training will be provided to youth
Hubs, Farmer Groups and Cooperatives (FG/FCs) and entrepreneurs for Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) development. This
will capacitate these groups to operate on a commercial basis and to inform decisions for maximizing returns on their
investments. FEBL training will cover the essentials of financial literacy and household finances; basic business skills on
managing their farm as a business; design of bankable business plans; and effective financial management of group and
cooperative enterprises. These courses are critical to generate regular savings, provide women and men farmers with the skills
and confidence to work collectively and engage with vendors and investors. They will also capacitate cooperatives to design and
implement ‘financial literacy’ campaigns and activities at the local level, including building themselves as potential future lenders
to their shareholders.
Formation and Strengthening of Farmer Groups and Cooperatives: For advancing commercially oriented agriculture
operations, BRECSA will support existing FG/FCs as well as establish new dairy, poultry, crop, mushroom etc. FG/FCs where
needed. The Sanam Japjorba will mobilise interested individuals/households who would like to join a FG/FC. Subsequently, the
SJ will submit the paperwork to RAMCO for formal registration of the FG/FC. The FG/FCs will receive training in 2 critical areas:
1) leadership, management and negotiation; and 2) FEBL (as described above). With regard to the first training area, several
service providers will be procured for training each FG/FC in leadership for building group cohesion; management for effective
meetings, collective decision making, and enforcement of bylaws; and negotiation for better input and sale prices.
74.
Activity 1.4.2:  Dairy and Poultry Production
75.
Dairy production:The SJs will identify interested households that want to engage in the dairy value chain and support them with
formation of Dairy FG/FCs. In addition to the trainings detailed in 1.4.1, the Dairy FG/FCs will be trained in hygienic shed
management, milking, container sterilisation and storage by the Regional Livestock Development Center (RLDC - DOL).
Furthermore, the project will financially support DOL with procuring dairy cattle and sex-sorted semen, co-finance improved shed
construction, production and distribution of improved fodder seed and vegetation for planting, establishment of community-
managed Milk Chilling Centres (MCCs), and refrigerated trucks where required.
76.
The project will provide the following support for expanding dairy production capacity:
Provision of cross-bred cows – 40% subsidy and 60% farmer – to increase daily volume of milk production. A total of around
1600 crossbred cattle will be purchased over the duration of the project. They animals will be transported according to
international standards, ensuring the welfare of animals. In order to minimize risks, provisions will be made for covering the
entire cost of quarantine and insurance for a year per animal;
Farmer groups who purchase crossbred animals will be supported with CGI roofing sheets and cement for improved shed
construction. The farmer groups will contribute local building materials and labour. Up to a total of 1600 cowsheds will be
supported under the programme. Dairy groups will be encouraged to engage with the National Biogas Programme for
combining biogas units with the improved sheds;
High nutrient content fodder seed will be provided to Dairy FG/FCs for cultivation on-farm and on fallow lands. The project will
also provide chaff-cutters for efficient fodder utilisation;
Resources will be provided to RLDC for training 40 Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWs) who are not only capable of
primary animal health care and administering artificial insemination but also, are able to train dairy farmers with hygienic shed
management and clean milk production;
Households that want to establish a complementary enterprise of vermicompost production will be supported through Sub-
Component 3.1 – Access to financial services.
77.
Poultry production:Notwithstanding the disruption to the egg and broiler chicken market caused by the inferior feed purchase in
2021 and subsequent import of eggs from India to meet the shortfall, poultry production provides a good entry-point activity for
youth FG/FCs to engage in as it is relatively less labour intensive and provides good returns within the first year of operations. To
ensure sustainability of poultry operations the project will focus on expansion of hatchery capacity, hygienic shed management,
local feed production, and storage and transport. The project will support existing poultry FG/FCs and the SJs will identify
interested households for forming new poultry FG/FCs. Both the existing and new FG/FCs will undergo the trainings described
above under the activity Formation and Strengthening of Farmer Groups and Cooperatives. The project will provide the following
support for improving poultry production:
For newly formed poultry FG/FCs the project will support procurement of parent stock for the National Poultry Development
Centre, Sarpang, and cost share the construction of improved poultry sheds, basic equipment (drinker, feeder and heater), and
day-old chicks. The project will cover 50% of the cost and the farmer or group will need to assume the remainder of the cost.
They will be connected with the credit service providers under “access to financial services” under SC3.1;
All poultry FG/FCs will receive training as described under the section above on Formation and Strengthening of Farmer
Groups and Cooperatives, as well as on hatchery management and expansion.
The CAHW will be trained in providing animal health support services such as for administering vaccines.
15/37
78.
Activity 1.4.3:  High Value Commodities
79.
A number of commodities have been identified that have high potential for cultivation in the target Dzongkhags with good market
value. Off-season vegetables (OSV), ginger, and turmeric rank the highest although other high value crops (HVCs) such as
shade grown cardamom, oil seed and green tea are also good candidates. Based on the ARPs, target zones for producing HVCs
will be delineated and SJs will mobilise interested households for formation of FG/FCs. The other high value commodity the
project will support is mushroom cultivation. Domestically, there is a significant demand for mushrooms that can be met through
the establishment of youth-run mushroom sheds similar to what ARDC Wengkhar initiated under CARLEP. As production
volumes exceed domestic demand, both fresh and dehydrated mushrooms can be exported to neighbouring countries and
markets further afield.
80.
Building on the honey value chain in Tsirang, Sarpang and Bumthang, an assessment on honey production in target Gewogs will
be undertaken to develop a systematic scaling up strategy. All crop and honey producer groups and cooperatives will be linked to
the Hubs for aggregation and marketing. Support will be provided to the National Apiculture Centre for procurement of Apiculture
seed, equipment and training for advancing its mandate in the project areas. The following are the key activities that the project
will support for promoting HVCs and honey production:
A 100 crop production groups will be established with the support of SJs, registered by RAMCO and trained in production
methods by ARDC Smartening and agri-extension officers using training materials developed under CARLEP (materials will be
revised/enhanced to suit the BRECSA target Dzongkhags). The crop production groups will also receive relevant additional
trainings described under Activity 1.4.1. ARDC Smartening and agri-extension officers will receive refresher training in
agroecological crop production by technical experts procured nationally or internationally;
The crop producer groups will receive a 50% subsidy on seed, bio-inputs, polytunnels, drip/sprinkler irrigation, and minor
production tools;
Ten mushroom groups will be established with the assistance of SJs. ARDC Wengkhar will train the groups in temperature-
controlled mushroom shed construction and maintenance, sterile substrate and spore production, and packaging.
Considering the relatively higher costs and the need for creating a critical mass of mushroom producers, a subsidy of 50% will
be provided to interested mushroom producer group members. The remaining 50% will be in the form of a loan obtained
through the financial service or through own contribution. (Sub-Component 3.1);
An assessment along the different agro-ecological zones will inform the investments in developing the honey value chain,
including group formation, capacity building (applying a peer-to-peer approach) and provision of basic production materials
like beehives (possibly “honey on tap” boxes), protective gear and simple equipment. Also, support will be provided to the
honey groups with packaging, branding, aggregation and transport. Initially about 10 honey producer groups will be
established with a possibility of expansion depending on the demand.
81.
Of the total beneficiaries of 12,074, those engaged in the honey, poultry, mushroom, and permaculture VCs are 1,410, which is
11.6% of the total. This group constitutes a critical mass for establishing the foundation for the respective value chains, and are
made up of semi-commercial or commercial farmers. Subsistence farmers have a different package of support and once they
graduate to semi-commercial status, they will be eligible to engage in these higher investment-related activities. The honey,
poultry and mushroom production is well suited for youth engagement considering that they are less labor intensive. While the
investment costs are relatively high due to Bhutan’s particular geographic context, the cost recovery period is between 2 – 4
years as the profit margins are lucrative due to high local, regional and export demand. These products are low hanging fruit for
establishing “Brand Bhutan” exports. There are several examples of well-functioning semi-commercial and commercial farmers
and youth groups who have taken up these activities under CARLEP. The project will link interested farmers with the rural finance
component to raise the 50% credit to match the project grant.
82.
Infrastructure: To support the above production activities the project will invest in public goods infrastructure, which will be
climate-proofed. The proposed interventions include:
1. 
1.  Climate-resilient Irrigation Infrastructure: The provision of irrigation (new/ rehabilitation schemes) was identified by the
RGoB and communities as the highest priority. Currently, many irrigation systems in Bhutan are in poor condition and
require rehabilitation. Leaky canals, frequent damage by landslides, sedimentation in the upper reaches of the canal,
lowering of river bed, insufficient water at the source, inappropriate structures, and increasing competition over the use
of water are some of the common problems these irrigation systems face. Theproject will fund: (i) 16 schemes for
rehabilitation and improvement of existing irrigation systems. The implementation of these schemes will benefit about
1,000 households and shall bring more than 1,200 acres of agriculture land under improved irrigation with adequate,
reliable and timely supply of water to farmlands; (ii) development of 4 new irrigation schemes (The final selection of
schemes/sites will be determined based on the CLEAR and ARPs. The new schemes are expected to benefit further
1,376 households and bring about 2,432 acres of land under irrigation); (iii) water storage to help the provision of more
reliable water supplies to the beneficiary communities during the dry seasons, and (iv) address climatic hazards like
floods and wildfires via increased soil carbon sequestration, which significantly increases absorption of soil moisture
and reduces soil erosion. Implementation will be done with the technical support of the Dzongkhag Engineering
Section. O&M will be the responsibility of Water User Associations (WUAs), comprising of beneficiary HHs. A MoU will
be signed between the project and the WUAs. The project will also strengthen the capacity of WUAs through formal
and informal trainings and through awareness raising sessions aimed at O&M of irrigation schemes, cost recovery, and
conflict resolution.
2.  Fencing: The project will fund appropriate fencing (vegetative, electric, chain-link) for the farms demonstrating high
16/37
potential for agriculture commercialization. The project will fund 160 km of electric and hybrid fencing, and will pilot 32
km of chain link fencing for scaling-up based on the results. The project will sensitize and proactively encourage
farmers to employ vegetative fencing such as, Sichuan pepper (Zanthoxylum spp), a sturdy thorny bush that deters
certain wildlife species.
3.  Land Development: The key activities anticipated in land development will include: preparation of terraces of suitable
width; site enhancement, land levelling, stabilizing risers etc. The proposed activities will help in developing land
suitable for hand-tiller usage to support commercial scale agriculture. These measures will be complemented with
improved soil fertility and water conservation measures for improving and sustaining land productivity and crop
production.
4.  Greenhouses: Based on the successful utilization of protected agriculture technology, the project will fund about 160
greenhouses in all four Dzongkhags. The greenhouses with improved technology (using appropriate material for
frame construction) will help in promoting year-round high value vegetable production. The project will pilot
automated drip-irrigation systems to gain efficiencies in water application and reduced labour. Greenhouses and all
other project interventions will be provided as per targeting strategy laid down in the PDR. The green houses will be
provided to both individual HHs and to clusters of farmers, specifically for youth hubs.
83.
Component 2: Strengthened Value Chain Coordination and Market Linkages
84.
This component will build on Component 1’s increased agricultural outputs and promote agricultural commercialization and foster
exports through investing in post-harvest facilities within the established hubs. The hubs will cater to a certain number of
prioritized crops based on market demand and other factors, including agro-ecological, climate, seasonality based on the CLEAR
analysis.
85.
Efforts will be undertaken to build business linkages between producers, buyers, financiers and local stakeholders through multi-
stakeholder platforms (MSP).
86.
Sub-component 2.1 - Enhancing efficiency of value chain operations:
87.
Enhancing efficiency in value chain transactions is crucial for improving the competitiveness of the RNR sector in Bhutan. This
sub-component will apply an integrated value chain approach, defining interventions in all value chain functions from input supply,
production, aggregation and storage, processing, to defining marketing channels, and export strategies. Value chain specific
intervention strategies and plans will be formulated to guide investment planning.
88.
Activity 2.1.1      Investing in post-harvest facilities for key commodities
89.
90.
91.
To support the commercialization of agricultural produce (including livestock products), the project will fund aggregation centres,
and small-scale processing centres with required washing, grading, packing facilities and storage. These processing facilities will
be strategically located based on the CLEAR analysis and Dzongkhag ARPs. Feasibility studies, detailed supply chain and
economic and financial analysis, and business plan development will precede all construction related to processing and
marketing facilities.
Dairy value chain: BRECSA will invest in improving supply chains (milk collection centers [MCC], milk cooling units, refrigerated
transportation) and processing (small scale dairy plants). BRECSA will support farming households with the development of a
cold chain for allowing efficient product flow to the nearest milk processing unit. Depending on the volumes produced and relative
remoteness of production units, a collection and aggregation system consisting of Milk Collection Centres (MCC) and
transportation arrangements will be established. The project will invest in approximately 10 MCC (500 Litres), allocating a total
budget of 100,000 USD benefitting an estimated 1000 beneficiaries of which 80% are women.
There are 21 existing dairy cooperatives active in the BRECSA target districts, of which 12 of them are in Trongsa. Existing
cooperative dairy processing units operate largely below their available processing capacity. Regarding small-scale milk
processing units, there are 12 operating in the project area of which 7 are in Zhemgang. BRECSA aims to identify potential
commercial dairy enterprises willing to source from the BRECSA target area in a similar setup as with Kofouko (KIPL) under
CARLEP. In the absence of a corporate investor for a large investment, BRECSA will explore opportunities to co-finance with
FG/FC the establishment of smaller scale milk processing units in locations that cater to local needs for fresh milk, yoghurt, butter
and soft cheese. The size of the small-scale production units will be determined by the production in the sourcing areas but vary
between a capacity of 100 to 300 liters per day for dairy groups totalling 30 to 50 members. It is estimated that at least 5 new
dairy processing units will be constructed with a tentative overall budget allocation of USD 1,750,000. All investments will be
preceded with a feasibility analysis.
92.
Lack of adequate quality control is observed at the cooperative milk aggregation processing centres. Introduction of a simple
technology to establish minimum hygiene standards and identify protein and fat content levels would provide additional value to
the product competitiveness in the market as certified / controlled products will fetch premium pricing and offer an extra layer of
protection against side-selling by producers. BRECSA will support dairy farmer groups in the procurement of lactometers
(measuring protein/fat content) and establishing a pricing system differentiating quality of produce. Farmer groups will be trained
in quality measurement and in applying the defined quality-based pricing system. This will benefit 15 farmer groups or 500
beneficiaries of which 80% are women.
93.
Poultry and egg value chain: There are several active farmer groups and cooperatives dedicated to the poultry and egg sub-
sector within the BRECSA target area. The project will invest in the strengthening of the existing groups and the formation of new
groups where needed. These groups will be supported in institutional development, business planning (including collective input
procurement), processing, transportation, marketing, quality control and advanced labelling and packaging. The Project will:
Cost-share on a 50% basis the upgrading of existing or new processing units for clean meat production and freezing;
Cover 50% cost of up to 4 freezer vans for transporting dressed frozen meat from processing units to retail outlets;
Undertake market analysis to identify possibility and need for product diversification, specific labeling, organic production, etc.;
17/37
94.
The SJs will identify investors/entrepreneurs interested in establishing small-scale poultry feed production units and connect them
with BRECSA financial service providers.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
Vegetable value chain: Vegetables are an essential part of the Bhutanese diet and particularly red and green vegetables (green
beans, dark green leafy vegetables, carrots, tomato, pumpkins) which contains essential vitamins and nutrients for improving
diets. Vegetable farming is a viable economic investment that generates income and creates jobs. Chilli, onion and tomatoes are
referred to as priority strategic commodities in the Renewable Natural Resources (RNR) strategy.
Aggregation and storage facilities for the vegetable value chain is crucial to reducing post-harvest losses, estimated to reach 30%
or more. The production figures per district vary substantially with Tsirang topping the list (approx.5000 MT) and Zhemghang
closing the ranks, not exceeding 1000 MT of annual production. Trongsa reports two existing warehouses while there is one in
Tsirang. With an estimated production increase of 25-50% of total, Tsirang would need a storage capacity of 7,000 to 10,000 MT,
Sarpang and Trongsa 5000 – 7000 MT and Zhemghang 1,500 MT.  Depending on the location of the main production areas vis-
à-vis destination markets, an average of 3 storage facilities per District will be established. This entails an average capacity per
storage of 2,500 - 3000 MT for Tsirang (3 facilities), 2000 MT for Trongsa and Sarpang (3 facilities) and 500 MT for Zhemghang
(3 facilities). These processing facilities will be strategically located based on the CLEAR analysis and Dzongkhag ARPs.
Besides vegetable producers, also producers of other strategic commodities like spices or mushrooms can potentially make use
of the foreseen facilities, benefitting an estimated number of 13,000 households (65% of farmers producing at the semi-
commercial or commercial level).
Spice value chain (ginger and turmeric): BRECSA will support the development of marketing strategy for the spice sub-sector
based upon identified market trends / opportunities and competitive advantage of the spice industry in Bhutan. Upon identified
needs and opportunities, BRECSA will invest in aggregation centers and processing units for ginger (including cleaning, sorting,
drying etc.), and turmeric (including curing, drying, polishing, milling, filtration etc.) to be owned and managed by established FGs,
as well as invest in packaging and labelling of processed produce for the retail market. BRECSA, and through the developed
marketing strategy, will look at opportunities for diversification and value addition, including oil production. Potential beneficiaries
include all spice producers in the target area or close to 2000 farmer households.
Mushrooms: Establishing mushroom Farmer Groups (FGs) is an effective way to reach economy of scale and building
backward and forward linkages. The project will support mushroom FGs in establishing an aggregation infrastructure with local
collection, storing, grading, packaging and drying facilities. It is estimated that 8 aggregation facilities with a total budget of USD
80,000 will be co-financed. The investments will benefit an estimate of 500 beneficiary households. BRECSA will also invest in
improving packaging and labelling and in establishing more direct farmer group – retail outlet/consumer linkages. Through
DAMC, additional market segments for processed mushrooms will be explored, including for the export market.
Other niche products (honey, oilseed, green tea…): A technical agency will be recruited to undertake an in-depth analysis in
Y1 looking into high potential niche products such as honey, medicinal and aromatic plants, and essential oils in relation to
speciality markets focusing on selected Asian (Japan, South Korea, Singapore etc.) and Western countries (Europe, US). This
analysis will serve to identify the commodities with the highest comparative advantage. An investment plan will be developed for
each commodity, including a marketing strategy, branding and packaging for export of a quality premium brand.
100.
The project will support individual beekeepers and apiculture farmer groups through subsidizing processing equipment. In case
new groups or mergers of existing groups consists of a minimum of 50 members with an anticipated production volume of 1500
kg annually, BRECSA will co-finance collective processing equipment like casting machine, honey extraction machine or a fully
utilised honey extraction centre, with sale counter and processing room. The total number of beneficiaries from intervention in the
honey value chain is estimated at 200 households.
101.
Sustainability - Operations and Maintenance: Most of the infrastructure investments proposed under the project will be taken
over by the corresponding beneficiary communities, farmers, cooperatives, youth groups or private sector entities (such as
market infrastructure – cold stores/processing units). The project will handover these facilities to the respective beneficiaries by
signing a standard Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), developed for every type of infrastructure facility. The MoU will
identify the management and O&M responsibility of funded assets, while clearly delineating the roles and responsibilities of
beneficiary, project and of other stakeholders (Dzongkhag/ Gewog administration/engineering section); provide mechanism for
meeting the operational expenditures (routine or special maintenance etc.); and respective contribution. The MoU will be a key
reference document for all post-completion activities.
102.
Technical assistance: WFP will support the enhancement and efficiency of value chains through targeted interventions,
including: (i) enhance the organisational levels of farmers and strengthen the performance of farmer groups and cooperatives; (ii)
create effective market linkages between farmer groups and buyers / outlets; (iii) strengthen the capacities of government
agencies in promising market-oriented planning based on economic (cost-benefit) analysis; (iv) build decentralized capacity of
DAMC officers in providing market-based and tailored services to farmers; (v) capacitate and assist Dzongkhag level government
agencies in developing and delivering on small-holder based market access policies and programmes; (vi) undertake market
research, exploration, trial marketing and establish linkages with international markets to enhance export, particularly of high-end
speciality products; and (vii) develop digital platforms/ICT tools including on markets and pricing .
103.
Activity 2.1.2 – Capitalising on Hubs to support commercialization:
104.
Support to commercialization will be mainly centered around the Hubs that will be created (SC 1.4), as well as, around the farms
established by the state-owned Farm Machinery Corporation Limited (FMCL). Within the FMCL farms, the government provides
the land and covers the costs of establishing the farm including fencing, land preparation, internal road construction, provision of
greenhouses and inputs. FMCL manages the farm and runs it with youth labour recruited and trained in commodity production.
The overall intention of FMCL is to handover the farm to the youth workers once the farm has become a viable operation.
18/37
105.
As a means of replicating the FMCL farm model, although significantly smaller and with critical enhancements, the project will
support the creation of youth FG/FC run Hubs. These youth FG/FCs will enter into long-term land leases with owners of fallow
lands in their locality. To further incentivize youth, the Hubs will be equipped with proper amenities such as housing, laundry,
WiFi connectivity, and some basic sport facilities. Drawing on lessons learned from Land Use Certificate (LUC) program and
CARLEP, engaging and retaining youth in agriculture is a major challenge. The retention rate was high where housing and basic
amenities were provided on-farm. Without housing, youth have to travel, in some cases, 3 – 4 hours a day to get to the farm. This
has proved to be a major reason for a high drop-out rate.
106.
The Hubs will be supported with training and serve as a Farmer Field Schools for the adjacent network of farmer FG/FCs for
building knowledge on agroecological farming. Based on demand, the Hubs will serve as an input distributor for provision of seed
and vegetative planting material, bio-inputs, and minor tools to the farmer FG/FC network. The Hubs will also serve as an
aggregation point for the neigbouring farmer FG/FC networks to deliver their produce based on a guaranteed minimum price and
profit sharing. The Hub will be an active member of the multi-stakeholder platform (MSP) and will negotiate forward contracts with
vendors for purchase of produce. The MSPs will also enable the linking of the ecosystem of service enterprises producing bio-
inputs etc. with the Hub for facilitating distribution to a larger clientele. The hub and spoke model will significantly reduce the
transaction costs for vendors as they will be able to collect bulk produce from one site.
107.
The Hubs will ”centralize” post-harvest processing activities for meeting both domestic and export markets. This could include
simple sorting and washing of produce to slightly more advanced processing such as slicing and sun-drying of organic ginger for
example. Based on the Hub Business Plan, other more sophisticated processing activities could be initiated such as dairy
processing into cheese and yoghurt, jam and pickle production, mushroom dehydration etc. In partnership with PPD clear
guidelines will be developed for handover of FMCL farms to the youth FG/FCs.
108.
Table 7: Beneficiary households’ composition by income generating (value chain) activity
109.
As the quota of each beneficiary group is specified and criteria refined and agreed with RGoB, there is little scope for elite
capture. In addition, 60% of beneficiaries are women who typically experience multi-dimensional intra-household poverty, which
further militates against the possibility of elite capture. Furthermore, elite capture will be mitigated through the engagement of
Sonam Japjorba (SJ) (i.e. community mobilisers). The SJs will work with the Gewog administration to identify the target
beneficiaries from each category (subsistence, semi-commercial and commercial). The intervention packages will thus be
assured to reach the correct target groups.
110.
Sub-Component 2.2 - Business linkages and multi-stakeholder platforms:
111.
Under this sub-component, BRECSA will facilitate the establishment and functioning of multi-stakeholder platforms to support
business development and commercialisation at Thimphu and District levels. These MSPs will focus on 2-4 commodities and
bring together all relevant stakeholders that engage in the RNR sector including Gewog and Dzongkhag personnel, farmers,
vendors, investors and representatives of women and youth. The platforms will have a linking, learning and problem-solving
character, and at Thimphu level, will be chaired by DAMC and co-chaired by the Bhutan Chamber of Commerce and Industry
(BCCI). Dzongkhag level MSP meetings will be convened and chaired by RAMCO. Through the establishment of MSPs, a more
systematic engagement between farmers, their groups and private sector operators will be facilitated, which will open up access
to private sector engagement for provision of value chain services over the longer term.
19/37
112.
MSPs, in partnership with relevant departments and agencies, will be responsible for domestic and export market exploration and
facilitation. MSPs will engage in investment planning and based on the initial value chain analysis and defined investment
strategies, a Strategic Investment Plan (SIP) will be prepared for each selected commodity. The SIP will be based on sound
market assessments and will enable market oriented production by farmers as well as determine volume, quality, price, primary
processing, and transport to market. It will provide a framework for inviting farmers and their groups, entrepreneurs, the
government, development projects, private investors and service providers to co-invest in the project area, thus facilitating
access to markets, knowledge, technology and capital for smallholder rural farmers. The SIP will be guided by the Dzongkhag
ARPs and aligned with the Hubs to support commercialization of the agricultural sector. Under the framework of the SIP,
BRECSA will promote the use of PPP funding to promote investments in rural enterprises and RNR farms for creating job
opportunities particularly for youth and women.
113.
The Farmer to School linkages (B2B) marketing strategy was initiated by the CARLEP to help smallholder farmers solve
marketing issues. Additionally, in order to introduce food production planning among farmers for supply to schools, WFP has
been implementing the School Menu Planner (SMP) PLUS.
114.
SMP PLUS is a digital tool that uses a set of databases on food prices and food composition tables and an algorithm to produce
value-for-money, nutritious menus for school meals using locally sourced food and seasonal ingredients. The tool quantifies
schools’ monthly requirements of vegetables, fruits and livestock products that help local farmers plan their production of crops
for a full year in advance. Reports from the pilot districts of Zhemgang, Trongsa and Tsirang show several encouraging results of
implementing the SMP PLUS tool (i) 15% reduction in cost per meal (ii) 26% improvement in dietary diversity in school meals (iii)
28% to 60% increase in procurement of locally produced perishable foods (iv) increase in food sourced from smallholder farmers
from 10 % to 17% and (v) quantification of weekly/monthly requirement of vegetables, fruits, livestock products in schools
generating advance demand for farmers thus helping them in production planning.
115.
The table below indicates the coverage of the farmer to school linkages in BRECSA target districts. Of the 90 schools present in
the district, 95.5% are covered for supply of fresh produce via a network of 119 farmer groups and cooperatives. While SMP
PLUS has been piloted, its coverage is limited to only 18 schools (20%) with no presence in Sarpang.
116.
Table 8: Coverage of ´farmer to school´ linkages (*Data provided by RAMCO)
117.
The SMP Plus tool will be introduced in the remaining 74 schools across the target districts over a period of one year. To analyse
operational challenges in BRECSA target districts, the project will undertake a detailed analysis of constraints on the existing
functions of the supply chain across farmers cooperatives and schools. The analysis will include assessing end-to-end
requirements - customer/beneficiary requirements, demand signals, vis-a-vis supply capacity. The data collection will be
undertaken during the first year of implementation through focus group discussions and in-depth interviews with farmer groups,
cooperatives, Gewog administration officials, extension officials, RAMCO and the buyers. Findings of this analysis will be further
validated for each target district along with identifying possible interventions through four workshops (one per district). The
activity will be a stepping stone to intensify linkages between local farmers and schools as well as strengthening markets' ability
to supply food at more affordable prices. Potential interventions include the amendment of contractual clauses allowing for price-
adaptations based on price fluctuation in the market, improved transportation schedule, skill development support, etc. The
overall intervention will include 90 schools and 87 FGs with over 2000 direct beneficiary farmer households (excluding 18,578
students as indirect beneficiaries in terms of improved daily dietary intake and nutritional status).
20/37
118.
Component 3 – Innovative and competitive agri-food sector:
119.
This component supports the first two components through the creation of an enabling financial and policy environment to
promote a competitive and modernized food sector. Under this component, activities will be supported to improve access to
financial services, digitization, and policy dialogue to support private enterprise development and certification for meeting
internationally recognized food standards.
120.
Sub-component 3.1 - Access to financial services:
121.
Access to financial services especially for rural enterprises and agriculture sector in general has remained a key challenge in
Bhutan. To improve access to financial services for the key target segments of BRECSA, the project will undertake specific
interventions focused on challenges and constraints on the demand side i.e., farmers, youth, cooperatives, groups etc. The key
activities under this sub-component are:
122.
Focus on primary production, subsistence orientation and low engagement of private sector are a few key issues surrounding
agriculture in Bhutan. To shift its current production driven agricultural practice into market led and commercial agricultural
practice, Bhutan will need to turn ‘semi-commercial’ agricultural holdings into ‘commercial’ holdings and assist ‘commercial’
holdings to be more competitive and efficient. Such a transition would require a number of inputs including ‘capital’. However,
‘semi-commercial’ holdings continue to face challenges raising capital for scaling up[32].
123.
When it comes to rural and agricultural finance, the Bhutan Development Bank (BDBL), a state-owned enterprise (SOE), is the
key financial institution. In fiscal year 2020/21, BDBL alone accounted for more than 90% of the total agricultural loans provided
by the financial sector. National Cottage and Small Industries Development Bank (NCSIDBL) is another state-owned enterprise,
established by the Government, specifically to meet the financing needs of the cottage and small industries from agricultural and
nonagricultural sector. Beyond banks, the project may also consider engaging Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) especially in
rural areas and remote geographic clusters which are difficult for banks to reach. Amongst 5 MFIs operating in Bhutan, RENEW
is the market leader with over 70% share in the total MFI loan portfolio and covers 10 Dzongkhags and 95 Gewogs.
124.
BRECSA will provide ‘matching grants’ to entrepreneurs who show intent and capacity as a partial credit guarantee to the bank.
This will also help mitigate the ‘collateral requirement’, which is one of the key barriers in access to finance. Matching grant
support will be used as a one-time start up fund to set-up enterprises, and will be instrumental to build the confidence of the
beneficiaries leading to their participation in the market system, as well as building their asset base for enterprise management.
The matching grant will be implemented through a tripartite arrangement involving the project, beneficiaries and participating
financial institutions. The project will release the 'matching grant' to the beneficiaries in their respective bank accounts
(withdrawal restricted), and the bank will issue loans to the beneficiary taking the 'matching grant' as a form of partial credit
guarantee. The implementation will be guided by a MOU/Agreement between the project and the participating financial institution.
The MOU will specify the role of the parties in identifying the beneficiaries, collection of proposal and loan documentation, release
of 'matching grant', and coordination on the ground for loan monitoring and repayment. The proposed matching grant scheme will
cover up to 50% of the project cost not exceeding $6,000 per project concept. The borrower is expected to secure 20-30% of the
project cost from the bank as a ‘loan’ and the remaining 30-20% as his own contribution. A total of 150 beneficiary farmer
households are expected to be covered under this initiative.
125.
Sub-component 3.2 - Digital technologies to support marketing:
126.
This sub-component aims at the development of new (or adaptation of proven) digital support platforms or tools based upon
mapping the RNR digital environment as well as assessing past and existing ICT investments and demands. The developed
digital tools will be aligned with the government plans for the digitalization of the agricultural sector as captured in the Bhutan E-
RNR Masterplan.
127.
There have been several initiatives to address the needs of farmer for digitised information. The main initiative currently
operational is the Agricultural Market Information System (AMIS) Platform managed by DAMC. AMIS provides pricing data from
26 retail markets and 4 auction markets spread over Bhutan. While the retail markets provide retail prices that provide farmers
with an indication of price trends but not farm-gate prices, the auction markets are more relevant for informing farmers regarding
price setting for their produce.  Although the AMIS has made a step further regarding digitalization of farmer support services, the
data input is very unreliable and often outdated.
128.
BRECSA will conduct an analysis that will define enhancements and new tools and functionalities to existing systems. Based on
the results of the analysis, a new ICT platform will be defined and subcontracted to an ICT firm. The new ICT application will be
user-friendly, in local language, and could tackle issues related to: (1) production and pricing in different locations, (2) demand in
different markets, (3) transportation (facilitating farmers and traders to search and contact transport service providers), and (4)
any other useful functionalities.
129.
BRECSA will train Gewog staff on the use of the enhanced tool. Demonstrations will be organised for at least 50 farmers per
Gewog. To enhance traffic and increase volume of visitors, the project will develop and deliver an awareness raising and
knowledge sharing campaign through regional roadshows and digital exhibitions in all Gewogs. In addition, DAMC will be trained
to conduct regular user monitoring with feedback loops to allow for client responses and refinements. A software maintenance
contract with the developer will be entered into for 6 years. The platform and data will be owned by DAMC.
21/37
130.
Sub-component 3.3 - Policy dialogue:
131.
This sub-component will undertake policy dialogue to support the promotion of Brand Bhutan’s organic and high-value agri-food
products in regional and international export markets. To this end, internationally recognised regulation, standardization and
certification processes will be pursued. This sub-component will be led and managed by the Policy and Planning Division of
MOAF and Bhutan Agriculture and Food Regulatory Authority (BAFRA). Establishing a Geographical Indication (GI) for project
commodities will enable the promotion of Brand Bhutan linked to target Dzongkhags. The GI in the context of BRECSA could be
developed for a whole Dzongkhag, or for specific high value commodities within the Dzongkhag.
132.
The conditions for the establishment and management of the GI can be summarized as follows: (i) the specific quality linked to
origin that is well defined in the specifications (in order to demonstrate intellectual property right and ensure strong market
differentiation); (ii) the collective action and territorial governance; (iii) the effective marketing efforts (the GI is effectively used to
market the products); and (iv) the legal framework and role of PPD and BAFRA pertaining to the effective protection of GI.
133.
BRECSA will provide support for the development of GI as well as to regulation, standardization and certification. This support
includes: (i) enhancing the technical capacity of the BAFRA laboratory; (ii) strengthening on-farm biosecurity in the target areas
and prime commodities; (iii) Strengthening Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS) to enhance food safety and facilitate
trade of commodities; (iv) setting up standards, including a code of practice or regulations of use relevant to the GI; (v) support
for meeting conditions for development of GI certificates in compliance with requirements of importing countries; (vi) support
inspection and certification as per the quality standards developed by the technical departments (DoL, DoA & DAMC); (vii)
establish traceability, verification and control schemes in order to ensure continued quality and compliance with the code of
practice or regulations of use; (viii) obtain legal protection for the geographical indication and design an enforcement strategy; and
(ix) build the capacity of BAFRA staff in inspection, certification and enforcement.
134.
With regard to cooperatives, the RGoB developed a Cooperative Act in 2001, which was later revised in 2009. The Act was
enacted to facilitate the development of cooperatives as a sustainable pillar of growth within the private sector. The
implementation of this Act was supplemented in 2010 by Co-operatives Rules and Regulations, which provide procedural
requirements for the formation, governance, management and financial oversight of farmer groups and cooperatives. 
The current legislation is cooperative friendly and allows for the promotion and development of farmer groups and cooperatives in
the country. However, some issues have been raised by cooperative members, DAMC and Legal Services of the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forests. BRECSA will work with DAMC to address these through a revision of the rules and regulations, and will
produce guidelines that foster agri-food commercialization. Additionally, BRECSA will support DAMC in developing Federation
and Auditing guidelines to assist with amalgamation of Farmer groups and Cooperatives into Federations that can facilitate price
stabilization and lobby for improved policy and regulation for their respective sub-sectors.
135.
WFP has been supporting RGoB with DRR and has prioritized policy support under its new country strategy. This will continue
during the duration of BRECSA, along with support to MOAF in strengthening institutional capacities to enhance mainstreaming
of climate risk and DRR into planning and decision-making at different levels.
E. Theory of Change
136.
The agricultural sector of Bhutan consists mostly of traditional and subsistence farming units and suffers from a limited asset
base, weak capacity of farmers and their groups, climate vulnerability, limited water availability, wildlife-crop depredation, low soil
fertility, inadequate dietary diversity, gender inequality, and labor shortage compounded by minimal engagement or interest by
youth to engage in the sector. Furthermore, high post-harvest losses, limited storage and processing facilities, and inefficient
market linkages due to poor engagement of the private sector and entrepreneurial investments, are holding back the
commercialisation of the sector.
137.
BRECSA’s theory of change is that the transformation of Bhutan’s agri-food system into a leading edge, resilient and competitive
system that can improve national food and nutrition security, while also creating sustainable income for farmers and jobs for
youth will, require increasing the resilient production and productivity of smallholder farmers, developing integrated and resilient
value chains (coupled with post-harvest processing), establishing market linkages, and engaging youth and private sector in that
transformation process. Providing opportunities for private sector operators to expand their services, and creation of an
ecosystem of new services linked to agroecological farming and export oriented production, is essential for ensuring long-term
sustainability. Likewise, the extensive capacity building proposed on agroecological farming, financial and business literacy, and
cooperative formation undergird the transition to commercial farming.
138.
The above focus areas will be supported by the creation of an enabling financial and policy environment to promote a competitive
and streamlined food sector, including improved access to financial services, policy dialogue to support certification for meeting
internationally recognized food standards, as well as, the development of digital support platforms and tools for the digitalization
of the agricultural sector as articulated in the Bhutan E-RNR Masterplan.
139.
In addition to improving access to - and availability of –nutritious food to enhance dietary diversity through investments targeted
at vulnerable households, the project has defined specific interventions to ensure a nutrition-sensitive approach. These include
capacity building, awareness raising, fostering behavioural change, home gardens for vulnerable households and linkages with
the national school meal programme. The creation of new jobs and business opportunities for women and young people will
contribute to women and youth empowerment.
140.
The project will pay close attention to mainstream climate considerations into value chain selection, production and marketing
interventions. The application of the CLEAR tool will inform the project on agroecological zoning for crops and livestock
production, and selection of aggregation, processing and marketing centres based on robust spatial and temporal climate
vulnerability and risk assessment. The multistakeholder Dzongkhag-level ARPs will be developed based on the CLEAR analysis,
to further strengthen the resilience of agriculture and livestock sectors to climate and other shocks, as well as, on robust market
analysis.
22/37
141.
The linkages between climate-resilient value chain development and market-oriented food production will act as a catalyst in
boosting the Country’s aspirations to transition from a Least-Developed to Middle-Income Country under its 12th and 13th 5-Year
Plans. The focus on empowering women and youth employment and income opportunities aligns with several of the RGOB’s
social and economic policies and addresses the need to generate an employment base and opportunity for future generations to
participate in a productive and sustainable society in line with the aspirations of Bhutan’s Gross National Happiness
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
142.
Alignment with SDGs:BRECSA is in line with the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. Investment in food and agriculture
sector has the highest potential to accelerate achievement of almost all SDG goals. Targeting smallholder farmers in high poverty
areas, improving food security, enhancing farm production and productivity, targeting all Gewogs in all project districts,
supporting small and medium infrastructure, and adopting agroecological technologies and practices and other climate change
adaptation measures will contribute to SDG goal # 1 ending poverty, goal # 2 ending hunger, and goal # 13 combating climate
change and its impacts. As a gender transformative and nutrition and youth sensitive project, providing customized support to
women headed households, households with differently abled persons, and improving nutritional status of households, will
contribute to SDG goal # 3 ensuring healthy lives and wellbeing for all and goal # 5 gender equality and empowerment of women
and girls.
143.
144.
Alignment with national priorities:BRECSA is fully aligned with the RGoB’s 12th Five-Year Plan, RNR Strategy 2030, RNR
Marketing Strategy 2021, other RNR sub-sector strategies, RNR Marketing Policy 2021, Transformation of Agriculture through
Crop Prioritization 2022 (A strategy document for 2022-2027), Economic Contingency Plan 2020,
Bhutan’s Food Systems Pathways submitted to the UN Food Systems Summit 2021, Guidelines on Cost-Sharing Mechanism for
RNR Sector 2021 (DAMC), Draft Enterprise Development Guidelines (DAMC), Cooperative (Amendment) Act of Bhutan 2009,
Agriculture Survey Report 2021 (National Statistics Bureau), Labour Force Survey Report 2021 (National Statistics Bureau),
White Paper on Bhutan School & Hospital Feeding Program 2019 (MoAF) and Incentive Scheme for Market-led Production of
RNR Commodities 2021. It is also in alignment with the national organic flagship program and water and irrigation flagship
program.
145.
The project is also in line with Bhutan’s nationally determined contribution (NDC) document that highlights climate- resilient
agriculture and climate-proofing key infrastructure, such as irrigation and roads, as priority adaptation needs. The NDC highlights
adaptation priorities to promote climate resilient agriculture, organic farming, sustainable agricultural practices, and resilience to
the impacts of climate change.
146.
Alignment with IFAD policies and corporate priorities:With relation to IFAD’s corporate strategic objectives (SO), the project is
aligned to SO1: Increase poor rural people’s productive capacities, and SO2: Increase poor rural people’s benefits from market
participation. The project also responds to both objectives of IFAD’s Country Strategic Note (CSN) for Bhutan: SO1 - Foster
transformation of smallholder agricultural production into inclusive, equitable, diverse and resilient agri-food systems, and SO2 -
Create an enabling environment for private sector enterprise development in the agri-food sector for engaging youth in lucrative
commercial ventures.
147.
Country Ownership:From the beginning of preparing the concept note, the process has been led by the Policy and Planning
Division (PPD) of the MoAF in collaboration with the teams from IFAD and WFP. Similarly, with a team of experts from IFAD and
WFP, the project design process was led by the PPD. Accordingly, the project design report is prepared in full consultation with
MoAF and all other relevant agencies and stakeholders including Ministry of Finance, GNH Commission, local governments,
CSOs, youth and private sector representatives, and farmer’s representatives and cooperatives in all project districts. Like other
IFAD supported projects, BRECSA will be implemented through the RGoB agencies and in line with the RGoB’s financial and
procurement systems.
148.
Harmonization and partnerships:BRECSA will directly contribute to the RGoB’s priorities to enhance food security, economic
recovery, growth, and diversification, and youth engagement. The project’s support to the existing commercial farms and
development of new Hubs for agricultural production, aggregation, processing and training of youth and farmers fits into the
MoAF’s overall plan to establish commercial farms and processing hubs in different parts of the nation to enhance food self-
sufficiency and import substitution. The project’s support to building market linkages and infrastructure, commercialization of
farming systems, and support for required certification and standardization for export market development fits into the nation’s
priority to accelerate market development for agri-food products. The project’s targeted support to the vulnerable households and
smallholder farmers contributes to the nation’s goal to reduce poverty and inequality. The project’s focus on youth and private
sector engagement and promotion of digital agriculture, permaculture and protected farming contributes to the MoAF’s aspiration
to develop a new generation of farming and farmers.
149.
BRECSA will complement, cooperate and promote partnerships with ongoing and future projects funded by other development
partners in the four projects districts. The relevant ongoing projects include:
World Bank’s GAFSP supported Food Security and Agriculture Productivity Project (FSAPP), with COVID-19 response
additional funding (July 2017 - December 2024). The USD 13 million project is being implemented by the MoAF, in partnership
23/37
with the World Bank and FAO. The project covers 24 Gewogs (out of a total of 58) in five south- western Dzongkhags:
Chukha, Dagana, Haa, Samste and Sarpang. It includes Sarpang, one of the BRECSA project districts. The project’s objective
is to increase agricultural productivity and enhance access to markets for farmers in the above districts. There are many areas
of complementarity in terms of strengthening farmer capacity, enhancing productivity, infrastructure development and market
access. BRECSA’s support to Sarpang districts will be aligned and coordinated with the ongoing support from FSAPP.
Green Climate Fund’s (GCF) Supporting Climate Resilience and Transformational Change in the Agriculture Sector in
Bhutan. This is an on-going project (January 2020 - December 2025). The project, with USD 25.347 million GCF funding, is
being implemented by the GNH Commission, in partnership with the UNDP. The project’s direct beneficiaries include 27,598
agriculture households (118,839 people) in 8 target Dzongkhags of Dagana, Punakha, Trongsa, Tsirang, Sarpang, Samtse,
Wangdue Phodrang and Zhemgang. It includes all BRECSA project districts of Zhemgang, Tongsa, Sarpang and Tsirang.
There are areas of complementarity in climate- resilient infrastructure, climate-resilient agriculture and land development.
BRECSA’s project activities will be aligned and coordinated with the ongoing GCF project.
Adaptation Fund’s (AF) Adaptation to Climate-induced Water Stresses through Integrated Landscape Management. This is
an on-going project (January 2022 - December 2026). The project, with USD 9.999 million AF funding, is being implemented
by the Department of Agriculture and Department of Forest and Park Services, MoAF in partnership with Bhutan Trust Fund
for Environmental Conservation (BTEF). The project includes two BRECSA project districts of Sarpang and Tsirang.
BRECSA’s project activities will be aligned and coordinated with this AF project, especially in the areas of irrigation water
infrastructure.
Youth Employment and Rural Entrepreneurship (YERE) – Bhutan: The ‘Youth Employment and Rural Entrepreneurship
(YERE)’ project was introduced by the Government of Bhutan’s Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, and the World Bank, with
financial support from the Japan Social Development Fund. It is a three-year project, with a total budget of USD 1.25 million.
The project aims to promote youth employment in the export industry, reversing COVID-19’s negative impacts. The project
provides rural youth with access to financial, business, technical and life-skills training. Computer training is also provided to
bridge the digital divide. After the successful completion of the trainings, the top 200 youth-enterprise proposals are supported
with grants of USD 4,600 each, and technical assistance for the establishment of their respective enterprises. In this context,
the project is contributing to the national goals of enhancing economic opportunities for unemployed youth, alleviating rural
poverty, and reducing the vulnerability of the local population in poor and remote areas of the country.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
24/37
150.
Retroactive financing/ Project Pre-Financing Facility (PFF): At the Borrower’s request IFAD financing up to USD 0.5 million
may be provided as retroactive financing with prior Executive Board approval, to cover eligible expenditures between the date of
approval of the design document by IFAD and the date of Entry into Force. Some of the activities that can be funded under
retroactive financing are: (i) costs related to studies to be initiated (ii) procurement and customization of software; (iii) some
operating costs; (iv) staff and consultants recruitment cost; (v) purchase of a minimum set of equipment and materials; and (vi)
activities related to a baseline survey. To be eligible for retroactive financing, goods and services must have been procured
according to the procurement procedures applicable to Grant/ Loan financing. The funds for these activities will be provided
initially by the RGoB, which will be reimbursed once the IFAD conditions precedent to withdrawal have been met.
151.
Taxes: The proceeds of the IFAD financing will not to be used to pay taxes which will be part of the counterpart funding of RGoB
to the project. The estimated tax amount is USD 0.757 million, which will be borne by the RGoB, as part of its contribution as
counterpart funding.
152.
Conditions Precedent to withdrawal: In accordance with Section 4.02 of the General Conditions, no withdrawal shall be made
from the Loan and Grant Accounts until the first AWPB, including the 18-month procurement plan has been approved by IFAD.
Furthermore, the following will be designated as additional general conditions precedent to withdrawal: (i) the PMU shall have
been duly established and the respective key project staff such as Project Director and Finance Manager shall have been
appointed; (ii) the Borrower shall submit an official document confirming the availability of adequate counterpart funds for the first
Project Year; (iii) the authorized signatories shall have been submitted to IFAD; (iv) the draft Project Implementation Manual shall
have been endorsed by the PSC and received no-objection from IFAD; (v) the Designated Accounts shall have been duly
opened. 
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
153.
Retroactive financing/ Project Pre-Financing Facility (PFF): At the Borrower’s request IFAD financing up to USD 0.5 million
may be provided as retroactive financing with prior Executive Board approval, to cover eligible expenditures between the date of
approval of the design document by IFAD and the date of Entry into Force. Some of the activities that can be funded under
retroactive financing are: (i) costs related to studies to be initiated (ii) procurement and customization of software; (iii) some
operating costs; (iv) staff and consultants recruitment cost; (v) purchase of a minimum set of equipment and materials; and (vi)
activities related to a baseline survey. To be eligible for retroactive financing, goods and services must have been procured
according to the procurement procedures applicable to Grant/ Loan financing. The funds for these activities will be provided
initially by the RGoB, which will be reimbursed once the IFAD conditions precedent to withdrawal have been met.
154.
Taxes: The proceeds of the IFAD financing will not to be used to pay taxes which will be part of the counterpart funding of RGoB
to the project. The estimated tax amount is USD 0.757 million, which will be borne by the RGoB, as part of its contribution as
counterpart funding.
155.
Conditions Precedent to withdrawal: In accordance with Section 4.02 of the General Conditions, no withdrawal shall be made
from the Loan and Grant Accounts until the first AWPB, including the 18-month procurement plan has been approved by IFAD.
Furthermore, the following will be designated as additional general conditions precedent to withdrawal: (i) the PMU shall have
been duly established and the respective key project staff such as Project Director and Finance Manager shall have been
appointed; (ii) the Borrower shall submit an official document confirming the availability of adequate counterpart funds for the first
Project Year; (iii) the authorized signatories shall have been submitted to IFAD; (iv) the draft Project Implementation Manual shall
have been endorsed by the PSC and received no-objection from IFAD; (v) the Designated Accounts shall have been duly
opened.
c. Disbursement
156.
Two Designated Accounts (DA) denominated in USD for the Investment Entity GAFSP Grant and IFAD Loan shall be opened by
the Royal Monetary Authority (RMA) of the RGoB in its Central Bank, Bank of Bhutan Limited (BOBL), to which funds will flow
from IFAD. The funds will be disbursed in USD. RMA will transfer the funds based on project requirements to the Department of
Public Accounts (DPA), which in turn will release this amount to the project in accordance with the approved AWPB. Funds will
be disbursed following revolving fund methodology with advances based on quarterly submitted Interim Financial Reports (IFRs).
The project may also request funds as reimbursements for pre-financed activities. The method of disbursement of IFAD funds
and the procedure for submission of WAs will be detailed in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).
157.
 The government counterpart funds, aside from the taxes on goods and services, shall be contributed by the RGOB, and it shall
ensure timely and adequate release of the funds to the project in accordance with the AWPB. The project shall have a separate
bank account at each of the implementing units wherein the amounts received from RGoB through DPA including, GAFSP, IFAD
loan and RGoB counterpart funds will be deposited and used for project activities. The project shall submit withdrawal
applications (WAs) for eligible expenditures, as per IFAD procedures and formats, to RMA, Ministry of Finance, through MOAF
for onward transmission to IFAD. Beneficiary contribution shall also be recorded in the books of the project to arrive at the total
project expenditure.
25/37
158.
Disbursements from the DPA in respect of GAFSP, IFAD and RGoB counterpart funds will be made to all implementing units as
per the approved AWPBs. All implementing units shall provide monthly expenditure statements by financier, components and
categories to the PMU. The fund flow is depicted in the flowchart below:
159.
Regarding the portion of the GAFSP grant channelled directly from GAFSP Trustee to WFP for Technical Assistance, WFP shall
provide to the PMU a quarterly statement of expenditure by components and categories to enable the PMU to compile the total
project expenditure for its quarterly Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) submission to IFAD. The WFP funds utilization should be
segregated in the reporting. GAFSP project funding for the TA part to WFP will be disbursed directly from GAFSP Trustee to
WFP. 
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
160.
Direct benefits: The primary benefit streams of the project will be through increased net incomes from household farm
enterprises for the various commodities supported by the project due to production intensification, commercialization,
empowerment of farmers’ group and improved market access. The benefits would accrue mainly from agricultural business
creation and expansion, facilitated by project support on supply chain development and establishing market linkages with
potential suppliers. This will be supplemented by intensification and commercialization of production in a sustainable way.
Increased income will be possible through increased land productivity (higher cropping intensity and yields), labour productivity
(higher return on family labour) and access to water (higher water use efficiency).
161.
26/37
Indirect benefits: The value chain approach being adopted by the project will create rural employment with new job
opportunities, especially for the youth. These would not necessarily be in the production sector but in the service sector along the
value chains, from processing and packaging to transportation, machinery hiring, etc. Promotion of climate-sensitive and
sustainable production techniques in soil fertility management such as intercropping, rotation, relay cropping, strip cropping, etc.,
water management and promotion of resilient seeds will have positive environmental benefits. Intensification and diversification of
agriculture and livestock production might also have benefits in terms of household nutrition through a more diversified diet from
own production as well as purchases made through additional incomes. Further project support in cold storage, dairy processing
plants, assembling, marketing and trading activities and foreign trade will generate significant indirect benefits.
162.
Financial analysis: A financial analysis of the following enterprises, households and sub-sector models was carried out: (i) high
value commodities (vegetable, mushrooms, ginger, turmeric and honey), (ii) animal (dairy/cattle and poultry), and (iii)
permaculture, (iv) livelihood investment plans, (v) home gardens, and general subsistence and semi-commercial farmers
including PWDs. Incremental annual net benefits[33] vary widely across activities, ranging from US$ 96 for livelihood
improvement plans to US$ 4,971 from permaculture enterprises. As anticipated, these activities are playing a bigger role in
employment generation[34], on an average 2 family members and 1 hired worker were employed and there is prospect to
increase employment generation to a notable level in all the selected value chain commodities. Not surprisingly, the return is less
in case of livelihood improvement plans, home garden and general subsistence and semi-commercial farmers including PWDs.
All the models demonstrate very satisfactory benefit/cost ratios, financial internal rates of return (FIRR) and positive net present
value (NPV). This indicates the attractiveness of the investments in these value chain enterprises.
163.
Economic analysis: Based on the financial models on enterprises, households and sub-sector, an economic analysis of the
project has been conducted using economic prices. The economic benefits of each model have been aggregated based on: (i)
the number of direct beneficiaries for each model aligned with phasing of investments in the COSTAB; and (ii) adoption rates
(crop and livestock models) and survival rates (rural enterprise models) based on the past experiences. As for the economic
costs, investment cost, O&M costs of the marketing, irrigation and other infrastructure cost and recurrent cost were considered.
The costs covered by the project have been extracted from the models to avoid double counting. Cost-benefit analysis yields an
overall EIRR of 19.2%. The estimated NPV for a 9% discount rate is Nu. 2,905.72 million (USD 38.74 million) and the BCR of 2.3.
A positive NPV under the current Opportunity Cost of Capital of 9% indicated that the project investments were sound and solid.
164.
Risk analysis: Sensitivity analysis and switching value analysis was done to assess the impact of changes on return on
investment due to change on risk parameters: A sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess the effect of variations in (i) 10%
and 20% decrease in benefits; (ii) 10% and 20% increase in costs, (iii) one year and two-year delay on incremental income
accrual, and (iv) 10% and 20% decrease in adoption rate. In all these scenarios, EIRR was above 15%. Result of sensitivity
analysis revealed that the project is highly sensitive on delay on accruing benefit by even by one year compared to decrease on
project benefits, increase in project cost and decrease in adoption rate. The switching value for the total project benefits is about
56.8% while for the project costs it is approximately 131.4%.
165.
Project cost by beneficiary: The project will target to 12,047 households and 47,088 persons. With the project cost estimates,
project cost per beneficiary households is USD 2,489.6 and that of cost per person is USD 638.4.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
166.
A detailed exit strategy for BRECSA will be prepared during PY4. A consultation workshop will be undertaken in each district, in
collaboration with all project partners, to detail and finalize the exit strategy. Risks and challenges will be identified early on to
allow for elaboration of mitigation measures. The exit strategy will be coupled with a monitoring framework to ensure readiness.
The exit strategy will phase out activities as linkages with the supported private sector entities are strengthened. A high level of
participation from the Government, beneficiaries and partner institutions is planned from the outset to ensure ownership by local
stakeholders. BRECSA incorporates several features designed to promote long-term sustainability, including:
The CLEAR tool will ensure that BRECSA plans and maps out the spatial and temporal impacts of climate change on
smallholder farmers and rural communities. This exercise will inform how food security is affected by climate risks, enabling
climate resilient planning for placing commodities in their appropriate agroecological zone, as well as, for defining specific
infrastructural needs as a response to anticipated climate impacts and identified commodity value chains. This will ensure
sustainability of investments over the longer-term.
Strategic value chains have been chosen to ensure availability of adequate resources to establish these well. Production and
marketing investments for crops and livestock is designed to support value chain development planning over the long-term.
Village level planning and implementation through ARPs, farmer groups, farmer coops and group formation, establishing O&M
groups for asset management is expected to stimulate ownership by target communities.
The value chain approach will lead to interweaving production, marketing and enterprise development to ensure benefits to
farmers as well as the private sector, creating viable businesses to ensure sustainability.
Technical assistance is targeted to meet real needs, improve capacities and knowledge of farmers, asset accumulation and
agro-ecological technologies to sustain farm enterprises.
Improved market access, linkages, transport efficiency and product quality, storage facilities to control post-harvest losses,
contractual relationships and capture of premium prices will enhance incomes and resilience and create durable enterprises.
Overall, strengthening local institutions, farmers and their groups and developing ownership is the most effective way to
ensure sustainability beyond the implementation period. The programme will also strengthen the organisation capacity of
RAMCO, ARDC and other partner organizations and stakeholders to continue to serve local communities beyond the
programme period.  
167.
With regards to O&M of infrastructure, the infrastructure will be handed over to beneficiary communities such as farmers,
cooperatives, youth groups or private sector entities under an MoU. The MoU will clearly delineate the roles and responsibilities
of beneficiary, project and other stakeholders, and shall provide a mechanism for meeting the operational expenditures with
respective contributions. Budget allocations have been made in the COSTAB for training Water User Groups (WUAs) and Road
User Associations (RUAs). Furthermore, through the provision of TA, the project will build the capacity and provide trainings to
beneficiary communities and infrastructure management committees on operational maintenance of infrastructure facilities.
27/37
168.
The RGoB remains committed to improve access to, and use of finance, in the agriculture sector, particularly targeting
smallholders and micro-small-medium enterprises (MSMEs). The project’s one-time injection of capital is for building economic
viability and sustainability of agricultural enterprises amidst a challenging environment. This in turn is expected to nurture and
sustain the financial sector’s confidence in the agri-sector for enhancing investments.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
169.
Various project risks have been analysed and mitigation measures have been planned. The main risks and mitigations are as
follows:
Potential Risks
Scale
Mitigation Measure
Limited capacity of implementing
partners
Medium
Limited capacities and resources for
farmers to embark on agricultural
commercialisation
Medium
Limited opportunities for policy
Engagement
Medium
IFAD has managed to identify strong
partners (ARDC, FMCL, RLDC) who have
supported implementation of CARLEP
activities and added value in terms of
innovation. IFAD will continue engaging
with its partners, and identify others to
support its objectives. BRECSA has
allocated sufficient resources for capacity
development support and targeted
technical assistance.
BRECSA has defined a solid
programme to build capacities and
skills, including on governance,
enterprise management, financial
literacy, value addition and marketing,
coupled with investments and access to
financial services.
IFAD, and through CARLEP, has some
success stories to build on regarding
policy work. A well-defined policy
agenda has been defined within
BRECSA, replete with resources for
implementation. Engagement with
government (PPD and BAFRA) and
other partners will be pursued for
supporting commercialization
opportunities through MSPs and
enhanced branding, regulation,
standardization and certification.
28/37
Ineffective inclusion of women, youth
and vulnerable groups in project
interventions
Low
Challenge of strengthening climate change
resilience at farm and community level
Medium
Market price fluctuations affect the income
patterns of production models
Medium
Failure to establish sufficient management
capacity of the marketing groups and
cooperatives
Medium
Extension service outreach is limited to
ensure inclusion of remote households and
most-vulnerable groups
Low
BRECSA has a strong focus on social
inclusion. Direct targeting will be used
to ensure social inclusion of women,
youth and vulnerable groups, such as
women-headed households and
persons with disabilities. Specific
budget allocations have been made to
ensure outreach. Sixty percent of
BRECSA beneficiaries will be women
and 30 percent will be youth. Six
hundred differently abled women, men
and youth, constituting 25% of the
population of differently abled persons
in the target districts will benefit from
BRECSA interventions.
The main planning instruments of
BRECSA are the CLEAR tool and ARPs,
which will guide interventions, enhance
long-term adaptive capacities and
generate knowledge to integrate
agroecological planning. BRECSA will
also support the implementation of
recommendations of the NDC
document, including the selection of
drought tolerant crop varieties, and
promoting agroecological approaches,
including permaculture.
MSPs will allow for strategic production
planning based on market demand and
facilitate necessary adjustments as
changes take place. Also, access to
market information through digital tools will
support real time decision making. Farmer
group and cooperatives will be organized
around production and commercialization
hubs to strengthen negotiation skills and
help share better price premium.
Comprehensive technical support, training
and exposure and access to new
techniques and know-how will be provided
by the PMU (marketing and value chain
development Specialist), RAMCO, DAMC
and other relevant stakeholders. This will
include close support through the
development process and implementation
of Investment Plans.
The project will recruit a team of Sanam
Jabjorpa (community
supporters/mobilizers) to mitigate the
shortage of extension officers, work closely
with beneficiaries, identify needs, and
support ARP development and
implementation. This team will act as a
direct link between beneficiaries and the
PMU, and will undertake continuous
support and close monitoring to ensure
successful engagement.
170.
A project Financial Management (FM) risk assessment has been completed in accordance with Financial Management Division
(FMD) guidelines. The assessment has been developed after virtually meeting with the finance officials of the MOAF. The risk
assessment and the mitigation measures are provided in the IPRM. Based on a combination of inherent country risk with
identified project risks, the overall FM inherent risk is Substantial before mitigation, and the overall FM risk rating assigned to
BRECSA after mitigation measures are implemented is Moderate.
29/37
Inefficient use of funds due
to lack of fiduciary
oversight and weak
internal controls
Substantial
Failure to deliver timely
and satisfactory
audit/financial reporting as
per IFAD/GAFSP
requirements 
Substantial
Project management will ensure that internal control mechanisms adopted for
BRECSA are adhered to at all project levels through i.a: i) regular monitoring of
physical implementation progress and identification of issues; ii) establishing a
time bound action plan for addressing any identified issues; and iii) ensuring
proper segregation of duties by clearly outlining roles/responsibilities and
verification through monitoring activities. Dzongkhags/Gewogs will be required to
submit regular financial reporting to PMU for the consolidated quarterly IFR
reporting. Furthermore, the project should be subject to internal audits with follow-
up on recommendations.
Training of project staff on IFAD/GAFSP requirements and procedures for financial
reporting will be provided during start-up and to any new staff joining later. The
PIM will include information on timelines for reporting to ensure preparation of IFRs
and annual financial statements with adequate time for internal clearance and
approval processes. MoAF should further have a clear MoU with the RAA to
complete the external audit within the stipulated timelines, allowing for timely
submission to IFAD.
As e-PEMS does not currently allow for customization the project will adopt a
separate system (computerized) from which reports can be automated and
generated, to reduce manual input.    
I. Environment and Social category
171.
The proposed environmental and social category for BRECSA is moderate, based on the SECAP screening tool. The Project will
not impact on any sensitive areas or result in loss of natural habitat and biodiversity. BRECSA’s interventions will be confined to
existing cultivated and fallow lands; and activities will not be located in areas at high risk of geophysical hazards, thus the risk to
agriculture, livestock and small-scale infrastructure are considered to be minimal. The Project design will be directed at
environmentally sound and sustainable agriculture and livestock: a) priority will be given to water source protection and multiple
water use systems for water use efficiency, b) agroecology will be promoted, lead farmers and Sanam Jabjorpas will provide
onsite support to farmers, c) chemical inputs will be replaced by locally made biofertilizers and pesticides, use of liquid fertilizer
will be promoted, project will encourage integrated pest management d) Project will work to minimize the waste from agriculture
or livestock, and market and processing centres, and as far as possible these will be recycled mostly for manure production, e)
renewable energy technology will be promoted as part of the value chain and support market development activities. BRECSA
will only support small-scale climate proofed infrastructure with no further harm on environment.  The project has a strong focus
on social inclusion with ambitious targets for the inclusion of women, youth and differently abled persons. It has customized
interventions for these groups who will be actively engaged in decision-making and provided with opportunities for peer-learning
and dialogues on their needs and priorities with RGoB. Inclusion of women, youth, and where possible, differently abled persons,
in the development of ARPs and strategic investment plans will facilitate their participation in BRECSA.
J. Climate Risk classification
172.
As per the SECAP screening tool, the climate risk category of the project is determined as moderate. Following are the key
themes and steps followed to assess climate risks:
173.
Hazard identification: As per the ThinkHazard report, the project intervention area is likely to experience river flood, landslides,
extreme heat and wildfires. The CLEAR tool will be employed to assess climate hazard hotspots and decisions will be made
whether to avoid such areas or integrate appropriate adaptive measures for project interventions. Likewise, climate scenarios
predict changes in temperature, climate variability and alterations in intensity and frequency of extreme events. The ARPs,
supported by the findings of the CLEAR tool, will guide location for project interventions considering aforementioned climate
change and its potential impacts on households and commodities.
174.
Exposure Assessment: Crop and livestock production are frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes
in temperature, and pest and diseases. BRECSA will support efficient irrigation and water-use technologies to tackle water
scarcity problems. Efforts will be made to promote Permaculture, integrated pest management, and bio-input production, and
selection of suitable crops to manage pest and diseases.
175.
Sensitivity: The only positive response to sensitivity screening questions is the multidimensional poverty, which is above 0.1 for
Bhutan. However, the multidimensional poverty has been halved in 2017 compared to 2012. BRECSA will support vulnerable
households to participate in value chains to increase their income and livelihood standard.
176.
Adaptation capacity and climate resilience: One of the core goals of the project is to increase community resilience to adverse
impact of climate change. The RGoB together with development partners and NGOs, are wisely supporting target households
with the necessary social and economic resources to prepare for or respond to climate-related events. The country has good
farm road networks and the rural infrastructure effectively delivers services to farmers and rural dwellers. Farmers are getting
ample support from government to continue and diversify their farming practices. The detailed analysis of the climate scenario
and resulting risks and response measures to the main investments indicate that the BRECSA is expected to be moderately
sensitive to climate risks and an integration of climate issues has been undertaken as part of the detailed design. This process
has resulted in practical adjustments under the project to reduce losses and damages from climate change impacts to target
beneficiaries, and will also strengthen local climate adaptation capacities.
30/37
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
177.
Project oversight: The Ministry of Finance (MoF), as IFAD’s counterpart agency and borrowing entity, will be the nodal agency
for the BRECSA project. MoF will designate a Focal Officer (FO) from the Department of Public Accounts (DPA) who will be
responsible for liaising with the Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (MoAF) and IFAD and the Project Management Unit (PMU),
for facilitating operations of the Designated Accounts, clearing Withdrawal Applications (WAs), ensuring smooth fund flow and
disbursements, submitting consolidated financial progress reports and ensuring audit of the project. The FO will participate in
programme review meetings, meet with supervision missions and participate in mission wrap up and other meetings to discuss
and resolve fund related issues.
178.
The MoAF – and through the Policy and Planning Division (PPD) - will be the executing agency of the project and the formal
counterpart to IFAD and WFP. MOAF will provide overall implementation support and oversight, policy guidance and direction,
second technical staff from the pool of civil servants for implementation, and provide technical backstopping through line
departments and agencies in the field. The Project Management Unit (PMU) will report to the Chief of the PPD.
179.
To undertake these tasks, PPD will be supported by a Planning Officer and a Coordination Officer. The Planning Officer will
liaise with the Project Management Unit (PMU) and relevant departments within MoAF and other relevant Ministries to facilitate
convergence and coherence with flagship programmes and other initiatives and coordinate with other donor programmes and
projects to build synergies and avoid duplication; be responsible, in collaboration with IFAD and WFP, to organize and coordinate
annual supervision and implementation support missions, mid-term and project completion reviews, and analytical studies as
detailed in the project design; support all policy related work under BRECSA; and assist the PPD Chief with PSC related matters.
The Coordination Officer will be responsible for domestic and international communication, media relations and advocacy;
monitoring, evaluation and reporting; and facilitate youth, gender, nutrition and inclusion mainstreaming priorities[35]. The
Coordination Officer, in addition to project activities, shall also support the PPD in carrying out communication advocacy services
including M&E support for the PPD of the Ministry. This will enable a better integration of BRECSA within MOAF advocacy and
M&E activities.
180.
Project Steering Committee (PSC): BRECSA will be governed by a Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the
Secretary, MOAF and comprised of the following members: Secretary/ Director, Gross National Happiness Commission (GNHC);
Director, Ministry of Finance (MoF); Director, Ministry of Health (MoH); Dzongdag, Sarpang Dzongkhag Administration;
Dzongdag, Tsirang Dzongkhag Administration; Dzongdag, Trongsa Dzongkhag Administration; Dzongdag, Zhemgang
Dzongkhag Administration; Director, Bhutan Agriculture and Food Regulatory Authority (BAFRA), MoAF; Director, Department of
Agriculture (DoA), MoAF; Director, Department of Agricultural Marketing and Cooperatives (DAMC), MoAF; Director, Department
of Livestock (DoL), MoAF; Chief Planning Officer, Policy and Planning Division (PPD), MoAF; Project Director, BRECSA, Project
Management Unit (PMU). The Chief Planning Officer PPD will function as the member Secretary of the PSC. IFAD and WFP
representatives will participate as observers. The PSC shall meet at least twice a year and convene additional meetings when
necessary.
181.
The responsibilities of the PSC will include, among others: (i) broad oversight of project implementation; ii) compliance of project
activities with Government’s policies and the terms and conditions of the financing agreement; (iii) approval of Annual Workplan
and Budgets (AWPBs) and Consolidate Procurement Plan (CPP), (iv) coordination of project interventions with other
development programmes and projects; and (v) policy and strategic guidance for improved implementation.
182.
Project Management Unit (PMU): A PMU will be established at the Agriculture Research and Development Center (ARDC)
Samtenling in Sarpang. The PMU is the primary implementation arm of the project for delivery of all Gewog and Dzongkhag level
activities. The PMU will be led by a Project Director (PD) (a senior officer from the MoAF selected through a competitive
process). The PD will lead and oversee the overall implementation of the project at the Gewog and Dzongkhag levels, including
WFP technical assistance activities, and support the policy aspects of the project. He/she will manage the PMU team for delivery
against performance indicators. The PD will report to the Chief of the Policy and Planning Division (PPD) of MoAF.
183.
The following professional positions will be staffed within the PMU to ensure effective and timely implementation of the different
activities:
184.
Full-time Finance Officer who will be responsible for budgeting, account management, Interim Financial Reporting (IFR) for fund
flow management, compilation of Withdrawal Applications and reconciliation, annual financial reporting, submission of annual
audit, and monitoring government counterpart financing.
185.
Full-time Procurement Officer who will be responsible to initiate and conclude project related procurement processes that are
consistent with RGoB and IFAD procurement policies and guidelines.
31/37
186.
Three full-time Sub-Sector Specialists respectively for i) crop production, ii) livestock production, and iii) marketing and value
chain development.
187.
Full-time Engineer who will work in cooperation with the DoA Engineering Division and Dzongkhag Engineers, to plan,
coordinate, facilitate procurement, and monitor implementation of infrastructure activities.
188.
Full-time ARP Coordinator who will organise the capacity building of the Sanam Jabjorpa (community supporters for ARP
implementation) to deliver key project interventions, develop annual workplans for CMs based on AWPB, direct and manage the
work of the community mobilisers in the field, and monitor performance.
189.
Full-time Social Inclusion and Nutrition Officer who will implement strategies for engaging the different groups, including
women, youth and differently-abled persons, and facilitate the specific project interventions designed to meet their respective
needs. The Officer will also support the implementation and supervision of the recommended activities of the ESCMP and will
support the M&E and KM officer on monitoring and data collection.
190.
Full-time Monitoring, Evaluation and Knowledge Management Officer who will maintain a project Management Information
System (MIS) for tracking all project indicators, identify lags in implementation and propose adaptive management options, and
produce targeted knowledge products for promoting resilient, nutritious and commercial agriculture production, youth
engagement, scaling up good practice, and evidence gathering for informing policy dialogue.
191.
TA funded technical specialists responsible for the implementation of technical assistance activities will be an integral and
embedded part of the PMU team. The medium-term TA specialists are national market system and value chain development
specialist (47 months), national cooperative strengthening and marketing specialists (2 positions of 24 months, each one
responsible for two districts), and national nutrition specialist (36 months), who would be complemented by short term national
and international thematic experts for areas such as CLEAR, ARPs, agroecology, business plans, high-end marketing and ICT.
The WFP technical team will delineate the TA activities to be carried out annually for inclusion in the Annual Workplan and
Budget (AWPB) and Procurement Plan (PP). The WFP technical specialists will work under the supervision of the PD of PMU and
report to him/her. All budgets for annual work plans, personnel and administration costs for the WFP technical assistance
component are integral part of the overall work planning and budgeting.
192.
The full-time professional officers at the PMU will either be seconded staff from MoAF (government contribution) or experienced
and qualified individuals recruited from the market.
193.
Implementation Modalities: Under the leadership of the Dzongdags, respective Dzongkhag and Gewog administrations will be
the implementing agencies in the project areas. The Dzongkhag and Gewog administrations will be responsible for planning,
coordination, implementation, supervision, monitoring and evaluation, finance and accounts, procurement, audit, report
generation, and other activities related to the project. There will be a Dzongkhag Project Coordination Committee (DPCC) with
the Dzongdags as the chairpersons, Gups of all Gewogs, relevant sector heads and other relevant agencies and stakeholders as
members. The Dzongkhag Agriculture Officer (DAO) will serve as the Dzongkhag Project Coordinator and as member
Secretary of the DPCC.
194.
Under each Dzongkhag, the Gewogs will take the lead in implementing the project activities. The Dzongkhags with relevant
sector heads and technical experts, and concerned agencies like ARDC, RLDC, RAMCO and FMCL will support the Gewogs in,
among others: (a) planning for investments; (b) collection of inputs for Dzongkhag level AWPB and PP; (c) management of inputs
supply; (d) supervision; (e) technical backstopping and trainings; (f) accounts, financial management, procurements, and audit,
(g) progress monitoring including data collection and data validation to feed into the PMU M&E systems; and knowledge
management through documentation of good practices and lessons learned.
32/37
195.
Inter-agency coordination: IFAD and WFP will coordinate based on quarterly meetings, where the Country Directors of the two
organisations will bring in needed project staff and experts, review the performance of the project as per the AWPB, identify
challenges and bottlenecks, as well as mitigation measures. Other meetings could be convened on a need’s basis. In addition to
the coordination meetings, IFAD and WFP will hold a meeting every March of the project implementation calendar to engage in
AWPB and procurement planning.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
196.
Summary Risk Assessment: A Financial Management (FM) risk assessment has been completed, following virtual meetings with
the finance officials of the MOAF. The risk assessment and the mitigation measures are provided in Annex 10 to the PDR. Based
on a combination of inherent country risk with identified project risks, the overall inherent risk is Substantial before mitigation, the
overall FM risk rating assigned to BRECSA after mitigation measures are implemented is Moderate.
1.  Inherent risk at country level: Bhutan’s fiduciary environment for utilising both internal and donor funds is considered
broadly adequate. The Government has made progress in strengthening its Public Expenditures Management System
(ePEMS). It has demonstrated its commitment to continuing its PFM reforms by developing more efficient public FM systems
and ensuring transparency by strengthening state oversight institutions. The Corruption Perception Index of Bhutan published
by TI has been constant at 68 (ranking 25/180) as the 25th least corrupt country in the world in 2021.
1.  Control risks: Overall, BRECSA will be operating in a substantial inherent risk environment due to the persistence of some
weaknesses in the public sector FM systems as outlined in the PEFA analysis and in light of observed deficiencies noted for
CARLEP, primarily relating to financial reporting and audit. Proposed project FM arrangements incorporate multiple measures
intended to reduce such risks and ensure that (i) project funds are used for intended purposes in an efficient/effective way; (ii)
reliable/timely financial reports are prepared and audited within the stipulated time; (iii) internal audit is conducted; and (iii)
project assets/resources are safeguarded from unauthorized or wasteful use.
2.  Organization and staffing at the central and district level. A dedicated Finance Manager (FM) will be deputed by MoF to
the PMU and will be in charge of the finance functions for the project period. The PMU finance team will be responsible for
compiling/consolidating data of all the district units and implementing partners. The FM will be responsible for the overall
functioning of the finance team, for coordination with the Government for disbursement of counterpart funds,
preparation/submission of IFRs, Withdrawal Applications (WA), preparation of consolidated financial statements (FS), review
of financial reports, timely audit completion/submission and provision of guidance to the Dzongkhag teams. Moreover, he/she
will be responsible for maintaining accounts of the PMU, contributing to AWPB preparation, coordinating with the Dzongkhag
accounts officers, disbursement of funds to the Dzongkhag offices, checking vouchers and synchronization of accounts.
3.  At Dzongkhag level the PMU will have a dedicated accountant. The PMU finance team will perform all accounting and
reporting functions such as preparation of vouchers, issue of cheques and recording all transactions in the software, and
preparation of monthly bank reconciliation statements. The finance personnel will report to the FM at the PMU. Accounting and
reporting will be undertaken in accordance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS-Cash).
4.  Accounting systems, policies, procedures and financial reporting. BRECSA will use the country E-Public Expenditure
Management System (ePEMS) for its accounting, which is a double entry computerized accounting system used for all
Government accounts. The system works well with a uniform chart of accounts and is linked to the Multi Year Rolling Budget
(MYRB) which tracks expenditure against the approved budgets. However, since the software is a centralized accounting
system, no customization can be done at project level. Thus, preparation of reporting by components, categories and
financiers, and for the Interim Financial Reports (IFRs), in the formats required have to be performed through a separate
system by exporting the data and consolidating it. Accounts of the PMU/districts will be synchronized every month and will be
used for consolidated quarterly financial reports and for preparation of the WA. The AWPB prepared by the project and the
audited accounts shall be submitted to the PSC for approval before submission to IFAD.
33/37
5.  Financial reporting arrangements: The PMU will be required to prepare and submit IFRs on a quarterly basis to IFAD no
later than 45 days after the end of each reporting period. All financial reporting will disaggregate information by
component/category and by source of financing, among others, to enable IFAD reporting to GAFSP. Content and format of the
IFRs will be specified in the PIM.The PMU will consolidate its accounts with those of the relevant Dzongkhag offices, project
implementing agencies and districts and produce consolidated annual financial statements in line with IFADs reporting
requirements. The unaudited FS will be submitted to IFAD within four months of the end of each fiscal year. In line with IFAD’s
requirements, documentation will be reviewed through Project Supervision Missions and for audit purposes.
6.  MoAF follows the budget preparation guidelines set out in the Budget Manual issued by MoF. Annual budgeting will be done
in line with Government’s existing budget framework and timetable (Budget calendar) as part of MoAF’s regular budget
submission. The budget line with GAFSP and IFAD contributions will be clearly identified and reported upon as part of MoAF
budget allocations under a sub-budget category to ensure that the principle of ‘aid on budget’ is observed. After obtaining data
from the districts which will be based on the annual plans of the communities/ institutions and other activities to be undertaken
by the PMU, the budget will be finalized by the PMU, ensuring coherence with defined categories/components and allocations.
Along with the PP, the AWPB has to be submitted to IFAD for approval at least two months prior to the commencement of the
relevant fiscal year. The RGOB shall ensure timely release the funds to the project in accordance with the approved budget.
7.  Submission of withdrawal applications (WAs). It is foreseen that the project will prepare and submit to IFAD WAs on a
quarterly basis through the MoF for the loan funds. For the GAFSP grant, it is foreseen that WAs will be submitted annually.
All financing and loan service payments shall be exempt from taxes. The WA should be by way of quarterly IFRs. For Report
Based disbursement (RBD), BRECSA needs to have an integrated computerized system and all reports should be automated
and generated from the software itself.
8.  Internal controls: The government policy lays out transactional control on all government receipts and payments at all levels.
The transactional control framework is considered adequate and reflects best practice. Physical achievements are not tracked
against financial expenditure. The Project’s internal controls will rely on the Government established accounting and internal
control guidelines as documented in the Financial Management Manual (FMM) issued by MoF. Internal controls will also be
verified during the annual audit exercise and reported to IFAD in a Management Letter, in line with IFAD’s audit guidelines.
9.  Procedures and record maintenance at all levels will be based on RGoB procedures consistent with IFAD’s requirements and
those documented in the FMM and the PIM. The PIM shall include provisions in respect of internal controls, preparation of
project FS, financial reporting arrangements, contract management and audit requirements. The FM shall be responsible for
the effective implementation of the overall internal control system. To the extent possible, all payments will be made through
direct bank transfers. Cash transactions will be permitted only in exceptional cases and for reasons to be recorded in writing
or for petty cash payments.
10.  Fund Flow: The flow of funds is depicted in the chart under the Disbursement section. The project will follow report-based
disbursement, the format of which is provided in the PIM. Funds will be advanced based on the cash flow forecasts of the next
two quarters and upon submission of the relevant IFR for withdrawal claims; IFAD will confirm whether a minimum of 50% of
the previous advance has been justified. IFRs are required to be submitted to IFAD on a quarterly basis to fulfill the reporting
requirement, regardless of whether a WA is scheduled to be submitted.
11.  Subsidiary Agreement. As RGoB’s funds and IFAD financing are transferred to the implementing agencies and partners, the
PMU will enter into subsidiary agreements with each entity receiving project funds. The provisions of the agreement shall be
articulated in the PIM.
12.  Internal Audit. The internal audit unit at MoF works based on its priorities and is need based. Due to its mandate of covering
all RGoB units based on its internal assessment, it may have limited capacity available to cover the Project activities as part of
its oversight functions. Should it be ascertained that the internal audit arrangements provided by the Internal Audit Unit are
insufficient, a private audit firm may be contracted as a complementary measure, in order to determine risk areas and propose
mitigating measures. The internal audit function should be conducted of the PMU every quarter. A copy of the report along
with the Management replies to the observations will be submitted to IFAD. The internal audit will also include statutory
compliances. TORs for the internal audit will be included in the PIM. An action taken report (ATR) from the PMU and the
districts shall be submitted to the PD and the internal auditors (reports/ATR reviewed by the PSC every six months).
13.  External Financial Audit. The Royal Audit Authority (RAA) has the mandate to audit all foreign funded loan projects,
following standard and specific donor requirements by INTOSAI.
197.
The consolidated FS including the use of the counterpart funds will be audited by the RAA and reports will be furnished to IFAD
within six months of the end of the relevant fiscal year. The auditor is required to deliver an audit package consistent with the
TORs defined in the PIM. The Project shall maintain an Audit Log in respect of the audit observations and get it validated by the
auditor during the subsequent audit or earlier.
1.  In light of the resource restraints as per noted above, in case the RAA is unable to complete the audit within the stipulated
time, the project may consider procuring an independent auditor to undertake the audit in accordance with approved TOR to
ensure fulfilment of the IFAD audit reporting requirements.
198.
34/37
Project Procurement will be undertaken in accordance with RGoB’s National Procurement Framework consistent with IFAD’s
procurement procedures. This includes the use of the Governments e-procurement system and adoption of standard bidding
documents as accepted by other international financial institutions. Overall inherent procurement risk rating under BRESCA is
moderate while residual risk post mitigation is low. Main risks identified include: (i) the inadequate capacity of the seconded
procurement officers; ii) inadequate and poor technical inputs (upstream activities) such as with regard to design, drawings, and
bill of quantities leads to complications during contract implementation; (iii) risk of substantially low or high bid prices; (iv)
unpredictable increase in raw material and fuel costs; (v) delays in contract implementation due to lack of labour, material and
contractors’ liquidity issues; and (vi) inconsistencies with IFAD Standard Bidding Documents. Mitigation measures proposed
include: (i) Drawings and designs are supported by external technical assistance; (ii) recruit dedicated long term technical
experts instead of seconded officers; (iii) request bidders and contractors signing the Self-Certification Forms on anticorruption,
sexual harassment, sexual exploitation and abuse as a part of bids/proposals and contract documents; (iv) conduct prior and ex-
post procurement review; (v) undertake coaching, on-the-job trainings and refresher trainings on procurement (IFAD project
procurement guidelines and manual, ICP E2E Procurement System, participation in BUILDPRO procurement training program);
vi) require accreditation in national procurement system (framework); (vii) apply relevant provisions in the bidding documents to
deal with abnormally low bids, including seeking higher performance security; viii) rate analysis and have realistic technical
estimates; (ix) ensure sufficient contingency funds are allocated; x)prepare technical estimates referring to both BSR and the
market rates of materials; and (xi) realistic contract management plans;xii) add a requirement of bank credit lines specifically for
the contract in the evaluation and qualification criteria; xiii)provision for advance payment in installments; xiv) provision of
payment for plant and materials; xv) monitor the contractor’s performance closely and take necessary action as early as
possible; xvi) close monitoring of the contract execution; and xvii) use an early warning clause in contracts.
199.
Governance and transparency framework : All project staff should be familiarized with the IFAD Anti-Corruption policy and in
case any fraud or corruption is noticed during implementation of the project it should be reported to the Investigating Section of
the IFAD Office of Audit and Oversight (AUO) as per procedures defined in the relevant documentation.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
200.
Planning: The Dzongkhags with relevant sector heads and technical experts, and concerned agencies like ARDC, RLDC,
RAMCO and FMCL will support the Gewogs in collection of inputs for the preparation of the Dzongkhag level Annual Workplan
and Budget (AWPB) and Procurement Plan (PP). WFP TA support will guide the AWPB and PP development process. The PMU
will compile the different Dzongkhag level AWPBs and prepare a single project AWPB. The AWPB will be approved by the PSC.
The AWPB will identify all agencies and service providers responsible for delivering project activities, and estimated financial
outlays for the year including, RGoB and beneficiary contributions. The PP will detail all procurements, including WFP’s
procurements, to be undertaken for the year and the modalities governing those procurements. Whenever implementing partners
identify the need to change, adopt and adjust the working modality and annual work plans or procurement plans, they may
propose such changes to the PMU, to be ultimately endorsed by the PSC and IFAD. BRECSA will be enrolled in IFAD’s
BUILDPROC training programme in order to increase the procurement capacity of the PMU.
201.
Monitoring and Evaluation:
202.
Drawing on the CARLEP M&E system, a robust geo-referenced M&E system will be established. The PMU will establish an M&E
unit and develop the M&E system, which will support progress monitoring. The M&E system will harmonize with RGoB’s PLaMS
as mandated for all projects, as well as, ensure full complementarity between IFAD, WFP and the GAFSP M&E requirements.
The M&E system will systematically monitor the ESCMP activities and collect related data. Additionally, the PMU M&E unit will
design formats to capture and collect critical data not captured by PLaMS and for data from the field level, drawing on lessons
from CARLEP as per IFAD programme management requirements. The M&E system will also serve to highlight areas where
immediate intervention and remedial action is needed. The system will be participatory and decentralized involving key target
groups so that the target groups will participate in identification of project activities and monitoring implementation of project. The
measurement of all IFAD outcome indicators will follow the COI measurement guidelines methodology.
203.
The logframe will constitute the basis for the 3 tier M&E system: (i) output monitoring with focus on physical and financial inputs,
activities and outputs; (ii) outcome monitoring for the measurement of benefits at household and community levels; and (iii)
impact assessment evaluating project impact for the target groups in comparison with objectives. The system will be compliant
with IFAD requirements, and relevant data, analysis and reporting will be disaggregated by gender and age. The data will inform
the preparation of above mentioned AWPBs and annual progress reports. The PMU M&E unit will carry out annual outcome
surveys (AOS) to measure changes as a result of programme interventions to provide a rapid feedback on progress. A baseline
survey will be commissioned by the PMU at the start to assess the socio-economic status of households and define the
benchmark against which project performance will be assessed. The Empowerment Indicator and the Minimum Diet Diversity
Indicator (MDD-W) will be included in the baseline survey and tracked at mid-term and completion. An end-of-programme impact
survey will be contracted to an external agency to assess the contribution of BRECSA in achieving its overall goal.
204.
Learning, knowledge management and communication: A comprehensive KM action plan will be developed during the first
year of implementation. BRECSA's KM activities will support the effective flow of relevant information between project staff,
beneficiaries and other stakeholders. The objective of knowledge management is to ensure the project units are able to generate
and document the knowledge that is useful to build practical know-how that helps to improve project performance and results.
Output, outcome and impact data generated by the M&E system will inform high-quality case studies, briefs and reports. The
PMU will document the emerging experiences, lessons, best practices and policy briefs, and share them widely. Additional
technical assistance will be sourced by the PMU for producing knowledge products as needed. All knowledge products will be
disseminated for enhancing learning, policy dialogue and potential scaling-up of successful interventions.
35/37
b. Innovation and scaling up
205.
BRECSA will introduce and pilot innovative features that include: a) climate-resilient infrastructure, including for water harvesting
and “automation” of currently manually operated drip irrigation systems; b) improved greenhouse design (testing stronger and
economical material for frame construction – with assessing right orientation allowing maximum/optimal radiation; c) e-agriculture
using ICT coupled with digital education for farmers and their groups; d) the Introduction of Hybrid/Chain link fencing instead of
electric fencing to be more effective against human-wild life conflict for certain species; e) creation of production and marketing
hubs that act as start-up incubators for young farmers; f) a solid approach and designed activities to target differently-abled
persons and promote their social and economic well-being, and g) promotion of permaculture to enhance farmers´ resilience to
climate change through converting existing farms into permaculture farms, coupled with permaculture trained lead farmers. The
lead farmer model will thus be an important innovation of the extension services system in Bhutan and will as such be prepared
for nation-wide scaling up. A website will be established (or existing MoAF website used), including knowledge management
products as knowledge sharing tools on innovation
M. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
a. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback.
206.
BRECSA will have a strong focus on vulnerable households, youth, and differently-abled persons. Since this target group may
not normally come forward to take up any project activities, special efforts will be made to identify and engage them. Their
engagement will be ensured in both planning and implementation stages through the continuous support of the Sanam Jabjorpa.
The CLEAR and ARPs formulation processes will engage target groups to identify priorities, suitable value chains, and specific
locations for project interventions. BRECSA’s annual planning process will include community consultation to identify target
groups’ needs and issues. The FG/FC and other capacity building interventions will include building skills and leadership to
effectively participate in project planning and implementation. BRECSA will develop beneficiary selection criteria for vulnerable
households and quotas; sensitivity to the availability of women and marginalized people when organising events; delivery of
services for vulnerable people to their homes; timely and regular assessment of participation of different categories of farmers
and vulnerable groups such as women-headed households; and outreach to ensure the participation of poor households in
livelihood support packages.
207.
BRECSA will have adequate mechanisms to gather and consider the target group and key stakeholders’ needs, priorities and
feedback, including on SECAP processes where applicable. The project ARP Coordinator will collate feedback for improving
delivery and enhancing AWPBs and PPs. A poster with information of the Gewog and Dzongkhag project officer’s name, photo
and easily accessible contact details (including email and phone number) in local language will be placed in visible places of all
project offices. Similarly, a feedback collection box will be placed in visible and easily accessible places with readable
sign/language in all project offices. Digital means (email, website, social platforms) will also be widely used to collect feedback. A
simple feedback collection format will be developed and made easily available to project beneficiaries and stakeholders. A
person, group or organizations’ identity - who shares feedback - will be kept anonymous if requested and the project’s actions to
address the feedback will be shared with them in a timely manner through email, phone, project’s ongoing events, website and
social media. Periodic and annual progress reports will have a section on key feedback and actions taken by the project to help
support adaptive management. BRECSA will deploy special studies and field verification visits to collect feedback and to assess
stakeholders’ satisfaction with project’s response. An Annual Outcome Survey will be conducted to review project’s performance
and outcomes at the household level; assess the efficacy of its targeting strategy and beneficiaries’ satisfaction with services
delivered.
b. Grievance redress.
208.
RGoB has a well-established online grievance mechanism Known as eKaaSel which can be accessed from the Citizen Portal-
www.citizenservices.gov.bt [36]. The system has been developed to serve as a one-stop platform with the primary objective of
streamlining the grievance redressal aspect of service delivery through an online channel of communication. BRECSA will
conduct a campaign through project staff to make its beneficiaries aware of this mechanism. In addition, the project will establish
a project specific feedback and grievance redress mechanism for project beneficiaries and those affected by project activities in
the target Dzongkhags. The grievance procedure and disciplinary procedure will be put in place in consultation with MoAF and
relevant Dzongkhag officials. The grievance redress mechanism will include a system to receive, address and document any
concerns, complaints, notices of emerging conflicts, or grievances alleging actual or potential harm to people affected by project
activities. The period for resolution of the complaint will be specified and a quarterly report on the number of complaints, key
issues and action disaggregated by gender and age will be prepared by the PMU. These complaints will be analyzed and
measures to address them will be undertaken by the PMU.
209.
BRECSA will publish the grievance redress mechanism on its website, Facebook page and through other media, as well as,
communicate the procedure for providing feedback/registering a grievance during all inception workshops and MSPs. This
mechanism will also address the beneficiaries concerns and grievances related to social and environmental compliance as
mentioned in the SECAP. Also, IFAD has a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and complaints
with respect to alleged noncompliance of its environmental and social policies and the mandatory aspects of its Social,
Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures. https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/accountability-andcomplaints-procedure.
N. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
36/37
210.
The project will be implemented over seven years. In the first year, a Start-up Workshop will be organized to sensitize all key
project stakeholders on the project’s design, development objectives key components and implementation arrangements.. The
workshop will allow partners to discuss their role in BRECSA and reflect on logframe indicators, baselines and target values.
Furthermore, procedures for financial management, procurement, selection of beneficiaries for different components, strategies
for M&E and KM will be introduced to staff undertaking these key functions. Follow up inception workshops will be subsequently
organized in each Dzongkhag to sensitize local partners about the project.
211.
The PMU will commission a study in PY1 to establish the baseline for measuring outcome indicators related to target beneficiary
groups. Terms of reference will be prepared with the help of IFAD and WFP to ensure that all key indicators included in the log-
frame are included in the baseline and completion surveys.
212.
At least one supervisionmission will be undertaken annually by IFAD and WFP with additional implementation support missions
deployed as required. The composition of the implementation support missions will be based onthe technical needs of the project
components and lagging areas of performance.
213.
A mid-term review will be organized by IFAD and WFP, together with the RGoB in year 3 to: (i) assess implementation progress,
achievements and the continued validity of project design; efficiency and effectiveness of implementation management,
procurement and financial arrangements; (ii) identify key lessons learnt and good practice; and (iii) provide recommendations for
improved performance including need for restructuring, if required.
214.
Thematic studies will be conducted on a needs basis to support programme activities, policy dialogue and scaling up. The
projectwill conduct an annual outcome survey to assess progress.
215.
At the end of the project, BRECSA will conduct an end of project impact evaluation to assess the extent to which the project has
achieved its development objectives and addressed beneficiary needs. This evaluation will also provide valuable information
regarding lessons for future programming.
216.
BRECSA will benefit from Project pre-financing under the IFAD Facility for faster implementation of project start-up (FIPS) to
accelerate project start-up and improve implementation readiness. The specific actions under FIPS include:
Recruitment of PMU staff.
Recruitment of community supporters for ARP implementation (Sanam Jabjorpa)
Preparation of first AWPB, Project Implementation Manual (PIM) and Procurement Plan
Procurement of essential goods and services required during the first year of implementation
Establishment of the fiduciary and M&E systems
Footnotes
[1] National Accounts Statistics 2021.
[2] National Accounts Statistics 2021.
[3] National Accounts Statistics 2021.
[4] National Accounts Statistics 2021.
[5] The World Bank in Bhutan: Bhutan At A Glance https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/bhutan/overview#1
[6] World Bank, Country Partnership Framework for the Kingdom of Bhutan for the period 2021–24.
[7] National Statistics Bureau, Labour Force Survey, Bhutan,2019.
[8] 12th Five Year Plan 2018-2023
[9] RGoB, UNDP, 2020. Rapid Socio-Economic Impact Assessment of COVID-19 on Bhutan’s Tourism Sector
[10] Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the French Agricultural Research Centre for International
Development and the European Union Rome, Montpellier and Brussels, 2022, FOOD SYSTEMS PROFILE - BHUTAN Catalysing the
sustainable and inclusive transformation of food systems.
[11] Bhutan’s Second Nationally Determined Contribution
[12] Climate Risk Country Profile: Bhutan (2021): The World Bank Group and the Asian Development Bank
[13] Bhutan’s third national communication, Vulnerability and adaptation assessment report
[14] GNHC . (2017). Strategic Program for Climate Resilience under the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience. Climate-Resilient and
Low-Carbon Sustainable Development Toward Maximizing the Royal Government of Bhutan’s Gross National Happiness. Gross
National Happiness Commission, RGoB
37/37
[15] ADB, Accounting for Unpaid Work in Bhutan, 2019
[16] Labour Force Survey, Bhutan 2020.
[17] UNDP, Gender Assessment Bhutan, 2019.
[18] Young People – UNFPA, Bhutan.
[19] Labour Force Survey, 2021
[20] Determinants of Youth Unemployment, National Statistics Bureau, June 2020.
[21] Dentrup, T. (2018). Agriculture transformation in Bhutan: From peasants to entrepreneurial farmers.  Asian Journal of Agricultural
Extension, Economics & Sociology, 1-8.
[22] Tshering Pelzom and Om Katel, Youth Perception of Agriculture and potential for employment in the context of rural development
in Bhutan, Development Environment and Foresight, 2017, Vol. 3, No. 2, 92—107, ISSN: 2336-6621
[23] This has been guided by IFAD’s engagement in pro-poor value chain development - Corporate Level Evaluation. The pro-poor
value chain selection crietria (Inclusive and sustainable development potential; growth potential, and enabling environment
responsiveness) were considred for prioritization.
[24] An Empowerment Index (EI) survey will be undertaken as part of the baseline survey in order to understand the women’s role and
needs in terms of empowerment. This is in line with IFAD’s policy on gender equality and women’s empowerment.
[25] Naila Kabeer, Gender equality and women's empowerment: a critical analysis of the third Millennium Development Goals, 2005.
[26] Overview FGs and ACs in Bhutan, Ministry of Livestock, 2022
[27] Households who produce for their own consumption
[28] FSAPP target districts include Chhukha, Dagana, Haa, Samtse and Sarpang. Sarpang is the overlapping district between FSAPP
and BRECSA
[29] The 9 priority behaviours are: Knowledge and Awareness of Child Malnutrition, Exclusive Breastfeeding, Complementary Feeding
(Anaemia in children <5), Dietary Diversity/Anaemia in Adolescent/Pregnant Women, Antenatal Care, Consumption of Alcohol and
Betel Nuts, Adolescent Pregnancies, Overweight and Obesity Among Adolescents and Hygiene Practices
[30] Adjusted to fit the study needs
[31] WFP country office in Bhutan in collaboration with the Ministry of Education is undertaking qualitative behavioural research to
inform a Social and Behaviour Change (SBC) Strategy aiming to promote healthy diets among school-aged children in Bhutan. The
findings of this survey will also inform BRECSA interventions as the age group of adolescents is overlapping for both surveys.
[32] Economic Census of Bhutan, 2019
[33]   The net benefits include net of cost of yearly investments and smallholders require external loans to finance their working capital
need in the first year. Their yearly / seasonal investment will be met either from their annual cash flow from the enterprise or additional
borrowing. Since most of these activities are seasonal in nature with gestation period of few months to year, they may need working
capital loan in the beginning of the farming season which can be paid after harvest.
[34]  Like in other parts of rural Bhutan, BRECSA project areas is characterized by youth unemployment and under-employment of
the smallholder farmers, most of them opting seasonal migration to Thimphu, neighbouring countries and overseas countries. Initial
impact of the BRECSA support will be to gradually reduce underemployment rate and later attracting seasonal migrants as well on
BRECSA promoted enterprises. In rural areas, smallholders are confident that growing two crops of vegetables (with gradual
expansion), 2 milking cattle/buffalo and 500 bags of mushroom provide decent and full-time employment.
[35] Specific ToR for gender, nutrition and youth mainstreaming will be prepared for the Coordination officer in order to ensure
appropriate implementation and follow up of social inclusion activities and outcomes.
[36] https://thebhutanese.bt/ekaasel-online-grievance-redressal-system/
Bhutan
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
25 April 12 May 2022
Document Date:
14/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003935
6281-BT
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Logical Framework
Results Hierarchy
1/9
Name
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
No delays in project
implementation,
procurement and
disbursement
Outreach 
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project
Progress Report
Annual
PMU
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Non-Indigenous people
Total number of persons receiving
services
Male
Female
Young
11000
18836
14000
28252
5600
14126
25000
47088
40
60
10
40
60
30
Persons with disabilities
340
600
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households members
Progress Report
Annual
PMU
Household members
37050
47088
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Progress Report
Annual
PMU
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Households
9500
12074
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Project Goal 
Catalyze a 30% increase in resilient commercial agricultural
production and improve food and nutrition security in the 4 target
districts by 2030
Development Objective 
Transform smallholder agriculture into inclusive and resilient agri-
food systems that are increasingly profitable and food and
nutrition secure
2/9
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
% of households reporting 30% increased production yield / produce
being marketed compared to baseline - Increase in income of
beneficiaries (GAFSP Tier 1)
Impact Assessment
PMU
At baseline,
mid-term and
completion
Females
Males
Young
Total number of persons receiving
services
Males
Females
Young
Persons with disabilities
60
60
11000
18836
5600
14126
25000
47088
40
40
14000
28252
10
30
340
600
1.2.8 Women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDDW)
Progress Reports
Annual
PMU
Women (%)
Women (number)
Households (%)
Households (number)
Household members
35
50
6353
14126
35
50
6353
9075
25410
36300
Women-headed households
8440
2954
4220
Non-women-headed households
IE.2.1 Individuals demonstrating an improvement in empowerment
Project monitoring
Total persons
Total persons
Females
Females
Males
25340
47688
14170
28552
PMU
Baseline,
mid-term and
completion,
yearly
A baseline survey is
conducted; Project
approach and
timelines are
adhered to; An
efficient M&E
system is
developed and
implemented,
impact assessment
undertaken
A baseline survey is
conducted; Project
approach and
timelines are
adhered to; An
efficient M&E
system is
developed and
implemented
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outcome 
Enhanced agri-food sector contribution to GDP, economic
opportunities, food and nutritional security and income of
smallholder farmers, women and youth
3/9
Name
Males
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
11170
19136
2.2.5 Rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase in sales
Percentage of rural POs
Number of Rural POs
Rural POs wtih women in leadership
position
2.2.1 Persons with new jobs/employment opportunities
Males
Females
Young
Total number of persons with new
jobs/employment opportunities
44
80
60
150
1000
1700
1200
2040
3000
5000
2200
3740
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Project monitoring and
progress reports
Annual
PMU
PMU
At baseline,
mid-term and
completion
Persons with disabilities
170
360
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services
Progress Report
Annual
PMU
Household members
Non-indigenous households
Indigenous households
Non-women-headed households
Women-headed households
Households (%)
Households (number)
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-making of
local authorities and project-supported service providers
Progress Report
Annual
PMU
Household members
Non-indigenous households
Indigenous households
Results of CLEAR
tool clearly guide
the development of
the ARPs. The
ARPs are
developed in all
gewogs and
inclusive.
Government
supports PMU to
bring about effective
implementation of
ARPs.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/9
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Non-women-headed households
Women-headed households
Households (%)
Households (number)
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Progress Reports
Annual
PMU
Total number of household members
Households
Women-headed households
100
100
38
71
Households
8000
15000
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable
and climate-resilient technologies and practices
Progress Reports
Annual
PMU
Total number of household members
Households
Women-headed households
Households
1.2.9 Households with improved nutrition Knowledge Attitudes and
Practices (KAP)
Indigenous households
Non-indigenous households
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Households (number)
Households (%)
Household members
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
5/9
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
Output Component 1
1.1.8 Persons provided with targeted support to improve their
nutrition (GAFSP Tier 2.12)
Progress Reports
Annual
PMU
Total persons participating
Females
Young
Women-headed households
Differently abled persons
Extension workers / Government Staff
10000
24766
10000
24766
1200
3625
300
886
37
37
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to improve their
nutrition
Progress Report
Annual
PMU
Total persons participating
5880
8220
ARPs implemented
and monitored;
Mentoring
undertaken to
support vulnerable
households; training
and awareness on
nutrition effectively
undertaken;
Trainings are
scheduled in a time
and location
suitable for all
beneficiaries
Males
Females
Households
Household members benefitted
Non-Indigenous people
Young
Not Young
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
5880
8220
2520
3780
Households with homestead kitchen gardens which beneficiaries are
included in nutrition educations
Females
Males
Young
Differently abled persons
772
1158
380
114
570
172
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
6/9
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Capacity building of extension workers
on nutrition
Households
37
37
1266
1900
3.1.4 Land brought under climate-resilient practices
Progress Report
Annual
PMU
Hectares of land
552
1577
1.1.3 Rural producers accessing production inputs and/or
technological packages
Progress Reports
Annual
PMU
Males
Females
Young
Total rural producers
1200
2000
2300
6000
500
1300
3500
8000
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or business
management
Progress Reports,
MIS system
Annual
PMU
Males
Females
Young
Persons trained in IGAs or BM (total)
Persons with disabilities
500
1000
1500
3000
750
1350
2000
4000
3.1.4 Agricultural/land area where climate resilient or sustainable
agriculture practices are implemented (GAFSP Tier2.14)
Progress Reports
Annual
PMU
Hectares of land
552
1577
Number of farmers receiving inputs or service on climate resilient or
sustainable agriculture practices (GAFSP Tier 2.13)
Progress Reports
Annual
PMU
Total number of farmers adopting
technologies or practices received
Total number of female farmers
adopting technologies or practices
received
3500
8000
1200
3000
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
7/9
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outcome 
Fostered business-oriented environment for farmer groups to
develop private sector enterprises in the agri-food sector and for
engaging youth in lucrative commercial ventures
2.2.2 Supported rural enterprises reporting an increase in profit
Number of enterprises
Percentage of enterprises
Farm
15
30
Progress Reports,
MIS system
Annual
PMU
Baseline
established, hubs
supported, farmers
are willing to
participate in
Producer Farmer
Organizations
2.2.6 Households reporting improved physical access to markets,
processing and storage facilities
Households reporting improved physical
access to markets
20
50
Size of households
4.6
4.6
4.6
Progress Reports.
surveys, service
providers' records,
MIS System
Annual
PMU
Women-headed households
Households reporting improved physical
access to processing facilities
10
20
Size of households
4.6
4.6
4.6
Women-headed households
Households reporting improved physical
access to storage facilities
25
60
Size of households
4.6
4.6
4.6
Women-headed households
Households reporting improved physical
access to markets
Households reporting improved physical
access to processing facilities
Households reporting improved physical
access to storage facilities
4200
10500
2100
4200
5250
12600
Output 
Output Component 2
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
8/9
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Policy 2 Functioning multi-stakeholder platforms supported
Progress Reports
Annual
PMU
Number
16
24
2.1.3 Farmer groups supported (GAFSP Tier 2.4)
Progress Reports
Annual
PMU
Total size of POs - Organizations
15
2000
3900
Baseline
established, farmers
are willing to
participate in
Producer Farmer
Organizations
Rural POs supported - Organizations
Males
Females
Young
Rural POs supported that are headed by
women - Organizations
80
500
130
900
1500
3000
500
1000
25
50
Outcome 
Enabling financial and policy environment to promote a
competitive and modernized food sector
Policy 3 Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies
proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or amendment
Number
0
1
Output 
Output Component 3
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services (GAFSP
Tier 2.5)
Progress Reports
Annual
PMU
Men in rural areas accessing financial
services - credit
Women in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Young people in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
70
156
70
156
20
46
BAFRA assigns a
focal group to work
closely with PPD
and BRECSA to
accelerate the
process of
regulation,
certification and
standardization;
willingness of policy
makers and other
key stakeholders to
provide enabling
environmnet
Appetite of
beneficiaries to
take-up loans;
Banks
capacitated/oriented
to provide suitable
packages to
smallholder farmers.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
9/9
Name
Total persons accessing financial
services - credit
Persons with disabilities in rural areas
accessing financial services - credit
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
140
312
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Bhutan
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
25 April 12 May 2022
Document Date:
14/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003935
6281-BT
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Impact 
  Reduced Poverty 
Enhanced food security 
Improved nutrition 
BRECSA THEORY OF CHANGE 
Goal 
Development 
Objective 
  Catalyze a 30% increase in resilient commercial agricultural production and improve food and nutrition security in the 4 target districts by 
2030. 
  Transform smallholder agriculture into inclusive and resilient agri-food systems that are increasingly profitable and food and nutrition 
sensitive. 
  Agri-food sector contribution to resilience, food 
Key 
Outcomes   
and nutritional security and income of 
smallholder farmers, women and youth is 
enhanced. 
Commercialisation is fostered for farmer 
groups to develop private sector 
enterprises and for engaging youth in 
lucrative commercial ventures. 
Enabling financial and policy environment to 
promote a competitive and modernized food 
sector is enhanced 
  Available 
data on 
vulnerability, 
agricultural 
and livestock 
production 
zoning, 
aggregation, 
processing 
centres and 
satellite 
markets. 
Developed 
gender and 
youth 
inclusive 
Agriculture 
Resilience 
Plans to 
support 
climate-
resilient 
production.  
Developed 
skills and 
approaches 
for 
increasing 
productivity 
and 
investment 
allocated to 
enhance 
commerciali
sation. 
Enhanced 
diet 
diversity 
through 
diversified 
food 
production 
(for both 
market and 
household 
consumptio
n) and 
increased 
nutrition 
education.  
  Undertake the Consolidated Livelihood Exercise 
for Analyzing Resilience (CLEAR) diagnostic tool 
with gender and youth disaggregated data and 
analysis 
Formulate district and sub-district agriculture 
resilience plans (ARP) 
Key Outputs 
Key 
Activities 
Completed 
value chain 
specific 
intervention 
strategies 
and plans  
to guide 
investment 
planning  
Establishe
d gender 
and Youth 
inclusive 
hubs to 
support a 
robust 
agri-
business 
sector. 
Supported 
investments 
in effective 
and inclusive 
climate 
resilient 
infrastructure 
to support 
commercializa
tion. 
Established 
inclusive multi-
stakeholder 
platforms and 
business 
linkages. 
Developed 
inclusive 
financial 
products and 
processes & 
financial 
/business 
literacy to 
support 
production, 
processing, 
business 
development 
and 
expansion. 
Established 
digitalizatio
n tools and 
platforms in  
support of 
marketing  
Improved 
competitiven
ess of value 
chains and 
market share 
in domestic 
and 
international 
markets 
through 
regulation, 
standardizati
on and 
certification. 
Build the skills of women, men and youth farmer 
groups and cooperatives and provide them with 
access to assets for diversification and 
commercialization of farm systems and products, 
including off-farm businesses (organic inputs, 
biochar, soil stimulants, bio-fertilizers, bio-
pesticides, etc.)  
Support financial institutions to 
design and align their products and 
processes to enhance access to 
financial services for women, men 
and youth in smallholder households, 
cooperatives, producers, aggregators 
and traders. 
Support nutrition-sensitive interventions (home 
gardens, nutrition education and awareness, 
water harvesting/storage tanks and selected 
on-farm and off-farm activities) to improve 
livelihoods and food and nutrition security of 
vulnerable groups 
Establish gender and youth inclusive enterprise 
hubs for aggregation, storage, processing, 
packaging and marketing 
Develop digital technologies and real 
time marketing, production and/or 
logistics data, including custom 
applications for on-demand extension 
and agri-food advisory services 
Invest in sustainable commercial farming 
systems of selected commodities (including in 
climate-resilient infrastructure) to enhance 
productivity and production expansion to 
support commercialization 
Finance small and medium-scale infrastructure 
(aggregation and processing centers, cold 
storage, milk chilling centers and marketing 
facilities) 
Promote branding of national niche-
products through certification and 
regulation processes to ensure 
products meet internationally 
recognized food standards 
  Develop skills of smallholder farmers (women 
and men), cooperatives and youth-led 
enterprises on climate resilient farming 
practices and technologies, including on 
permaculture, to ensure their economic 
empowerment 
Facilitate business linkages between producers, 
buyers, financiers, and local public stakeholders 
through multi-stakeholder platforms (MSP) and 
business interactions (B2B) to meet local, 
national, regional and global consumer demand 
Main 
Components 
  Resilient production systems 
Strengthened value chain coordination and 
market linkages 
Innovative and competitive agri-food 
sector  
Underlying 
Issues 
  Limited capacities of farmers and their groups. 
Climate vulnerability affecting productivity, 
limited water availability, wildlife crop 
depredation, labour shortage, low soil fertility, 
inadequate diet diversity, gender inequality and 
limited asset base to support livelihoods of 
vulnerable smallholder farmers. 
Commodity loss, inadequate post-harvest 
handling, limited storage, processing and market 
facilities and inefficient linkages between farm 
produce and markets. 
Lack of attractive opportunities and 
limited support for youth and women 
to invest in entrepreneurial activities. 
Absence of policy to support 
competitiveness of agri-food sector 
Bhutan
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
25 April 12 May 2022
Document Date:
14/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003935
6281-BT
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
SUMMARY OF DETAILED COSTS TABLES 
Summary: Total programme costs are estimated as around US$30.0433 million over the seven years implementation period as below. 
Table 1: Programme costs by component and financier 
Table 2: Programme costs by expenditure category and financier 
Table 3: Programme costs by component and year 
a)  Programme financing  
Total programme financing of US$30.0644 million is comprised of GAFSP grant funding of US$13.0 million (US$ 2.6 million through WFP 
and US$ 10.4 million from IFAD), IFAD loan (US$ 8.935 million), government funding of US$1.1134 million, banks US$0.704 million and 
beneficiaries US$6.3112 million. There is no financing gap. 
Table 4: Programme financing plan 
Detailed cost tables 
Table 5: Component 1 - Resilient Production Systems 
Table 5: Component 1 - Resilient Production Systems (Contd….) 
Table 6: Component 2 - Strengthened Value Chain Cooridnation and Market Linkages 
Table 7: Component 3 - Innovative and Competitive Agri-food Sector 
Table 7: Component 3 - Innovative and Competitive Agri-food Sector (Contd…) 
Table 8: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management 
Table 8: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management (Contd..) 
Bhutan
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
25 April 12 May 2022
Document Date:
14/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003935
6281-BT
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Background 
1. 
Project  goal:  The  Goal  of  the  project  is  to  “catalyze  a  30%  increase  in  resilient 
commercial  agricultural  production  and  improve  food  and  nutrition  security  in  the  four 
target districts by 2030. The development objective is to transform smallholder agriculture 
into inclusive and resilient agri-food systems that are increasingly profitable and food and 
nutrition secure. 
2.  Geographical area: The Project will be implemented in the central and central south 
Dzongkhags  of Sarpang, Trongsa, Tsirang and  Zhemgang.  The four project Dzongkhags 
are administratively further divided into Gewogs and villages. There is a total of 37 Gewogs 
and 539 villages in the project target Dzongkhags. BRECSA will target all Gewogs within 
these four project districts. 
Target  groups:  The  Project  will  target  commercial,  semi-commercial  and 
3. 
subsistence farmer households. The total direct beneficiaries of BRECSA interventions are 
at 12,074 farmer households, out of which 60% will be women and 30% youth. The project 
will  have  a  multi-dimensional  targeting  approach  focusing  on  poverty  reduction  and 
improved  food  and  nutritional  security  while  boosting  commercialization,  strengthening 
value-chains  and  increasing  the  resilience  of  both  poor  smallholder  farmers  and 
commercially-oriented  farmers.  The  project  will  develop  specific  mechanisms  for  poor 
households  to  be  able  to  join  appropriate  value  chains,  and  these  households  will  be 
benefiting  from  expanding  local  agriculture  employment  opportunities  associated  with 
value chain-driven growth.  
4. 
Beneficiaries: The project will target around 12,074 farmers’ households who will 
benefit as producers, agri-industry entrepreneurs and employees and an additional about 
10,000 household benefits indirectly through public infrastructure, agricultural extension, 
and financial education and business literacy sessions and financial services. Sixty percent 
of  the  beneficiaries  will  be  women,  including  a  minimum  of  5  percent  women-headed 
households and 30 percent will be youth. Six hundred people with disability (PWD) women, 
men and youth, who constitute 25% of the differently abled persons in the target districts 
will benefit from project interventions.  
5.  Duration:  Duration  of  the  programme  will  be  84  months  (7  years).  The 
implementation of the project will start in January 2023 for a period of seven years. The 
official  closing  date  of  the  programme  is  December  2029.  The  economic  and  financial 
analysis  (EFA)  of  the  project  has  been  covering  the  project  duration  of  84  (7  years) 
months. 
Project components  
6. 
BRECA project is structured around three inter-connected components: (i) Resilient 
production systems; (ii) Strengthened value chain coordination and market linkages; and 
(iii) Innovative and competitive agri-food sector.  
7. 
First  component  focuses  on  building  resilient  production  systems  based  on  a 
regenerative  model  that  increases  resilience  to  climate  and  other  shocks,  and  that 
contributes to food and nutrition security. A stratified approach will be adopted in targeting 
commercial,  semi-commercial  and  vulnerable  subsistence  households  as  a  means  to 
incrementally improve their overall quality of life.  
Second component seeks on building business linkages between producers, buyers, 
8. 
financiers  and  local  stakeholders  through  multi-stakeholder  platforms  (MSP).  The  MSPs 
will  support  farmers  in  achieving  effective  commercialization  of  prime  competitive 
commodities as well as identify investment needs associated with  aggregation, storage, 
processing, packaging and marketing.  
Finally, the third component supports the creation of an enabling financial and policy 
9. 
environment to promote a competitive and modernized food sector.  
Project cost 
10.  The main assumptions underlying the derivation of project costs and the financing 
plan are the following:  
•  Project costs: Total cost of the project is USD 30.06 million, it is based on April 2022 
prices, and will be financed over a seven-year period (2023-2029). The Project costs 
are presented in both BTN and USD. 
• 
Inflation: Inflation in Bhutan is quite fluctuating. In 2019, average inflation was 2.82% 
which increased to 4.15% in 2020. The average inflation further increased to 6.27% 
per  annum  in  2021  and  it  is  expected  to  remain  at  about  6%  per  annum  in  2022. 
Average inflation is assumed to remain at 5% over the project period.  
•  Exchange Rate. Base Exchange rate of Bhutan Ngultrum (BTN) to USD is 75 (rounded) 
in April 2022 and this exchange rate has been used in EFA analysis. Conversions from 
current USD values into BTN use constant purchasing power exchange rates of NRs. 
75 per USD. 
•  Taxes and Duties. There is value added tax (VAT) of 12 per cent levied on all imported 
and locally procured goods and services. Vehicles have a tax of up to 120% per cent 
depending on an engine power.  
• 
International technical assistance does and grants not carry any taxes. Social security 
benefits (employee’s portion) and income tax (employee deductions) are  eligible for 
IFAD financing.  
11.  The  Government  will  finance  the  cost  of  all  taxes  on  goods  and  services  procured 
under the Project. RGoB will also finance some PMU staff (on deputation) and operating 
costs and contribute to the cost of infrastructure development.  
Project support 
12.  The  project  provides  diverse  types  of  support  to  the  target  beneficiaries.  For  the 
purposes of Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA), benefits are modelled assuming the 
following project support in each of the three project components:  
13.  Resilient Production Systems: The resilient production systems will be promoted 
by  (i)  Consolidated  Livelihood  Exercise  for  Analyzing  Resilience  (CLEAR),  (ii)  Develop 
Gewog  and  Dzongkhag  Agriculture  Resilience  Plans  (ARPs);  (iii)  Improve  livelihoods  of 
vulnerable groups, and (iv) Invest in commercial farming systems through a systematic 
support as under.  
(a)  CLEAR Tool: The project will use CLEAR diagnostic tool for zoning agricultural 
and  livestock  production,  locating  aggregation  and  processing  centres  and 
satellite markets, and streamlining supply-side logistics based on a robust spatial 
and temporal climate vulnerability and risk assessment. 
(b)  Gewog  and Dzongkhag  ARP:  The project  will support preparing Gewog and 
Dzongkhag  ARP  involving  smallholder  households,  producer  organisations, 
cooperatives, buyers, financiers, and district agriculture and market facilitation 
officers;  
(c) 
Improve  livelihood  of  vulnerable  households:  The  project  will  follow  the 
principles  of  ‘leaving  no  one  behind’  and  provide  customized  support  to 
subsistence  smallholders  farmers,  vulnerable  households  -  including  women-
headed  households  and  households  of  PWD  in  the  target  villages  through  the 
development  of  Livelihood  Investment  Plans.  The  project  will  improve  the 
nutritional  status  of  these  households  by  promoting  nutrition-sensitive 
agriculture interventions through home gardens, poultry production and selected 
on-farm and off-farm activities and awareness raising on food-based nutrition. 
The project will also contribute to graduating these households from subsistence 
to  semi-subsistence  by  providing  them  with  necessary  production  and  post-
harvest inputs, capacity building, inclusion in cooperatives and market linkages. 
(d)  Invest on commercial farming systems: The project will support the creation 
of hubs as production zones for the different BRECSA prime commodities. The 
hubs  will  be  centered  along  main  arteries  and  economic  corridors  and  will  be 
designed using permaculture farming principles for promoting climate resilient 
agro-ecological  farming  and  promotion  of  selected  and  promising  value  chain 
commodities.  Farmers  will  be  organised  into  a  network  of  Farmer  Groups  or 
Cooperatives (FG/FCs), and linked to the Hubs for facilitation of capacity building, 
input provision, aggregation, post-harvest processing and marketing. 
14.  Strengthen  value  chain  coordination  and  market  linkages:  The  value  chain 
coordination and market linkages will be strengthened through  This component includes 
three sub-components: (i) Enhance efficiency of value chain operations, (ii) Establish Hubs 
to support commercialization and (iii) Business linkages and multi-stakeholder platforms 
(MSP) as under. 
(a)  Enhancing  efficiency  of  value  chain  operations:  The  project  will  apply  an 
integrated  value  chain  approach,  defining  interventions  in  all  value  chain 
functions from input supply, production, aggregation and storage, processing, to 
defining  marketing  channels,  export  potential  and  strategies.  The  project  will 
fund small to medium scale infrastructure to address remoteness and absence 
of appropriate marketing facilities for improving the profitability of smallholder 
farmers. The project will also fund provision of aggregation centres, storage, and 
small-scale processing centres with required washing, grading, packing facilities 
and  storage  to  support  the  commercialization  of  agricultural  produce.  These 
processing facilities will be strategically located based on the CLEAR analysis and 
Dzongkhag ARPs.  
(b)  Establishment  of  Hubs  to  support  commercialization:  The  project  will 
support the creation of Youth Farmer Group/Cooperative run Hubs. It will support 
the  establishment  of  at  least  4  youth-led  Hubs  per  Dzongkhag  (16  in  total). 
These Hubs will be supported with training and serve as a Farmer Field Schools 
for the adjacent network  of  farmers for building knowledge  on agro-ecological 
farming.  Based  on  demand,  the  Hubs  will  serve  as  an  input  distributor  for 
provision of seed and vegetative planting material, bio-inputs, and minor tools 
to the farmer groups. The Hubs will also serve as an aggregation point for the 
farmer  groups  to  deliver  their  produce  based  on  a  guaranteed  minimum  price 
and profit sharing. 
(c)  Business  linkages  and  multi-stakeholder  platforms:  The  project  will 
facilitate  the  establishment  and  functioning  of  MSPs  to  support  business 
development and commercialisation at Thimphu and District levels. The MSPs, in 
partnership  with  relevant  departments  and  agencies,  will  be  responsible  for 
export market exploration and facilitation. MSPs will also engage in investment 
planning.  Based  on  the  initial  value  chain  analysis  and  defined  investment 
strategies, a Strategic Investment Plan (SIP) will be prepared for each selected 
commodity.  
15.  Innovative  and  competitive  agri-food  sector:  The  innovative  and  competitive 
agri-food sector will be supported to create an enabling financial and policy environment 
to promote a competitive and modernized food sector. This includes activities such as: (i) 
Access to financial services, (ii) Digital technologies to support marketing and (ii) Policy 
dialogue. 
(a)  Access to financial services: The project will enhance access to and usage of 
agricultural financial services and VC financing tools for commercial and semi-
commercial smallholders, producer groups, cooperatives, aggregators, traders, 
processors  and  other  value  chain  actors  engaged  in  selected  agricultural 
commodities.  The  project  will  also  work  with  financial  institutions  to  develop 
customized products that are aligned to cash flow and seasonality of the different 
agricultural  commodities  and  enhance  the  capacity  of  their  field  staff. 
Furthermore,  the  project  will  support  farm  households  and  enterprises  to 
improve  their  financial literacy,  skills  and  knowledge  to  improve  their  financial 
habits, financial discipline and investment decisions. 
(b)  Digital technologies to support marketing: The project will conduct careful 
analysis to assess existing farmer-support digital tools, their shortcomings and 
current needs of farmers to later develop a user-friendly tool/platform. The tool 
will  tackle  issues  related  to:  (i)  production  and  pricing  in  different  locations 
(commodity,  volume  and  price),  (ii)  demand  in  different  markets  (commodity, 
volume and price), (iii) transportation (facilitating farmers and traders to search 
and  contact  transport  service  providers  for  transporting  agriculture  produce), 
and  (iv)  other  functionalities  under  the  above  four  areas  identified  during  the 
diagnostic analysis.   
(c)  Policy  dialogue:  This  project  will  undertake  policy  dialogue  to  support  the 
promotion  of  Brand  Bhutan’s  organic  and  high-value  agri-food  products  in 
regional and international markets. To this end, the Project will support BAFRA 
in the development of GI as well as provide needed investments for regulation, 
standardization and certification. The project will also work with DAMC to revise 
the  rules  and  regulations  of  the  Cooperative  Act  and  produce  guidelines  that 
foster agri-food commercialization.  
Project Beneficiaries Composition 
improved 
16.  The project proposes to adopt a multi-dimensional targeting approach focusing on 
poverty  alleviation  and 
food  and  nutritional  security  while  boosting 
commercialization, strengthening value-chains and increasing the resilience of both poor 
small  holder  farmers  and  commercially-oriented  farmers.  The  project  is  using  direct 
targeting to ensure social inclusion of women, youth and vulnerable groups like women-
headed households and PWD disability through setting quotas, including specific budget 
allocations  to  ensure  outreach.  The  project  will  support  them  through  different 
interventions. 
17.  Livelihood investment plans: The project will support about  1,500 beneficiaries 
HHs to prepare and implement livelihood investment plans (LIPs). They will be mainly the 
subsistence farmers who may graduate to semi-commercial category over time. 
18.  Nutrition-sensitive agriculture interventions: The project will impart nutrition 
education to 21,600 people  to further improve nutritional practices comprising of 6,300 
youth (boys and girls), 14,700 women and 600 PWD. Among them, the project will support 
around  3,166  subsistence  smallholder  households1  through  an  adapted  home  garden 
support package.  
19.  Readiness support for differently abled persons: In view that differently abled 
persons  can  be  excluded  from  social  activities  and  have  higher  risks  of  getting 
marginalized,  the  project  targets  600  differently  abled  persons  (PWD)  or  caregivers  to 
increase their readiness to engage in agriculture related income generating activities. 
20.  Permaculture farming: The project will support the setting-up of 16 permaculture 
farm and train 16 lead farmers and 384 youth and other farmers interested in adopting 
agro-ecological  farming  who  reside  relatively  close  to  the  Lead  Farmer  to  promote 
permaculture farming practices. Total will be 400 beneficiaries HHs.  
21.  Value chain development: To start with the project will support promotion of value 
chain in commodities such as (i) dairy and poultry, (ii) high value commodities (off season 
vegetables, ginger, turmeric, etc.), (iii) mushrooms, and (iv) other niche products such as 
honey, tea, etc. Number of beneficiary HHs are estimated to be 800 dairy HHs, 800 poultry 
1  
Subsistence smallholder households who produce for their own consumption 
HHs  on  poultry  productions,  2,000  HHs  on  high  value  crop  production,  10  HHs  on 
commercial mushroom production and 200 HHs on honey production. Total beneficiaries 
on direct value chain development will be 3,810 HHs. 
22.  The project will ensure that subsistence farmers and semi-commercial farmers in the 
project  districts,  excluded  under  support  packages  encompassing  LIPs,  home  gardens 
support,  readiness  to  PWD,  permaculture  and  value  chain  will  benefit  from  (i)  financial 
education and business literacy, (ii) formation and strengthening of FGs and Cooperatives 
and (iii) project supported infrastructures. Total will be 2,598 beneficiaries HHs.  
23.  Table  1  below  shows  the  phase-in  and  total  number  of  direct  beneficiaries  of  the 
project over the project period.  
Table 1: Smallholder Beneficiaries Households Distribution by Year 
S.
N. 
1 
Project support / 
Value Chain / 
enterprises 
Livelihood 
investment plans 
3 
4 
5 
2  Home garden 
support 
Readiness 
support to PWD 
Permaculture 
Livestock 
production 
Dairy – Cattle 
Poultry 
6  High value 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
commodities 
Vegetables 
Ginger 
Turmeric 
Mushrooms 
(Oyster - 
Medium) 
Honey production  No 
No 
7  General 
Unit 
2023/
24 
2024
/25 
2025
/26 
2026
/27 
2027
/28 
2028
/29 
2029
/30 
Total 
% of 
Total 
150 
300 
300 
300 
450 
1,500 
12.4 
400 
700 
700 
600 
766 
50 
150 
150 
150 
100 
50 
100 
100 
100 
50 
50 
50 
250 
250 
200 
200 
200 
200 
100 
100 
200 
50 
50 
- 
350 
100 
100 
4 
350 
100 
100 
4 
300 
50 
50 
2 
200 
- 
- 
- 
- 
500 
50 
500 
75 
600 
75 
600 
- 
398 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3,166 
26.2 
600 
5.0 
400 
3.3 
800 
800 
6.6 
6.6 
1,400 
300 
300 
10 
11.6 
2.5 
2.5 
0.1 
200 
2,598 
1.7 
21.5 
-  12,074 
- 
100 
100.
0 
subsistence and 
semi-commercial 
farmers 
Total 
No 
1,550 
% of the Total 
13 
2,85
4 
24 
2,879  2,627  2,164 
24 
22 
18 
24.  During BRECSA design, three broader groups of support  such as (i) permaculture, 
and value chain commodities: (ii) animal (dairy and poultry) husbandry and (iii) high value 
commodities (vegetables, ginger, turmeric, mushrooms, and honey) are proposed based 
on  agro-ecological  suitability,  comparative  competitive  advantage,  market  potential  and 
private  sector  interest,  market  demand  and  profit  margin.  Details  on  value  chain 
commodities selection is provided in Attachment 1. Further in order to improve the food 
and nutrition security and livelihood status of beneficiaries, the project includes packages 
of services such as implementation of livelihood investment plans, home garden, readiness 
support to PWD and support to general small holders (subsistence and semi-commercial) 
farmers.  
25.  These households will be benefiting through various project interventions geared at 
farmers  through  value  chains  development 
building  resilience  of  smallholders’ 
interventions  and  will  be  supported  based  on  cluster  development  approach  through 
different  packages  of  services  (business  literacy,  extension,  grant,  private  and  public 
infrastructure,  etc.).  This  process  will  be  driven  by  the  primary  actors  themselves, 
principally farmers and MSMEs through packages of services comprising of mentoring and 
mobilization of small-scale producers, brokering and cluster facilitation and inclusive value 
chains  knowledge  and  policy  support.  They  will  receive  business  skill  and  household 
finances; managing own farm as a business; managing the enterprise as well as integrate 
the aspects of climate change, youth, and nutrition. 
26.  Beneficiaries  will  be  assisted  through  multiple  services  such  as  adaptation  and 
mitigation technologies and practices, improved access to markets, basic and productive 
and market infrastructure, support to permaculture, small irrigation, improvement of cattle 
and poultry shed and financial education and business literacy and eventual linkages with 
affordable  and  suitable  financial  services  and  products  of  the  banks  and  financial 
institutions. Under this project, confidence of the farmers on production will be enhanced 
to  promote  their  inclusion  into  value  chain  and  improved  marketing  strategies  through 
their  participation  on  FGs  that  will  allow  enable  them  engage  in  produce  aggregation, 
distribution, and responsiveness to market demands. The project support through FGs will 
be  focus  on  enabling  them  to  promote  investments  and  become  reliable  value  chain 
partners for buyers and customers. 
Post-harvest value chain 
27. 
Besides  pre-harvest,  BRECSA  is  creating  incremental  benefits  by  improving 
efficiency and effectiveness on existing value chain of supported commodities. This will be 
done through strengthening of the local aggregators comprising of FGs and cooperatives, 
post-harvest processors, youth enterprises and traders; and youth enterprises.2 These will 
be  complemented  through  improvement  on  wholesale  and  retail  markets,  promotion  of 
irrigated agriculture through surface and pond irrigation technologies and other types of 
value  addition  such  as  produce  aggregation,  processing,  packaging,  storage  and 
distribution. Such a support to create time, place and form utility of the commodities.  
28. 
The  project  will  focus  on  brokering  and  cluster  facilitation  to  improve  linkages 
between farmers, buyers and service providers to better exploit market opportunities. This 
will be done through facilitation of rolling MSPs, and associated business-to-business (B2B) 
follow-up with existing buyers and post-harvest value chain infrastructures initially. During 
the later stage of the project, some post-harvest value chain enterprises mainly related to 
processing  of  the  commodities  and  input  supply  will  gradually  emerges.  Indicative 
enterprise and production models for most likely value chains such as  small-scale dairy 
processing and agro-vet services are prepared under this EFA exercises.  
Financial services  
29.  Rural and agricultural financial is not very well development in Bhutan. Most of the 
smallholder  farmers  lack  access  to  formal  sector  finance  from  Banks  and  Financial 
institutions (BFIs). The project support will focus on strengthening potential rural finance 
intermediaries  (FGs  and  Cooperatives)  as  well  as  linking  them  with  wholesale  financial 
services from BFIs. 
30.  Sub-component 3.1 under component 3 focuses on leveraging and enhancing access 
to  financial  services  for  local  private  sector  aggregators  (smallholder  producers,  farmer 
groups  and  cooperatives)  from  development  finance  such  as  BDBL,  and  CSI  Bank;  and 
microfinance institutions such as RENEW MFI, BAOWE, Tarayana, Foundation, and enhance 
digital access to financial services for producers, aggregators and traders including online 
registration, and visibility of interest rates and charges. Further, the project will support 
the beneficiary farmers to prepare the livelihood investment plans, and linked them with 
2  
Candidate enterprise will comprise of: (i) vegetable processing (drying and pickling); (ii) production of 
compost  fortified  briquettes,  soil  bio-stimulants  and  bio-pesticides;  (iii)  silage-making  in  bags;  (iv)  seed 
processing and packaging; (v) agro-vet services, (vi) processing, packaging and marketing of the feasible dairy 
products. 
these  financial  service  providers.  Mainly  development  finance  institutions  (case  of  large 
value chain entrepreneurs) and microfinance institutions and financial cooperatives (case 
of smallholder farmers) for required financial services depending on their stage and level 
of involvement on value chain system. Producers themselves will take risks and rewards 
analysis of their own investments and implement their plans.  
31.  Enterprises  potentially  promoted  under  BRECSA  required  both  short  (working 
capital) and medium term (term) loan. Very few enterprises likely to be emerged under 
BRECSA  value  chain  development  support  such  as  cold  storage,  large  scale  dairy,  and 
processing entity could potentially are long-term nature, but such enterprise requiring long 
term loans are not visualized at the design stage.  
32.  Government of Bhutan (GOB) has Priority Sector Lending (PSL) policy wherein loan 
ceilings  for  individuals  is  Nu  0.5  million,  loan  term  is  for  5  years,  no  collateral  but 
mandatory insurance, up to 100% debt financing and preferential interest rate of 8%; for 
FGs / cooperatives and incorporated companies loan ceiling goes up to Nu 10m while other 
features remain the same. PSL target for the banks has been 1% of total loan portfolio to 
be lent to agricultural CSIs for all banks except BDBL. Additional 1% of total loan portfolio 
to  be  lend  to  non-agricultural  CSIs  for  all  banks  and  insurance  companies.  The  project 
support will be centered to support potential project farmers, FGs and cooperatives under 
PSL of the GOB. 
Approach and Methodology of EFA 
Cost-benefit analysis method was used for carrying out the EFA3. Project benefits 
33. 
includes potential return from various project interventions such as permaculture farming, 
and value chain commodities namely (i) livestock (dairy and poultry) and (ii) high value 
commodities  (vegetables,  ginger,  turmeric,  mushrooms,  and  honey)  as  well  as  project 
support on food and nutrition security, livelihood investment plans and readiness support 
to differently abled people, and value chain enterprises. The potential costs to be incurred 
to realize these benefits by the project beneficiaries are accounted.  
34. 
Benefits are estimated for all categories of the project beneficiaries and proposed 
value  chain  commodities.  Major  sources  of  quantifiable  benefits  are  incremental 
agricultural production through adoption of improved technology, management practices 
and BRECSA access to financial services including financial education and business literacy, 
and strengthening of FGs and cooperatives. These benefits are properly accounted. The 
project will support to improve wholesale and retail markets, processing, road access, and 
irrigation, which will be generating different benefits. BRECSA farmers will be benefiting 
directly from grant support from the project through livelihood improvement plans, home 
garden,  support  to  differently  abled  people,  permaculture  farming  and  promotion  of 
selected value chain commodities on high value crops and livestock production. They will 
also  benefit  indirectly  through  improved  agricultural  production  environment  such  as 
improved irrigation facilities, road access, and market linkages. These benefits had been 
captured through indicative model for livelihood improvement, kitchen garden, enterprise 
and  production  models,  etc.  that  are  focused  on  input  marketing,  product  aggregation, 
processing, packaging, storage and distribution.  
Further, the project implementation approach to increase sustainability, resilience 
35. 
and  profitability  as  a  result  of  adaptation  and  mitigation  technologies  and  practices, 
improved  access  to  markets,  access  to  basic  and  productive  and  market  infrastructure, 
and  financial  education and  business  literacy  are  assumed  to  reduce  price  and  quantity 
risks of the producers and are captured through integrated pricing mechanism.  
3  
The project's cost benefit analysis was carried out based on 'with/without' assumptions. Required data 
were collected from multiple sources including MOAF / DOA produced documents (i) Cost of Production of Food 
and Horticulture Crops in Bhutan, June 2020; (ii) Package of Practices of Field and Horticultural Crops of Bhutan, 
June 2019, (iii) Bhutan RNR Statistics, 2018, (iv) Agricultural Statistics 2020, (v) RNR Statistics of Bhutan 2019 
and field level data collected during the mission and field survey of representative enterprises. 
BRECSA EFA was done using the similar assumptions that was used during CARLEP 
36. 
project design as well as due consideration on CARLEP EFA results to ensure that BRECSA 
EFA is consistent to the EFA done under the IFAD funded projects in Bhutan.  
Financial Analysis 
37.  Financial  analysis  is  done  to  demonstrate  viability  of  the  project  proposed 
intervention at the enterprise and farming household levels. The methodology employed 
is  to  establish  individual  gross  margin  enterprise  budgets  for  all  the  project  support  to 
demonstrate the efficiency of investment through positive change in net income following 
project implementation. These budgets provide the basis building blocks of the household 
farming business as expressed in farm budgets. Farm budgets4 are developed for each of 
the  value  chain  commodities:  permaculture  farming,  high  value  commodities  such  as 
vegetables  (onion,  chilies  and  tomato),  mushrooms  (Oyster  –  medium  scale),  ginger, 
turmeric, and honey, and livestock commodities such as dairy/cattle and poultry as well 
as other farmed crops so as to develop a household perspective.  Further, household model 
for  LIPs,  home  garden,  improved  farming  as  a  result  of  project  support  such  of  FEBL, 
FGs/cooperatives and public infrastructure support from the project. The financial analysis 
is formulated on an incremental basis and as such comparing with-project (WP) situation 
to the without-project (WoP) situation. In this way, the incremental benefit has been used 
as a basis of financial analysis. 
38.  Assumptions and observations: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
All the costs and benefits are valued at constant market price of April 2022. 
Only  direct  beneficiaries  are  considered  and  benefits  and  cost  associated  to  over 
10,000 indirectly benefitting households were not considered in this analyzed.  
Average  size  of  landholding  is  1.5  acre  in  project  areas  and  various  seasonal  and 
perennial crops are planted and BRECSA support will enable beneficiary households 
to  shifts  from  traditional  cropping  patterns  to  more  commercial  oriented  farming 
system within the project areas. 
In  all  12,074  farm  households  will  receive  BRECSA  benefits  directly.  These 
households will have access to services such as project grants, training, extension 
and financial services, improved value chain infrastructure, which will enable them 
to  adopt  new  packages  of  production  practices,  crop  varieties  and  cultivation 
techniques eventually leading to increased production and income.  
Beneficiary households already organised into FGs will benefit from the project. The 
project will support them to enhance their competence through training and capacity 
development and will actively participate in BRECSA package of services. In project 
areas, where FGs do not exist, new FGs will also be formed.  
Beneficiary households will receive BRECSA package of services directly or indirectly 
from  the  project  under  three  components  discussed  above.  They  will  receive 
technical  support  through  RGOB  Field  Agricultural  Officers  (FAO),  Agricultural 
Technicians (ATs) and community mobilizers recruited under project and other expert 
support as well as existing network of service providers at non-government sector. 
Most villages in project Dzongkhags have perennial or seasonal streams that could 
be  tapped  for  irrigation  through  the  construction  of  surface,  pipelines-based, 
sprinkler  and  small  lift  irrigation  system.  Smallholders  will  also  benefit  from  the 
market-oriented community infrastructure to be supported from the project.  
Commonly  grown  crops  are  paddy,  wheat,  maize,  millets,  pulses,  vegetables  and 
other  fruit  crops  and  the  households  apply  farm  yard  manure  /  compost  or  little 
4  
A farm budget is a function of the farms cropping (and in some cases) livestock production pattern and 
the  representative  budget  for  that  household  type.  The  farm  budget  also  reflects  the  investment,  the  debt 
service, the on-farm use, household consumption and the labour availability. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
chemical  fertilizers  and  households  especially  in  proposed  Dzongkhags  use  poly-
tunnels for improved vegetable farming.  
Crop productivity is gradually being improved through adoption of quality of seeds / 
varieties,  weeding,  mulching,  use  of  improved  farm  tools  and  implements,  which 
were demonstrated by the beneficiary households. The access to quality seeds and 
inputs has been an issue and agro-vet located in several places in project areas will 
be strengthened to supply quality seed to the farmers.  
Vegetable farming comprises of several crops such as cabbage, cauliflower, carrot, 
radish,  coriander,  broad  leaved  mustard,  peas,  beans,  cucumber,  etc.,  but  major 
focus of the project will be on promoting cultivation of essential vegetables namely 
chilies,  onion  and  tomato  that  has  high  demand  both  at  local  and  international 
market  and  have  attractive  rate  of  return.  Area  under  vegetable  farming  ranges 
between 0.5 acre and 1.5 acre, with an average of 1 acre (0.4 ha (approx.).  
Improved road connectivity, irrigation facilities, access to agricultural inputs, market 
infrastructure, transport, processing, trade and other attendant facilities supported 
under the BRECSA and already provided by RGoB will enable participating households 
to realise increased margins on agricultural production.  
The  smallholders  in  the  project  areas  raise  livestock  such  as  cattle,  pigs,  goats, 
poultry birds, etc. in addition to agricultural activities. There exist potential to up-
scale these business through technology, training and para-vet services. Back yard 
poultry  and  dairy  cattle  farming  are  highly  promising  activities  with  providence 
evidences  for  commercialization.  The  project  support  smallholder  farmers  to 
specialize and gradually commercialize on poultry and dairy cattle farming. 
There  will  be  notable  improvement  on  marketing  of  the  farm  produces  due  to 
BRECSA  support  through  mentoring  and  mobilization  of  small-scale  producers, 
brokering and cluster facilitation through MSPs and inclusive value chains knowledge 
and  policy  support.  Over  90%  beneficiary  households  will  get  information  about 
prices and most will receive instant payments at sale and very few beneficiaries will 
receive payment after weeks. These practices will be gradually minimized. 
An  average  wage  rate  of  Nu  500/person  day  for  both  male  and  female  labour  for 
hard  work  like  land  preparation  and  Nu  350-400/person  day  for  both  male  and 
female labour for other activities like care and management of agricultural enterprise 
and inter-cultural operation. This wage rate has been assumed although the farm-
wages tended to vary. The same rate is assumed for without project situation.  
Farmers  pay  land  taxes  as  applicable  and  these  form  part  of  the  fixed  production 
costs.  They  use  farm  implements  as  well  and  depreciation  in  these  implements  is 
expected  and  12.5%  depreciation  rate  is  used  assuming  8  years  economic  life  of 
these implements.  
Commodity prices vary significantly between Dzongkhags and seasons and the April 
2022 prices were collected during the mission from different sources and those prices 
were compared with the prices used in undertaking EFA during CARLEP design. These 
prices were cross-checked / triangulated from national level price statistics collected 
by DOMC under MOAF.  
Access to financial services in Bhutan is at a nascent stage. Despite relatively wide 
branch networks of the BFIs, they are yet to expand access to financial services to 
inaccessible and remote areas. Available financial services are concentrated in few 
urban centres and along the market centers /  township along the road corridor  of 
the  major  highways.  At  present,  BFIs  are  extending  the  short-  and  medium-term 
loans  in  the  initial  3-4  years  in  several  potential  sectors  mainly  RGOB  guarantee. 
They will potentially extend long term financial support to value chain enterprises on 
services  related to aggregation, processing, packaging, storage and distribution in 
the later phase of the project. Overall loan portfolio for long-term loan for the BFIs 
has been increasing (<5%). 
• 
The RGOB/MOAF has been designing suitable agricultural insurance services in the 
country and will potentially start implementation in 2023. The BRECSA project will 
work  to  strengthen  agriculture  insurance  services  as  a  tool  for  risk  mitigation  for 
producers  in  the  value  chain  and  agricultural loan  extended  by  BFIs.  Benefit  from 
these  services  in  form  of  risk  reduction  for  producers  and  improved  repayment 
performance  of  the  BFIs  could  be  integrated  in  higher  production  and  better 
commodity prices, but this has not been considered in the EFA analysis.  
Enterprise models 
39.  Enterprise models type: following enterprise models, which are indicative, were 
develop under without project and with project situation for the purpose of ex-ante EFA.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
•  Permaculture 
•  Livestock farming - dairy/cattle and poultry 
•  High value commodities - vegetables (chilies, tomato, onion), mushrooms (Oyster - 
Medium), ginger, turmeric and honey 
•  Livelihood improvement plans 
•  Home garden 
•  General subsistence and semi-commercial smallholder farming  
40.  The  demand-driven  nature  of  the  project  makes  both  financial  modeling  and 
calculation of a benefit stream rather indicative. Above six categories of enterprise models 
were prepared to illustrate income generating activities and micro-enterprises that can be 
subject of BRECSA supports. These supports will be extended through three inter-related 
but distinct project components.  
41.  The  project  is  working  on  value  chain  development  activities  in  above  mentioned 
livestock  and  high  value  agricultural  commodities  in  four  Dzongkhags  namely  Sarpang, 
Trongsa, Tsirang, and Zhemgang  
42.  Benefits: The project is expected to lead to increase in incomes for smallholder HHs 
who  otherwise  lacks  access  to  basic  services  on  extension,  finance,  and  technology  to 
increase income and generate employment opportunities in the target areas. Key benefits 
would  accrue  from  agricultural  business  creation  and  expansion,  facilitated  by  project 
support on value chain development through social mobilization from project to establish 
their  linkages  with  potential  suppliers  and  enhanced  access  to  basic  services  including 
access to financial services.  
43.  Financial  analysis  was  done  at  project  level  using  market  prices.    Incremental 
benefits were estimated based on actual physical outputs from the selected commodities. 
Prices information was collected for all inputs and output commodities from the markets 
and adjusted them to farm-gate prices. Using all available primary and secondary data, 
type of production models for each of the project intervention were developed under with 
and without project scenario.  
44.  Without  and  with  project  scenario:  While  vegetables,  ginger  and  turmeric 
farming are land intensive activities, while honey, mushrooms, milk/dairy and poultry are 
not. Field observation revealed that honey, mushrooms and  small-scale poultry farming 
are very much suitable to marginal and landless farmers.  
Table 2: Project support / value chain / enterprise under without and with 
project scenario 
Project support / 
value chain / 
enterprises 
Average 
farm size 
(acre) 
With-out project  With project 
Model size 
with project 
(acre) 
Livelihood 
investment plans 
1.0  Barren land, paddy, 
wheat, maize 
0.8  Paddy, wheat, 
maize 
4.0  Barren land, maize, 
wheat, wheat  
Paddy, wheat, maize, 
pulses, vegetable, 
cattle, poultry  
Paddy, wheat, maize, 
pulses, vegetable, 
cattle, poultry 
Paddy, wheat, maize, 
pulses, vegetable, 
cattle, poultry, 
grasses,  
1.0  
1.0  
4.0  
Home garden 
support 
Permaculture 
Livestock 
production 
Dairy – Cattle 
1.0  Barren land, paddy, 
maize and wheat, 
cattle  
Dairy cattle, cereal 
crops pulses 
2.0 cross-
bred cattle 
Poultry 
1.0  Barren land, paddy, 
maize and wheat, 
backyard poultry  
1.5  Barren land, paddy, 
wheat, maize 
1.5  Barren land, paddy, 
wheat, maize, 
mushroom 
1.5  Barren land, paddy, 
wheat, maize 
1.5  Barren land, paddy, 
wheat, maize 
0.8  Barren land, paddy, 
wheat, maize 
1.50  Barren land, paddy, 
wheat, maize 
High value 
commodities 
Vegetables 
Mushrooms 
(Oyster - Medium) 
Ginger 
Turmeric 
Honey production 
General 
subsistence and 
semi-commercial 
farmers 
Poultry (1000 
boilers), cereal crops  
1,000.0 birds 
Vegetables (chilly, 
onion, tomato), 
cereal crops  
Mushroom, cereal 
crops  
1.0  
500.0 balls 
Ginger, cereal crops 
1.0  
Turmeric, cereal 
crops  
Honey, cereals, 
vegetables,  
Paddy, wheat, maize, 
pulses, vegetable, 
cattle, poultry  
1.0  
50.0  
1.5  
45.  Field  observation  in  revealed  that  adoption  of  BRECSA  promoted  technologies  by 
smallholders will be gradual and there will be a continuous shift from current situation and 
desired level. For example, less than 20% of their farm will be transformed from cereal 
crops  to  vegetables,  ginger  and  turmeric  farming  in  the  initial  year  of  project  support. 
Farmers raising one cattle will increase to two cattle. This way implication on food security 
and nutrition (FSN) will be minor and such a system will enable farmer to gradually develop 
resilience on BRECSA induced changes. Production of staples will decrease marginally while 
with the adoption of intensive farming in some plots of their farm land, smallholders will 
have supplementary sources of income to finance other household necessities.5 In order 
to  address  FSN  issues,  subsistence  farmers  will  be  assisted  to  implement  livelihood 
improvement plan, adopt the  kitchen garden practices and which will be facilitate them 
graduate to semi-commercial and commercial scale.  
46.  Due  to  project  support  on  various  layers  of  the  value  chain,  modernization  of  the 
farming  sector  is  expected  through  (i)  transformation  of  cereal  crops  farming  into  high 
value cash crops such as vegetable, ginger and turmeric farming, (ii) up-grading of the 
Household model developed in this EFA has accounted overall HH income of adopting new ADSP 
5  
promoted technologies where self consumption is considered as an “income” as this substitutes their portion to 
be purchased from market.  
subsistence  and  traditional  dairy  (1  cattle)  farming  to  commercial  activity  (2  improved 
cattle),  and  (iii)  shift  from  limited  scale  production  of  back-yard  poultry  to  commercial 
scale.  This  assumption  is  supported  and  based  on  emerging  trend  of  large  number  of 
smallholder  farmers  in  the  project  areas  transforming  traditional  farming  to  more 
commercial  one.  Such  conversion  will  gradually  take  place  in  the  project  areas  and 
potentially increases during the project period.  
47.  Enterprise  models  were  prepared  for  all  activities  discussed  above.  Profit  margin 
under different enterprise models: (i) without project scenario covering traditional crops 
like paddy, wheat, maize, rajma beans, backyard poultry and dairy activities, and (ii) with 
project  for  vegetables,  ginger,  and  turmeric,  permaculture,  etc.  are  land  intensive 
activities,  while  mushrooms,  dairy,  poultry  (boiler),  and  honey  as  less  land  intensive 
activities. The enterprise model for cardamom is also prepared but is not modeled in cost-
benefit framework. These are included in the separate excel file. 
48.  Financial benefit and cost analysis of enterprise model: fixed investment, operative 
(fixed and variable) cost, benefits of all above commodities over 25-year horizon (2023-
2048)  of  the  project  were  estimated.  Summary  of  the  financial  analysis  of  selected 
enterprises are presented in Table 3 and 4.  
Table 3: Summary of Financial Analysis of Selected Value chain Commodities 
Project support / 
value chain  
/ enterprises 
Livelihood 
investment plans 
Home garden 
support 
Unit 
Size of 
Enterprise 
Total  
Investment 
(US$) 
Incremental 
annual net 
benefits at 
full 
development 
(US$) 
Acre 
1.0 
733 
96 
Acre 
1.0 
500 
101 
Permaculture 
Acre 
4.0 
13,333 
4,971 
Livestock production 
Dairy – Cattle 
Poultry 
High value 
commodities 
Vegetables 
Mushrooms (Oyster 
- Medium) 
Ginger 
Turmeric 
No 
No 
Acre 
Balls 
Acre 
Acre 
2.0 
4,280 
1,000.0 
26,667 
1,149 
4,530 
1.0 
3,200 
668 
500.0 
13,200 
2,386 
1.0 
1.0 
3,267 
3,200 
612 
580 
Honey production 
Hives 
50.0 
7,787 
2,613 
Acre 
1.5 
487 
146 
General subsistence 
and semi-
commercial farmers 
including PWD 
Incremental 
family labor 
per year 
Incremental 
hired labor 
per year 
0 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
- 
- 
8 
1 
3 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
- 
Incremental annual net benefits6 vary widely across activities, ranging from US$ 96 
49. 
for  livelihood  improvement  plans  to  US$  4,971  from  permaculture  enterprises.  As 
anticipated, these activities are playing a bigger role in employment generation7, on  an 
average 2  family members and 1 hired worker were  employed and there is prospect to 
increase  employment  generation  to  a  notable  level  in  all  the  selected  value  chain 
commodities. Obviously, the return is less in case of livelihood improvement plan, home 
garden  and  General  subsistence  and  semi-commercial  farmers  including  PWD.  All  the 
models demonstrate very satisfactory benefit/cost ratios, financial internal rates of return 
(FIRR)  and  positive  net  present  value  (NPV).  This  indicates  the  attractiveness  of  the 
investments on these value chain enterprises.  
Table 4: Summary of Financial Analysis of Selected Value Chain Commodities 
Project support / value chain  
/ enterprises 
Unit 
Size of Enterprise 
Net 
incremental 
benefits per 
USD of 
investment 
BCR 
NPV 
(USD) 
at 
12% 
DF 
FIRR8 
Livelihood investment plans 
Acre 
Home garden support 
Permaculture 
Livestock production 
Dairy – Cattle 
Poultry 
High value commodities 
Vegetables 
Mushrooms (Oyster - 
Medium) 
Ginger 
Turmeric 
Honey production 
General subsistence and 
semi-commercial farmers 
including PWD 
Acre 
Acre 
No 
No 
Acre 
Balls 
Acre 
Acre 
Hives 
Acre 
1.0 
1.0 
4.0 
0.13  1.01 
212  16.1% 
0.20  1.02 
286  24.2% 
0.37  1.17  28,566  54.4% 
2.0 
0.27  1.27 
4,887  28.2% 
1,000.0 
0.17  1.11  14,348  20.0% 
1.0 
0.21  1.12 
3,525  42.4% 
500.0 
0.18  1.25 
6,502  18.3% 
1.0 
1.0 
50.0 
1.5 
0.19  1.10 
2,976  35.2% 
0.18  1.16 
2,703  32.5% 
0.34  1.67  13,706  41.7% 
0.30  1.06 
775  43.1% 
6  
The net benefits include net of cost of yearly investments and smallholders require external loans to 
finance their working capital need in the first year. Their yearly / seasonal investment will be met either from 
their annual cash flow from the enterprise or additional borrowing. Since most of these activities are seasonal in 
nature with gestation period of few months to year, they may need working capital loan in the beginning of the 
farming season which can be paid after harvest. 
7  
Like in other parts of rural Bhutan, BRECSA project areas is characterized by youth unemployment and 
under-employment of the smallholder farmers, most of them opting seasonal migration to Thimphu, neighbouring 
countries  and  overseas  countries.  Initial  impact  of  the  BRECSA  support  will  be  to  gradually  reduce 
underemployment rate and later attracting seasonal migrants as well on BRECSA promoted enterprises. In rural 
areas,  smallholders  are  confident  that  growing  two  crops  of  vegetables  (with  gradual  expansion),  2  milking 
cattle/buffalo and 500 bags of mushroom provide decent and full-time employment.  
8  
Financial  internal  rate  of  return  is  significantly  higher  than  the  prevailing  interest  rate  of  Bhutanese 
banking and financial sector. One-year retail bank deposit rate is 9%; interest rate from microfinance is more 
than 18% excluding services charge and that of commercial banks and development banks ranges between 8 
and 12%.  
50.  Permaculture: In view of the potentials of properly designed permaculture farming 
for  the  growth  of  agricultural  ecosystems  in  a  self-sufficient  and  sustainable  way,  the 
project  targets  to  promote  such  farming  among  lead  farmers  and  their  followers  in  the 
project areas. Actually, this form of agriculture draws inspiration from nature to develop 
synergetic farming systems based on crop diversity, resilience, natural productivity, and 
sustainability. For the EFA, an indicative model comprising of crop livestock integration has 
been proposed and analyzed. The permaculture farming can potentially generate as much 
as  US$  4,971  net  profit  per  year  while  creating  2  and  4  supplementary  jobs  for  family 
labour and hired labour respectively. 
51. 
Vegetable production: The agro-ecological conditions in the project Dzongkhags 
(Sarpang, Trongsa, Tsirang, and Zhemgang) are favorable for vegetable production round 
the year. The vegetables grown have experienced increasing domestic demand and have 
a huge export potential. The model assumes that a smallholder with 1 acre of land can 
produce up to 5,000 kg of onion, 1200 kg of small chili, 2,000 kg of large chili, and 8,000-
10,000 Kg of tomato per acre. Farmers are gradually growing vegetable in a low-cost poly-
house of 5 x 20 m and make a  comparative higher return. Average earning per year of 
USD 668 obtaining about US$ 5 per family labour-day while generating some additional 
external employment during harvest time and for greenhouse maintenance. 
52.  Mushroom  farming:    Shiitake  (Lentinus  edodes)  and  Oyster  (Pleurotus  sp.)  are 
focused mushrooms for production in different part  of Bhutan.  Out  of these, Mushroom 
(Oyster)  is  very  popular  in  these  areas  and  to  start  with.  BRECSA  will  support  the 
promotion of Oyster mushroom which is grown in several capacities. Farm model of 500 
balls capacity Oyster mushroom farming has been prepared. Rationalized by the increasing 
loss  of  arable  land  to  urbanization  and industrialization,  the  threat  of  climate  change  is 
severe on farming. Thus, mushroom farming is the best substitute farming practice. The 
oyster  mushroom  farming  (500  balls  capacity)  can  potentially  generate  as  much  as 
US$ 2,386 net profit per year while creating 2 and 1 supplementary jobs for family labour 
and hired labour respectively. 
53.  Ginger farming: There growing demand for ginger products as household spice or 
medicinal  value.  Ginger  farming  has  larger  potential  to  increase  production  and 
productivity. The ginger produced in 1 acre of land  can potentially generate as much as 
US$ 612 net profit per year while creating 2 and 3 supplementary jobs for family labour. 
Ginger  farming  is  suitable  as  inter-crop  as  shade  loving  plant  and  can  be  grown  in  a 
neglected land / fallow land as well. 
54.  Turmeric farming: There is great potential for turmeric production in Bhutan and 
RNR strategies has identified it as one of the potential export crops. There is huge un-met 
demand and larger portion of turmeric consumed in Bhutan as a spice crop and medicinal 
value.  At  present  there  has  been  growing  interest  and  demand  for  turmeric  farming  in 
Bhutan and in the project areas as well. There exists possibility of generating as much as 
US$ 580 net profit per year while creating 2 and 3 supplementary jobs for family labour 
by intensive turmeric farming in 1 acre of land. 
55.  Dairy: Demand for dairy products in Bhutan in general and in the project areas in 
particular has been growing significantly in the recent years, driven by more consumers, 
higher incomes and greater interest in nutrition. Dairy production in Bhutan is one of the 
growing economic sectors, in the recent years, and is playing an important role to increase 
household level income in rural areas, mainly by increasing employment opportunities and 
establishing  rural-urban  linkages  through  milk  and  milk  product  as  well  as  industrial 
products trade. Two cattle model can generate as much as US$ 1,149 net profit per year 
while creating 2 and 3 full time jobs for family labour. 
56.  Poultry:  Poultry  (boiler)  farming  is  leading  agricultural  industries  in  Bhutan.  It  is 
one of the easiest means with low gestation period to generate cash income. Boiler farming 
is popular as chicken meant contains high quality of essential nutrients such as proteins, 
minerals, and vitamins that are required for improving human nutrition.9 Because of quick 
returns, it is youth friendly and supplements family income and employment opportunities. 
Boiler poultry farming model of 1,000 birds can generate as much as US$ 4,530 net profit 
per  year  while  creating  3  and  5  full  time  jobs  for  family  labour  and  hired  labour 
respectively. 
57.  Honey: Bhutan is known to have seven different honeybee species. Of these, Apis 
mellifera, Apis cerana and Trigona species are domesticated for honey production. Given 
the rich floral diversity, beekeeping is picking up but slow. Even trained beekeepers have 
reverted to the traditional form of beekeeping. Farmers harvest honey three or more times 
per  year  with  an  8-10  kg  average  per  year  of honey  production per  colony.  Honey  has 
quick  return;  it  is  youth  friendly  and  supplements  family  income  and  employment 
opportunities. Honey production model of 50 hives can generate as much as US$ 2.613 
net profit per year while creating 2 and 1 full time jobs for family labour and hired labour 
respectively. 
58.  Other  project  supports:  Other  project  support  in  the  form  of  implementation 
support to livelihood investment plans, home garden and transform of the benefits of FEBL 
and support to FGs/Cooperatives by smallholder subsistence and semi-commercial farmers 
can  potentially  lead  to  create  foundations  for  their  participation  in  agriculture 
commercialization process and with some return and employment generation. 
59.  The details are included in the separate excel file. 
Households Models 
60.  Using enterprise budgets and models from a range of project support / value chain 
/  enterprises  ‘household  models’  for  the  respective  project  support  were  prepared  to 
broadly  illustrate  the  BRECSA’s  ‘expected  impacts’  on  the  incomes,  and  involvement  of 
household labour on-farm and non-farm activities. For the purpose of assessing household 
operations,  average  size  of  operational  landholding  was  accounted  and  analyzed. 
Households models analyzed include: livelihood investment plan, home garden support, 
permaculture  farming,  livestock  (dairy/cattle  and  poultry)  farming,  high  value  crops 
(vegetables, ginger, turmeric, mushroom, and honey) and General subsistence and semi-
commercial farmers including PWD.  
61.  Table 6 presents the overview of these household models. 
Table 5: Overview of the Household Model 
Project support / Value Chain / enterprises 
Livelihood investment plans 
Home garden support 
Permaculture 
Livestock production 
Dairy – Cattle 
Poultry 
High value commodities 
Average 
farm 
size 
(ha) 
Cropping intensify 
(%)10 
Model size 
WoP 
WP 
Unit  Quantity 
1.0 
0.8 
4.0 
1.0 
1.0 
170 
150 
150 
180 
180 
210  Acre 
160  Acre 
200  Acre 
1.0 
1.0 
4.0 
180  No 
2.0 
180  No 
1,000.0 
Jamtsho T. et al (2021), “Profitability of Broiler Farms in Four Southern Districts in Bhutan” Bhutan 
9  
Journal of Animal Science, Volume 5, Issue 1 Page: 89-94, 2021.  
10  
expressed through a formula. Cropping Intensity = Gross Cropped Area/Net Sown Area x 100 
It  refers  to  raising  of  a  number  of  crops  from  the  same  field  during  one  agricultural  year;  it  can  be 
Vegetables 
Mushrooms (Oyster - Medium) 
Ginger 
Turmeric 
Honey production 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
0.8 
General subsistence and semi-commercial  
1.50 
farmers including PWD 
153 
160 
153 
153 
150 
187 
187  Acre 
1.0 
160  Balls 
500.0 
167  Acre 
167  Acre 
1.0 
1.0 
160  Hives 
50.0 
213  Acre 
1.5 
Total 
1.26 
167 
188 
62.  Farm size: The target group of the project are the smallholders and farm size greatly 
vary  across  project  support  packages.  In  general,  farmers  receiving  support  on  home 
garden, and honey production will have smallest farm size of 0.8 acre. While those under 
vegetable, ginger, and turmeric value chain will be have on an average larger farm size 
(1.5  acre).  Those  adopting  permaculture  farming  will  have  largest  farm  size.  Those 
receiving  support  on  livelihood  investment  plans,  mushrooms,  honey  and  general 
subsistence and semi-commercial farmers including PWD will have mixed size of holding. 
Average farm size of the BRECSA target beneficiary farmers will be 1.26 acre. 
63.  Cropping intensity: The programme intervention is expected to brings changes on 
cropping  pattern  and  eventually  on  cropping  intensity  due  to  increase  in  area  under 
irrigation as well as shift to low duration crops varieties from long duration one. There will 
be  no  change  in  cropping intensity  of  farm  households  engaged  in livestock  (cattle  and 
poultry), mushroom and honey farming while there will be change in cropping intensity 
will increase in case of other types of project interventions. Average cropping intensity is 
167% before the project which will increase to 187% after full development of the project.  
64.  The details are included in the separate excel file. 
Sub-Project Model 
65.  Household  models  when  grouped  and  aggregated  are  at  project  intervention  level 
are called “sub-project models” and these are required in order to estimate overall project 
performance  indicators.  Information  on  implementation  phasing  of  these  sub-projects 
provided  in  Table  1  for  seven-year  project  period  provided  basis  for  sub-project  model 
preparation.  The  sub-project  models  are  estimated  for  all  the  commodities  and  project 
interventions. The analysis results are summarized in Table 6.  
Table 6: Overview of the Sub-project Model 
Financial Indicators 
Project support / Value Chain / 
enterprises 
Total HHs 
Adoption 
rate 
Adoption 
adjusted 
IRR 
BCR 
NPV 12% 
DF 
(Rs.'000) 
Livelihood investment plans 
1,500 
60% 
900  16.4% 
23,319 
1.01 
Home garden support 
3,166 
60% 
1,900  15.3% 
15,364 
1.01 
Permaculture 
400 
90% 
360  49.9% 
556,923 
1.16 
Livestock production 
Dairy – Cattle 
800 
75% 
600  38.1% 
225,204 
1.39 
Poultry 
800 
75% 
600  14.2% 
247,195 
1.05 
High value commodities 
Vegetables 
Mushrooms (Oyster - Medium) 
Ginger 
Turmeric 
Honey production 
General subsistence and semi-
commercial  
farmers including PWD 
1,400 
10 
300 
300 
200 
60% 
75% 
60% 
75% 
90% 
840  39.0% 
145,835 
1.11 
8  25.6% 
5,551 
1.28 
180  57.9% 
80,224 
1.53 
225  29.1% 
25,657 
1.13 
180  41.6% 
142,033 
1.64 
3,198 
52% 
1,659  32.8% 
86,682 
1.05 
Total 
12,074 
62% 
7,451 
66.  There will be 12,074 smallholders engaged in eleven types of project support / value 
chain / enterprises supported by the project. Not all the beneficiaries will benefit from the 
project, and some of them drop-out. It has been estimated that drop-out will be 38% and 
adoption rate will be 62% (rational discussed in section below). About 7,451 smallholder 
farmers will be retained and benefitted directly from the project. 
67.  The details are included in the separate excel file. 
Adoption rate 
68.  Average adoption rate for the project has been estimated integrating the findings of 
the mission during field studies, discussion with key informants, focus groups discussions, 
assumptions on adoption rate done on similar projects in Bhutan, especially the findings 
on assumption by similar recently completed projects, especially CARLEP in Bhutan and 
High Value Agriculture Project (HVAP) and KUBK in Nepal.  
69.  Field survey conducted under this mission uncovered that in general, adoption rate 
will be higher in those activities relatively longer in duration, required initial investment 
that is specific to the enterprises and proven evidence of the perpetual flow of income over 
the  longer  period  with  lower  intensity  and  impact  of  price  and  production  risk.  These 
commodities  are  livestock  (dairy  and  poultry)  farming,  permaculture,  honey,  and 
mushrooms. On the other hand, adoption rate is relatively lower on commodities with low 
initial investment cost,  higher intensity and impact of price  and production risks. These 
commodities  are  vegetables,  ginger  and  turmeric  production.  Project  interventions  on 
livelihood  investment  plans,  home  garden  support  and  general  subsistence  and  semi-
commercial farmers including PWD have a low adoption rate, in view of the intensity and 
impact of price and production risks.  
In cognizance to above a 62% adoption rate (ranging between 52% and 90% among 
70. 
the selected value chain commodities) was used in this EFA.  
71.  The assumption on adoption rate used in this report is consistent to the other recently 
appraised report (VITA) and completed projects (HVAP) in Nepal and rate used in CARLEP 
at design. Adoption rate used by ex-post EFA of HVAP ranged between 64% and 91%, with 
an average of 84%. The adoption rate used was highest (91%) in case of goat and off-
season  vegetable  value  chain  and  lowest  (64%)  for  timur.  The  adoption  rates  used  for 
other crops were: apple (88%), vegetable seed (83%), turmeric (78%), and ginger (72%). 
In  view  of  above  the  adoption  rate  used  in  this  EFA  is  similar  to  commodities  like 
72. 
livestock  (dairy  and  poultry)  farming,  high  value  commodities  (vegetables,  ginger, 
turmeric, mushroom and honey) and permaculture.11  
73.  The details are included in the separate excel file.  
Financing plans 
74.  Total  investments  are  financed  through  beneficiaries’  equity  contributions  in  cash, 
contributions in kind, and grant support from the project. There will be notable financing 
gaps. This need to be financed by as short to medium term loans from BFIs or matching 
grant  support  from  government  and  non-government  sectors.  Financing  plans  were 
prepared for all models, in order to assess whether the mix of funding sources would be 
sufficient  and  adequate  for  enterprise  creation  and  expansion.  Table  7  presents  the 
financing plans for the selected value chain enterprises. 
Table 7: Financing Plans – Total financing requirements and sources of finance 
Project support / Value Chain  
/ enterprises 
Unit 
Size 
Fixed 
Investment 
Working 
capital 
Total 
Program 
grant and 
infrastructure 
support 
Smallholder's 
equity 
Financing 
gaps  
Total financing requirement (NRs) 
Financing source (NRs) 
Livelihood investment plan 
Acre 
Kitchen garden support package 
Acre 
1.0 
0.1 
38,000 
17,000 
55,000 
37,500 
3,500 
14,000 
30,000 
7,500 
37,500 
37,500 
- 
- 
Permaculture 
Acre 
4.0 
860,000 
140,000 
1,000,000 
600,000 
80,000 
320,000 
Livestock production 
Dairy – Cattle 
Poultry 
High value commodities 
No 
No 
2.0 
306,000 
15,000 
321,000 
200,000 
24,200 
96,800 
1,000.0 
1,900,000 
100,000 
2,000,000 
300,000 
340,000 
1,360,000 
Vegetables 
Acre 
1.0 
135,000 
105,000 
240,000 
35,000 
41,000 
164,000 
Mushrooms (Oyster - Medium) 
Number 
500.0 
890,000 
100,000 
990,000 
65,000 
185,000 
740,000 
Ginger 
Turmeric 
Honey 
Acre 
Acre 
1.0 
140,000 
105,000 
245,000 
35,000 
42,000 
168,000 
1.0 
140,000 
100,000 
240,000 
65,000 
35,000 
140,000 
Hives 
50.0 
534,000 
50,000 
584,000 
400,000 
36,800 
147,200 
General subsistence and  
Acre 
1.5 
29,000 
7,500 
36,500 
- 
7,300 
29,200 
semi-commercial farmers 
Note: Project support includes production related support such as input supply, fixed investment as well as public infrastructure 
such  as  irrigation  (pond,  surface,  and  lift),  fencing,  marketing,  storage,  transportation  etc.,  for  the  beneficiary  smallholder 
farmers.  
75.  Subsidy from the project will be inadequate for the project beneficiary to realize the 
full  benefits  of  the  project  support,  but  such  support  will  act  as  a  catalyst  to  them  for 
augmenting  current  level  of  production.  In  order  to  get  full  potential  from  the  project 
support, project need to assist them for access to finance from BFIs and access support 
from alternative sources.  
Cash flow analysis 
76.  Cash analysis was done for all the value chain models. Cash flow is negative in all 
the value chain commodities in the first year12 and it is necessary for the smallholders to 
11  
Since majority of the smallholders benefits through livelihood investment plans, home garden support 
and general subsistence and semi-commercial farmers including PWD whose adoption rate is in general low, the 
overall adoption rate worked-out to be low.  
12  
Due to upfront investment need for construction of cattle and goat shed, purchase of live animals (goat 
and cattle/buffalo), irrigation, poly-tunnels, storage requirement, planting materials, etc. cash flow in the first 
look for alternative financial sources to ensure adoption of the proposed technology. Access 
to grant support from BRECSA supplemented through financial linkage for medium term 
loan  from  BFIs  will  be  instrumental  for  farmer  to  finance  the  proposed  investment. 
Financing  is  also  required  to  manage  the  short-term  working  capital  for  uninterrupted 
management  of  the  annual  operational  cost  of  these  value  chain  commodities  by  the 
smallholders.  
77.  Cash  flow  analysis  was  done  to  evaluate  the  cash  inflows  and  outflows  from 
operations of six value chain household models. This indicates that these farm households 
will  have  difficulties  to  manage  the  enterprises  in  the  absence  of  the  external  loan  and 
grant  support.  The  cash  flow  analysis  was  done  integrating  planned  equity  investment, 
grant from the project and borrowing from BFIs including projected repayment of principle 
and  interest  of  the  loans  in  cash  flow  before  financing  of  each  value  chain  household 
models.  
78.  The  cash  flow  after  financing  /  grant  support  from  project  shown  for  each  project 
support / value chain / enterprises model proves that for all the year during the project 
life,  there  is  no  negative  cash  flow  in  these  models.13  This  indicates  that  proposal  to 
promote these interventions is “financially viable” at household level. Project proposal will 
be  attractive  for  the  beneficiaries,  ensuring  relatively  high  rate  of  adoption  of  the  core 
value  chain  commodities  selected  for  promotion  from  the  project.  This  finding  provides 
solid basis to assume that the investment on these value chain would yield the expected 
financial benefits.  
79.  The details are included in the separate excel file. 
Economic Analysis 
Main assumptions 
80.  Following  were  the  assumptions  used  for  economic  analysis  of  the  project.  These 
assumptions were cross-checked with the assumptions used in economic analysis during 
CARLEP appraisal (ex-ante) and HVAP and KUBK (ex-post).  
•  A twenty-year analysis period is assumed, which included 7-year project investment 
period. 
•  Project  produced  goods  will  move  freely  within  project  area  in  response  to  market 
signals. 
•  All agricultural inputs and outputs that are traded are valued at price as of April 2022 
and constant market price has been used.  
•  Economic  investment  costs  are  net  of  taxes.    All  costs  directly  associated  with  the 
incremental production are included in full, including incremental farm inputs and labour. 
•  A standard conversion factor (SCF) of 0.90 is applied to both traded and non-traded items 
for adjusting financial prices. A SCF of 85% have been used to come-up at shadow wage 
rate of labour.  
•  The  analysis includes  only direct  on-farm  benefits.  Benefits  accruing  from  value  chain 
infrastructure  such  as  such  market  centers,  small-scale  community  infrastructure 
including  small-scale  water  and  irrigation  schemes  for  crops  and  livestock  (<  5  Ha. 
each),  fencing  and  upgrading  farm  access  roads  (under  5  km  each)  has  not  been 
accounted  in  view  of  the  well-coordinated  nature  of  project  implementation  at  sub-
year will be negative. BRECSA grant and access to finance is important for farmers to motivate investment on 
these activities. Owner equity in the form of skill labour, supply of construction materials, equipment, etc. will 
supplement upfront cost to start these enterprises.  
13  
These households require term (medium to long term) loan in the first year and nominal working capital 
loan  in  subsequent  year  and  this  depends  on  propensity  to  save/re-invest  of  these  smallholders.  Enhancing 
access to finance has important role for the sustainability of the BRECSA intervention. 
component  level.  Benefits  of  these  infrastructures  is  assumed  to  be  captured  by 
incremental income in the project promoted value chain commodities; 
•  All  costs  and  benefits  are  relating  to  investments  made  on  targeted  project  area 
households and the resultants benefits; 
•  Significant changes or shifts in cropping patterns are assumed owing to strengthening of 
the value chain and increased adoption of appropriate agronomic practices such as inter-
cropping, crop rotation, use of improved seeds, improved technologies, etc. and these 
reflect in cultivation of vegetables, ginger and turmeric farming.  
•  The analysis employs an Opportunity Cost of Capital (OCC) at 9%, which is the current 
long-term bond rate in Bhutan and forecasted future stream of benefits and cost were 
discounted at 9%. The same rate was applied during EFA at the time of CARLEP appraisal. 
Costs and Benefits Streams and Analysis 
81.  Production benefits. The productions at farm level by project beneficiaries through 
different project supported interventions are direct output from the respective sub-project. 
In all, 12,074 households will receive project support in different form. Improved farming 
practices resulted in productivity increase will be in a range of 30% and 40%. The EIRR is 
calculated for all the project support / value chain / enterprises being supported from the. 
This  was  done  in  cognizance  to  the  fact  that  these  are  the  eventual  project  results. 
Incremental  net  benefits  at  full  development  were  used  for  all  categories  of  farm 
investment. Adoption rate of each farm enterprises is estimated to range between 52% 
and  90%  with  an  average  of  63%  (for  justification  refer  para  69  to  74  above)  and 
consistent to the process done during appraisal of the CARLEP.  
82.  Project economic costs. The project economic costs are direct expenditures after 
adjusting for taxes and inflations but inclusive of physical contingencies. Recurrent costs 
for continued operations and maintenance are included in full. Economic prices for inputs 
and  outputs  models  were  estimated  by  applying  conversion  factors  on  financial  prices. 
Inputs  and  outputs  prices14  were  collected  during  mission’s  field  visit  and  review  of 
published information of Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Forestry, and National Bureau of Statistics in Bhutan.  
83.  Environmental  Benefit.  Key  environmental  benefits  were 
increased  rural 
employment, social mobilisation and effective participation of smallholder farmers, linkages 
with  rural  economy  and  markets  and  overall  reduction  in  vulnerability.  BRECSA  demand-
driven  approach  will  ensure  that  FGs  adopt  gender  responsive  process  to  address  the 
potential gender implications on labor. 
Analysis Results 
84.  Economic  analysis.  Cost-benefit  analysis  yields  an  overall  EIRR  of  19.2%.  The 
estimated NPV for a 9% discount rate is Nu. 2,905.72 million (USD 38.74 million) and the 
BCR  of  2.3.  A  positive  NPV  under  the  current  Opportunity  Cost  of  Capital  (OCC)  of  9% 
indicated that the project investments were sound.  
85.  Main results for economic cost-benefit analysis are presented in separate excel file.  
86.  Sensitivity Analysis. A sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess the effect of 
variations in (i) 10% and 20% decrease in benefits; (ii) 10% and 20% increase in costs, 
(iii) one year and two-year delay on incremental income accrual, and (iv) 10% and 20% 
decrease in adoption rate. In all these scenarios, EIRR was above 15%. Result of sensitivity 
analysis revealed that the project is highly sensitive on delay on accruing benefit accrual 
by even by one year compared to decrease on project benefits, increase in project cost 
and decrease in adoption rate. 
14  
See Annex … containing list of financial and economic prices used in EFA. 
Table 8: Results of the Sensitivity Analysis15 
Risk scenario 
∆% 
Link with the risk matrix  EIRR  NPV (USD M) 
Base scenario 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project costs 
Project costs 
19.2% 
               38.74  
-10%  Combination of risks 
17.9% 
               31.92  
-20% 
10% 
20% 
affecting output prices, 
yields and adoption rates 
Combination of risk 
associated to inflation of 
project related materials  
16.5% 
               25.10  
18.0% 
               35.99  
17.0% 
               32.85  
Project benefits delayed 
1 year  Delay in the programme 
17.0% 
               30.50  
Project benefits delayed by two year  2 year 
implementation due to 
various factors including 
implementation capacity, 
delays in system set-up. 
15.0% 
               22.93  
Adoption rate  
Adoption rate  
-10%  Combination of risks 
17.5% 
               31.43  
-20% 
affecting output prices, 
yields and adoption rates 
15.6% 
               24.73  
87.  Switching Values. The switching value for the total project benefits is about 56.8% 
while for the project costs it is approximately 131.4%.  
Table 9: Switching value 
NPV incremental benefit 
NPV incremental cost 
Project Benefits 
5,116,735 
2,211,019 
-56.8% 
131.4% 
88.  The immediate benefits from the project will be increased productivity through the 
introduction of better management and improved farming practices of the selected value 
chain commodities. The responses could be expressed as increased household income. As 
discussed  already,  seasonal  gainful  employment  and  under  employment  (gainful) is  the 
main problem in the BRECSA areas like in other part of Bhutan and this is especially true 
in case of youth. The BRECSA support will enable smallholders including youth to reduce 
prevalent  under-employment.  At  present,  smallholders  lack  resources  to  start  the 
profitable  agri-enterprises  and  BRECSA  will  potentially  meet  this  gap.  BRECSA  gender 
responsive  intervention  will  be  will  be  instrumental  to  reduce  potential  higher  labor  for 
women promoting gender equity and social inclusion. Only a fraction of the land (15-20%) 
owned  by  smallholders  is  suitable  for  cash  crop  farming  and  the  transaction  from 
subsistence  to  commercial  farming  will  be  slow  /  low  and  requires  confidence  building 
through demonstration and learning by doing. Potential food security and nutrition (FSN) 
problem will be low and there will be marginal reduction on current availability of staples. 
15  
Sensitivity analysis is done identifying attributes contributing to constant increase or benefit decrease 
and not the opposite on the assumption that increase in benefit and/or decrease in cost will improve the financial 
indicators under base scenario.  
Further,  farmers  can  manage  their  HH  need  for  staples  crops  by  increase  in  cropping 
intensity on land not covered or not suitable for selected value chain.  
89.  Other  benefits.  Additional  benefits  will  be  generated  from  BRECSA’s  capacity 
building  interventions  on  value  chain  development,  potentially  increased  availability  of 
value chain infrastructure. First, all participating households and FGs will be benefiting and 
taking  advantages  of  the  services  of  value  chain  actors,  and  private  service  providers, 
which will be capacitated and provided fund support for various economic and commercial 
developments.  Second,  women  and  youth  from  the  poor  groups  will  participate  in 
managing  their  social  and  economic  development  and  have  better  access  to  inputs  and 
marketing  their  products.  Third,  there  are  agro-businesses  facilitated  buy-back 
arrangement, technical training and capacity building that further strengthen value chain. 
The  BRECSA  support  adoption  of  improved  cattle  will  be  raised  under  stall  feeding 
conditions. The BRECSA support package include promotion of feed and fodder farming, 
chaff-cutter  (for  making  piece  straw,  grass  and  fodder),  and  shed  management  which 
ensure proper manure management and promote stall feeding.  
90.  Tax revenue and other incomes. The project is generating additional tax revenues 
to  the  government  in  the  form  of  corporate  taxes  including  VAT  on  the  incremental 
turnover of the project generated agro-businesses such as cold storage, dairy processing 
plants, assembling, marketing and trading activities and foreign trade.  
Farm Income Analysis 
91.  The  project  will  target  to  12,074  smallholder  households  and  adjusting  to  the 
potential drop-out due to various reasons such  as migration, project failure, etc., 7,587 
small-holder  households  will  effectively  benefit  from  different  services  offered  from 
different project interventions. Table 10 and 11 provides information on incremental farm 
income attributable from the programme interventions. 
Table 10: Estimated Physical Contribution of the Project  
Project support / value chain / 
enterprises 
Livelihood investment plans  
Home garden support  
Permaculture  
Livestock production  
Dairy - Cattle  
Poultry  
High value commodities  
Vegetables  
Unit 
Acre 
Acre 
Acre 
No 
No 
Acre 
Mushrooms (Oyster - Medium)  
Balls 
Ginger  
Turmeric  
Honey production  
General subsistence and semi-
commercial  
Acre 
Acre 
Hives 
Acre 
Incremental 
enterprise 
size 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
(Adoption 
Adjusted) 
Scale of 
progress 
(incremental) 
1.0 
1.0 
4.0 
2.0 
1,000.0 
1.0 
500.0 
1.0 
1.0 
50.0 
1.5 
900 
1,900 
360 
640 
640 
910 
8 
195 
195 
180 
1,659 
900 
1,900 
1,440 
1,280 
640,000 
910 
4,000 
195 
195 
9,000 
2,489 
Project support / value chain / 
enterprises 
Unit 
Incremental 
enterprise 
size 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
(Adoption 
Adjusted) 
Scale of 
progress 
(incremental) 
farmers including PWD  
Total 
7,587 
92.  Expected physical progress of the programme will be increase in 1,280 number of 
improved breed of cattle, 640,000 numbers of poultry birds, and farming of vegetables, 
ginger, and turmeric in additional 910 acre, 195 acre and 195 acre of land and mushroom 
farming in additional 4,000 balls in the project areas. Whole BRECSA area is food deficit 
and land is under-utilized as evidenced by current estimated cropping intensity of 167%. 
There will be marginal increment on cropping intensity due to project intervention reaching 
to 172 %. As a  rule of  thumb, cropping intensity can go  up to 200%  without providing 
stress  on  land  use  (organic  matter,  soil  fertility  and  productivity)16.  Promoting  of  stall 
feeding of cattle farming will lower such stress.  
Table 11: Estimates of Incremental Income of the Target Beneficiaries 
Project support / value chain / enterprises 
NPV (12% DF) including labor income 
(Nu. '000) 
Incremental Income 
Before project 
After Project 
(Rs. '000) 
Livelihood investment plans 
541,086 
698,952 
Home garden support 
312,415 
407,367 
157,866 
94,953 
Permaculture 
Livestock production 
Dairy – Cattle 
Poultry 
High value commodities 
909,860 
3,893,757 
2,983,897 
447,466 
816,608 
369,143 
478,795 
2,009,922 
1,531,127 
Vegetables 
350,706 
901,975 
Mushrooms (Oyster - Medium) 
356,335 
756,319 
Ginger 
Turmeric 
Honey production  
363,829 
721,569 
363,829 
613,899 
312,415 
1,240,214 
General subsistence and semi-commercial  
688,730 
773,798 
farmers including PWD  
551,269 
399,983 
357,740 
250,070 
927,800 
85,068 
Total 
3,663,521,407  7,207,858,046 
3,544,336,640 
Income increase per beneficiary HH 
482,894 
950,078 
467,184 
16  
Cropping  intensity  in  highly  commercialized  area  in  Nepal  is  above  250%  and  in  some  areas  of 
Kathmandu valley it is up to 400% owing to adopting of short duration crop varieties and less time required for 
land preparation due to mechanization. 
93.  Based  on  the  estimates  done  in  this  analysis  for  the  representative  farm  and 
household model, the project beneficiaries will realize the average discounted income of 
Nu. 467,184 during the project period. 
Employment Generation 
94.  Majority  of  the  households  in  BRECSA  areas  depends  on  agriculture.  The  area  is 
characterized  by  youth  un-employment  and  under-employment  of  smallholder  farmers. 
Less  than  20%  population  are  estimated  to  be  fully  employed.  Seasonal  migration  to 
Thimphu and bordering India cities is common phenomena in the area for search of jobs. 
BRECSA  interventions  will  be  instrumental  to  address  under-employment  problem 
prevalent in the areas and check seasonal migration some extent. 
95.  Estimated employment generation based on farm and household models prepared in 
undertaking EFA analysis has been average 3.5 person year of employment per value chain 
enterprise with a total of 10,948 person year employments. Smallholders use family labor 
for most of the farming activities that are easy to do and use hired labour to those farming 
activities  demanding  more  hardship  and  energy  such  as  land  preparation,  harvesting, 
marketing, manure management, and occasional fodder chopping and management.  
Risk Analysis 
96.  There were a number of risks associated with BRECSA. These were relating to farm 
technology, reluctance on the part of the farmers to adopt the new technology, inadequate 
extension and market linkages and low price margins, lack of service providers and poor 
coordination and institutional support and policy risks. These issues and risks need to be 
addressed to some extent during the implementation of the programme. 
Table 12: Risk Analysis 
Risks 
Risk description  
Economic 
and market 
risks 
• 
• 
External shocks to 
market economy 
Increase in cost of 
production inputs 
•  Reduced producers 
prices 
•  Reduced demand 
Mitigation measures  
Probability 
of 
occurrence  
Low to 
medium 
Value chain 
management 
Likely impact on 
BRECSA 
performance  
Decline in benefits 
and increase in 
costs by 20%: 
EIRR= 14.2% 
NPV= USD 19.20 
million 
Institutional  Delay in technology 
Medium 
transfer/lack of quality 
planting materials 
slowing down the 
uptake rates and 
production 
Extensive training 
and support to value 
chain linkages of 
commercially viable 
key commodities  
Benefits lag by 2 
years: 
EIRR= 15.0% 
NPV= USD 22.93 
million 
Lack of financial 
capacity of smallholders 
to invest in high value 
agriculture 
Low to 
Medium 
Value chain financial 
product development 
and staff training 
Promotion of digital 
financial services  
Decline in benefits 
by 20%: 
IRR= 16.5% 
NPV= USD 25.1 
million 
Risks 
Risk description  
Market 
Inadequate profit 
margins due to poor 
access, lack of 
transport and of market 
information 
Lower market prices of 
commodities 
Policy 
Lack of commitment to 
investing in inclusive 
agricultural value chain 
development 
Medium 
Mitigation measures  
Probability 
of 
occurrence  
Medium to 
high 
Strengthen market 
information system 
Diversified 
production, market 
led production 
promotion and 
strengthen value 
chain 
Orientation and 
awareness on value 
chain approach to 
government officials 
and policy makers.  
Likely impact on 
BRECSA 
performance  
Decline in benefits 
and increases in 
cost by 15%: 
IRR= 15.5% 
NPV= USD 24.08 
million 
Farm operating 
costs increase by 
20%: 
IRR= 17.0% 
NPV= USD 32.85 
million 
Others  
Climate change risks of 
delayed and abnormal 
rainfall, drought, 
floods, frosts, etc.  
Natural calamities 
including flood and 
drought lower output of 
farm production 
Medium  
Training farmers on 
agro-ecological 
practices/agroecology 
Decline in benefits 
and increase in 
costs by 15%: 
Promotion of 
agriculture insurance 
services 
IRR= 15.5% 
NPV= USD 24.08 
million 
97.  There  is  potentially  high  market  risk,  followed  by  medium  incidence  policy,  and 
institutional risks. There is also economic and market risk and their incidence are likely to 
be small to medium. Focus group discussion conducted in Sarpang and Trongsa during the 
mission revealed that these risks could be mitigated through very basic project approaches 
to  value  chain  management,  extensive  training  and  support  to  value  chain  linkages  of 
commercially viable key commodities, value chain financial product development by BFIs 
and  staff  training,  promotion  of  digital  financial  services,    strengthening  market 
information system, support to diversified production,  market led production promotion 
and strengthen value chain, and promotion of agriculture insurance services. There is also 
a  need  to  orient  government  officials  and  policy  makers  on  value  chain  approach  and 
training  farmers  on  agro-ecological  practices.  These  measures  are  likely  to  reduce  the 
potential risks inherent to project implementation.  
Attachment 1: Value Chain Commodity Selection 
BRECSA project seek to facilitate the transformation of the agricultural sector in Bhutan 
through  adopting  a  climate-resilient,  nutrition-sensitive,  and  commercial  value-chain 
approach.  The  project  will  target  commercial,  semi-commercial  and  subsistence 
smallholder farm households and assist them with moving out of subsistence agriculture 
and  transitioning  to  more  commercially  oriented  production  for  improving  their  overall 
quality of life. 
Value chain selection 
A crucial part of the project approach and inclusion strategy is the sound selection of value 
chains,  based  on  agro-ecologically  suitable  commodities  which  have  a  comparative 
commercial  advantage,  market  potential  and  private  sector  interest.  The  selection  of 
commodities  has  been  based  on  market  demand  and  economic  and  financial  analyses, 
along  with  take  into  consideration  the  additional  benefit  to  youth  and  women,  and 
household nutrition. This appendix provides process adopted for value chain commodity 
selection  and  prepare  the  list  of  initial  selection  of  commodities  for  further  analysis, 
especially in-depth economic and financial analysis.  
Agricultural commodities 
A study on “Cost of Production for Field and Horticultural Crops in Bhutan” undertaken by 
the Department of Agriculture under the Ministry of Agriculture and Forests of RGOB has 
collected  information  on  cost  of  production  (COP)  of  different  agriculture  commodities 
grown in the country representing different agro-ecological regions in June 2020. Table 1 
provides information of different types of commodities covered in the COP survey. 
Table 1: Commodities Covered in the Cost of Production Survey 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
S.N.  Commodity groups 
Cereal crops 
1 
Type of commodities 
Low altitude paddy, mid altitude paddy, high altitude paddy, 
Quinoa, Millet, Wheat, Barley, Buckwheat and Maize 
Rajma bean, Lentil, Soybean, Urd/Mung bean 
Mustard, Sunflower, Groundnut, Perilla, Niger 
Pulses/legumes 
Oilseeds 
Solanaceous Vegetables  Chilli, tomato, egg plant 
Pod vegetables 
Leafy vegetables 
Bulb vegetables 
Cole vegetables 
Cucurbits vegetables 
Stem vegetables 
Roots 
vegetables 
Mushroom 
Spice 
Temperate fruit 
tuber 
and 
Bean, pea and okra 
Spinach, mustard green 
Onion, garlic 
Cauliflower, broccoli, cabbage 
Bitter guard, cucumber, pumpkin 
Asparagus 
Potato, Radish, Carrot, Turnip, Cassava, Sweet potato, Yam, 
Ground apple 
Shiitake, Oyster 
Cardamom, ginger, turmeric 
Apple, Persimmon, Apricot, Pear, Plum, Peach, Walnut, Kiwi, 
Hazelnut 
Mandarin, Mango, Banana, Litchi, Watermelon, Papaya, 
Jackfruit, Passion fruit, Guava, Pomegranate, Avocado, 
Pineapple 
Green tea, coffee, areca nut 
Goned, Zanthoxyllum, Tiyangku, Ruta Manu 
15 
Sub-tropical fruit 
16 
17 
Plantation crops 
Medicine  and  aromatic 
herbs 
As far as livestock commodities are concerned, similar information can be extracted from 
different sources for milk, chicken (meat), piggery, and honey.  Information included in 
the  “Cost  of  Production  for  Field  and  Horticultural  Crops  in  Bhutan”  for  the  above 
agricultural  commodities  and  information  compiled  for  the  livestock  commodities  are 
presented in Table 1 in excel sheet. 
Rationale for selection of the commodities 
It is clear from the review of agricultural and livestock commodities grown in Bhutan that 
there are over 80 commodities grown. While some of these commodities are highly viable 
with  greater  and  sustained  benefits  to  smallholders  and  others  have  very  limited  scope 
and  impact.  Further  the  project  like  BRECSA  can’t  support  the  promotion  of  all  these 
commodities  to  demonstrate  the  visible  impact  over  the  project  period.  This  calls  for 
selecting  the  commodities  that  have  a  comparative  commercial  advantage,  market 
potential, private sector interest and high economic and financial rate of return. 
Selection methodology  
Against  above  background,  all  the  agriculture  and  livestock  commodities  currently 
cultivated in Bhutan were ranked based on following four criteria: (i) cost of production, 
(ii) priority commodities of the Bhutan renewable and natural resources (RNR) strategies, 
(iii) success story stories of Commercial Agriculture and Resilient Livelihoods Enhancement 
Programme (CARLEP),  (iv)  nutrition  improvement  potential,  (v)  market  potential,  (vi) 
income generation potential and (vii) gender, environment and climate considerations. 
Among the above commodity selection criteria mentions above, (i) cost of production was 
assess computing cost of per kilogram of production, (ii) two other criteria namely priority 
commodities of the Bhutan renewable and natural resources (RNR) strategies, and success 
story  stories  of  Commercial  Agriculture  and  Resilient  Livelihoods  Enhancement 
Programme (CARLEP) in two discrete measurement as yes or no i.e. 0 = No and 1 = Yes, 
while  remaining  four  criteria  were  measured  using  sub-criteria  outlined  in  Table  2  in  a 
subjective scale of 1-3 as 1 = low, 2 = medium and 3 = high. 
Table 2: Sub-criteria under four main selection criteria 
S.N.  Main criteria  
Sub-criteria 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Nutrition 
improvement 
potential 
Market potential 
•  Food consumption 
•  Food preferences 
•  Food composition 
•  Market demand 
•  Private-sector interest and 
upgrading 
Income 
generation 
potential 
Gender, 
environment and 
climate impact 
•  Agro-ecological conditions  
•  Level of engagement of smallholder 
producers 
•  Margins 
•  Employment generation 
•  Gender  
•  Environment and climate 
Measurement 
scale 
1 = Low 
2 = Medium 
3 = High 
1 = Low 
2 = Medium 
3 = High 
1 = Low 
2 = Medium 
3 = High 
1 = Low 
2 = Medium 
3 = High 
Information  required  for  this  selection  exercises  were  obtained  through  a  review  of 
information  from  secondary  sources  such  as  nutrient  content  of  the  commodities,  food 
habit  and  preference,  review  of  export  and  import  data  and  agro-ecological  mapping, 
consultation with producers, comparison of cost of production and market price (wholesale 
and retail), comparison of the farm / enterprise budget prepared for economic and financial 
analysis.  Further,  these  experiences  were  substantiated  through  a  review  of  project 
progress report, annual outcome survey and other relevant information. 
Commodity selection results: 
Table 2 in the excel sheet presents the results of the commodity selection exercise based 
on the criteria outlined in Table 2 above. It is evident that these commodities are ranked 
in  a  score  range  of  11  (minimum)  to  33  (maximum).  The  score  received  by  these 
commodities ranges between 14 and 33. The information presented in Table 2 in the excel 
sheet provide the basis for choosing the commodities for promotion based on economic, 
financial, environmental and nutritional considerations. 
Recommendations for value chain promotion 
On the basis of the value chain selection process discussed above, following commodities 
are recommended for the value chain promotion under BRECSA project. 
List of commodities selected for VC promotion in BRECSA 
Commodity groups  Name of commodities 
Total score (11-33) 
Milk/Dairy 
Cattle 
Chicken 
Poultry (1000 birds) 
Vegetables 
Chili, tomato, onion 
Mushroom 
Oyster Medium (500 bags) 
Spices 
Spices 
Honey 
Ginger 
Turmeric 
Bee (100 hives) 
33 
33 
32 
29 
27 
27 
25 
Bhutan
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
25 April 12 May 2022
Document Date:
14/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003935
6281-BT
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
The SECAP Review note should build on the preliminary note mentioned above, draw on the results of the screening exercise and be
informed by the issues raised during the design mission, the stakeholders interviews, publicly available tools and dataset, and
environmental, social or climate-related studies that inform on the characteristics of the project location. The SECAP review note
includes the revised ESMP and should be attached to the Project Design Report, integrated in Draft Project Implementation Manual
(PIM) and COSTAB and shall be submitted to Design Review Meeting (DRM) or IRC (for NSOs).
1/21
1. Introduction
1.
2.
3.
This Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) background contributes to the formulation of Building
Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture (BRECSA) project. It is a fully blended project of IFAD and the Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program (GAFSP). IFAD is the investment Supervising Entity (SE) for Investments and the Lead Implementing
Partner Agency, while the World Food Programme (WFP) is the SE for Technical Assistance and Implementation Support. The
project development objective is to transform smallholder agriculture into inclusive and resilient agri-food systems that are
increasingly profitable and food and nutrition secure. The objective will be achieved through three closely related key
components: 1) resilient production system, 2) strengthened value chain coordination and market linkages, and 3) innovative and
competitive agri-food sector.
BRECSA is a gender transformative project, targeting 60% women and promoting gender friendly tools and technologies. It is
nutrition sensitive as the project seek to improve access to and availability of nutritious foods to enhance dietary diversity through
combination of the income pathway. The use of Consolidated Livelihood Exercise for Analysing Resilience (CLEAR)[1] tool and
Agricultural Resilient Plans (ARPs) will enable the project to factor in climate resilience in value chain selection, production and
marketing interventions. Moreover, having the high-level youth targeting (30%) and a key focus to engage them in both on and off
-farm activities, the project could also be classified as youth sensitive. Considering the production potential, substantial youth
demography and high poverty levels, proximity to roads and local markets, and contiguity with CARLEP[2] Dzongkhags for
expanding climate resilient farming systems and value chains, BRECSA will cover four Dzongkhags namely Sarpang, Tsirang,
Trongsa, and Zhemgang.
This study was carried out following the requirements set by IFAD’s Operational Procedures and Guidelines and the 2021 edition
of IFAD’s SECAP[3]. It was informed by i) desk review of relevant national policies and strategies, ii) analysis of ongoing projects
funded by IFAD, GAFSP, and other development partners, and iii) wider consultations with representatives from the Royal
Government of Bhutan’s, Dzongkhags and Gewogs level line agencies, private sector actors, and target groups of the targeted
Dzongkhags. The report also analyses relevant institutional frameworks, country program evaluations, and current
environmental, social, and climate change studies and assessments.
2. Situational analysis and potential project impacts
4.
Bhutan is a mountainous country with 771,612 people scattered along steep mountain slopes and valleys, many in remote and
far-flung hamlets. The elevation reaches from about 150 meters above sea level in the south to over 7,000 meters in the north
just within a horizontal distance of 100–150 KMs. More than half of the land area (51%) is protected to preserve the country’s rich
biodiversity. With 70.77% forest coverage, excluding shrubs, Bhutan is the only carbon-negative country in the world, absorbing
more greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) than it emits. Bhutan’s independence throughout its history has helped preserve its rich
cultural heritage and traditions. As its development policies demonstrate, Bhutan strives to be self-sufficient and to conserve its
environment and culture (NSB, 2021) (GNHC, 2019). However, being a land locked and least developed country with a fragile
mountainous ecosystem, high dependence on agriculture and the significant role of hydropower for economic development place
the country at risk from climate and other shocks (NEC, 2020). Poverty remains a key challenge of the project´s targeted
smallholders. Traditional production-oriented farming, limited employment opportunities, a lack of skills, outmigration to pursue
employment options as well as a lack of gender equality and social inclusion are the key identified social challenges.
Furthermore, people inhabiting rural areas generally do not have easy access to financial institutions for agriculture-based credit,
especially for longer term investment.
2.1 Socio-economic assessment
a. Overall poverty situation
5.
Bhutan’s economy is characterized by a high proportion of self-employed persons, notably those who work on their own land.
There are also good deals of small and cottage industries operated from home. The proportion of persons working for wages is
relatively small. Bhutan has reduced poverty by two-thirds, from 36 to 12 % from 2007 through 2017, based on the $3.20/day
poverty line. Extreme poverty ($1.90 per day) has been almost eradicated. However, poverty pockets continue to persist, creating
geographical imbalances in economic development and opportunities for (youth) employment. Since the early 1980s, the annual
real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate has been 7.5 %. The multidimensional poverty rate stands at 5.8% of the
population, with the urban and rural poverty rates of 1.2% and 8.1%, respectively; and 93% of Bhutanese poor live in rural areas.
6.
Figure 1 Bhutan Poverty and inequality status (Source: World Bank Poverty and Equity Brief, April 2021)
2/21
7.
8.
9.
The country’s economy was seriously affected by COVID-19 impacts. The Bhutanese economy recorded a decline of 10.08 % in
2020, which is a 15.83 percentage points drop as compared to a growth of 5.76 % in 2019 (NAS, 2021). All economic sectors
faced impacts of COVID-19 and overall economy contracted by 1.2 % in the financial year 2020/21. Service sector output fell by
3.6%, as the tourism industry remained closed affecting more than 50,000 jobs, mostly youths (WorldBank, 2021). COVID 19 has
significantly affected the project´s targeted smallholder’s livelihoods. Youth, especially in tourism and off farm activities, and
migrants lost their jobs. Income from wages was stopped due to strict lockdown and their connection to the markets was
disturbed.
Bhutan is administratively divided into 20 Dzongkhags, which consist of 205 Gewogs (“blocks”), 4 larger towns (“Thromdes”), 18
Dzongkhag towns and 42 satellite towns. Bhutan’s moderate rural poverty rate marks substantial disparity across Dzongkhags,
with the headcount ratio, i.e. the proportion of people living below the national poverty line, in 2017 ranging from merely 0.4 % in
Paro to 38.6 % in Dagana (NSB, 2019). BRECSA targets people of the poorest Dzongkhags. It will be implemented in Zhemgang
which has the second highest poverty rate in the country with 29.4%. Similarly, the project targeted Saprang and Trongsa
Dzongkhags have the 6th and 7th highest poverty rate, respectively. Tsirang has a comparatively lower poverty rate as it shares
its borders with India and has a relatively high amount of productive land and access to market. Selected Dzongkhags are
located in geographically remote areas in south-east Bhutan, making access to services and market difficult.
The majority of the project’s targeted smallholders are engaged in farming with limited cultivable lands. The smallholders are
facing a number of challenges including: (a) water scarcity for agriculture, (b) labour shortages, (c) low agricultural productivity,
(d) wildlife depredation of crops, (e) lack of market access and high competition with cheap food imports from India, and (f)
adverse impacts of climate change.
b. Gender
10.
11.
Bhutan ranks 5th among the South Asian countries according to the Global Gender Gap Report 2021. Overall, the country is
ranked 130 out of 156 countries (previously ranked 131 in 2020 and 122 in 2018). Bhutan scored highly in key areas such as
educational attainment (117), however with a few women in parliament and ministerial positions, Bhutan ranked low in political
empowerment (137) (WEF, 2021).
Women’s economic engagement is less compared to men. The country ranks 130 out of 156 in females’ economic participation
and opportunities (WEF, 2021). The unemployment rate in Bhutan stood at 5% in 2020 (3.4% in 2018), with 6% women
unemployed against 4.1% men. Young females’ unemployment is furthermore worrisome, as it is estimated at 61.3% compared
to 38.8% for men. More males (37.0%) are ‘regular paid employees’ than females (19.7%). The proportion of females (58.8%)
working in the agriculture sector is higher than that of males (41.7%) (NSB, 2020). Total working female population in the four
project Dzongkhags is 49,486 (46.64%), out of which 38,384 (77.49%) live in rural areas. Female labour force participation
remains below 67% except in Zhemgang with 76.1% female engagement in the labour force. Both labour force and employment
figures are largely dominated by agricultural works (LabourSurvey, 2021).
12.
Table 1 Women economic engagement in Dzongkhags
Labor force participation (%)
Unemployment (%)
Dzongkhags
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
Sarpang
66
63.8
64.9
3/21
Trongsa
71.7
67
Tsirang
76.1
66.2
Zhemgang
75.2
76.1
69.2
71.1
75.7
4.8
3.9
0.9
1.2
4
3.9
1.8
2
4.4
3.9
1.3
1.6
13.
14.
15.
Similar to country trends, more women are engaged in agriculture than men in the project’s targeted Dzongkhags. This trend is
growing as men are increasingly leaving farms in search of off-farm works. Women actively managing households also
participate in multiple livelihood strategies including agriculture production, livestock rearing, food preparation, working for wages,
and maintaining their home. Their role in processing, aggregation and enterprises is limited mostly due to lack of knowledge and
access to finance and market. The physical workload, and lack of access on modern tools and technologies are making women’s
life difficult.
The land inheritance is perceived to favour women in Bhutan. The majority of population follows matrilineal heritage giving
women an advantage in ownership of land and livestock. It is estimated that 70% of land is owned by women. A gender
assessment study conducted by UNDP Bhutan reports[4] the benefits accrued from agriculture and forestry activities were
equally shared between men and women, while benefits from an off-farm contract, business and farm labour accrued more to
men.
Women are more confined in household level works and participate less in decision making. Traditional beliefs have not
restricted women’s involvement in agriculture, household decision-making, and property inheritance, but their activities outside
the community are less encouraged, especially in rural areas (WorldBank, NA). Generally, women’s roles are confined to
agricultural activities within the household, while men do off-farm or non-agricultural work. Women are also mainly involved in
marketing of agricultural products in the local market(NEC, 2019). Women’s representation at and engagement in political
decision-making level is comparatively lower than their male counterparts in both the Parliament and local government with only
15.27 % and 11.6 % respectively. Similarly, there are only 11.2 % women at executive level in the civil service (GNHC, 2019).
c. Youth
16.
17.
18.
Bhutan has a positive youth force with enormous potential to contribute to economic development. The country´s population is
predominantly young, with 60% of its population below the age of 25 years. The literacy rate of the youth population defined as
aged between 15-24 years is estimated at 93%. The literacy rate for urban youth is 97%, while it is 91% for the rural youth (NSB,
2017). But the lack of gainful employment for young people presents one of the key challenges in Bhutan today. The overall
youth unemployment rate in 2021 is 20.9% (6,492 persons), almost six times higher than that of the national unemployment rate.
Unemployed female youths are much higher than males. Out of the total unemployed youth, about 61.4% are females and 38.6%
are males. Youth unemployment is almost double in urban areas with 28.6% and among people with skills than that of rural
areas (15.8%) (LabourSurvey, 2021).
As per the statistical year book 2021, the four Dzongkhags targeted by BRECSA have 36,547 youths aged between 18-35 years
(Sarpang-16,249; Trongsa-8757; Tsiring-6478; and Zhemgang-5063). While exact figures on youth unemployment could not be
retrieved for each of the Dzongkhags, the national unemployment rate indicates that there are a large number of youths facing
challenges to pursue economically viable and meaningful livelihood. The impact of COVID-19 on tourism and migrant working
sector has further impacted on youth jobs. Along with the lack of employment opportunities, youths also struggle with limited
access to finance, land, knowledge and markets.
Most of the youths are not willing to participate in conventional farming, as it is seen as a labour-intensive and difficult job with
low economic return and little financial security. Young people rather prefer a secure government job. However, the field visits
and interaction with youth explored that they are interested in modern agriculture, which requires fewer physical activities and
has secured financial return. For that, they need capacity building, access to finance and land and enhance their business literacy
and entrepreneurship skills. The government had initiated a Land Use Certificate (LUC) program for young people. However, the
dropout rate was very high due to remoteness of land and lack of capacity building initiations. It was noticed that quick income
from the farm could play a motivational factor for them to continue farming. Activities involving livestock like dairy or poultry, or
mushroom farming can be helpful in generating these quick returns.
d. Indigenous peoples
19.
The Drukpa are the dominant people group in Bhutan. They are divided into four main ethnic groups: the Sharchops, Ngalops,
Khegs and Lhotsampas. These four groups make up 98% of country population. The Dzongkhags targeted by the project have
limited opportunities for income generating activities. Smallholders are mostly engaged in subsistence farming, which is
adversely impacted by water shortage and wildlife depredation. Lack of knowledge on business literacy and entrepreneurship,
limited access to market, and poor understanding on agriculture commercialization are the main barriers for smallholders to
explore further opportunities. BRECSA will support marginalized and vulnerable groups in the project area to enhance their
livelihood without interfering with their cultural practices.
4/21
e. Marginalised groups
20.
BRECSA will respect indigenous and marginalized group’s culture and rights and will support them to enhance their livelihood
without interfering with their cultural practices.
f. Nutrition
21.
22.
23.
Bhutan continues to be at the crossroad of a triple burden of malnutrition with undernutrition, micronutrient deficiencies and
overweight/obesity often coexisting. Nutrition is identified as one of the key national priorities in the 12th Five Year Plan (2019-
2023). National Nutrition Survey 2015 shows that 21.2% of children aged 0-59 months are stunted and 4.3% are wasted.
Disparities in the level of undernutrition remain persistently elevated in the eastern region of the country, in the poorest sections
of the society and in rural areas. The stunting prevalence is high and of public health concern[5] which needs to be addressed
through a mix of nutrition specific and nutrition sensitive interventions. Micronutrient deficiencies remain a major public health
issue with the prevalence of anaemia among children under 5 years of age at 43.8%, among women of reproductive age at
34.9% and among pregnant women being 27.3%.
Although 98% of households in Bhutan are food secure, dietary diversity within households is very poor. The traditional
Bhutanese diet mainly consists of cereals (predominantly rice), with a per capita consumption of 110 kg/year; consumption of
pulses, animal source foods, fruits and vegetables are very low. Generally, diets are less diverse in rural areas and household in
the poorer quintiles. For children aged between 6 to 23 months, only 11.7% of young children are fed with minimum acceptable
diet, 16.6% are given iron rich food and only 15.3% are provided with 4 or more food groups (NNS 2015). This clearly indicates
that only targeting food security is not enough for improving nutritional status. 
Food habits increasinglyinclude more processed foods and sugary drinks.On a per capita basis, Bhutanese households spend20
% of their food budget on dairy products,13 % on vegetables, 10 % on rice, and10 % on other cereals and pulses[6]. Data shows
that 43 to 96 % of household food expenditure was on imported food items and reliance on imports was especially high for
cooking oil and rice. Data also indicates that demand for packed and processed food is expected to rise the fastest[7]. These
dietary changes have already resulted in an increase in obesity and chronic diseases. The NCD STEP Survey 2019, which
collected the data for Bhutanese aged 15-69, shows that 33.5% are overweight and 11.4% are obese. The findings indicate
insufficient consumption of fruits and vegetables, heavy episodic drinking, and limited physical activity as some of the major
causes for high prevalence of overweight and obesity. Furthermore, diabetes is estimated to affect 13.2% of adult women and
13.9% of adult men. NCDs account for 71% of all deaths which makes NCDs Bhutan’s biggest health challenge. The country has
not shown any progress towards achieving its target for reducing obesity and diet related NCDs. The generally poor dietary
diversity prevalent among the Bhutanese households can be indicative of the inadequate intake of many micronutrients such as B
vitamins, iron, folate, vitamin A and possibly other key nutrients, such as zinc, found especially in fresh foods. Limited
biochemical and dietary information and long gaps between national surveys to assess the micronutrient status of in the
Bhutanese population suggests a need to conduct a micronutrient survey, including biochemical, dietary and clinical components.
24.
Bhutan is rich in local food traditions, dietary practices and indigenous knowledge which needs to be considered and respected
in developing climate change plans and programmes. For example, whole grains such as red rice (like brown rice in texture, with
a nutty taste, is the only variety of rice that grows at high altitudes) buckwheat, and increasingly maize are traditionally
consumed. It is essential, that traditional, desirable practices such as taking whole grain cereals, along with consumption of local
animal breeds (that provide good quality protein and bioavailable micronutrients), herbs, spices (sources of antioxidants and
immunological attributes), medicinal plants and lesser used neglected and underutilized species (NUS) which are locally grown
and nutritious, should be promoted within a context of nutrition-sensitive agriculture and climate considerations to promote dietary
diversity
2.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implications
25.
Geography: Bhutan lies in the eastern part of the Himalayan region. The country has a rugged terrain and sharp contrast in
elevation ranging from 150 meter (m) in the south to over 7500 m above sea level in the north. The northern part of the country is
characterized by snow-capped peaks of elevations above 7,300 m with abundant glaciers and alpine pastures. Bhutan is
bordered by mountains in the Tibet Autonomous Region, the Lesser Himalayas (Inner Himalayas), and Duars Plain along its
southern border. About 72.3% of the country is covered by forest, approximately 1.6% is glacier area and 13.8% account for
agricultural land (Climate Risk Country Profile: Bhutan). Broadly, the country is divided into three agro-ecological zones: sub-
tropical, temperate and alpine. Table 2 below summarizes the nature of different zones and the proportion of project area. The
majority of the project area (54.15%) falls under the sub-tropical zone while nearly 39.5% area represents temperate zone.
26.
Table 2 Agroecological zone and project area (NSB, 2021) (FRMD, 2017)
5/21
27.
Forest and Biodiversity: Bhutan has 11 types of forests and rich biodiversity with an altitudinal range from 200 to 4600 m (NEC,
2019). The country’s diversity includes more than 5,600 species of plants, nearly 700 species of birds and about 200 species of
mammals (NBC 2014). Forests are the dominant ecosystems in the project area with more than 90% area coverage. Forest fires,
land degradation, increase in pollution, improper waste management, and increasing urbanization are some of the key issues
identified for the forest and biodiversity conservation. BRECSA’s activities will be confined only within the agricultural area and
attention will be given to forest and water bodies’ conservation. Collaboration will be made with competent authorities to monitor
forest area and quality.
28.
Table 3 Land cover and use (NSB, 2021)
29.
Water: A status report on water sources in Bhutan, carried out by the Watershed Management Division, shows that 2% (147) of
the water sources have already dried whereas about 35% (2317) are in the verge of drying. The trend is similar in the
Dzongkhags of the project. Out of 1329 water resources in the four targeted Dzongkhags, 3.2% (43) already dried up and more
than one third (457) are drying.
a. Environmental assessment
30.
31.
32.
The project’s goal of increasing resilient commercial agriculture production and improve food and nutrition security in the 4 target
Dzongkhags by 2030 demands a good amount of cultivable land, soil nutrient, fodder and water resources. If not properly
managed, imposing pressure on the environment may range from increased water resource depletion, higher pollution levels due
to the use of chemicals and pesticides, degraded soil quality, accelerated soil erosion and landslides, and increased pressure on
natural resources. There may be chances of increased pressure on forests for fodder and infrastructure development. In addition,
wildlife depredation of crops (up to 55% crop loss) and domestic animals are some of the major challenges faced by the farmers.
The project will carefully consider these risks and identify specific mitigation measures (see Table below and ESCMP matrix).
Increases in cropping area in the project sites are expected to take place on currently abandoned agricultural land with a proper
management and wise utilization of fallow lands. The project will support the government’s program of engaging youth and to
make a better utilization of fallow lands. BRECSA will not do value chain activities outside the agricultural lands.
BRECSA will promote sustainable agriculture and livestock practices limiting the use of agrochemicals, promote environmental
stewardship, enhance quality of life for farming families and communities and increase the production. Permaculture sites will be
established and onsite support to adopt permaculture will be provided. The milk value chain will include adequate fodder
plantation, stall feeding, use of dung and urine for manure, biofertilizer and biopesticide production which will ultimately reduce
use of chemical inputs on farms. The project will encourage the use of farmyard manure, organic and mineral fertilizers; and bio-
medicines. The project will promote an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) approach which will allow farmers to manage
diseases, insects, weeds and other pests in a cost-effective and environmentally sound way.
33.
As water scarcity is increasing, BRECSA will support interventions that will improve water accessibility, availability and
distribution, such as source protection, irrigation canals, and water ponds to gain water efficiency during conveyance and field
applications. The project has identified value chains that demand less water. In addition to that, support will be given to promote
water efficient technologies such as drip irrigation, micro-sprinkles, in-field catchment ponds and mulching to increase soil water
retention.
34.
BRECSA only supports the construction and/or rehabilitation of small-scale infrastructure that has minimal and localised
environmental risks and impacts that will be mitigated by known measures included in ESCMP.
35.
The crops will be selected considering low impact from wildlife. BRECSA will fund appropriate fencing (vegetative, electric, chain-
link) to reduce wildlife depradation. The project will fund 160 km of electric and hybrid fencing, and will pilot 32 km of chain link
fencing for scaling-up based on the results. The project will sensitize and proactively encourage farmers to employ vegetative
fencing such as, Sichuan pepper (Zanthoxylum spp), a sturdy thorny bush that deters certain wildlife species.
6/21
36.
Increased waste stream and pollution from market centre, processing units, agriculture as well as livestock farms are other
potential environmental impacts. BRECSA will coordinate and collaborate with organizations working to recycle wastage. These
wastages can be used to produce organic compost and could be translated as an opportunity for income generation and mitigate
the environmental impacts related to collection and disposal of solid waste. As far as possible, the use of renewable energy
technologies for the production, processing and storage will be promoted via local support markets and commercial providers to
help to reduce existing levels of pollution.
37.
The table below summarizes environmental impact of the priority list commodities and the proposed solution measures.
38.
Table 16 Environmental impacts and mitigation/adaptation measures
SN
Value chain /
activity
Potential impacts on Environment
1
Milk
Increase in number of cows may create
additional pressure on natural resources for
feed and farm pollution
(Positive, if managed well: reduced
pressure on natural environment, reduce
pollution from waste, improved soil fertility,
crop residues and waste reduction)
Risk
signif-
icance
Medium
Mitigation/Adaptation measures
i) improved shed management to increase capture
and reuse of both urine and dung as a manure,
biofertilizer and biopesticide, ii) Increase the
production of own feed resources by additional
plantation of fodder and forage, iii) hay/silage
production from crop residues, iv) 
use of wider availability of sexed semen for the
better breed production and reduce the number of
cattle
2
Mushroom
Mushroom production demands more
natural resources base as production media
(straw, animal dung, logs), parts of
production practices may require more
energy and water (sterilizing straw through
boiling)
Low
Multiple uses of natural resources, adequate
management of reuse and recycle, exploring and
using alternative energy sources.
Monocropping – reducing local bio-diversity
and increase disease risks, hence
increased use of chemicals and pesticides
Low
Intercropping mostly legume species, promotion of
organic mulching, use of semi processing- solar
dryer
3
Ginger/Turmeric
Increase use of Fertilizer and Pesticides
Medium
i) encourage farmer for bio inputs, ii) Training
farmer on good agriculture practice and IPM
Improper waste management leading to
pollution
Use of waste to make bio compost
Smell pollution
Construction of farm in adequate distance from
house/village
4
Poultry
Medium
over use of vaccination and antibiotics also
leading to health problem,
Regulate use of vaccination and medicines
increase number and impact of
parasites/diseases and pests
Maintain hygiene
5
Vegetable
Increase in chemical fertilizer and pesticides
may pollute soil and water; excessive land
use; increase water use
Medium
Promote permaculture and train on homemade bio
inputs production, IPM trainings, avoid steep
slopes to cultivation, minimization of tillage
operation, mixed/intercropping, efficient water use
technologies
b. Climate trends and impacts
7/21
39.
The country’s varied topography and geographical location dramatically varies. There is significant seasonal variability in
temperatures: the summer months of June–August are characterised by average temperatures of 24°C–29°C, compared to the
winter months of December–February with a mean annual temperature near 0°C, for the most recent climatology, 1991–2020.
Average monthly rainfall follows a similar pattern, in which considerably more rainfall occurs during the summer months
(approximately 240 millimeters [mm]) than during the winter months (approximately 90 mm). Data from 1976-2005 shows the
mean temperature of Bhutan has increased by 0.8° The temperature increase has varied from an average increase of 0.7°C in
October and November, to an average increase of 0.8°C during June, July and September. Most variability from the mean was
estimated for March, April and May with 0.6°C and December, January and February with 1.3°C (NCHM, 2019, adopted from
(NCWC, 2020) ).
40.
Figure 2 Left: Bhutan Temp & Precipitation Trend (WorldBank CC Portal), upper right: 2020 monthly precipitation, lower right:
2020 monthly and average temperature (NSB, 2021)
41.
42.
Dzongkhags, Sarpang was hotter and also received comparatively high rainfall compared to the other three Dzongkhags.
Average temperature in Sarpang was above 20°C compared to around 17°C for other Dzongkhags. Similarly, Sarpang also
received heavy precipitation reaching 2000mm during July, nearly five times more than that of the other three Dzongkhags. The
average precipitation in Sarpang in the last five years amounted to 5,613 mm while the average precipitation of the other
Dzongkhags was below 1,500 mm.
Climate Scenario: Temperature projection shows a consistent increase in temperature for Bhutan under both Representative
Concentration Pathways (RCPs). The increase in temperature under RCP 4.5 is about 0.8°C– 2.8°C during 2021-2100, while
RCP 8.5 scenario shows increases of about 0.8°C to more than 3.2°C towards the end of the century. Mean annual rainfall over
Bhutan is likely to increase in the future under both RCPs. Under the RCP 4.5 scenarios, the annual rainfall over Bhutan indicates
an increase of about 10% to 30%, with 5% to 15% increase in summer rainfall. The projection also notes a likely increase of
rainfall in the winter with some northern and north-western parts likely to experience a decrease in rainfall. Under the RCP 8.5
scenario, the mean annual rainfall indicates an increase of about 10-20% during 2021-2050 with more than 30% increase all over
Bhutan towards the end of the century.
c. Climate change mitigation
43.
The principal climate risks for the project include: (i) water stress due to variability of rainfall patterns and drying up of water
sources; (ii) increased incidences of new and existing pests and diseases; (iii) productivity and quality declines due to
temperature and water stress; (iv) and disruption of agri-value chains due to damaged roads and infrastructure caused by
extreme climate events. Along with these, the predicted temperature increment has also some positive impacts on value chains
including: i) creating opportunities of new vegetable and crop varieties in higher altitude; ii) increasing yields and an extension of
the production seasons of vegetable and crops; and iii) favourable conditions for bees to collect more raw materials in extended
production seasons resulting in increased honey production. The use of the CLEAR tool and ARPs will enable the project to
factor in climate resilience in value chain selection, production and marketing interventions. The following provides a brief
pathway to build resilience and address climate stressors:
44.
Table 5 Pathways to build resilience
Production
Marketing
Consumption
●         Extension of climate information services
and support to producers
●         Promotion of low emission agricultural
practices
●         Shortening value chains
8/21
●         Reducing reliance on the import and
distribution of fresh produce
●         Improving post-harvest processing and
storage
●         Crop and variety selection in relation to
seasonal and climate projections
●         Waste recycling
●         Water use efficiency including irrigation
●         Reducing food waste
●         Improved soil-water management
practices
●         Protected cultivation (greenhouses)
●         Soil fertility management to maximise soil
carbon
●         Local aggregation and storage
infrastructure – community organisations and
institutions
●         Central aggregation and storage –
market centres
●         Cold chain development, storage and
transport
●         Promoting the shift toward
sustainable, climate friendly
vegetable-based diets
●         Transforming social norms
surrounding acceptable and
nutritious diets
45.
The table below summarizes the potential impact of climate change to the proposed commodities and the solution measures
planned by the project. It has been compiled through discussions with production experts on the likely technical impacts on
production of the above climate changes:
46.
Table 6 Climate change impacts and mitigation/adaptation measures
SN
Commodit
y
Potential Climate risk on value
chains
Risk
significance
Solution measures
1 Milk
Increase in temperature may
change in disease timing and
outbreaks
Medium
ii) Provision of improved shed and proper monitoring, ii) improved
breed selection and good husbandry, iii) easy access and
effective animal health services, iv) forage-based feeding, v)
improved biosecurity via stall-based production system
Mushroom
2
Increase pest and diseases
Low
Integrated pest management, regular monitoring, adequate
consultation with experts
3
Ginger/
Turmeric
Water shortage due to irregular
rainfall and long dry period
Medium
i) organic mulching to retain moisture, ii) provision for cover
crops, iii) efficient water use and addition measures to increase
water availability by promoting water catchment pond, and
construction or maintenance of small-scale irrigation iv) use of
compost and biochar to retain moisture around the root zone
Increase in temperature and
excess water during monsoon
may cause disease outbreak of
rootrot
Low
i) adoption of integrated pest management practice, ii) promote a
good soil health management by crop rotation, ridge making/
proper drainage, intercropping, mulching, proper selection of
varieties etc., iii) provision of crop insurance iv) site selection,
including focus on clusters in higher elevations with prolonged
cold periods to reduce disease load.
5
Poultry
High or low temperature may
increase mortality and disease
and pest outburst, and decrease
production 
Low
i) proper poultry house construction, ii) hygiene maintenance, iii)
improve technical support to farmers 
6
Vegetable
Prolonged dry spell, irregular
rainfall, excessive temperature,
increase diseases and pest 
Medium
i)provision of efficient water use, ii) organic mulching, iii) mixed
and intercropping, iv) right selection of vegetable as per season,
v) protected agriculture: tunnel faming, vi) promotion of
permaculture
47.
Second Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)
48.
9/21
The pledge to be carbon neutral is maintained in the second NDC, which was presented to the UNFCCC on June 24, 2021.
Through sectoral Low Emission Development Strategies (LEDS) and the National REDD+ Strategy and Action Plan 2020, it
reaffirms to remain carbon neutral while also charting a path to improve mitigation targets and activities. The LEDS were
developed for key sectors of human settlement, food security, industries, and surface transport. The sectoral strategies aim at
decoupling economic growth and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions through clean technology, innovation, renewable energy,
and green jobs creation. While the second NDC is ambitious and sets clear carbon reduction targets, Bhutan would require
financial, technical and capacity building support from both national and international partners to ensure it meets its raised
climate goals. The following table summarizes a few potential areas of collaboration to support Bhutan’s second NDC targets.
49.
Table 7 BRECSA’s contribution to second NDC implementation
NDCs provision
BRECSA’s interventions
Mitigation
Integrated Land Use Planning through CLEAR tool and ARPs;
Forest conservation and
management
Promotion of agroecological production through promotion of permaculture and ARPs identified
agriculture practices;
Increased production and income
Low Emission Development
Strategy for Food security
Switch from synthetic to organic fertilizers; Improved agricultural practices; increased biomass
through increased perennial crop production; Small and medium scale domestic biogas
production; Improved dairy cattle production through breed improvement and feeding
management
Low Emission Development
Strategy for Human Settlement
Increase in composting and recycling; Wastewater management; promotion of energy efficient
appliances; Solar water heaters
Waste Management
Production, processing and marketing waste management, convert waste to manure
Alternative Renewable Energy
Biogas, solar, waste-to-energy technologies
50.
The first NDC had highlighted ten broad areas of priority adaptation needs. The second NDC’s adaptation priority is based on
upcoming National Adaptation Plans (NAP). The NAP still hasn’t been submitted yet, however, the second NDC has indicated
NAP will cover priority needs and actions in the areas of water, agriculture, forests and biodiversity. Based on the presently
available information, BRECSA will support on NAP implementation and contribute to (1) the adaptation sectors like sustainable
commercial agriculture development and poverty reduction; (2) enhancement of smallholder’s access on water; (3) improvement
of the vulnerability scale of rural communities through community infrastructure support (irrigation, fencing,
aggregation/processing and market structure etc.); (4) smallholder and institutional capacity building on climate adaptation; (5)
increased income generating activities through support on agriculture enterprises etc.
2.3 Target group profiles
51.
52.
BRECSA will target smallholder to medium size farmers, female, youth, people with disabilities, and private sector actors involved
in the selected value chains. Inclusion of small farmers and food insecure population will be ensured by selecting commodities
that are expected to benefit the largest number of poor and by promoting efficient and climate resilient technologies, climate
resilient and profitable crop varieties, as well as value chain commodities that benefit the intended target group most. The target
households are broadly divided into three categories: a) households which are fully commercial and produce for sell only, ii)
households producing for sale as well as own consumption and have a potential for commercial farming, and iii) households
producing only for own consumption. The CLEAR tool and ARPs will help to identify the most vulnerable communities, suitable
project interventions for them, and specific locations for the implementation of activities, which will be instrumental for targeting.
To mitigate the short- and longer-term economic impacts of COVID-19 and to support recovery and resilience building, the project
will target at least 60 % women beneficiaries and 30 % youth aged 18-35[8]. Six hundred differently abled people, constituting
25% of the population of differently abled persons in the target Dzongkhags will benefit from BRECSA interventions. Strategies
will be adopted to support the empowerment of youth and women through enhanced economic opportunities, equal participation
in groups and cooperatives, and leadership in local decision-making. Special attention will be paid to engaging these groups in
the formulation of the Dzongkhags and Gewog level agriculture resilience plans.
53.
54.
55.
In view of a large temporary economic migration in rural areas and lack of economic opportunities to women, attention will be
given to address the specific needs of the households headed de facto by women. This will involve the selection of
crops/livestock with high returns on labour and technologies that are less labour intensive and help reducing drudgery of women.
Such crops/livestock are mushroom production, poultry and dairy, as they give high returns and are also suitable for small plots
owned by women. Similarly, disadvantaged households, and other disadvantaged groups will be specifically targeted by the
project. Specific income generating activities suitable for people with disabilities will be planned and priority will be given to them
for other activities that are also suitable for them.
10/21
Youths, especially rural and female, will be one of the key priority target groups. BRECSA will work together with the government
on fallow land utilization where support will be made to youths on access to basic requirements like finance, information, tools
and technologies, and their skill development including farming & business skills, financial literacy, marketing and
entrepreneurship for the sustainable commercial farming. Youths will be engaged in both off and on farm activities as per their
interest and convenience.
BRECSA will develop mechanisms such as quotas, beneficiary selection criteria for vulnerable households, time and venue
selection for activities considering the availability of women and marginalized people; delivery of certain services for vulnerable
people at the doorstep, timely and regular assessment of participation of different categories of farmers and vulnerable groups
such as women-headed households; and customized interventions that will ensure the participation of poor households in
appropriate value chains. This will be achieved in part by expanding local agriculture employment opportunities associated with
value chain-driven growth. The project will explicitly use a graduation approach for mobilization of poorer and more risk averse
individuals, facilitating them to join commercial agriculture ready to do so, enabling them to work alongside and learn from their
more experienced neighbours while being able to benefit from the improved access to markets and services via the group.
3. Institutional analysis
56.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (MoAF) is the leading ministry working with IFAD in coordination with the Ministry of
Finance (MoF) as the borrower. The MoAF has a mandate of removing rural poverty. The Department of Agriculture (DoA),
Forestry and Park Service (DoFPS), Livestock (DoL), Agriculture Marketing and Cooperatives (DAMC) and the Policy Planning
Division (PPD) are the executive arms of the MoAF. At the Dzongkhag level, the MoAF has three offices from the line RNR
sectors, i.e., agriculture, livestock and forestry, constituting the core staff responsible for the management, planning and
execution of RNR development programmes. The Gewogs have three agricultural staff representing the line RNR sectors, who
are the front-line staff (extension agents) working with farmers. Both the Agricultural Research Development Centre (ARDC) and
Livestock Research Centre backstop the Extension Agents of both Agriculture and Livestock in the 205 sub-
57.
The World Food Programme will lead on the technical aspect of BRECSA implementation. The WFP has more than 40 years of
working experience with the Royal Government of Bhutan. The partnership has focused on providing school meals, enhancing
food security and nutrition. WFP’s support now is focused on providing technical assistance and capacity development to the
government in nutrition, climate resilient food systems and agriculture, and disaster preparedness and response.
58.
The ministry of Labour and Human Resources has a department dedicated to providing entrepreneurship training to youth. The
TVET division under the same Ministry runs programmes focusing on skill development for youth.
59.
60.
The infrastructure interventions will be implemented by the respective “Dzongkhag Engineering Sections (DES)”. These DESs
have a well-established institutional set up - comprising about 12-16 qualified engineers - in each Dzongkhag; and are attached
with the respective Dzongkhag administration. The DES is headed by a “Chief Engineer” who is supported by one/two Executive
Engineers, 2-3 Deputy Executive Engineers; and 8-10 Assistant Engineers. These engineering staff are loosely divided into
three main sub-sections including: (i) design, (ii) implementation; and (iii) monitoring. On average, one dedicated engineer is
available for each Gewog who is supposed to perform all tasks related to implementation of different types of infrastructures
(roads, buildings, electric fencing, irrigation, aggregation centres and municipal services). The DES is assessed as sufficiently
skilled and experience on infrastructure implementation, quality assurance and monitoring during execution of ordinary projects.
However, DESs generally lack in skills and experience for the engineering designs of relatively complex projects, such as: new
irrigation schemes (flow and loss calculations, optimum sizing etc.) and design of roads (geometry, curve design, structural
stability etc.).
There are a number of farmer groups and cooperatives in the agri-food sector, including conventional farming, organic farming,
marketing, dairy farming, and poultry farming. Youth Development Fund (YDF) is the main registered Community Service
Organization (CSO) dedicated to youth. Other CSOs like Bhutan Centre for Media and Democracy (BCMD) and government
agencies also have youth programs in different areas. There are also some CSOs which specialize in providing services to
differently abled persons such as Ability Bhutan and Bhutan Disabled Persons Association. There are also many governmental
and non-governmental agencies providing general entrepreneurship programs for unemployed youth. Beside DAMC
(Department of Agriculture Marketing and Cooperatives), the Ministry of Agriculture and Forests started providing
entrepreneurship and other related trainings to youth aspiring to take up agri-farming businesses. The cooperatives and self-help
group (SHGs) are a relatively a new development in Bhutan’s rural market. These groups of rural farmers, producers are at a
nascent stage of their evolution with basic abilities in aggregation and mobilizing small local resources. Yet, there remains a
potential to enhance their capabilities and even explore opportunities to link such local actors/aggregators with the market actors
including financial institutions.
61.
There are also CSOs specializing in working with entrepreneurs such as Loden Foundation, and Tarayana Foundation. RENEW
works with women on gender equality and has implemented an innovative training on financial literacy with women and men
farmers, changing mindsets to promote commercialization.
62.
Policy and regulatory frameworks
11/21
63.
64.
The Renewable Natural Resources (RNR) Strategy 2040, which covers the forest, agriculture, and livestock sectors, was
adopted in 2021 covering the forests, agriculture, and livestock sectors, and also includes the AFOLU sector under the IPCC
emissions source category. Building on the REDD+ Strategy, LEDS for Food Security 2021, and the National Strategy for
Sustainable Socio-economic Development through the Commercialization of Organic Farming 2019, the RNR Strategy integrates
climate change resilience and low-emission development as one of the key strategies to actualize transformational change in this
integrated sector (NDC, 2021).
The Climate Change Policy of the Kingdom of Bhutan 2020 was adopted with a vision for “a prosperous, resilient and carbon
neutral Bhutan where the pursuit of gross national happiness for the present and future generations is secure under a changing
climate.” The policy aims to (i) provide strategic guidance to ensure that Bhutan remains carbon neutral and protect the wellbeing
of the people of Bhutan by adapting to climate change in an efficient and effective manner, (ii) ensure meaningful participation of
all relevant stakeholders in climate change action in a coordinated and coherent manner with clear roles and responsibilities, and
(iii) ensure that the challenges and opportunities of climate change are addressed at all appropriate levels, through adequate
means of implementation (finance, technology, capacity building and awareness) and integration into relevant plans and policies
(NDC, 2021).
65.
The national institutions for coordination of climate change actions across key agencies and stakeholder groups have been
revitalized with the Climate Change Coordination Committee (C4) from the erstwhile Multisectoral Technical Committee on
Climate Change. In addition, a climate change ‘one stop platform’ is being set up to help coordinate multi-stakeholder dialogue to
develop and implement climate related work in Bhutan, with the aim to improve coordination between the different climate-
sensitive sectors, enhance knowledge management and improve reporting and monitoring of all climate actions in Bhutan (NDC,
2021).
66.
The Renewable Energy Master Plan (2017-2032) was adopted as a strategy for the long-term implementation of renewable
energy technologies. This master plan identified 39,462 MW of technically feasible small hydropower, solar and wind projects
across the country. These renewable energy technologies provide a basis for both clean energy generation for mitigation and
adaptation to changing water flows and the impacts on hydropower in Bhutan (NDC, 2021).
4. Environmental and social category
67.
The proposed environmental and social category for BRECSA is moderate, based on the SECAP screening tool. The Project will
not impact on any sensitive areas or result in loss of natural habitat and biodiversity. BRECSA’s intervention will be confined to
existing cultivated and fallow lands and activities will not be located in areas at high risk of geophysical hazards. Thus, the risks to
agriculture, livestock and small-scale infrastructure are considered to be minimal. The Project design will be directed at
environmentally sound and sustainable agriculture and livestock: a) priority will be given to water source protection and multiple
water use systems for water use efficiency, b) agroecology will be promoted, lead farmers and barefoot consultants will provide
onsite support to farmers, c) chemical inputs will be replaced by locally made biofertilizer and pesticide, use of liquid fertilizer will
be promoted and the project will encourage integrated pest management d) the Project will work to minimize the waste from
agriculture or livestock,  and market and processing centres and, as much as possible, these will be recycled mostly on manure
production, e) alternative renewable technology will be promoted as part of the value chain and this is expected to support market
development activities. BRECSA will only support small climate proof infrastructures with no further harm to the environment. 
The project has a strong focus on social inclusion with ambitious targets for the inclusion of women, youth and differently abled
persons. It has customized interventions for these groups who will be actively engaged in decision-making and provided with
opportunities for peer-learning and dialogues on their needs and priorities with RGOB. Inclusion of women, youth, and where
possible, differently abled persons in the development of ARPs and strategic investment plans will facilitate their participation in
BRECSA.
5. Climate risk category
68.
As per the SECAP screening tool, the climate risk category of the project is determined as moderate. Following are the key
themes and steps followed to assess climate risks: (i) Hazard identification: As per the ThinkHazard report, the project
intervention area is likely to experience river flood, landslides, extreme heat and wildfires. The CLEAR tool will be employed to
assess climate hazard hotspots and decisions will be made either to avoid such areas or to integrate appropriate adaptive
measures for project interventions. Likewise, reports on future climate scenarios show a change in temperature, climate
variability and alterations in intensity and frequency of extreme events. The Agriculture Resilient Plans, supported by the findings
of the CLEAR tool, will guide appropriate value chains, vulnerable communities and location for project interventions considering
aforementioned climate change and its potential impacts (ii) Exposure Assessment: The crop and livestock productions are
frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature, and pest and diseases. BRECSA will
support on irrigation and water use efficient technologies to tackle water scarcity problems. Support will be made to promote
Permaculture, integrated pest management, and bio-inputs production, and selection of suitable crops to manage pest and
diseases. (iii) Sensitivity: The only positive response to sensitivity screening questions is the multidimensional poverty, which is
above 0.1 for Bhutan. However, the multidimensional poverty has been halved in 2017 compared to 2012. BRECSA will support
vulnerable households to participate in value chains to increase their income and livelihood standard. (iv) Adaptation capacity
and climate resilience: One of the core goals of project is to increase community resilience to adverse impact of climate change.
The RGOB, together with development partners and NGOs, wisely supports target households with the necessary social and
economic resources to prepare for or respond to climate-related events. The country has good farm road networks and the rural
infrastructures are effectively delivering services to farmers and rural dwellers. Farmers are getting ample support from
government to continue and diversify their farming practices. 
12/21
69.
The detailed analysis of the climate scenario and resulting risks and response measure to the main investment activities, as
summarized in table 6 will be further assessed with CLEAR and ARPs. For now, they indicate that the BRECSA is expected to be
moderately sensitive to climate risks and an integration of climate issues has been undertaken as part of the detailed design. This
process has resulted in practical adjustments under the project to reduce losses and damages from climate change impacts to
target beneficiaries, and will also strengthen local climate adaptation capacities.
6. Recommendations for project design and implementation
70.
BRECSA will pay a key attention to mainstream climate consideration into production and investment decisions in the supported
value chains. The CLEAR tool will help to identify major impacts of climate change, most vulnerable communities and inform
adaptation measures suitable for particular locations, which will be a key measure for targeting and the selection of activities
(Figure 3).
71.
Figure 3 CLEAR and ARPs for targeting
72.
73.
74.
75.
BRECSA is an inclusive project. To implement that on the ground, project planning and execution process will be transparent and
participatory. Proportionate participation from women, youth, indigenous and marginalized communities, and people with
disability will be ensured and their concerns will be streamlined in the project’s planning and implementation processes.
The selected value chains will be specifically targeted towards women and women headed households, rural youths, poor and
marginalized communities and people with disabilities. A special attention will be given to enhance financial inclusion, business
skills, appropriate methodology and tools for visioning and planning for better future, promote balanced workload between male
and female, awareness on climatic risk, awareness on nutrition, capacity building, skill-based training and awareness programs.
The time and venue for all such training will be aligned with these groups availability to participate.
Women: The project has the opportunity to ensure women participation in value chains from the planning to decision making. The
value chain selection process needs to consider the potential for women’s involvement. Their specific roles in the selected value
chains need to be studied so that their needs and priorities can inform value chain development. An analysis of workload and
working conditions by men and women themselves is essential, followed by interventions to promote more equitable rates of
participation of women in production and marketing.
BRECSA will facilitate women in building assets and role and voices in making decisions both at household and community level.
It will build their confidence to participate in household as well as cluster and bigger level decision making processes. Time-
efficient techniques and technologies will be introduced to reduce women´s workload and raise the efficiency and maximise profit
from involvement in value chains. These all will contribute to strengthen the agency of women, enhance their economic earning,
labour productivity and leadership.
76.
77.
To contribute to a deeper transformation of women’s roles in the rural economy, the project will also actively encourage to
strengthen women’s producer and processor groups through capacity building and business development support to increase the
profitability of their business.
13/21
Youth: The project will work to retain the youth force in value chain processes and develop special programs for the oversees
migrant returnee youth, in particular those returning from cities and those affected by COVID-19. Their engagement is an
important component of the project to achieve the desired outcome. Bhutanese youth are less attracted to traditional farming but
have shown ample interest in market based commercial farming, livestock and/or poultry. The project will provide skill
development trainings based on local requirements. There are potentials to develop entrepreneurship capacity among youths
that increase networking and leadership. Currently, youth population is relatively low in villages; if they find better opportunities in
the villages, in terms of both income and status, they will have opportunities to earn money in their hometown and also can
continue their education. Interventions like livestock support that quickly gives return will be supported initially to motivate youths.
Overall, the youth engagement in the programme leads towards sustainable and inclusive development of the villages. Figure 4
below illustrates the areas of youth support and potential partners.
78.
Figure 4  BRECSA's areas of youth support
79.
80.
81.
People with disability:BRECSA will give high priority to differently abled persons. With the learning from other projects supporting
differently able people like Adaptation for Smallholders in Hilly Areas (ASHA) in Nepal, the targeting, activities selection, and
appropriate cost management will be done during design phase. The project will take a holistic approach and include not only
livelihood opportunities but also wellness support for differently abled persons. Differently abled persons who cannot directly
participate in livelihood activities will still receive wellness support (assistive device or infrastructure, counselling on management
of disability) and benefit through the engagement of a caregiver in a livelihood activity. Among the project’s current selection of
value chains mushroom, poultry, and honey may be more suitable for the differently abled persons.
Nutrition:The project will encourage interventions that promote nutritionally diverse and rich foods, for example dairy, honey,
Adzuki beans and more. The new crop varieties with high nutritional value and benefits will be given higher priority. The project
will promote and support the development of post-harvest management, storage and processing technologies at the community
and household level. BRECSA will also focus on selection of gender responsive and nutrition sensitive value chains, pro-poor
investment in sustainable agriculture, maternal education and awareness of optimal nutrition practices and convergence with
ongoing nutritional programmes of the Royal Government of Bhutan. The project will facilitate the development of kitchen
gardens aiming to produce diversified high nutritious foods.
Sustainable commercial farming: The RGOB has been piloting farm hubs to increase production and train and attract youth on
farming. This is the right time to apply and promote sustainable commercial farming. BRECSA will focus on balancing economic
profit, environmental stewardship and social responsibility. Along with the increasing farm production, the project gives due
attention to enhancing soil quality, reduce the use of non-renewable and unsustainable inputs that are especially harmful for the
environment, sustainable use of water resources through adopting water source protection and multiple water use, and use of
indigenous knowledge and practices to tackle agriculture and natural resource problems. Such practices are also sound business
practices for farmers to achieve sustained success with farming as a business, enhancing their key productive resources rather
than mining them unsustainably. BRECSA will work to recover fallow lands and use them for sustainable commercial farming.
Appropriate numbers of Permaculture sites will be established in the Dzongkhags and lead farmers will be trained to disseminate
knowledge to fellow farmers. Youth will be encouraged to establish bio inputs enterprises, including vermicompost. Community
based organic certification will be encouraged and other viable certification options will be explored and adopted. The design
team will conduct an economic and financial analysis of permaculture and organic farming.
82.
Water: Water source drying and farm level water shortage is one of the key problems. BRECSA will integrate water source
protection, recharge ponds, multiple and efficient water use in irrigation and water related infrastructure. Equitable water sharing
mechanisms should be established to avoid social conflict by mobilising and strengthening Water User Associations (WUAs).
The irrigation master plan suggests that about 71% of the existing irrigation systems have either abundant or adequate water
supply, while 29% of them have scarce or inadequate water supply. Thus, BRECSA can support and upgrade the existing
systems to increase irrigated areas and/or cropping intensities with a particular focus on reverting fallow land back to cultivation.
14/21
83.
Infrastructure: The project will only support small scale production and marketing infrastructure. While duly considering
indigenous knowledge, final sites will be selected as per the CLEAR recommendation to avoid and minimize likely climate
hazards. Climate proofing of production and market infrastructure will be considered at each step of the implementation process
using an approach that reviews value chain resilience from farm to consumer. The project will support capacity building and
trainings of Dzongkhags’ engineers particularly in: climate resilient road designs and designing climate resilient irrigation
schemes. In addition, the technical assistance may be available for hiring the services of individual design
consultant(s)/consulting firm(s) on intermittent basis as and when needed. The project will also consider possible collaboration
with an ongoing five-year JICA supported project within the MoAF, specifically focused on the capacity building of engineers at
central level for design of large irrigation schemes. The engineers from DES will be competitively selected for participating in
customized trainings under the proposed collaboration, once materialized.  The waste management will be incorporated in
processing and market infrastructure.
84.
Human wildlife conflict: The project has identified commodities that are less affected by wildlife attacks, like honey, mushroom,
ginger and turmeric. A recent study on effectiveness on electric fencing shows the lack of ownership and maintenance by farmers
has resulted in as decrease in its efficiency. BRECSA will ensure the provision of maintenance, and also improved/innovative
fencing designs based on the lessons learnt in close collaboration with community, and government agencies. The priority,
however, will be given to biological fencing and selection of commodities and sites. 
7. Further studies needed
85.
There is no need for further studies. However, as per the project design, the CLEAR tool will be applied and
Dzongkhags/Gewogs level Agriculture resilient plans will be prepared. 
8. Monitoring and evaluation
86.
The project’s M&E should well capture gender, socio-ethnicity, people with disability, youth and household poverty disaggregated
data. All the project reports should reflect issues of gender, youth, marginalized and disadvantaged communities, and indigenous
communities. The PMU will lead in the monitoring and evaluation process of the project together with implementing partners and
stakeholders. BRECSA will adopt a strong focus on beneficiary-led collection and monitoring of project performance. Learning
should be taken from CARLEP as it has a robust M&E system. A list of M&E indicators is included in the ESCMP matrix. The
M&E framework should well capture ESCMP indicators and include in periodic reporting. 
9. References
1.  Bhutan Birding. Bhutan Birding. [Online] 10 21, 2021. https://www.bhutanbirding.com/climate-zones/.
2.  Bhutan Travel. bhutan.travel. [Online] 11 02, 2021. https://www.bhutan.travel/page/geography-geology.
3.  Climate Risk Country Profile: Bhutan. s.l. : The World Bank Group and the Asian Development, 2021.
87.
Dentrup, T. 2018.Agriculture transformation in Bhutan: From peasants to entrepreneurial farmers. . s.l. : Asian Journal of
Agricultural Extension, Economics & Sociology, 1-8, 2018.
88.
FRMD. 2017.Land Use and Land Cover of Bhutan 2016, Maps and. Thimphu, Bhutan : Forest Resources Management Division,
2017.
89.
GNHC. 2017.Strategic Program for Climate Resilience under the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience. Climate-Resilient and
Low-Carbon Sustainable Development Toward Maximizing the Royal Government of Bhutan's Gross National Happiness. . s.l. :
Gross National Happiness Comission, RGoB, 2017.
90.
—. 2019.Twelfth five year plan. Thimpu : Gross National Happiness Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan, 2019.
91.
Hazard, Think. 2021. Think Hazard. Think Hazard. [Online] 10 25, 2021. https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/31-bhutan/FL.
92.
HeveanlyBhutan. 2021. Heavenly Bhutan Travels - HBT Travels. Heavenly Bhutan Travels website. [Online] 11 03, 2021.
https://www.heavenlybhutan.com/omg-my-bhutan/indigenous-tribes-in-bhutan/.
93.
Karst, H. 2017.Protected areas and ecotourism: Charting a path toward social-ecological wellbeing. 2017.
94.
LabourSurvey. 2021.Labour Force Survey. Thimpu : National Statistics Bureau, Bhutan, 2021.
95.
Laigden Dzed, Hari Prasad Pokhrel,. 2021.National Nutrition Strategy and Action Plan 2021-2025. Thimphu Bhutan : Nutrition
Program, Department of Public Health, Ministry of Health, 2021.
15/21
96.
MPI. 2017.Multidimensional Poverty Index. Thimpu : National Statistics Bureau, Royal Government of Bhutan, 2017.
97.
NAS. 2021.National Accounts Statistics . Thimpu : National Statistics Bureau of Bhutan, 2021.
1.  NBC. s.l. : National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plan. National Biodiversity Center, Ministry of Agriculture and Forests,
Royal Government of Bhutan, 2014.
98.
NCWC. 2020.Gender and Climate Change in Bhutan with a focus on Nationally Determined Contribution Proprity Areas:
Agriculture, Energy and Waste. Thimpu : National Commission for Women and Children, RGOB, 2020.
99.
NDC. 2021.Nationally Determined Contribution. s.l. : Royal Government of Bhutan, 2021.
100.
NEC. 2020.Climate Change Policy . s.l. : National Environment Comission, Royal Government of Bhutan, 2020.
101.
—. 2019.Third National Communication: Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment Technical Report. s.l. : Nationl Environment
Comission, Royal Government of Bhutan, 2019.
102.
NNS. 2016.2015 National Nutrition Survey. s.l. : Nutrition Programme, Department of Public Health, Ministry of Health, 2016.
103.
NPWC. 2019.Accounting for Unpaid Care Work in Bhutan. s.l. : National Commission for Women and Children, RGoB, 2019.
104.
NSB. 2017.Bhutan Living Standards Survey Report. s.l. : Bhutan Statistic Bureau, 2017.
105.
—. 2017.Bhutan: Multidimensional Poverty Index. Thimpu : National Statistics Bureau, Royal Government of Bhutan, 2017.
106.
—. 2020.Labor Force Survey Report Bhutan. s.l. : Natioanl Statistics Bureau, 2020.
107.
—. 2019.Poverty Mapping Report 2017. s.l. : National Statistics Bureau, Bhutan and Poverty and Equity Global Practice, The
World Bank, 2019.
108.
—. 2021.Statistical Year Book of Bhutan. Thimpu : National Statistics Bureau, 2021.
109.
The Yaks: Heaart and soul of the Himalayan tribes of Bhutan. Wangchuk, D., Dhammasaccakarn, W., Tepsing, P., &
Sakolnakarn, T. 2013. 2013, Journal of Environmental Research and Management, pp. 189-196.
110.
WEF. 2021.Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva : World Economic Forum, 2021.
111.
WorldBank. NA.Systematic Country Diagnosis. s.l. : World Bank Group, NA.
112.
—. 2021. World Bank. World Bank. [Online] 10 24, 2021. https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/bhutan/overview#1.
113.
YouthPolicy. 2011.National Youth Policy. s.l. : Department of Youth and Sports, Ministry of Education, RGoB, 2011.
ESCMP Matrix
16/21
17/21
18/21
19/21
20/21
21/21
Footnotes
[1] WFP CLEAR guideline (link)
[2] Commercial Agriculture and Resilient Livelihoods Enhancement Program (CARLEP), IFAD’s ongoing project
https://www.carlep.gov.bt/
[3] See https://www.ifad.org/en/-/social-environmental-and-climate-assessment-procedures
[4] Report Link
[5] 20 to < 30 prevalence cut-off values are considered high for public health significance as per WHO 
[6] National Statistics Bureau (2017)
[7] FAO, European Union and CIRAD. 2022. Food Systems Profile – Bhutan. Catalysing the sustainable and inclusive
transformation of food systems. Rome, Brussels and Montpellier, France. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb8156en
[8] Youth definition from: RGOB, 2010. National Youth Policy
Environmental and Social Safeguards Classification: Moderate
1/4
Environmental and Social Safeguards
Biodiversity conservation
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence Risk
1.1 Could the project potentially involve or lead to conversion or degradation of
biodiversity, habitats (including modified habitat, natural habitat and critical
natural habitat) and/or ecosystems and ecosystem services?
1.2 Could the project involve or potentially lead to activities involving habitats
that are legally protected, officially proposed for protection, or recognized as
protected by traditional local communities and/or authoritative sources (e.g.
National Park, Nature Conservancy, Indigenous Community Conserved Area,
ICCA, etc.)?
No
No
Rating
Low
Low
1.3 Could the project potentially involve or lead to an increase in the chance of
human-wildlife encounters/conflict?
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
1.4 Could the project potentially involve or lead to risks to endangered species
(e.g. reduction, encroachment on habitat)?
1.5 Could the project potentially involve or lead to impacts/risks to migratory
wildlife?
1.6 Could the project potentially involve or lead to introduction or utilization of
any invasive alien species of flora and fauna, whether accidental or intentional?
1.7 Could the project involve or lead to the handling or utilization of genetically
modified organisms?
No
No
No
No
Conflict leads
to some loss of
livelihood or
threat to
wildlife, but this
is not
catastrophic
Low
Low
Low
Low
1.8 Could the project involve or lead to procurement through primary suppliers of
natural resource materials?
Yes
Almost
certain
Negligible
Moderate
No
procurement of
natural
resource
materials
through
primary
suppliers.
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence Risk
2.1 Could the project involve or lead to the release of pollutants to the
environment due to routine or non-routine circumstances with the potential for
adverse local, regional, and/or transboundary impacts?
2.2 Could the project involve or lead to primary not environmentally sustainable
production of living natural resources? (Note: this includes the cultivation or
rearing of plants or animals, including annual and perennial crop farming, animal
husbandry (including livestock), aquaculture, plantation forestry, etc )
2.3 Could the project involve or lead to engagement in areas of forestry,
including the harvesting of natural forests, plantation development, and/or
reforestation?
2.4 Could the project involve or lead to significant consumption of raw materials,
energy, and/or water?
2.5 Could the project involve or lead to significant extraction, diversion or
containment of surface or ground water (e.g. construction of dams, reservoirs,
river basin developments, groundwater extraction)?
No
No
No
No
No
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
2.6 Could the project involve inputs of fertilizers and other modifying agents?
2/4
Yes
Almost
certain
Negligible
Moderate
Environmental and Social Safeguards
The project
does not
require the
input of
fertilizers or
other
modifying
agents.
2.7 Could the project involve or lead to procurement, supply and/or result in the
use of pesticides on crops, livestock, aquaculture or forestry?
Yes
Almost
certain
Negligible
Moderate
The project
does not
require the
input of
pesticides.
2.8 Could the project be located in an area which is being, or has been, polluted
by an external source (e.g. a mine, smelter, industry)?
No
Low
2.9 Could the project involve livestock – extensive and intensive systems and
animal products (dairy, skins, meat, etc.)?
Yes
Almost
certain
Minor
Moderate
The project
involves
livestock or
fisheries, but
not in
extensive or
intensive
systems.
Cultural Heritage
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence Risk
3.1 Could the project be located in areas that are considered to have
archaeological (prehistoric), paleontological, historical, cultural, artistic, and
religious values or contains features considered as critical cultural heritage?
3.2 Could the project directly or indirectly affect indigenous peoples’ rights,
lands, natural resources, territories, livelihoods, knowledge, social fabric,
traditions, governance systems, and culture or heritage (tangible and
intangible)?
3.3 Could the project involve or lead to significant excavations, demolitions,
movement of earth, flooding or other environmental changes?
3.4 Could the project involve or lead to adverse impacts to sites, structures, or
objects with historical, cultural, artistic, traditional or religious values or
intangible forms of culture (e.g. knowledge, innovations, practices)? (Note:
projects intended to protect and conserve Cultural Heritage may also have
inadvertent adverse impacts)
3.5 Could the project involve or lead to alterations to landscapes and natural
features with cultural significance?
3.6 Could the project involve or lead to utilization of tangible and/or intangible
forms (e.g. practices, traditional knowledge) of Cultural Heritage for commercial
or other purposes?
No
No
No
No
No
No
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
indigenous peoples
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence Risk
4.1 Could the project be sited in areas where indigenous peoples are present
(including the project area of influence)?
4.2 Could the project result in activities located on lands and territories claimed
by indigenous peoples?
No
No
Rating
Low
Low
Environmental and Social Safeguards
4.3 Could the project result in impacts on the rights of indigenous peoples or to
the lands, territories and resources claimed by them?
3/4
4.4 Could the project result in the utilization and/or commercial development of
natural resources on lands and territories claimed by indigenous peoples?
4.5 Could the project lead to impacts on the Cultural Heritage of indigenous
peoples, including through the commercialization or use of their traditional
knowledge and practices?
No
No
No
Low
Low
Low
Labour and Working Conditions
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence Risk
5.1 Could the project operate in sectors or value chains that are characterized
by working conditions that do not meet national labour laws or international
commitments? (Note: this may include discriminatory practices, high gender
inequality and the lack of equal opportunities, denial of freedom of association
and collective bargaining, labour migrants)
5.2 Could the project use or operate in a value chain where there have been
reports of forced labour? (Note: Risks of forced labour may be increased for
projects located in remote places or where the status of migrant workers is
uncertain)
5.3 Could the project involve children (a) below the nationally-defined minimum
employment age (usually 15 years old) or (b) above the nationally-defined
minimum employment age but below the age of 18 in supported activities or in
value chains?
5.4 Could the project: (a) operate in a sector, area or value chain where
producers and other agricultural workers are typically exposed to significant
occupational and safety risks, and/or (b) promote or use technologies or
practices that pose occupational safety and health (OSH) risks for farmers, other
rural workers or rural populations in general? (Note: OSH risks in agriculture
might include: dangerous machinery and tools; hazardous chemicals; toxic or
allergenic agents; carcinogenic substances or agents; parasitic diseases;
transmissible animal diseases; confined spaces; ergonomic hazards; extreme
temperatures; and contact with dangerous and poisonous animals, reptiles and
insects. Psychosocial hazards might include violence and harassment.)
No
No
No
No
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Community Health, Safety and Security
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence Risk
6.1 Could the project be at risk from water-borne or other vector-borne diseases
(e.g. temporary breeding habitats), and/or communicable and non-
communicable diseases?
6.2 Could the project lead to unintended negative impacts on nutrition?
6.3 Is there a possibility of harm or losses due to failure of structural elements of
the project (e.g. collapse of buildings or infrastructure)?
6.4 Could the project involve or lead to the construction or rehabilitation of
dams?
6.5 Could the project involve or lead to transport, storage, and use and/or
disposal of hazardous or dangerous materials (e.g. explosives, fuel and other
chemicals during construction and operation)?
6.6 Could the project lead to adverse impacts on ecosystems and ecosystem
services relevant to communities’ health (e.g. food, surface water purification,
natural buffers from flooding)?
6.7 Could the project lead to the potential for gender-based violence, including
sexual harassment, exploitation and abuse, as a result of labour influx, land
redistribution, or other actions that alter community dynamics?
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
6.8 Could the project lead to increases in traffic or alteration in traffic flow?
4/4
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Environmental and Social Safeguards
Moderate
changes to
traffic volumes
or alterations
to traffic flow.
Risk of injury
or death is
reduced by
good design
and
implementation
of safety
protocols. New
construction,
rehabilitation
or upgrade of
rural roads,
with Annual
Average Daily
Traffic (AADT)
below 400
6.9 Could the project lead to an influx of project workers?
6.10 Could the project involve or lead to the engagement of security personnel to
protect facilities and property or to support project activities?
No
No
Low
Low
Physical and economic resettlement
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence Risk
7.1 Could the project result in temporary or permanent and full or partial
physical displacement (including people without legally recognizable claims to
land)?
7.2 Could the project result in economic displacement (e.g. loss of assets or
access to resources due to land acquisition or access restrictions – even in the
absence of physical relocation)?
7.3 Could the project present a risk of forced evictions?
7.4 Could the project result in impacts on or changes to land tenure
arrangements and/or community-based property rights/customary rights to land,
territories and/or resources?
No
No
No
No
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Financial intermediaries and direct investments
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence Risk
8.1 Could the investment be granted to an institution that does not have an
environmental and social policies and an associated environmental and social
management system (ESMS) in place (transparent, publicly available)?
8.2 Could the investment be granted to an institution with insufficient capacities
(i.e. unqualified personnel e.g. ES Officer) to implement the ESMS?
8.3 Could the investment be granted to an institution that does not have an
Exclusion List?
8.4 According to the institution's portfolio classification: Could the institution have
potential high-risk projects in their portfolio?
8.5 Is there evidence that the institution does not comply with the local legal
framework?
8.6 Does the institution provide a stable communication channel with
stakeholders and local communities (e.g. a Grievance Redress Mechanism)?
No
No
No
No
No
No
8.7 Does the organization provide auxiliary or capacity building support services. No
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Climate Risk Classification: Moderate
Step 1: Hazard identification
1/2
What are the expected hazards in the project intervention area?
No, Yes, TBD
River flood
Costal Flood
Urban Flood
Landslide
Cyclone
Water Scarcity (agricultural droughts and/or dry spells)
Extreme Heat
Wildfires
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Future climate scenarios foreseen (period 2040-2059) - Change in frequency and intensity
No, Yes, TBD
Change in temperature (increase or decrease)
Change in rainfall (increase or decrease)
Climate variability (larger or smaller)
Intensity and frequency of extreme events (larger or smaller)
Is the project expected to have an impact on climate?
Is the project expected to be a significant emitter of greenhouse gases?
Step 2: Exposure Assessment
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No, Yes, TBD
No
Is the project located in exposed areas to weather-related natural hazards?
No, Yes, TBD
Low-lying areas (valleys, coastal zones, and small islands)
Very warm areas (subtropical)
Tropical areas (rainforests)
Arid and semi-arid areas (deserts)
Mountains zones and permafrost areas (tundra)
River banks
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Does the project target agricultural systems, ecosystems or livelihoods exposed to weather-related
hazards?
No, Yes, TBD
Is crop production frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature or pests
and diseases?
Is livestock productivity frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature or
diseases?
Are fisheries frequently affected by ocean acidification, water salinity and changes in sea surface temperature due
to ocean-atmospheric oscillations or climate change?
Is forest productivity frequently affected by wildfires, diseases, rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, or changes in
temperature?
Is the biodiversity in the project area likely to be affected by changes in climate variables?
Is any stage of the agricultural value chain (production, storage, processing and marketing) exposed to climate
related hazards?
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Is any rural infrastructure likely to be affected by flooding, landslides, changes in temperatures, and extreme winds. Yes
Step 3: Sensitivity Assessment
What are key sensitivities for the populations in the project’s areas of intervention?
No, Yes, TBD
Is conflict exacerbating the population's sensitivity to weather related hazards?
Is population displacement being exacerbated by climate change impacts?
No
No
Are diseases (e.g. COVID-19, malaria, cholera) increasing the population´s vulnerability and affecting their capacity
to address potential weather-related hazards?
2/2
Is the income of the target population predominately coming from agriculture?
Are social inequalities (e.g. based on gender, youth, indigenous persons and other marginalized groups) being
exacerbated by climate change?
Is the Human Development Index (HDI) equal to or below 0.6?
Is the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) equal to or above 0.1?
Step 4: Adaptive capacity and climate resilience
No
No
No
No
Yes
What are key adaptive capacities in the areas of project intervention?
No, Yes, TBD
Is the country well ranked in the Disaster risk reduction progress score?
Are climate and weather information services (real-time weather data, seasonal forecasts etc.) effectively being
delivered (through radio, TV, SMS, extension services etc.) to farmers, rural dwellers, and end users?
Does the project country have an early action plan (preparedness and emergency response) to mitigate the
impacts of weather-related hazards once the shock occurs?
Does the government or other institutions support the target population/communities with the necessary social and
economic resources to prepare for or respond to climate-related events?
Is the target community carrying out (using their own means) agricultural adaptation?
Does the target population have the economic means or support to adjust or adapt their activities in response to
weather related shocks?
Do policies/mechanisms exist that make financial credit, loans, and agricultural insurance available?
Are rural infrastructures effectively delivering services to farmers and rural dwellers?
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Bhutan
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
25 April 12 May 2022
Document Date:
14/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003935
6281-BT
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Component 1: Resilient Production System 
Component 1: Resilient Production System (Contd…) 
Component 2: Strengthened Value Chain Coordination and Market Linkages 
Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostCost (BTN '000)Cost (USD '000)ExpenditureOther AccountsUnitPY1(BTN)(US$)PY1PY1AccountDisb. Acct.Fin. RuleProc. Acct. I. Investment Costs A. Sub-component 2.1: Enhancing efficiency of value chain operations 1. Support to market infrastructure 3. Research / Studies Guidelines for FMCL for Gender and Youth Inclusive Hubs Number1675,0009,0006759.0WORK_EAWORK_DAWFP (100%)WORK_PASubtotal 6759.0Subtotal 6759.0B. Sub-component 2.2: Business linkages and multi-stakeholder platforms (MSP) Formation of National and Dzonkhag level MSPs Number5150,0002,00075010.0WORKSHOPS_EAWORKSHOPS_DAWFP (100%)WORKSHOPS_PAPreparation of Strategic Investment Plan for Value Chain Commodities Number7450,0006,0003,15042.2WORKSHOPS_EAWORKSHOPS_DAWFP (100%)WORKSHOPS_PAMeeting of the National Level MSPs Number2225,0003,0004506.0WORKSHOPS_EAWORKSHOPS_DAWFP (100%)WORKSHOPS_PAMeeting of the Dzonkhag Level MSPs Number8112,5001,50090012.0WORKSHOPS_EAWORKSHOPS_DAWFP (100%)WORKSHOPS_PARevew and revise farmer to business marketing strategy Number1750,00010,00075010.0CON_EACON_DAWFP (100%)CON_PAImplement farmer to business marketing strategy /b Number3720,85027877110.3WORKSHOPS_EAWORKSHOPS_DAWFP (100%)WORKSHOPS_PASubtotal 6,77190.6Total Investment Costs 7,44699.7II. Recurrent Costs Total 7,44699.7 _________________________________\a Total 60 participants @ 15 from each dhzonkhag (60% women-30 percent youth), cover board and lodging for 2 days.\b One per Gewog per year 
Component 3:  Innovative and Competitive Agri-food Sector 
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management 
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management (Contd…)
Bhutan
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
25 April 12 May 2022
Document Date:
14/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003935
6281-BT
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Procurment plan for civil works 
Package 
Number 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value (Nu. m) 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement  
W-01 
W-02 
W-03 
W-04 
W-05 
W-06 
W-07 
W-08 
W-09 
W-10 
W-11 
W-12 
W-13 
W-14 
Construction of Irrigation Scheme at 
Zhemgang Dzongkhag. 
Construction of Irrigation Scheme at 
Tsirang Dzongkhag. 
Construction of Irrigation Scheme at 
Trongsa Dzongkhag. 
Construction of Irrigation Scheme at 
Sarpang Dzongkhag. 
Rehabilitation/Renovation of 4 
Existing Scheme at Zhemgang 
Dzongkhag 
Rehabilitation/Renovation of 4 
Existing Scheme at Tsirang 
Dzongkhag 
Rehabilitation/Renovation of 4 
Existing Scheme at Trongsa 
Dzongkhag 
Rehabilitation/Renovation of 4 
Existing Scheme at Sarpang 
Dzongkhag 
12.000 
12.000 
12.000 
12.000 
3.70 
3.70 
3.70 
3.70 
Construction of Farm Road at 
Zhemgang Dzongkhag 
Construction of Farm Road at 
Tsirang Dzongkhag 
Construction of Farm Road at 
Trongsa Dzongkhag 
Construction of Farm Road at 
Sarpang Dzongkhag 
Improvement of existing Farm Roads 
at Zhemgang Dzongkhag 
Improvement of existing Farm Roads 
at Tsirang Dzongkhag 
23.00 
23.00 
23.00 
23.00 
5.00 
5.00 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
Post 
Post 
S1E1/eGP 
Q2/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q2/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q2/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q2/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q1/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q1/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q1/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q1/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q3/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q3/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q3/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q3/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q4/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q4/2023 
W-15 
W-16 
W-17 
W-18 
W-19 
W-20 
W-21 
W-22 
W-23 
W-24 
W-25 
W-26 
W-27 
W-28 
W-29 
W-30 
W-31 
Improvement of existing Farm Roads 
at Trongsa Dzongkhag 
Improvement of existing Farm Roads 
at Sarpang Dzongkhag 
Construction of Trails (internal farm 
roads, 5km) Zhemgang Dzongkhag 
Construction of Trails (internal farm 
roads, 5km) Tsirang Dzongkhag 
Construction of Trails (internal farm 
roads, 5km) Trongsa Dzongkhag 
Construction of Trails (internal farm 
roads, 5km) Sarpang Dzongkhag 
Construction of two Aggregation 
Centres at Zhemgang Dzongkhag 
Construction of two Aggregation 
Centres at Tsirang Dzongkhag 
Construction of two Aggregation 
Centres at Trongsa Dzongkhag 
Construction of two Aggregation 
Centres at Sarpang Dzongkhag 
Construction of Cold Storage (10-20 
MT) capacity at Sarpang Dzongkhag 
Construction of Cold Storage (10-20 
MT) capacity at Tsirang Dzongkhag 
Construction of 2 Small Scale 
Processing Facilities at Zhemgang 
Dzongkhag 
Construction of 2 Small Scale 
Processing Facilities at Trongsa 
Dzongkhag 
Construction of 2 Small Scale 
Processing Facilities at Tsirang 
Dzongkhag 
Construction of 2 Small Scale 
Processing Facilities at Sarpang 
Dzongkhag 
Small 
of 
Construction 
Shops/market facilities at Zhemgang 
Dzongkhag 
2 
5.00 
5.00 
0.80 
0.80 
0.80 
0.80 
5.00 
5.00 
5.00 
5.00 
15.00 
15.00 
5.00 
5.00 
5.00 
5.00 
3.00 
NCB 
NCB 
Shopping 
Shopping 
Shopping 
Shopping 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
S1E1/eGP 
Q4/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q4/2023 
S1E1/eGP 
Q1/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q1/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q1/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q1/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q1/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q1/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q1/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q1/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q2/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q2/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q3/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q3/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q3/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q3/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q4/2024 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Prior 
Prior 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
W-32 
W-33 
W-34 
Construction of 2 Small 
Shops/market facilities at Trongsa 
Dzongkhag 
Construction of 2 Small 
Shops/market facilities at Tsirang 
Dzongkhag 
Construction of 2 Small 
Shops/market facilities at Sarpang 
Dzongkhag 
3.00 
3.00 
3.00 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
S1E1/eGP 
Q4/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q4/2024 
S1E1/eGP 
Q4/2024 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Procurment plan for goods 
Package 
Number 
G-01 
G-02 
G-03 
G-04 
G-05 
G-06 
G-07 
G-08 
G-09 
General Description 
Supply and Installation of Electric 
Fencing for Tsirang  Dzongkhag 
(8km) 
Supply and Installation of Electric 
Fencing for Trongsa  Dzongkhag 
(8km) 
Supply and Installation of Electric 
Fencing for Sarpang Dzongkhag 
(8km) 
Supply and Installation of Electric 
Fencing for Zhemgang  Dzongkhag 
(8km) 
Supply and Installation of Chain Link 
Fencing Tsirang Dzongkhag (8km) 
Supply and Installation of Chain Link 
Fencing Trongsa Dzongkhag (8km) 
Supply and Installation of Chain Link 
Fencing Sarpang Dzongkhag (8km) 
Supply and Installation of Chain Link 
Fencing Zhemgang Dzongkhag (8km) 
Greenhouse, drip kits and water 
storage tanks for all the districts 
Estimated 
Value($m) 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
0.800 
Shopping 
Post 
1S1E/eGP 
Q1/2023 
0.800 
Shopping 
Post 
1S1E/eGP 
Q1/2023 
0.800 
Shopping 
Post 
1S1E/eGP 
Q1/2023 
0.800 
Shopping 
Post 
1S1E/eGP 
Q1/2023 
6.00 
6.00 
6.00 
6.00 
30.00 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
NCB 
Prior  
1S1E/eGP 
Q2/2023 
Prior 
1S1E/eGP 
Q2/2023 
Prior 
1S1E/eGP 
Q2/2023 
Prior 
1S1E/eGP 
Q2/2023 
Prior 
1S1E/eGP 
Q3/2023 
Procurement plan for services 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value ($m) 
Selection 
Method 
Review 
Advertisement 
Date(quarter/year) 
Type of 
Proposal 
Comments 
CS-01 
Consultancy 
services 
20.00 
QCBS 
(National) 
Prior 
Q3/2023 
STP 
quality and cost 
weightage of 80:20 
Bhutan
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
25 April 12 May 2022
Document Date:
14/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003935
6281-BT
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
KINGDOM OF BHUTAN 
BUILDING RESILIENT COMMERCIAL 
SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE  (BRECSA) 
DRAFT - PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL (PIM) 
Type of Report 
Report No. 
Date 
: 
: 
: 
Project Implementation Manual 
PIM 2022 
August 2022 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
ROYAL GOVERNMENT OF BHUTAN 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FORESTS 
BUILDING RESILIENT COMMERCIAL SMALLHOLDER 
AGRICULTURE (BRECSA) 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL 
(DRAFT) 
August 2022 
i 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS ............................................................................................................................... v 
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES ............................................................................................................................... v 
FISCAL YEAR ...................................................................................................................................................... v 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS .................................................................................................................. vi 
PROJECT AREA MAP ......................................................................................................................................... viii 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND .......................................................................................... 1 
1.1 Purpose and content of PIM ...................................................................................................................... 1 
1.2 Documents Referred .................................................................................................................................. 1 
1.3 Acknowledgements .................................................................................................................................... 1 
CHAPTER 2: PROJECT SUMMARY ..................................................................................................................... 2 
2.1 Background, Project Goal and Objectives ............................................................................................... 2 
2.2 Target Groups and Targeting .................................................................................................................... 2 
2.3 Project Components, Outcomes, Outputs and Activities ....................................................................... 2 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Resilient Production Systems; ............................................................................................................... 2 
Strengthened Value Chain Coordination and Market Linkages; ............................................................. 3 
Innovative and competitive agri-food sector ........................................................................................... 4 
2.4 Implementation and Coordination Arrangements ................................................................................... 4 
2.5 Project Risks and Sustainability ............................................................................................................... 4 
2.5 Roles and Responsibilities of Key Project Implementing Partners ....................................................... 6 
CHAPTER 3: PROJECT COST ESTIMATES ........................................................................................................ 7 
CHAPTER 4: ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT .......................................................................................... 9 
4.1 Project Management Structure .................................................................................................................. 10 
4.2 Human Resource recruitment .................................................................................................................. 11 
4.3 Implementation Responsibilities ............................................................................................................. 11 
4.3 Project Coordination Arrangement ......................................................................................................... 13 
4.4 Implementing Agencies and responsibilities ......................................................................................... 14 
4.5 Institutional Arrangements ...................................................................................................................... 15 
CHAPTER 5: ENGAGEMENT OF RGoB TECHNICAL AGENCIES AND TAs ................................................... 16 
5.1 Departments and Other Agencies ........................................................................................................... 16 
5.3 National and International Technical Assistance for BRECSA ............................................................. 18 
CHAPTER 6: PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES ................................................................................................. 20 
6.1 Procurement Regulations for BRECSA .................................................................................................. 20 
6.2 Procurement Packaging ........................................................................................................................... 20 
6.3 Procurement Procedures ......................................................................................................................... 20 
6.4 Procurement Methods .............................................................................................................................. 21 
6.5 Procurement Review  ............................................................................................................................... 24 
6.6 Procurement Committee .......................................................................................................................... 25 
CHAPTER 7: FINANCE MANAGEMENT ............................................................................................................. 26 
6 
7.1 Project Cost and Financing Arrangement .............................................................................................. 26 
7.2 Fund Flow Mechanism ............................................................................................................................. 26 
7.3 Type of Project Accounts......................................................................................................................... 27 
ii 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
7.4 Disbursement Procedures and Withdrawals .......................................................................................... 28 
7.5 Withdrawal Application ............................................................................................................................ 29 
7.6 Checklist for sending Withdrawal Applications ..................................................................................... 29 
7.6 Financial Reporting ................................................................................................................................... 30 
7.7 Audit Procedures ...................................................................................................................................... 31 
CHAPTER 8: PROJECT COMPONENTS AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ................................... 34 
8.1 Project Components ................................................................................................................................. 34 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Resilient Production Systems .......................................................................................................... 35 
Strengthened value chain coordination and market linkages........................................................ 38 
Innovative and competitive agri-food sector ................................................................................... 40 
CHAPTER 9:  M&E, KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND GENDER ............................................................... 43 
9.1 Purpose and objectives............................................................................................................................ 43 
9.2 Planning..................................................................................................................................................... 43 
9.3 Monitoring and Evaluation ....................................................................................................................... 43 
9.4 Results and Impact Management System .............................................................................................. 44 
9.5 Learning, Knowledge Management and communication ...................................................................... 45 
9.10 Gender Mainstreaming ........................................................................................................................... 46 
CHAPTER10: GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF AWP&B ......................................................................... 49 
10.1 Purpose and objective............................................................................................................................ 49 
10.2 General Guidelines ................................................................................................................................... 49 
10.3 AWPB preparation .................................................................................................................................. 50 
10.3 Changes in the AWP&B.......................................................................................................................... 50 
Annex 1: Project Logframe................................................................................................................................. 52 
Annex 2: Criteria for selection and identification of project interventions Matrix ........................................ 53 
Annex 3: Cost Tables by Disbursement Category with financing rules ......................................................... 54 
Annex 4: Terms of Reference for PMU staff ..................................................................................................... 55 
Annex 5: Project Organisation Charts .............................................................................................................. 65 
Annex 6: AWPB for the first Project Year ......................................................................................................... 66 
Annex 7: An 18-month Procurement Plan ........................................................................................................ 67 
Annex 8: Sample Chart of Accounts ................................................................................................................. 68 
Annex 9: Designated Account reconciliation statement ................................................................................. 69 
Annex 10: Checklist for Withdrawal Application .............................................................................................. 70 
Annex 11: Sample financial statement .............................................................................................................. 72 
Annex 12: Sample Fixed Asset register ............................................................................................................ 75 
Annex 13: Sample form for Record of Contracts ............................................................................................. 76 
Annex 14: Sample form for tracking contracts ................................................................................................. 77 
Annex 15: Staff and farmers groups/community training project/ Calendar ................................................. 78 
Annex 16: Indicators for output, outcome and impact monitoring ................................................................. 79 
Annex 17: RIMS Indicators ................................................................................................................................. 80 
Annex 18: Template for AWPB ........................................................................................................................... 81 
Annex 19: Template for Annual Progress Report ............................................................................................ 84 
Annex 20: Template for Annual Outcome Survey Report ............................................................................... 88 
Annex 21: Gender and social inclusion strategy ............................................................................................. 89 
Annex 22: Knowledge Management strategy ................................................................................................... 91 
iii 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 23: Key M&E formats ............................................................................................................................ 94 
Annex 24: Key compliance chart with dates for submission ........................................................................ 95 
Annex 25: List of PSC, DPCC, important contact numbers/address, etc. .................................................... 96 
Annex 25: Detailed Cost Tables ....................................................................................................................... 97 
FIGURE 1: MAP OF THE PROJECT AREA ……………………………………………………………………………viii 
FIGURE 2: PROJECT MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE ......................................................................................... 11 
FIGURE 3: PROJECT MANAGEMENT UNIT ORGANOGRAM ........................................................................... 11 
FIGURE 4: PROCUREMENT PROCESS ............................................................................................................. 20 
FIGURE 5: FUND FLOW FOR BRECSA .............................................................................................................. 27 
FIGURE 6: STEPS FOR PREPARATION & FINALIZATION OF AWPB ............................................................... 51 
TABLE 1: COMPONENTS, SUB-COMPONENTS AND ACTIVITIES ..................................................................... 2 
TABLE 2: BRIEF EXIT & SUSTAINABILITY STRATEGY OF THE PROJECT ....................................................... 5 
TABLE 3: MATRIX OF ROLES & RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROJECT IMPLEMENTING PARTNERS .................. 6 
TABLE 4: SUMMARY COST ESTIMATE ................................................................................................................ 7 
TABLE 5: ALLOCATION BY CATEGORY .............................................................................................................. 7 
TABLE 6: PROJECT COST ESTIMATES BY COMPONENT & YEAR ................................................................... 7 
TABLE 7: DISBURSEMENT ACCOUNTS BY FINANCIERS .................................................................................. 8 
TABLE 8: EXPENDITURE ACCOUNTS PROJECT COSTS SUMMARY ............................................................... 8 
TABLE 9: EXPENDITURE ACCOUNTS COMPONENTS - TOTALS INCLUDING CONTINGENCIES .................. 8 
TABLE 10: BRECSA PROJECT MANAGEMENT OFFICE STAFFING……………………………………………….10 
TABLE 11: OVERVIEW OF IMPLEMENTATION RESPONSIBILITIES FOR BRECSA ........................................ 12 
TABLE 12: KEY AREAS OF EXTERNAL TAS & TERMS OF REFERENCE ........................................................ 19 
TABLE 13: KEY PERFORMACE INDICATORS ................................................................................................... 22 
TABLE 14: FINANCIAL THRESHOLD- PRIOR & POST REVIEW ........................................................................... 25 
TABLE 15: DISBURSEMENT PROCEDURES ..................................................................................................... 28 
iv 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
Currency Unit 
Ngultrum (BTN) * 
USD 1.00 
=  BTN 75.00 
*/ The Bhutan Ngultrum is equal to the India Rupee. 
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
International metric system, unless otherwise mentioned, and except for: 
1 kilogram 
1 kilogram 
1 kilometre 
1 metre 
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
1 langdo 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.4047 hectares (ha) 
2.47 acres 
= 
1400 m2 
FISCAL YEAR 
1 July to 30 June 
v 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
ADB                              
Asian Development Bank  
ARP 
ARDC 
ASAP 
BAFRA 
BCC 
CAHW 
CARLEP 
Agriculture Resilience Plan 
Agriculture Research Development Center 
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (IFAD) 
Bhutan Agriculture and Food Regulatory Authority 
Behaviour Change Communication 
Community Animal Health Worker 
Commercial Agriculture & Resilient Livelihoods Enhancement 
Programme 
CLEAR 
Consolidated Livelihood Exercise for Analyzing Resilience 
CSN 
DAMC 
DoL 
DVPA 
ECP 
EU 
FAO 
FCBL 
FEBL 
FG/FC 
FNS 
FSAPP 
FY 
FYP 
GDP 
GLOF  
GGG  
GNH 
GNHC 
HVC 
IEC 
IFAD 
LED  
LUC 
Country Strategy Note 
Department of Agricultural Marketing and Cooperatives 
Department of Livestock 
Domestic Violence Prevention Act 
Economic Contingency Plan 
European Union 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
Food Corporation of Bhutan Ltd 
Financial Education and Business Literacy 
Farmer Group / Farmer Cooperative 
Food and Nutrition Security Policy 
Food Security and Agriculture Productivity Project  
Fiscal Year 
Five Year Plan 
Gross Domestic Product 
Glacial Lake Outburst Floods 
Global Gender Gaps 
Gross National Happiness 
Gross National Happiness Commission 
High Value Crop 
Information, Education, Communication  
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
Low Emission Development 
Land Use Certificate 
vi 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
ITC 
MCC 
MCH  
International Trade Centre 
Milk Chilling Centers 
Maternal and Child Health 
MDD-W 
Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDD-W) 
MoAF 
Ministry of Agriculture & Forests 
MoLHR  
Ministry of Labour and Human Resources 
MoF 
NCWC  
NGEP  
NNSAP 
NWFP 
UNDP 
UNRC 
Ministry of Finance 
National Commission for Women and Children 
National Gender Equality Policy 
National Nutrition Strategy and Action Plan 
Non-wood Forest Products 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations Resident Coordinator 
UNRCO 
United Nations Resident Coordinator’s Officer 
PBAS 
PMU 
PPD 
Performance-Based Allocation System 
Project Management Unit 
Policy and Planning Division 
RAMCO                        
Regional Agricultural Marketing Cooperatives Office 
REMP  
Renewable Energy Master Plan 
RGoB 
RLDC 
RNR  
SBC 
SDG 
SJ 
SME 
Royal Government of Bhutan 
Regional Livestock Development Center 
Renewable Natural Resources 
Social Behaviour Change 
Sustainable Development Goal 
Sanam Jabjorpa (community supporters for ARP implementation) 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
SO                                
Strategic Objective 
TA 
VAW  
WB 
WEAI 
WFP 
YELP  
Technical Assistance 
Violence Against Women 
World Bank 
Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index 
World Food Programme 
Youth Engagement and Livelihood Program 
vii 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
PROGRAMME AREA MAP 
Figure 1: Map of the Project area 
viii 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
1.1 Purpose and content of PIM 
The  purpose  of  this  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  is  to  assist  the  staffs  of  the 
Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  and  other  implementing  partners,  who  are  responsible 
for  planning,  implementation,  supervision  and  monitoring  of  the  project.  It  is  also 
intended to promote good practice management, administration, internal controls and a 
standardized  approach  to  various  tasks.  Therefore,  it  is  critical  that  all  the  project 
stakeholders understand and familiarize themselves with this PIM. 
The PIM is a ‘living and dynamic document’ and will be updated 
regularly on the basis of learning during project implementation. 
The  PIM  is  presented  in  10  Chapters  -  project  summary,  project  cost  estimates, 
organization  and  management,  engagement  of  Royal  Government  of  Bhutan  (RGoB) 
technical  agencies  and  Technical  Assistance  (TA),  procurement  procedures,  finance 
management,  project  components  and  implementation  arrangements,  monitoring  & 
evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management (KM) including gender and guidelines for 
preparing  annual  work  plan  and  budget  (AWPB).  The  PIM  also  contains,  among  others, 
sample templates (for AWPB, Annual Progress Report, Annual outcome survey and M&E), 
RIM  indicators  and  strategies  for  social  and  gender  inclusion  and  knowledge 
management. 
1.2 Documents Referred 
The following documents were referred while preparing this PIM: 
  IFAD Guidelines for Procurement 
  IFAD Guidelines for Loans and Grants Administration 
  Programme Implementation Manual of BRECSA 
  Project Design Report (PDR) of BRECSA and Working Papers 
  RGoB Procurement Rules & Regulations 2009 
  RGoB Financial Rules& Regulations 2016 
This is a draft PIM prepared prior to the signing of the Financing Agreement (FA). It will 
be a dynamic document. As the project implementation progresses and experiences are 
gained,  the  PMU  will  update  the  PIM  with  more  relevant  and  field  realistic  information 
and  forward  the  document  to  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD) 
after approval by PSC. 
1.3 Acknowledgements 
1 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
CHAPTER 2: PROJECT SUMMARY 
2.1 Background, Project Goal and Objectives 
The  Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder  Agriculture (BRECSA) aims to  catalyze a 
30%  increase  in  resilient  commercial  agricultural  production  and  improve  food  and 
nutrition security in the 4 target Dzongkhags by 2030. The development objective is to 
transform  smallholder  agricultural  production  into  inclusive  and  resilient  agri-food 
systems  that  are  increasingly  profitable  and  food  and  nutrition  secure.  BRECSA  will 
target subsistence, semi-commercial and commercial farmer households. The total direct 
households 
beneficiaries 
(47088 beneficiaries), out of which 60% will be women and 30% youth. 
interventions 
BRECSA 
12,074 
farmer 
are 
of 
2.2 Target Groups and Targeting 
The project will be implemented in the central and south-central Dzongkhags (Districts) 
of  Sarpang,  Trongsa,  Tsirang  and  Zhemgang.  The  four  project  Dzongkhags  are 
administratively further divided into Gewogs (Wards) and villages. There is a total of 37 
Gewogs  and  539  villages  in  the  project  target  Dzongkhags.  BRECSA  will  target  all 
Gewogs  within  these  4  Dzongkhags.  Zhemgang,  Sarpang  and  Trongsa  are  among  the 
poorer Dzongkhags of Bhutan. The Dzongkhag of Tsirang, contiguous to the three poorer 
Dzongkhags,  has  been  selected  for  its  high  potential  for  the  commercialization  of 
agriculture.  Sixty  percent  of  BRECSA  beneficiaries  are  women,  including  a  minimum  of 
five  percent  women-headed  households  and  thirty  percent  are  youth.  Six  hundred 
differently  abled  women,  men  and  youth,  constituting  25  percent  of  the  population  of 
differently  abled  persons  in  the  target  Dzongkhags  will  benefit  from  BRECSA 
interventions.  BRECSA  also  prioritizes  youth  engagement  and  vulnerable  populations, 
such as households with differently abled persons and women-headed households. 
2.3 Project Components, Outcomes, Outputs and Activities 
BRECSA  will  have  three  interlinked  project  components:  Component  1:  Resilient 
production  systems;  Component  2:  Strengthened  value  chain  coordination  and  market 
linkages;  and  Component  3:  Innovative  and  competitive  agri-food  sector.  Table  1 
presents the key components, its outputs and the activities. 
Table 1: Components, Sub-components and Activities 
Component 
Sub-component 
(output) 
Activities 
1.  Resilient 
Production systems  
1.1 Consolidated 
Livelihood Exercise for 
Analyzing Resilience 
(a)  Map out the spatial and temporal impacts 
of climate change and their anticipated 
impacts on smallholder farmers and rural 
communities 
(b)  Formulation of Gewog and Dzongkhag level 
ARPs 
2 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
1.2 Gewog and 
Dzongkhag Agriculture 
Resilience Plans 
(ARPs) 
(a)  ARPs  will  be  developed  for  all  Gewogs  in 
the 4 Dzongkhags.  
(b)  Identification  of  resilient  crop  varieties, 
spatial  and  temporal  planning  of  cropping 
zones  per  selected  crop,  identification  of 
agroecological  practices,  identification  of 
suitable 
management 
logistical and infrastructure needs 
post-harvest 
1.3 Support to 
vulnerable groups to 
improve income and 
nutrition status 
(a)  Provide  customized  support  to  vulnerable 
households  - 
including  women-headed 
households and households of persons with 
disabilities 
(b)  Development 
and 
implementation 
of 
(c) 
(a) 
(b)  
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(a) 
Investment 
in 
farming 
1.4 
commercial 
systems  
2. Strengthened 
Value Chain 
Coordination and 
Market Linkages 
2.1 Enhancing 
efficiency of value 
chain operations 
  (b) 
(c)  
3 
Livelihood Investment Plans 
Improve  the  nutritional  status  of  these 
households 
nutrition-
sensitive  agriculture  interventions  such  as, 
home gardens, poultry production, selected 
on-farm  and  off-farm  activities,  and 
awareness raising on food-based nutrition 
promoting 
by 
Creation of “Hubs” as production zones for 
the different BRECSA prime commodities 
will be undertaken 
Farmers will be organized into a network of 
Farmer Groups or Cooperatives (FG/FCs) 
and linked to the Hubs. 
Support the establishment of at least 4 
youth-led Hubs per Dzongkhag 
Invest in enhancing productivity of the 
following value chains, dairy, poultry, high 
value commodities (vegetables, ginger, 
turmeric, mushrooms, honey, etc.) 
Invest in land and soil management, as 
well as in productive infrastructure, 
including irrigation, fencing and 
greenhouses 
interventions in all value chain functions 
from input supply, production, aggregation 
and storage, processing, to defining 
marketing channels, and export 
support agricultural commercialization 
within the established Hubs through 
funding of aggregation facilities, and on-
site small-scale processing facilities 
equipped with washing, grading, packing 
and storage. 
The Hubs will be supported with training 
and serve as a Farmer Field School and 
input distributor for provision of seed and 
vegetative planting material, bio-inputs, 
and minor tools to the farmer network as 
also as an aggregation point for the farmer 
network to deliver their produce based on 
a guaranteed minimum price and profit 
sharing 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
2.2 Business linkages 
and multi-stakeholder 
platforms 
(a)  Facilitate the establishment and functioning 
of sub-sector specific multi-stakeholder 
platforms (MSPs) to support business 
development and commercialization; 
(b)  Establish market linkages for farm produce 
for both the domestic and export markets 
support fund; and 
investment planning to attract potential 
financiers into the sector.  
(c) 
3. Innovative and 
competitive agri-
food sector 
3.1 Access to financial 
services  
(a)  Enhance access to and usage of financial 
services and value chain financing; 
3.2 Digital 
technologies to 
support marketing 
(b) 
(c) 
Coordinate with financial institutions for 
routing matching grants 
Improve financial literacy, entrepreneurial 
skills and business knowledge to improve 
their financial habits, financial discipline 
and investment decisions of beneficiaries  
(a)  Develop digital user-friendly tools/ platform 
for farmers to tackle issues relating to  
production and pricing in different 
locations; commodity demand in different 
markets; transportation (to link farmers 
and traders with transport service providers 
for transporting produce); and any other 
functionalities under the above four areas 
identified during the assessment. 
3.3 Policy Dialogue 
(a)  Support the promotion of Brand Bhutan’s 
organic and high-value agri-food products 
in regional and international markets 
2.4 Implementation and Coordination Arrangements 
The MoAF with overall responsibility will lead the project implementation in coordination 
with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF)  as  the  borrower.  MoAF  will  provide  policy  guidance, 
the  required  technical  staff  for  implementation  from  its  pool  of  civil  servants  and 
technical  backstopping  through  its  line  departments  and  field  agencies.  The  PMU  will 
coordinate all activities and ensure that specific departments within MoAF will be directly 
responsible for results under all components  
2.5 Project Risks and Sustainability 
The key project risks envisaged and its mitigation measures are : (i) Limited capacity of 
implementing  partners;  (ii)  Limited  capacities  and  resources  for  farmers  to  embark  on 
agricultural commercialization; (iii) limited opportunities for policy engagement and (iv) 
management  capacity  of  marketing  groups  and  cooperatives.  The  PDR  provides  risk 
mitigating measures which includes provision of TA through WFP.   
Limiting  the  number  of  value  chains  would  ensure  adequate  resources  to  successfully 
design  and  establish  these.  Interlinking  of  production,  marketing  and  enterprise 
development  would  create  shared  stakes  between  farmers  and  private  sector  to  remain 
engaged. Involvement of communities in design and implementation, development of  
4 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
groups and setting up of community-based operation and maintenance (O&M) systems is 
expected  to  ensure  sustainable  use  and  management  of  assets  built  under  the  Project. 
Environment  protection  and  conservation  issues  have  been  incorporated  in  production 
models through value chains, are compatible with local production activities and profitable 
with  full  accounting  of  operating  and  capital  costs.  Strong  grassroots  institutions  and 
locally  accountable  support  services  envisaged  in  the  Project  are  the  most  effective 
means  to  ensure  sustainability  beyond  the  implementation  phase.  Table2  presents  brief 
exit and sustainability strategy of the project. 
Table 2: Brief exit & sustainability strategy of the project 
Components 
Component 1: Resilient Production Systems 
Exit/sustainability strategy 
Component 2: Strengthened Value Chain Coordination and Market Linkages 
Component 3: Innovative and competitive agri-food sector 
5 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
2.5 Roles and Responsibilities of Key Project Implementing Partners 
The  key  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  Project  implementing  partners  are  as 
highlighted in Table 3 below. 
Table 3: Matrix of Roles & Responsibilities of Project Implementing Partners 
Project Partners 
Roles & Responsibilities 
Project Steering Committee (PSC)  
Project Management Unit (PMU) 
Dzongkhags 
Gewogs 
 i) Provide broad oversight of project implementation; ii) 
compliance of project activities with Government’s 
policies and the terms and conditions of the financing 
agreement; (iii) approval of Annual Workplan and 
Budgets (AWPBs) and Consolidate Procurement Plan 
(CPP), (iv) coordination of project interventions with 
other development programmes and projects; and (v) 
policy and strategic guidance for improved 
implementation. 
The PMU is the primary implementation arm of the 
project for delivery of all Gewog and Dzongkhag level 
activities. 
Coordinate actual planning and implementation of 
project interventions 
Coordinate actual planning and implementation of 
project interventions 
Should we include here WFP also considering that they are responsible for providing TA?? 
6 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
CHAPTER 3: PROJECT COST ESTIMATES 
This Chapter presents key project costs tables with detailed cost tables being presented 
in Annex 26. 
Table 4: Summary Cost Estimate 
Component Project Cost Summary 
Components 
(BTN million) 
(US$ '000) 
Local 
Foreign   Total 
Local 
Foreign 
Total 
% 
% Total 
Foreign 
Base 
Exchange  Costs 
1. Resilient Production Systems 
Strengthened Value chain 
coordination and market linkages 
Innovation and Competitive agri-food 
sector 
2. 
3. 
4. Project management, M&E and KM 
Total BASELINE COSTS 
Physical Contingencies 
Price Contingencies 
Total PROGRAMME COSTS 
Table 5: Allocation by Category by financier: (USD ‘000) 
Table 6: Project Cost Estimates by Component & Year 
7 
Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Works283.03.738.10.52 354.530.54 139.253.6--906.411.77 721.225.7Equipments and Materials27.72.7--669.964.2223.921.5--121.211.61 042.73.5Vehicles6.45.0----120.795.0----127.00.4Goods, services and inputs270.22.1170.91.33 201.324.63 390.726.0704.85.45 288.340.613 026.143.4Consultancies57.03.9678.146.2559.738.2171.811.7----1 466.74.9Operating costs52.04.2--1 187.595.8------1 239.54.1Salaries and Allowances331.811.21 217.141.21 395.947.212.00.4----2 956.79.8Workshops25.42.6286.728.9195.319.7484.148.8----991.43.3Training34.22.3209.114.2835.956.8392.826.7----1 472.04.9Total project costs1 087.63.62 600.08.710 400.034.68 935.029.7704.82.36 315.821.030 043.3100.0RGOB ContributionGAFSP grant (WFP)GAFSP grant (IFAD)IFAD loanFinancial InstitutionsBeneficiariesTotalPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7Total1. Resilient Production Systems1 305.23 114.83 570.13 816.12 488.0524.0449.115 267.12. Strengthened Value Chain Coordination and Market Linkages99.71 137.81 887.21 951.01 686.2568.283.07 413.03. Innovation and Competitive Agri-food Sector390.1956.5902.7783.9747.230.971.83 883.14. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management657.9484.0500.8449.0562.8432.3393.23 480.0Total project costs2 452.95 693.06 860.87 000.05 484.21 555.4997.030 043.3 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Table 7: Disbursement Accounts by Financiers 
Disbursement Accounts by Financiers 
(US$ '000) 
Table 8: Expenditure Accounts Project Costs Summary 
   Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary 
BTN 
    Million  
   Local 
 Foreign  Total 
    Local 
  Foreign Total 
   US$       
  %      
%  
'000    
Foreign 
Total   
Base   
Exchange  Costs   
Table 9: Expenditure Accounts Components - Totals Including Contingencies     
   Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies 
Expenditure category   
(US$ '000)   
Total 
8 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
CHAPTER 4: ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT 
The  implementation  of  BRECSA  will  be  managed  by  the  PMU  based  at  the  Agriculture 
Research  and  Development  Center  (ARDC)  Samtenling  in  Sarpang  under  the  overall 
direction of the Secretariat of the MoAF. The PMU is the primary implementation arm of 
the project for delivery of all Gewog and Dzongkhag level activities. The PMU will be led 
by  a  Project  Director  (PD)  (a  senior  officer  from  the  MoAF  selected  through  a 
competitive  process).  The  PD  will  lead  and  oversee  the  overall  implementation  of  the 
project  at  the  Gewog  and  Dzongkhag  levels,  including  WFP  technical  assistance 
activities,  and  support  the  policy  aspects  of  the  project.  He/she  will  manage  the  PMU 
team for delivery against performance indicators. The PD will report to the Chief of the 
Policy and Planning Division (PPD) of MoAF.  
ii) 
livestock  production,  and 
The following professional positions will be staffed within the PMU to ensure effective and 
timely  implementation  of  the  different  activities:(1)  Full-time  Finance  Officer;  (2)  Full-
time  Procurement  Officer;  (3)  Three  full-time  Sub-Sector  Specialists  respectively  for  i) 
crop  production, 
iii)  marketing  and  value  chain 
development; (4) Full-time Engineer; (5) Full-time ARP Coordinator; (6) Full-time Social 
Inclusion  and  Nutrition  Officer;  (7)  Full-time  Monitoring,  Evaluation  and  Knowledge 
Management  Officer.  Besides  these,  TA  funded  technical  specialists  responsible  for  the 
implementation of technical assistance activities will be an integral and embedded part of 
the  PMU  team.  The  medium-term  TA  specialists  are  national  market  system  and  value 
chain  development  specialist  (47  months),  national  cooperative  strengthening  and 
marketing specialists (2 positions of 24 months, each one responsible for two districts), 
and national nutrition specialist (36 months), who would be complemented by short term 
national and international thematic experts for areas such as CLEAR, ARPs, agroecology, 
business plans, high-end marketing and ICT.  
The  WFP  technical  team  will  delineate  the  TA  activities  to  be  carried  out  annually  for 
inclusion  in  the  Annual  Workplan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  and  Procurement  Plan  (PP).    The 
WFP technical specialists will work under the supervision of the PD of PMU and report to 
him/her.  All  budgets  for  annual  work  plans,  personnel  and  administration  costs  for  the 
WFP  technical  assistance  component  are  integral  part  of  the  overall  work  planning  and 
budgeting. 
the 
leadership  of 
the  Dzongdags, 
respective  Dzongkhag  and  Gewog 
Under 
administrations  will  be  the  implementing  agencies  in  the  project  areas.  The  Dzongkhag 
for  planning,  coordination, 
and  Gewog  administrations  will  be 
implementation,  supervision,  monitoring  and  evaluation, 
finance  and  accounts, 
procurement, audit, report generation, and other activities related to the project. There 
will be a Dzongkhag Project Coordination Committee (DPCC) with the Dzongdags as the 
chairpersons, Gups of all Gewogs, relevant sector heads and other relevant agencies and 
stakeholders  as  members.  The  Dzongkhag  Agriculture  Officer  (DAO)  will  serve  as  the 
Dzongkhag Project Coordinator and as member Secretary of the DPCC. 
responsible 
Under  each  Dzongkhag,  the  Gewogs  will  take  the  lead  in  implementing  the  project 
activities.  The  Dzongkhags  with  relevant  sector  heads  and  technical  experts,  and 
concerned  agencies  like  ARDC,  RLDC,  RAMCO  and  FMCL  will  support  the  Gewogs  in, 
among others: (a) planning for investments; (b) collection of inputs for Dzongkhag level 
AWPB  and  PP;  (c)  management  of  inputs  supply;  (d)  supervision;  (e)  technical 
backstopping  and  trainings;  (f)  accounts,  financial  management,  procurements,  and 
audit,  (g)  progress  monitoring  including  data  collection  and  data  validation  to  feed  into 
the  PMU  M&E  systems;  and  knowledge  management  through  documentation  of  good 
practices and lessons learned. 
9 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
4.1 Project Management Structure 
The  overall  responsibility  for  BRECSA  implementation  will  rest  with  the  PMU 
composed  of  staff  as  listed  in  Table  10.  Figure  2  &  3  presents  the  project 
management and coordination structure. 
Table 10: Project Management Office Staffing at the PMU, Sarpang 
Positions 
  No of 
positions 
Remarks 
  Sl. 
  No. 
1 
2 
3 
PMU at ARDC, Sarpang 
Project Director 
Finance Officer 
Procurement Officer 
M&E and Knowledge Management 
Officer  
Engineer 
4 
5 
6  ARP Coordinator 
7  Component Manager (Crop  
  Production) 
8  Component Manager (Livestock 
  Production) 
9  Component Manager (Value Chain & 
  Marketing) 
  10  Social Inclusion and Nutrition Officer 
  11  Accountant 
12  Programme Support Officer 
13  Office Assistant 
14  Drivers 
Total staff at PMU 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
15 
RGoB 
RGoB; 
Contract 
RGoB 
RGoB 
RGOB 
DoA, RGoB; 
DoL, RGoB; 
RGOB/ Contract 
RGOB/ Contract 
RGOB 
Contract 
RGoB 
RGoB 
Figure 2: Project Management & Coordination Structure 
10 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Figure 3: PMU Organogram 
4.2 Human Resource recruitment 
The  full-time  professional  officers  at  the  PMU  will  either  be  seconded  staff  from 
MoAF (government contribution) or experienced and qualified individuals recruited 
from  the  market.  Contract  staff  will  be  recruited  through  open  competition 
following recruitment procedures of the RGoB. 
4.3 Implementation Responsibilities 
The major components, out puts and implementation responsibilities for the 
project are as shown in Table 11. 
11 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Table 11: Overview of Implementation Responsibilities for BRECSA 
 Project 
 Goal and Objectives 
Responsibilities 
MoAF – PMU 
Key support 
Component 1: Resilient 
Production systems 
I   
DoA, DoL, Gewogs, 
Dzongkhags 
  Output 1.1 
Data  on  vulnerability,  agricultural 
and  livestock  production  zoning, 
aggregation,  processing  centres 
and 
satellite  markets  made 
available. 
  Output 1.2  
Gender 
Agriculture 
developed 
production 
and 
youth 
Resilience 
inclusive 
Plans 
climate-resilient 
for 
  Output 1.3 
Diet  diversity  enhanced 
through 
diversified  food  production  (for  both 
market and household consumption) 
and increased nutrition education 
 Output 1.4 
Skills  and  approaches  developed  for 
increasing 
and 
investment  allocated  to  enhance 
commercialisation. 
productivity 
Component 2 – Strengthened 
Value Chain Coordination and 
Market Linkages 
II   
  Output 2.1  
Value  chain  specific 
intervention 
strategies  and  plans  formulated  to 
guide 
investment  planning  and 
capacities  enhanced  to  implement 
investment plans. 
  Output 2.2  
Gender  and  Youth  inclusive  hubs  to 
support  a 
robust  agri-business 
sector established. 
Output 2.3 
Effective  and 
climate 
resilient  infrastructure  investments 
to 
commercialization 
undertaken 
inclusive 
support 
12 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Output 2.4 
Establishment of inclusive multi-
stakeholder platforms facilitated and 
business linkages fostered. 
Component 3 – Innovative and 
competitive agri-food sector 
III   
Output 3.1  
Inclusive 
processes  developed  & 
/business 
support 
business 
expansion. 
financial  products  and 
financial 
to 
processing, 
and 
literacy  enhanced 
development 
production, 
  Output 3.2  
Marketing enhanced through 
digitalization. 
 Output 3.3 
Competitiveness of 
value chains and 
market share in 
domestic and 
international 
markets improved 
through regulation, 
standardization and 
certification 
4.3 Project Coordination Arrangement 
The  PMU  lead  by  Project  Director  (PD)  will  be  responsible  for  the  overall 
implementation  of  the  project.  The  PMU  will  mainly  facilitate  linkages  and 
coordination on the AWPB, Project Steering Committee (PSC) and District Project 
Coordination  Committee  (DPCC)  and  will  also  ensure  project  requirements.  The 
actual  implementation  of  the  components  will  be  led  by  the  respective  CMs  with 
technical assistance from the key focal persons from WFP. The CMs and the focal 
persons  will  maintain  consistent  interaction  with  the  Dzongkhag  and  Gewog 
Extension  officers  (GEO)  for  agriculture  and  livestock  and  assist  them  in  the 
project implementation. 
4.4 Implementing Agencies and responsibilities 
13 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Project  Management  Unit:  BRECSA  will  be  implemented  by  PMU  assisted  by  the 
agencies under the line Departments of the RGoB such as DoA, DoL, ARDC and DAMC. 
The  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  overall  coordination  and  implementation  of  planning, 
progress  monitoring&  reporting,  fund  allocation  and  disbursement  to  implementing 
agencies, knowledge generation and dissemination to RGoB, IFAD and other concerned 
agencies. 
Dzongkhags and Gewog Extension Centres: The Dzongkhags and gewog extension 
centres  operating  in  the  project  sites  will  be  responsible  for  identifying  project 
interventions in consultation with the Gewog Tshogde (GT), Gup, Gewog Administrative 
Officer  (GAO)  and  Tshogpas  with  support  of  the  Dzongkhag  Agriculture  and  Planning 
Officers.  They  will  also  lead  implementation  of  the  Dzongkhag  and  gewog  based 
activities  with  TA  from  the  service  agencies  of  the  line  Departments  including  central 
program agencies and commodity programs. 
Regional Agriculture Marketing Office (RAMCO): 
. 
Agriculture Research and Development Centre (ARDC):. 
(dairy  production 
technology).The  RLDC  will 
Regional  Livestock  Development  Centre  (RLDC,  Khangma):  RLDC  Khangma  will 
assist  in  the  implementation  of  livestock  production  component  by  providing  TA  in 
livestock  production 
the 
implementation  of  Lead  Farmers  in  livestock  for  farmers-to-farmers  extension  services 
and  CAHW  model.  The  Centre  will  operate,  implement  and  manage  these  extension 
models  with  the  aim  of  scaling-up  nation-wide  and  also  sustaining  the  operations  to 
benefit  the  livestock  and  dairy  farmers  as  also  self-sustaining  engagements  for  the 
CAHW  in  due  course  of  project.  With  its  regional  mandate,  it  will  provide  technical 
support  and  backstopping  to  Dzongkhags  for  livestock  development  activities,  while 
ensuring adequate monitoring of activities in the field. The Centre will also contribute to 
the  KM  aspect  of  the  project  in  the  areas  of  good  practices  in  livestock  and  dairy 
activities. 
lead 
The  RLDC  Khangma  will  also  seek  assistance  and  mobilise  necessary  production  inputs 
from other regional agencies mandated for input supplies in the region namely Regional 
Pig and Poultry Farm (RPPF), Regional Nublang Breeding Farm (RNBF), Regional Mithun 
Breeding Farm (RMBF) and Regional Centre for Aquaculture (RCA). 
14 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
4.5 Institutional Arrangements 
The implementation of BRECSA will adopt the following institutional arrangements: 
Ministry  of  Finance:  The  MoF  as  a  borrower  will  appoint  a  focal  officer  in  the 
Department  of  Public  Accounts  (DPA)  for  IFAD  who  will  be  responsible  for  coordinating 
with  the  PMU,  MoAF,  IFAD    and  WFP  for  timely  fund  flow,  disbursements,  financial 
reporting,  and  clearance  of  Withdrawal  Applications  (WA)  and  operation  of  designated 
accounts (DAs). 
Ministry of Agriculture and Forests: The MoAF will be the Lead Project Agency (LPA) 
in  project 
providing  policy  guidance,  policy  priority  direction  and 
implementation.  MoAF  will  also  provide  required  technical  staff  for  the  project  and 
arrange technical backstopping through its line departments and field agencies. In order 
to ensure stability in the PMU, the MoAF in collaboration with MoF and RCSC will ensure 
that appointed staff especially for PMU is kept through till completion of the project. 
facilitate 
Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC):  BRECSA  will  be  governed  by  a  Project  Steering 
Committee  (PSC)  chaired  by  the  Secretary,  MOAF  and  comprised  of  the  following 
members: Secretary/ Director, Gross National Happiness Commission (GNHC); Director, 
Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF);  Dzongdag,  Sarpang  Dzongkhag  Administration;  Dzongdag, 
Tsirang  Dzongkhag  Administration;  Dzongdag,  Trongsa  Dzongkhag  Administration; 
Dzongdag, Zhemgang Dzongkhag Administration; Director, Bhutan Agriculture and Food 
Regulatory Authority (BAFRA), MoAF; Director, Department of Agriculture (DoA), MoAF; 
Director,  Department  of  Agricultural  Marketing  and  Cooperatives  (DAMC),  MoAF; 
Director,  Department  of  Livestock  (DoL),  MoAF;  Chief  Planning  Officer,  Policy  and 
Planning  Division  (PPD),  MoAF;  Project  Director,  BRECSA,  Project  Management  Unit 
(PMU). The Chief Planning Officer PPD will function as the member Secretary of the PSC. 
IFAD and WFP representatives will participate as observers. The PSC shall meet at least 
twice a year and convene additional meetings when necessary. 
The responsibilities of the PSC will include, among others: (i) broad oversight of project 
implementation;  ii)  compliance  of  project  activities  with  Government’s  policies  and  the 
terms and conditions of the financing agreement; (iii) approval of Annual Workplan and 
Budgets  (AWPBs)  and  Consolidate  Procurement  Plan  (CPP),  (iv)  coordination  of  project 
interventions  with  other  development  programmes  and  projects;  and  (v)  policy  and 
strategic guidance for improved implementation   
 Dzongkhag  Project  Coordination  Committee  (DPCC):  Each  project  dzongkhag  will 
have  a  DPCC  with  the  Dzongdags  as  the  chairpersons,  Gups  of  all  Gewogs,  relevant 
sector heads and other relevant agencies and stakeholders as members. The Dzongkhag 
Agriculture  Officer  (DAO)  will  serve  as  the  Dzongkhag  Project  Coordinator  and  as 
member Secretary of the DPCC. 
Other  institutional  arrangements:  BRECSA  will  also  be  guided  by  other  institutional 
arrangements and mechanisms such as Procurement Committees (as detailed in Chapter 
6), AWPB preparation guidelines (as detailed in Chapter 10). Other agencies associated 
with the implementation of the project and their roles are as detailed in Chapter 5. 
15 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
CHAPTER 5: ENGAGEMENT OF RGoB TECHNICAL AGENCIES AND TAs 
The  Implementation of  BRECSA will be assisted by RGoB  Technical Agencies (both at  National and 
Regional  Levels),  relevant  corporations,  private  sectors,  financial  institutes  and  schemes  and  TA 
provided by WFP. TA will follow exploration of expertise available within MoAF and other government 
agencies  in  the  country.  Appropriate  services  from  private  sectors,  Corporations  and  financial 
institutes,  training  institutes  within  the  country  will  also  be  explored  depending  on  the  need.  The 
project will also seek TA from both national and international agencies and organizations in areas of 
expertise beyond the capacity of the existing technical agencies within the country. These agencies 
and their expected roles are described in this section of the Manual. 
5.1 Departments and Other Agencies 
The line departments under MoAF will provide technical backstopping and explore avenues whereby 
local  farmer  group  (FG)s/Coops/Youth  groups  can  participate  in  Agriculture  and  Livestock 
production. The line departments will assist with establishment of infrastructures such as irrigation, 
collection  and  bulking  centres,  processing  plants,  etc.  Once  established,  the  marketing  and  value 
addition  facilities  will  be  taken  over  by  FCBL  for  operation.  Similarly,  the  livestock  department  will 
establish  production  farms  particularly  for  dairy,  pork,  chicken,  and  fish  which  may  be  leased  to 
FG/Coops for operation if interested or best it should be allowed for educated youth entrepreneurs 
(individually  or  in  groups)  or  Private  Sector  to  operate.  This  will  not  only  allow  commercial  level 
production  but  also  help  generate  employment  and  provide  avenue  for  business  opportunities  to 
youths.  The  Departments  under  MoAF  will  also  facilitate  in  linking  FGs/Coops/Youth  Entrepreneurs 
with Bhutan Development Bank Ltd (BDBL) for Business Opportunity and Information Centre (BOIC) 
loan, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), CSOs with financial institutions for accessing loans 
and grants. 
5.1.1 Department of Agriculture 
The  DoA  under  the  MoAF  reaches  out  to  clients  through  a  network  of  Extension,  Research  and 
Central program offices established across the country. At the policy and coordination, the DoA HQ 
comprise  of  Agriculture,  Horticulture  and  Engineering  Divisions  including  Extension  Information 
System. The implementation of  BRECSA by the implementing agencies of DoA, MoAF in the region 
will be guided and supported by the DoA secretariat. 
The  Dzongkhag  Agriculture  Offices  and  gewog  extension  centres  will  be  actively  involved  as  an 
implementing  agency  at  the  grass  roots  level.  In  addition,  there  are  five  central  programs  under 
DoA namely AMC, NPHC, and NSC based in Paro; and NSSC and NPPC based in Thimphu. The NMC 
based in Yusipang and Central Machinery Unit (CMU) based in Bumthang and RDCs. 
These  Centres  provide  research,  extension  and  other  services  backstopping  the  Dzongkhag 
extension system and the implementation of BRECSA will seek services from them and also render 
support to enable them deliver services that contributes to the implementation of the project. Some 
of the agencies under  DoA  which will be involved in the implementation of  BRECSA are mentioned 
below: 
Agriculture Research and Development Centre  
ARDC  will  assist  implementation  of  the  agriculture  production  component  by  providing  technical 
assistance  in  agriculture  production  (horticulture  and  cereal  crops).  The  centre  will  also  initiate 
promotion  of  the  concepts  of  permaculture  innovations  and  lead  farmer  approach  in  agriculture 
extension  and  outreach  to  enhance  production  and  commercialization  of  agriculture  in  the  region 
mainly  focusing  on  off  season  production,  integration  of  fruits,  vegetables  and  cereal  crops.  ARDC 
with  the  support  of  the  project  will  also  develop,  test  and  promote  climate  resilient  agriculture 
technologies  for  both  cereal  and  horticulture  crops,  enhance  technical  capacity  of  farmers  through 
hands on practice approach and link with the establishment of commodity crop based villages in the 
region.  The  centre  through  its  communication  sector  will  also  complement  in  the  knowledge 
16 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
management  by  developing  extension  materials,  activity  write  ups,  updates  and  develop  a 
knowledge sharing mechanism. 
5.1.2 Department of Livestock 
Similar to DoA, the DoL under the MoAF also reaches out to clients through its network of Extension, 
Research  and  Central  program  offices  established  at  strategic  locations  throughout  the  country.  At 
the policy and coordination, the DoL comprises of Livestock Production, Animal Nutrition and Animal 
health  divisions.  The  implementation  of  BRECSA  activities  by  the  implementing  agencies  in  the 
region will be guided by these divisions at DoL. 
At  the  local  level,  the  department  has  its  network  of  extension  services  through  the  Dzongkhag 
livestock offices  and gewog  extension centers  and several veterinary  hospitals and AI  centres. The 
DoL  agencies  in  the  four  project  Dzongkhags  will  be  the  key  implementing  agencies  at  the  grass 
roots  level  for  BRECSA.  These  agencies  in  the  region  will  work  closely  with  the  Department,  the 
Research  Centres  and  Central  Programs  to  provide  assistances  to  address  the  livestock  production 
challenges of the local farming communities. 
The  regional  level  livestock  development  support  is  provided  by  the  4  regional  livestock 
development  centres  located  in  Khangma,  Tsimasham,  Wangdi  and  Zhemgang.  The  technical 
support  and  input  supply  services  are  provided  through  the  specific  national  centers  for  poultry, 
piggery, dairy, aquaculture, riverine and lake fisheries and animal nutrition. The implementation of 
BRECSA will seek services from them and also render support to enable them deliver services that 
contributes to the implementation of the project. 
5.1.3 Regional Livestock Development Centre (RLDC), Khangma 
The  RLDC  will lead in  the  implementation  of  Lead  Farmers  in livestock  through  farmers-to-farmers 
extension  services  and  CAHW  model.  The  Centre  will  operate,  implement  and  manage  these 
extension  models  with  the  aim  of  scaling-up  nation-wide  and  also  sustaining  the  operations  to 
benefit  the  livestock  and  dairy  farmers  as  also  self-sustaining  engagements  for  the  CAHW  in  due 
course. Livestock production related component of the project will be coordinated and managed by 
the RLDC in Khangma. With its regional mandate, it will provide technical support and backstopping 
to Dzongkhags and gewogs for livestock development activities, while ensuring adequate monitoring 
of activities in the field. The Centre will also contribute to the knowledge management aspect of the 
project in the areas of good practices in livestock and dairy activities. 
5.1.4 Regional Pig and Poultry Breeding Farm (RPPBF), Lingmethang 
The  project’s  livestock  production  component  will  rely  on  the  livestock  inputs  such  as  piglets  and 
pullets  which  the  RPPBF  at  Lingmethang  produces.  RPPBF  will  prioritize  input  generation  through 
their  collaboration  with  the  RLDC  Khangma  in  implementing  the  livestock  breed  improvement 
activities and establishment of commercial farms. 
5.1.5 Department of Agricultural Marketing and Cooperatives (DAMC) 
DAMC will facilitate and promote  effective and  efficient marketing of RNR products through market 
policy,  information,  research,  intelligence  and  capacity  building  support.  On  the  policy  front,  the 
department  will  formulate  enabling  policy  to  develop  proper  market  infrastructures,  logistics  and 
market  linkages.  It  will  also  help  in  establishing  agro  processing  units  and  enhancing  the  value  of 
products  through  value  addition  and  post-harvest  management  in  collaboration  with  NPHC,  DoA, 
MoAF.  
5.1.6 Private sectors and financial service providers 
BRECSA  is  focusing  on  commercialization  of  farming  and  will  make  every  effort  to  link  farmers, 
groups  and  commercial  farms  with  the  private  sectors,  financial  service  providers  including  credit 
17 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
schemes to initiate the PPP model. The project will take advantage of any existing financial institutes 
supporting rural development. 
5.1.7 Farmers/Farmers Groups/Cooperatives/Youth Entrepreneurs’ involvement in large 
scale production 
The majority of production is expected to occur in farmers’ field supported by different departments 
under  MoAF  in  organizing  mechanized  farming  with  quality  inputs  and  systematic  marketing. 
Individual  farmers  will  be  encouraged  to  take  up  large  scale  production,  form  groups  and 
cooperatives. The government is also emphasizing on youth engagement in farming for creation of 
employment  opportunities.  BRECSA  will  give  attention  to  groups  and  youth  entrepreneurs  in  the 
project  sites  by  prioritizing  them  under  the  production,  marketing  and  enterprise  development 
components. 
5.2 World Food Programme (WFP) 
WFP  will  support  the  enhancement  and  efficiency  of  value  chains  through  targeted  interventions, 
including: (i) enhance the organizational levels of farmers and strengthen the performance of farmer 
groups and cooperatives; (ii) create effective market linkages between farmer groups and buyers / 
outlets;  (iii)  strengthen  the  capacities  of  government  agencies  in  promising  market-oriented 
planning  based  on  economic  (cost-benefit)  analysis;  (iv)  build  decentralized  capacity  of  DAMC 
officers  in  providing  market-based  and  tailored  services  to  farmers;  (v)  capacitate  and  assist 
Dzongkhag  level  government  agencies  in  developing  and  delivering  on  small-holder  based  market 
access  policies  and  programmes;  (vi)  undertake  market  research,  exploration,  trial  marketing  and 
establish  linkages  with  international  markets  to  enhance  export,  particularly  of  high-end  specialty 
products; and  (vii) develop digital platforms/ICT tools including on markets and pricing . 
5.3 National and International Technical Assistance for BRECSA 
5.3.1 Key areas of Technical Assistance and Terms of Reference 
BRECSA  has  identified  some  of  the  specific  TA  requirements  where  fielding  of  national  and 
international TAs are likely to be required especially in areas beyond the capacity of RGoB Technical 
agencies. Some of the key areas of TA needs include: 
The key areas for external TAs with their broad Terms of Reference are mentioned in Table 12. 
18 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Table 12: Key Areas of External TAs & Terms of Reference 
SI.  
No  Activity/Areas 
. 
1 
Terms of Reference (ToR) 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
19 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
CHAPTER 6: PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES 
6.1 Procurement Regulations for BRECSA 
The procurement pertaining to  BRECSA will be carried out by the  PCU, WFP, ARDC and 
various  project  districts  based  on  the  provisions  of  the  PRR  2019  and  in  line  with  the 
IFAD’s  procurement  Regulations.  The  PCU  is  headed  by  a  Chief  Coordination  Officer 
(CCO)  and  will  be  playing  overall  coordination  of  the  project  activities.  The  ARDC  as  a 
PIU  will  be  headed  by  Project  Director,  Project  districts  headed  by  Dasho  Dzongda  and 
WFP  will  carry  out  the  procurement  for  the  project.  The  Procurement  Officers  of  the 
districts  supported  by  Store  In-Charge  are  responsible  for  procurement  of  all  the 
activities funded by the RGoB and other projects.  
6.2 Procurement Packaging 
The  projects  procurements  (good  and  civil  works)  are  spread  over  four  districts  viz. 
Trongsa,  Tsirang,  Sarpang  and  Zhemgang.  There  are  enough  number  of  contractors  in 
the  country,  that  will  be  qualified  if  each  one  of  the  civil  works  is  packaged  under  one 
separate package. Having, each one of the civil work as package will help in expediting 
project implementation. The capacity of the national contractors in Bhutan for civil works 
is  quite  competitive  and  the  criteria  for  multiple  contracts  in  the  bid  evaluation  can  be 
used  for  the  packages  that  will  be  advertised  at  the  same  time.  The  bid  evaluation  will 
not  be  too  complex  even  if  the  criteria  for  multiple  contracts  in  the  bid  evaluation  is 
used. 
6.3 Procurement Procedures 
Procurement  procedure  for  the  MoAF,  ARDC  and  districts  is  outlined  in  Figure  4.  The 
agencies  have  tender  committee  set  up  in  line  with  the  provisions  of  the  PRR  and  is 
responsible for approval of Annual Procurement Plan (APP), tender stage, bid evaluation 
and  award  stage.  There  are  three  committees  viz.  tender  opening  committee,  tender 
evaluation committee and tender award committee for goods, services, and civil works.  
Open competition is the default method for procurement above Nu1.800 million for civil 
works  and  Nu  0.400  million  for  goods  and  services.  Both  national  competitive  bidding 
(NCB)  and  international  competitive  bidding  (ICB)  are  used  for  the  procurement  of 
goods,  services,  and  civil  works  as  long  as  suppliers  are  registered  with  the  relevant 
agencies.  
Figure 4: Procurement Process 
Need 
Identification 
Annual Procurement 
Plan (APP) based on 
the approved budget 
Approval and 
Publish of APP 
Publish of 
tender 
Approval of Notice 
and tender document 
Opening of 
tender 
Evaluation of 
tender 
Preparation of 
notice and tender 
document 
Award Decision 
Contract signing 
and management 
Letter of Acceptance 
(15 days) 
Letter of intent to 
award (10 days) 
20 
20 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
6.3 Procurement Methods 
The  market  survey  revealed  that  there  are  enough  number  of  qualified  contractors  in 
Bhutan to make the bidding sufficiently competitive for all the packages – even with use 
of  the  criteria  of  multiple  contracts  (Appendix  3).  The  international  bidders  can  also 
participate  with  national  advertising,  if  they  are  interested.    All  the  packages  will  be 
advertised  on  eGP  website  and  other  media  such  as  Kuensel  and  BBS.  In  view  of  the 
above,  most  of  the  civil  works  packages  will  be  procured  through  National  Competitive 
Bidding  (NCB)  and  some  through  shopping  method  with  national  advertising.  For  other 
packages that may be added during project implementation, the procurement method will 
be  decided  based  on  the  nature  of  the  package  and  availability  of  suppliers/ 
contractors/consultants  in  Bhutan,  in  the  region  and  in  the  international  market.  The 
procurement methods will be agreed with IFAD before  start of any new procurement. All 
contract packaging and scheduling as outlined in the project’s procurement plan may be 
subject to revision and at least annually in line with the project progress. 
A.  Prequalification 
The  works  are  not  complex  enough  to  justify  prequalification.  The  prequalification  might 
delay the project implementation. The number of the potential bidders is not so large that 
the  bid  evaluation  without  prequalification  may  consume  too  much  time.  The  risk  of 
abnormally low bids is not high given the trend of bid prices received against a number of 
previous biddings. Following the prequalification process, the risk  of  collusion among the 
prequalified bidders might increase.  
In  view  of  the  above,  prequalification  will  not  be  followed  for  any  of  the  procurement 
packages of civil works currently included in the proposed procurement plan.  
The process of shortlisting will be followed for selection of the consultant firm. 
B.  Sustainability Requirements  
•  The  project  does  not  include  any  particular  sustainability  goals.  However,  the 
project  seeks  to  achieve  sustainable  procurement  based  on  the  components  that 
are  already  built  in  the  procurement  process  and  product,  including  compliance 
with  all  the  core  procurement  principles,  and  other  relevant  components  of 
sustainable procurement.  
•  Suitable  environmental,  social,  and  health  and  safety  considerations  will  be 
included  in  the  bidding  and  in  the  contracts  for  civil  works  as  per  the  relevant 
Safeguard  Policies.  An  environmental  management  plan  (EMP)  will  be  included  in 
the  bidding  documents  for  civil  works,  that  will  eventually  become  a  part  of  the 
construction  contracts.  The  EMP  will  outline  specific  mitigating  measures, 
environmental monitoring requirements, and related institutional arrangements. 
C.  Review Requirements 
•  Prior  review  of  large  and  complicated  packages  will  improve  quality  of 
outcomes  to  the  maximum.  PIU’s  prefers  to  have  prior  review  for  large  and 
complicated packages.  
•  For  other  packages  that  may  be  added  during  project  implementation,  the 
review method will be decided based on the risk assessment for the package.  
D.  Standstill Period 
•  The Procuring Agency shall observe 10 (ten) days of standstill period from the 
date of the issuance of letter of intent to award to allow the  bidders  to  lodge 
complain if aggrieved by the decision of the tender committee. 
E.  Payment Method 
The pricing and costing method and payments for the various packages will be as 
follows: 
21 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Package 
Civil works: 
All civil works packages  
Goods 
All packages 
Consulting services: 
One package (CS-01) 
Pricing and Costing Method 
Admeasurement  
On dispatch, delivery and acceptance 
Lump sum 
F.  Key Performance Indicators 
During  the  procurement  process,  the  following  key  performance  indicators  will  be 
used: 
(i)  Advertising by the planned date 
(ii) Awarding contract by the planned date  
(iii) Bid price vs reference price  
(iv) Complaint  received  regarding  any  procurement  process  and  satisfactory  disposals 
of the complaints. 
During  implementation  of  contracts,  Key  performance  indicators  (KPI)  will  be 
defined  as  part  of  the  Contract  Management  strategy.  However,  a  first  outline  is 
provided here below: 
Table 13-Key Performance Indicators 
Package 
Indicator 
Works 
contracts  
Works progress 
Personnel: 
Indicator follow-up 
• 
Progress  of  work  in  comparison  to  the  contractual  work 
program,  verified  by  through  contractor’s  (and  engineer’s) 
daily/weekly/monthly reports. 
•  Work is well-planned in advance. 
•  Meetings are held as required by the contract. 
• 
• 
•  Management  personnel  are  able  to  properly  manage  the 
Personnel on site is as per the proposed personnel (if any).  
Turnover of personnel is minimized. 
Equipment 
• 
• 
Site management 
• 
project and the contract. 
Equipment on site is as per the proposed equipment (if any). 
Equipment  is  reliable,  i.e.,  availability  greater  than  a  certain 
percentage (this covers a multitude of factors within one KPI, 
such 
condition,  maintenance, 
appropriateness for use, and record keeping. 
Facilities 
management plan are in place and well maintained.  
contract  and 
required  by 
contractor’s 
equipment 
site 
the 
as 
Environmental 
management: 
Subcontracting 
Extensions of 
time 
Variations 
safety  measures  are 
•  Health  and 
documented. 
The contractors’ activities are constrained to the work site(s). 
• 
•  Mitigation  measures  to  be  implemented  by  the  contractor  are 
implemented  and 
carried out in accordance with the contract. 
•  Subcontracts  are  compliant  with  the  main  contract  and 
performance is monitored by the contractor. 
•  All subcontractors to be approved by respective PIU. 
• 
Extensions  of  time  are  not  required,  except  for  those  due  to 
the employer, unavoidable variations and force majeure. 
•  Variations  instructed  by  the  employer  or  engineer  are 
promptly implemented. 
Disputes 
•  Any  disputes  are  dealt  with  in  accordance  with  the  contract 
and Arbitration Act of Bhutan. 
Consulting  Works progress 
•  Regular demonstration by the consultant the work is executed 
Personnel 
as planned. 
Personnel on site is as per the proposed personnel (if any).  
Turnover of personnel is minimized. 
• 
• 
•  Management  personnel  are  able  to  properly  manage  the 
project and the contract. 
Subcontracting 
•  Subcontracts  are  compliant  with  the  main  contract  and 
Extensions 
time 
Variations 
of 
performance is monitored by the contractor. 
•  All subcontractors are approved. 
• 
Extensions  of  time  are  not  required,  except  for  those  due  to 
the employer, unavoidable variations, and force majeure. 
•  Variations  instructed  by  the  employer  or  engineer  are 
promptly implemented. 
22 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Package 
Indicator 
Indicator follow-up 
Disputes 
•  Any  disputes  are  dealt  with  in  accordance  with  the  contract 
and the Arbitration Act of Bhutan. 
G.  Evaluation Method 
It will be practical to use the  criteria of multiple contracts  for bid evaluation for each 
packages  that  will  be  advertised  at  the  same  time.  It  will  be  economically 
advantageous to PIU’s if the criteria of multiple contracts for bid evaluation for those 
packages that will be advertised at the same time. The PIU’s has experience with MDB 
financed projects, of similar nature, using multiple contract award criteria. 
•  Domestic preference will not be applied.  
• 
•  The  proposal  evaluation  method  for  consulting  services  package  will  be  rated 
Joint ventures will be allowed to participate in bidding.  
criteria. For QCBS packages, Quality-Cost ratio will be 80:20. 
H.  Contract Management Approach 
•  Collaborative contract management approach will be used for all packages. For 
the  civil  works  contracts,  a  contract  implementation  plan  should  form  part  of 
the  tender  document  and  the  work  progress  will  be  monitored  based  on  the 
contract implementation plan.  
•  Effective  contract  management  will  enable  the  PIU’s  to  maximize  value  for 
money (VfM) in delivering project  outputs.  The focus  of contract  management 
will  be  on 
the  contract 
execution/implementation phase,  following the award of  contract.  The success 
of  contract  management  will  be  ensured  by  the  choice  of  contract  and 
contractor selection following the strategic procurement planning. 
that  are  undertaken  during 
the  activities 
The contract management approach will involve: 
• 
• 
• 
tracking and monitoring cost, time, quality and deliverables; 
collaborating  to  improve  performance  and  promote  opportunities  for 
ongoing innovation e.g., value engineering in appropriate contracts; 
being  clear  on  roles  and  responsibilities  of  both  PIU  and  supplier/ 
contractor/ consultant; 
•  managing  relationships  with  the  supplier/contractor/consultant  and  key 
stakeholders; 
•  managing payments in accordance with agreed terms; 
• 
being  proactive  throughout  the  contract  to  anticipate  problems  and  issues 
before they arise; and 
•  managing problems and issues as they arise, quickly, effectively, fairly, and 
in a transparent manner. 
PIU’s will ensure that there is sufficient time spent in planning the implementation 
of the contract. The internal arrangements that the PIU’s will include: 
(a) assigning  specific  and  detailed  contract  management  tasks  to  the 
individuals  or  the  team  responsible  for  contract  implementation.  The  tasks 
assigned  will  be  precise  and  realistic  (considering  the  specific  experience, 
expertise and workload of each individual); 
(b) establishing sufficient internal procedures (hierarchy, communication, levels 
of  authority,  flow  of  documents,  reporting,  verification  and  acceptance 
procedures, payment procedures, internal audit etc.); 
(c) monitoring  and  evaluating  contract  implementation  risks  and  ensuring 
effective  management  and  mitigation  measures  will  be  taken,  including 
assigning responsibility for their enforcement; 
(d) coordinating  arrangements  with  third  parties  (other  agencies,  end  users, 
beneficiaries etc.). 
I.  The  Contract  Management  approach  for  the  various  types  of  packages  is 
described as follows: 
23 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Civil works Packages: 
I. 
The Employer will gain greater control and project awareness from being involved 
as  an  active  party  in  terms  of  resolving  problems  and  in  general  fulfilling  its 
contractual responsibilities. However, the traditional standard works contracts can 
lead 
if  appropriate  Contract 
Management  procedures  are  not  put  in  place.  In  order  to  ensure  that  the 
contracts  are  executed  in  a  collaborative  manner  appropriate  Site  Supervision 
and Contract Management resources are to be provided. 
to  an  adversarial  atmosphere  developing 
Consultancy Contract 
II. 
The  Employer  will  improve  control  and  further  build  its  own  capacity  by 
interacting  with  its  Consultant’s  professional  staff.  It  is  also  of  primary 
importance  that  consultants  are  fully  aware  and  reactive  to  the  Employer’s 
requirements  and  expectations.  The  approach  should  therefore  also  be 
collaborative. 
J.  Suggestions on Qualification Criteria or other content of Bidding 
Documents  
• 
In  case  of  abnormally  low  bids,  requirement  may  be  included  to  submit 
additional  security  amount  (difference  between  the  estimated  amount  and 
the quoted amount of the bidder) in addition to 10% performance security. 
•  There  have  been  delays  in  implementation  of  contracts.  To  motivate  the 
contractors to actively resolve the issues that may arise during the contract 
implementation,  it  is  recommended  that  the  clause  of  issuing  appreciation 
certificate  for  timely  completion  without  compromising  the  quality  may  be 
used. It is suggested to include the following in the contract conditions: The 
supervising firm and the project engineer shall certify the completed works.  
K.  Value for Money Statement  
Value for money is achieved by the following procurement approaches: 
(i) 
Packaging the project works in different packages, that has been arrived at 
by  taking  into  account  the  geographical  dispersion  of  the  project  districts, 
project readiness, and market capacity. 
Using criteria of multiple contracts for bid evaluation for works packages. 
Adopting  Open  Competitive  Bidding,  advertised  nationally  and  in  eGP 
system of all civil works packages. 
IFAD’s  prior  review  for  large  and  complicated  civil  works  packages  and 
consulting package to ensure quality outcomes. 
Advance  procurement  on  some  works  packages,  consulting  and  non-
consulting packages.   
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
L.  Project Risk and Mitigation Measures Statement  
The procurement risk is assessed as moderate reflecting the following: The MoAF, 
ARDC  and  project  districts  has  good  experience  of  executing  projects  funded  by 
MDB’s; maintenance of all records of procurement documents; procurement audits 
done  diligently  by  Royal  Audit  Authority  of  Bhutan  and  ministry’s  Internal  Auditor 
and large number of qualified civil works contractors in Bhutan. Potential key risks 
in  the  procurement  will  be  mitigated  by  following  IFAD’s  Procurement  Policy,  and 
Procurement  Rules  and  Regulations  of  Bhutan  and  IFAD’s  prior  review  of  high 
value civil works packages and consulting services package. 
6.4 Procurement Review 
A.  Post or Prior Review 
Except  as  IFAD  may  otherwise  agree,  the  prior  or  post  review  which  applies  to  procurement  of 
goods, works and services shall be defined as follows: 
24 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Table 14-Financial Threshold- Prior and Post Review 
Procurement Method 
Type  of  Review 
Prior or Post 
Comments 
Procurement of Goods and Works 
ICB Works and Goods 
NCB Works 
Prior 
Prior 
NCB Goods 
Prior 
Shopping for works (quotations) 
Shopping for goods (quotations) 
Direct Goods 
Direct Works 
Recruitment of Consulting Firms 
Quality and Cost-Based Selection 
(QCBS) 
Fixed Budged Selection (FBS) 
Post 
Post 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
Least Cost Selection (LCS) 
Selection  Based  of  Consultants 
qualification 
Sole Source Selection (SSS) 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
Recruitment of Individual Consultants 
Individual Consultants 
Prior 
All contracts 
Except  procurement  valued  below  USD 
150,000 
Except  procurement  valued  below  USD 
50,000 
Except procurement valued below USD 2,000 
Except procurement valued below USD 2,000 
Except  procurement  valued  below  USD 
30,000 
Except  procurement  valued  below  USD 
30,000 
Except  procurement  valued  below  USD 
30,000 
Except  procurement  valued  below  USD 
30,000 
All contracts 
Except  procurement  valued  below  USD 
20,000 
The  aforementioned  thresholds  may  be  modified  by  IFAD  during  the  course  of 
Project  implementation.  IFAD  may  establish  its  prior  review  requirement  for 
procurement  below  and  above  thresholds  during  its  review  and  approval  of  the 
Procurement Plan. No taxes and duties will be financed out of the proceeds of the 
IFAD  loan  and/or  grant  and  PMU  will  obtain  necessary  tax  waiver  from  the 
relevant  authorities  if  necessary.  All  contracts  must  be  listed  in  the  Contract 
Monitoring  Tool,  which  should  be  updated  and  submitted  to  the  IFAD  Country 
Programme Manager on a monthly basis. 
6.5 Procurement Committee 
The Procurement Committee of Project will comprise of the following officials & 
representatives: 
1.   
2.   
3.   
4.   
5.   
6.   
For Dzongkhag Tender Committee, the composition shall be: 
1.   
2.   
3.   
4.  . 
Responsibilities of the procurement committee are to ensure that procurement plans have 
been  prepared  for  each  year,  review  of  draft  procurement  notices,  invitations,  MoUs, 
agreements and provide overall policy guidance; ensure that the procurement procedures 
are in compliance with the Financing Agreement and are within the rules and regulations 
of  the  RGoB/IFAD;  ensure  that  the  proposed  procurement  packages,  methods  and 
arrangements are within agreed limits of Procurement Rules &Regulations 2009 of RGoB 
and or IFAD Programme Procurement Guidelines. 
25 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
CHAPTER 7: FINANCE MANAGEMENT 
7.1 Project Cost and Financing Arrangement 
The total project cost is estimated to USD 30.94 million over a period of seven (7) years, 
including  contingencies.  The  project  will  be  financed  by:  (i)  an  IFAD  loan  of  USD  8.935 
million  (29.7%  of  total  project  costs);  (ii)  a  GAFSP  (IFAD)  grant  of  USD  10.40  million 
(34.6% of total costs); (iii) a GAFSP (WFP) Grant of USD 2.6 million (8.7% of total costs); 
(iv) the contribution of beneficiaries estimated to around USD 6.315 million (21% of total 
costs); (v) the contribution of RGoB corresponding to around USD 1.087 million (3.6% of 
total costs); and (vi) the financing by Financial Institutions amounting to USD 0.7 million 
(2.3 % of total costs). The RGoB will finance most of the recurrent costs, taxes and duties 
as  part  of  the  mandate  of  the  MoAF.  The  beneficiaries  will  provide  their  contributions  in 
kind  and  in  the  form  of  labour.  The  IFAD  loan  will  finance  all  incremental  project  costs 
except:  (i)  duties  and  taxes  on  vehicles,  and  the  costs  of  ongoing  office  utilities  (ii)  the 
contribution provided by the beneficiaries. 
7.2 Fund Flow Mechanism 
Funds  for  Loan  and  Grants  from  IFAD  shall  be  deposited  to  the  Designated  Accounts 
(DAs)  maintained  in  USD  at  Central  Bank  of  Bhutan,  Royal  Monitory  Authority  (RMA), 
acceptable to IFAD and operated by the MoF. On request by the PMU, MoF will release the 
fund to the Project Letter of Credit (PLC) accounts of PMU and Dzongkhags based on the 
approved AWPB. The MoF will release the IFAD funds quarterly from the DA to the Project 
account held in any commercial bank acceptable to IFAD. For other project implementing 
agencies  the  fund  will  be  released  as  per  their  approved  AWPB  and  the  expenditure 
reports received from them. 
The government counterpart funds, aside from the taxes on goods and services, shall be 
contributed by the RGOB, and it shall ensure timely and adequate release of the funds to 
the project in accordance with the AWPB. The project shall have a separate bank account 
at each of the implementing units wherein the amounts received from RGoB through DPA 
including,  GAFSP,  IFAD  loan  and  RGoB  counterpart  funds  will  be  deposited  and  used  for 
project  activities.  The  project  shall  submit  withdrawal  applications  (WAs)  for  eligible 
expenditures, as per IFAD procedures and formats, to RMA, Ministry of Finance, through 
MOAF for onward transmission to IFAD. Beneficiary contribution shall also be recorded in 
the books of the project to arrive at the total project expenditure. 
Disbursements from the DPA in respect  of  GAFSP, IFAD and RGoB  counterpart funds will 
be  made  to  all  implementing  units  as  per  the  approved  AWPBs.  All  implementing  units 
shall provide monthly expenditure statements by financier, components and categories to 
the PMU.  
Beneficiary  Contribution:  The  project  also  envisages  beneficiary  contribution.  The 
implementing  agencies    shall  evolve  a  system  to  collect  information  in  respect  of 
beneficiary  contribution  to  the  project  on  a  regular  and  ongoing  basis.  This  could  form 
part  of  the  reporting  system  by  the  agencies  to  the  PMU.  The  utilization  certificates  of 
funds  disbursed  for  activities  which  involve  beneficiary  contribution  could  be  used  as  a 
basis for accounting the beneficiary contribution. 
The fund flow is depicted in the flowchart below: 
26 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Figure 5:   FUND FLOW  
7.3 Type of Project Accounts 
Loan/Grant  Finance  Administration,  which  is  the  part  of  the  responsibility  of  the  PMU, 
deals  with  the  issues  of  disbursement  and  flow  of  funds,  procurement  of  goods  and 
services  and  financial  control  and  management  aspects  of  implementation  such  as 
budgeting  and  accounting,  financial  planning  and  reporting  and  audit.  Prior  to  the  first 
disbursement, the DA and the PLC accounts will have been opened. 
. The Project will have the following categories of accounts: 
  Two DAs to be maintained in USD at RMA and operated by MoF,  and 
  PLC accounts maintained in BTN by PMU and implementing entities 
Designated Account (DA): The RGoB/MoF will open DA and thereafter maintain in any 
of  the  bank  of  Bhutan  acceptable  to  IFAD,  an  account  denominated  in  USD,  for  the 
purpose  of  financing  the  Project.  After  the  DA  is  opened,  upon  the  RGoB  request,  IFAD 
will remit funds based on the withdrawal applications submitted from time to time. 
Replenishment and use of funds from the designated Account will be on the basis of the 
AWPB and IFRs. The DA and the PLC Accounts will be protected against set-off, seizure or 
attachment on terms and conditions proposed by the Borrower and accepted by IFAD. 
PLC Accounts: The Lead Project Agency, the MoAF will open and thereafter maintain in 
any Bank acceptable to IFAD, a PLC account denominated in BTN for  Project operations. 
The PD and the Finance Officer of the PMU will be fully authorised to operate the PMU PLC 
Account  and  both  their  signatures  will  be  required  to  make  any  withdrawal  from  the 
27 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Project Account. The heads of Dzongkhags and the AO will be fully authorized to operate 
their own PLC accounts. 
Authorised  Signatories:  Before  withdrawal  can  commence  (after  the  FA  is  declared 
effective),  the  MoF  will  send  a  letter  designating  the  persons  authorised  to  sign 
withdrawal applications, together with their authorised specimen signatures.  
7.4 Disbursement Procedures and Withdrawals 
There are four standard procedures that are used for disbursing Loan funds from IFAD. The Loan 
Disbursement Handbook for IFAD Directly Supervised Projects provides details of disbursement 
methods and submission of Withdrawal Applications. Of these, the method of advance funding will 
not be used for the project. 
Table 15-Disbursement Procedures 
Disbursement 
Procedure 
Procedure I 
Procedure II 
Procedure III 
Disbursement Type  Description 
to 
Designated 
Reimbursement 
the 
Account 
Direct Payment 
Special 
Commitment 
This  procedure  is  used  for  claiming  reimbursement 
where  eligible  project  expenditure  reimbursable  by 
IFAD have been pre-financed by the Government    
IFAD makes direct payment to a third party on the 
basis of Government instructions 
This is used for items imported by the Project under 
a  Letter  of  Credit 
for 
reimbursement 
requiring  guarantees 
Procedure I Designated Account (DA) / Reimbursement of Funds to the DA: This 
procedure  provides  a  mechanism  like  a  revolving  fund  to  assist  the  government  in 
financing eligible expenditures defined in the Financing Agreement as payment falls due. 
While  the  project  implementation  is  underway  the  account  is  replenished  when 
satisfactory  evidence  of  expenditure  incurred  is  received.  The  DA  shall  be  reimbursed 
periodically  based  on  the  utilization  of  funds  by  the  project.  It  is  proposed  to  adopt  Interim 
Financial  Reports  (IFRs)  modality  for  submission  of  withdrawal  applications  to  IFAD  through  the 
Ministry of Finance. 
PMU  shall  submit  withdrawal  applications  every  quarter  based  on  the  actual  eligible 
expenditures incurred at PMU and district level. These expenditures shall be reported in 
quarterly  consolidated  IFRs,  subject  to  audit  certification  at  the  end  of  each  financial 
year. Expenditure categories eligible for financing under the Financing Agreement and as 
per the disbursement percentage will be financed out of the proceeds of the IFAD loan. 
The  IFRs  should  be  prepared  from  the  accounting  software  used  by  the  project.  The 
software needs to be customized to generate the IFRs from the system and this will be a 
condition precedent to withdrawal.  
IFRs  shall  be  prepared  by  grouping  expenditures  in  accordance  with  the  disbursement 
categories as outlined in Schedule II of the Financing Agreement. Background/supporting 
documentation  shall  be  retained  by  the  project  and  submitted  to  IFAD  upon  request. 
IFRs shall contain in annex the list of contracts above USD 50,000 equivalent for which 
disbursements  have  been  executed  during  the  period  as  well  as  all  the  required 
supporting  documentation.  Full  supporting  documentation  shall  be  annexed  to  the  IFRs 
for  single  payments  above  USD  50,000  equivalent  executed  in  the  period.  These 
prescriptions are applicable to all cost categories outlined in Schedule II of the Financing 
Agreement. 
IFRs  shall  be  submitted  to  IFAD  on  a  timely  basis  within  45  days  after  the  end  of  each 
quarter.  In  case  of fund requirements above  USD 5 million equivalent, ad-hoc  IFRs can 
be prepared and submitted to IFAD anytime. 
28 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Procedure  II  Direct  Payment:  Under  this  procedure,  the  government  requests  the 
Fund  to  pay  suppliers  directly  from  the  loan/grant  funds.  The  procedure  is  similar  to 
Procedure  I  described  above  but  the  payment  is  made  direct  to  the  third  party  as 
advised  and  instructed  by  the  project,  for  example,  payment  to  TA  and  suppliers  of 
vehicles and equipment. 
Procedure  III  Direct  Payment  to  a  foreign  supplier:  Under  this  procedure,  the 
project uses a Letter of Credit (LC) as a mode of payment to a foreign supplier. Form 301, 
an Application for a Special Commitment, Form 302 Letter of Commitment from IFAD to a 
Bank  and  Form  303  Bank’s  Request  for  Payment.  This  is  extensively  used  for  financing 
import of goods and under this procedure IFAD gives assurance to the suppliers. 
Force  Account  Works:  This  procedure  is  applicable  when  the  implementation  agency 
uses its own work forces, equipment, and other resources in carrying out civil works. This 
procedure  involves  submission  of  periodic  certification  of  progress  or  completion  of  civil 
works  in  support  of  application  for  withdrawal  of  loan  proceeds  instead  of  the  usually 
required supporting documentation such as invoices, bills and receipts. 
Taxes: The proceeds of the IFAD financing will not to be used to pay taxes which will be 
part of the counterpart funding of RGoB to the project. The estimated tax amount is USD 
XXX  million,  which  will  be  borne  by  the  RGoB,  as  part  of  its  contribution  as  counterpart 
funding. 
Retroactive  financing/  Project  Pre-Financing  Facility  (PFF):  At  the  Borrower’s 
request  IFAD  financing  up  to  USD  0.5  million  may  be  provided  as  retroactive  financing 
with  prior  Executive  Board  approval,  to  cover  eligible  expenditures  between  the  date  of 
approval of the design document by  IFAD and  the date of  Entry into Force. Some  of the 
activities that can be funded under retroactive financing are: (i) costs related to studies to 
be  initiated  (ii)  procurement  and  customization  of  software;  (iii)  some  operating  costs; 
(iv) staff and consultants recruitment cost; (v) purchase of a minimum set of equipment 
and materials; and (vi) activities related to a baseline survey. To be eligible for retroactive 
financing,  goods  and  services  must  have  been  procured  according  to  the  procurement 
procedures  applicable  to  Grant/  Loan  financing.  The  funds  for  these  activities  will  be 
provided  initially  by  the  RGoB,  which  will  be  reimbursed  once  the  IFAD  conditions 
precedent to withdrawal have been met.  
7.5 Withdrawal Application 
Conditions Precedent to withdrawal: In accordance with Section 4.02 of the General 
Conditions, no withdrawal shall be made from the Loan and Grant Accounts until the first 
AWPB,  including  the  18-month  procurement  plan  has  been  approved  by  IFAD. 
Furthermore,  the  following  will  be  designated  as  additional  general  conditions  precedent 
to  withdrawal:  (i)  the  PMU  shall  have  been  duly  established  and  the  respective  key 
project staff such as Project Director and Finance Manager shall have been appointed; (ii) 
the  Borrower  shall  submit  an  official  document  confirming  the  availability  of  adequate 
counterpart  funds  for  the  first  Project  Year;  (iii)  the  authorized  signatories  shall  have 
been  submitted  to  IFAD;  (iv)  the  draft  Project  Implementation  Manual  shall  have  been 
endorsed by the PSC and received no-objection from IFAD; (v) the Designated Accounts 
shall have been duly opened. 
When the project wishes to request for a withdrawal from the loan and/or grant account 
the project shall submit to the Fund an application in the form specified by the Fund, 
together with such documents and other evidence in support of the application as the 
Fund shall reasonably request. 
The DPA shall furnish to the Fund satisfactory evidence of the authority of the person or 
persons authorised to sign such applications and the authenticated specimen signature of 
each person. 
29 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Reallocation of Financing Proceeds 
If the amount of Financing allocated to a category of  eligible expenditure is insufficient, 
the project shall request the Fund/IFAD for: 
i)  Reallocation  for  such  category  of  amount  from  another  category  to  the  extent 
required to meet the estimated shortfall; and/or 
ii)  If such reallocation does not meet the estimated shortfall, the project shall reduce 
the percentage of such eligible expenditure and notify the Fund accordingly 
Allocation of Unallocated Fund 
The MoF shall process for obtaining approval of IFAD for allocating the unallocated fund 
to any sector that the MoF prioritizes during the project period. 
7.6 Checklist for sending Withdrawal Applications 
Following aspects need to be checked and verified before an application for withdrawal is 
sent to IFAD for re-imbursement or payment: 
  Designation of WA signatory 
  Designation for operation of the Designated Account 
  WA Sequential number 
  WA signatory 
  Currency and the amount due 
  Account Number 
  Banking instructions 
  Correspondent Bank 
  Supporting documents 
  Percentage of Financing 
  Disbursement procedure used 
  Procurement details 
  Contract or purchase order no and date 
  Description of goods, works or services 
  Currency and total amount of contract 
  Invoice numbers and net amount of invoice covered by this application 
  Withdrawal details: category and % of expenditures to be financed by IFAD 
7.7 Financial Reporting 
Financial Statements: The Project accounts will reflect all financial transactions during 
the  project  period,  by  standard  expenditure  categories.  The  Project  accounts  will  be 
maintained  separately  from  any  routine  budget  accounts  or  other  externally  funded 
project account. The PMU will consolidate the project accounts and will submit quarterly 
interim financial statements to IFAD within 45 days of the end of the quarter and annual 
audited  financial  statements  of  project  expenditures  for  each  fiscal  year  within  to  IFAD 
no  later  than  six  months  after  the  close  of  the  fiscal  year,  i.e.  31st  December  of  each 
year. All expenditure should be in accordance with the approved AWPB.  
 The PFS shall include financial statements covering the reporting period in accordance 
with IPSAS (Cash). The following specific disclosures will be included in the financial 
statements: 
•  Comparison of budget and actual amount  
•  Notes to accounts (a summary of significant accounting policies and other 
explanatory notes) 
•  Statement of cash receipts and cash payments 
•  Withdrawal application statement – appendix 1 to the IFAD Handbook on Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects 
30 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
•  Sources and uses of funds statement- appendix 2 to the IFAD Handbook 
•  Fixed Asset Schedule  
•  Designated Account Statement and reconciliation 
AWPB: The MoF will advise the MoAF to make budgetary allocations for each Fiscal Year 
equal  to  the  funds  called  for  in  the  AWPB  for  the  relevant  Project  Year  and  make  such 
allocations available to the PMU and each Project Party promptly as required to carry out 
the Project. In addition to the proceeds of the Financing, the MoF will advise the MoAF to 
make  available  to  the  PMU  and  each  other  implementing  agency,  promptly  as  needed, 
such funds, facilities, services and other resources as may be required from time to time 
to carry out the Project. The Project will use the proceeds of the Loan/Grant exclusively to 
finance eligible expenditures of the Project in accordance with the FA. 
GAFSP (WFP) funds: Regarding the portion of the GAFSP grant channeled directly from 
GAFSP Trustee to WFP for Technical Assistance, WFP shall provide to the PMU a quarterly 
statement of expenditure by components and categories to enable the PMU to compile the 
total  project  expenditure  for  its  quarterly  Interim  Financial  Reports  (IFRs)  submission  to 
IFAD. The WFP funds utilization should be segregated in the reporting 
7.8 Audit Procedures 
Annual  Audit:  As  required  by  IFAD,  the  government  will  have  the  project  accounts  be 
audited  on  a  yearly  basis  by  an  independent  auditor  acceptable  to  IFAD.  Audit  will  be 
carried out in accordance with the international Standards on Auditing and the Standard 
of auditing must be disclosed in the Audit report. The Audit report will provide a separate 
opinion stating that the proceeds of the Loan & Grant finance that have been withdrawn 
on the SOEs have been used for the purposes for which they were provided. 
The Royal Audit Authority (RAA) has the mandate to audit all foreign funded loan projects, 
following  standard  and  specific  donor  requirements  by  INTOSAI.  The  consolidated  FS 
including the use of the counterpart funds will be audited by the RAA and reports will be 
furnished to IFAD within six months of the end of the relevant fiscal year. The auditor is 
required  to  deliver  an  audit  package  consistent  with  the  TORs  defined  in  the  PIM.  The 
Project  shall  maintain  an  Audit  Log  in  respect  of  the  audit  observations  and  get  it 
validated by the auditor during the subsequent audit or earlier. During the audit exercise, 
the PMU and the respective implementing entities /disbursing units shall be responsible in 
providing  records/evidences  and  in  settling  audit  queries  as  may  be  required  by  the 
auditors  of  the  RAA.  The  audit  shall  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  International 
Standards on Auditing. 
In  light  of  the  resource  restraints  as  per  noted  above,  in  case  the  RAA  is  unable  to 
complete  the  audit  within  the  stipulated  time,  the  project  may  consider  procuring  an 
independent auditor to  undertake the audit in accordance with approved  TOR to  ensure 
fulfilment of the IFAD audit reporting requirements. 
Audit  Report  Format:  The  audit  report  along  with  certified  financial  statement  will  be 
submitted to IFAD within six months after the end of the each fiscal year. 
The Audit Report will contain a separate management letter, which will include a report 
on the efficiency of the flow of funds procedures and internal controls. The reply by the 
PMU to the management letter will be submitted to IFAD within 30 days of the receipt of 
the  audited  accounts.  Certified  copy  of  the  audited  Financial  Statements,  Audit  Report 
and Management Letter will be submitted to IFAD within six months of close of Financial 
Year. 
31 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Compliance  with  Audit  requirements:  In  case  of  project  delays  to  furnish  the 
required  audit  report  on  time  or  in  satisfactory  form,  the  Fund  will  determine  that  the 
project  is  unlikely  to  do  so  within  a  reasonable  period,  then  the  Fund  may  engage 
independent auditors of its choice to audit the accounts relating  to the period. The fund 
may finance the cost of such audit by withdrawal from the Loan and/or grant account. 
Annual Audited Financial Statements:  The PMU will submit progress reports  to IFAD 
in English. These reports will use a predetermined format to be agreed at project start-up 
to provide essential information on the physical and financial progress of project activities 
and  regular  assessment  of  the  project  impact.  Reports  will  be  prepared  at  Dzongkhag 
level and consolidated by the PMU. All financial Statements of the operations, resources 
and expenditures relating to the Project will be prepared by PMU for each fiscal year. 
The  auditors  should  also  provide:  (i)  an  opinion  on  the  certified  statements  of 
expenditure  and  the  operation  of  the  Designated  Accounts  of  Loan  and  Grant  and  the 
Project Accounts; and (ii) a separate management letter, addressing the adequacy of the 
accounting  and  internal  control  systems.  The  PMU  will  deliver  the  above-mentioned 
reports through MoF to IFAD within six (6) months of the end of each such Fiscal Year. 
In reviewing the project accounts and financial statements, the auditor will adhere to the 
scope of audit provided in the IFAD Handbook (Appendix 7). The auditor also will: 
•  verify that acceptable accounting standards have been consistently applied 
and indicate any material deviation from these standards, and the effect of 
such deviation on the annual financial statements; 
•  assess 
the  adequacy  of  accounting  and 
internal  control  systems 
(procedures  and  responsibilities)  for  monitoring  expenditures  and  other 
financial  transactions  (commitment,  review,  approval,  payment  and 
accounting)  and  ensuring  safe  custody  of  project-financed  assets,  and 
document any instances where controls are lacking or need strengthening; 
•  determine  whether  the  PMU  and  other  implementing  agencies  have 
maintained  adequate  documentation  for  all  transactions;  e.g.  procurement 
documents,  contracts,  suppliers.  invoices,  letters  of  credit  and  evidence  of 
payment,  and  ascertain  that  expenditures  were  properly  authorized  and  in 
compliance with legal requirements; 
•  verify the numerical accuracy of statements and accounts; 
•  verify  that  disbursement  requests  for  expenditures  submitted  to  IFAD  are 
eligible  for  financing  under  the  loan  agreement,  and  identify  clearly  any 
ineligible expenditures; and  
• 
• 
carry  out  a  physical  verification  of  any  significant  assets  purchased  and 
confirm their existence and use for project purposes. 
report  on  the  status  of  implementation  of  recommendations  issued  in  the 
previous years 
The  auditor  shall  discuss  the  findings  in  the  form  of  a  draft  report  with  the  project's 
finance and accounts department and the Project Director. The auditor shall consider and 
include the response of the project in the final report. 
32 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Internal Audit. The internal audit unit at MoF works based on its priorities and is need 
based. Due to its mandate of covering all RGoB units based on its internal assessment, it 
may have limited capacity available to cover the Project activities as part of its oversight 
functions. Should it be ascertained that the internal audit arrangements provided by the 
Internal Audit Unit are insufficient, a private audit firm may be contracted as a 
complementary measure, in order to determine risk areas and propose mitigating 
measures. The internal audit function should be conducted of the PMU every quarter. A 
copy of the report along with the Management replies to the observations will be 
submitted to IFAD. The internal audit will also include statutory compliances. TORs for the 
internal audit will be included in the PIM. An action taken report (ATR) from the PMU and 
the districts shall be submitted to the PD and the internal auditors (reports/ATR reviewed 
by the PSC every six months).   
33 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
CHAPTER 8: PROJECT COMPONENTS AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
8.1 Project Components 
BRECSA will have three major technical components: 1) Resilient Production Systems, 
2)  Strengthened  Value  Chain  Coordination  and  Market  Linkages,  and  3) 
Innovative  and  competitive  agri-food  sector,  interlinked  and  implemented  in  close 
coordination. The system of components/sub-components and activities (as per Financing 
Agreement) is as follows: 
COMPONENT 1. RESILIENT PRODUCTION SYSTEMS 
Outcome 1. Enhanced agri-food sector contribution to GDP, economic opportunities, 
food and nutritional security and income of smallholder farmers, women and youth 
The objective of the Resilient Production Systems is to 
Outcomes and Outputs 
Key Performance Indicators 
Data  on  vulnerability,  agricultural  and 
livestock production zoning, aggregation, 
processing  centres  and  satellite  markets 
made available 
Gender  and  youth  inclusive  Agriculture 
Resilience  Plans  developed  for  climate-
resilient production 
diversity 
enhanced 
Diet 
through 
diversified  food  production  (for  both 
market and household consumption) and 
increased nutrition education 
Skills  and  approaches  developed  for 
increasing productivity and investment 
allocated 
enhance 
to 
commercialisation. 
These productions related project activities will be implemented in close coordination and 
in  complement  with  the  value  chain,  marketing  and  policy  related  project  activities 
presented under Component 2 and 3. 
34 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENT, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
Component 1. Resilient Production Systems 
DoA / ARDC 
DoL / RLDC 
Agencies 
involved 
Primary responsibility 
Activity 
Undertake the Consolidated 
Livelihood Exercise for Analyzing 
Resilience (CLEAR) diagnostic tool 
with gender and youth 
disaggregated data and analysis 
Implementation Arrangement 
Formulate district and sub-district 
agriculture resilience plans (ARP) 
Support nutrition-sensitive 
interventions (home gardens, 
nutrition education and 
awareness, water 
harvesting/storage tanks and 
selected on-farm and off-farm 
activities) to improve livelihoods 
and food and nutrition security of 
vulnerable groups 
Invest in sustainable commercial 
farming systems of selected 
commodities (including in climate-
resilient infrastructure) to enhance 
productivity and production 
expansion to support 
commercialization 
35 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Develop skills of smallholder 
farmers (women and men), 
cooperatives and youth-led 
enterprises on climate resilient 
farming practices and 
technologies, including on 
permaculture, to ensure their 
economic empowerment 
KEY SUCCESS FACTORS 
  DAO and DLO of Dzongkhags are fully aligned with the Component 1 and project 
implementation strategy in coordination with the Gewog administrations including 
the extension staffs. 
  Selected Gewogs (with all its administration) are fully involved in the planning 
and implementation of Component 1 activities. 
  Trust  and  rapport  built by  the  DAO  and  DLO  and  the  Gewog  administration 
with the participating village community. 
  Quality of farmers groups, both old and new groups, participating in the activities. 
  Timely availability of quality inputs and services for agriculture and livestock. 
  Quality and timeliness of technical support from technical agencies besides 
the DAO and DLO, including farmer friendly extension materials. 
  Quality of facilitation and technical extension by RDC and RLDC along with 
quality outreach extension for agriculture and CAHW services for livestock. 
  Development  of  water-use  efficient  irrigation  infrastructures  and  normal 
monsoon (for rain-fed areas). 
  Effective  cost  sharing  mechanisms  for  production  inputs  that  engender 
ownership and encouragement 
  Sustainable incentive mechanisms for extension workers – lead farmer and 
CAHW 
  Efficient  coordination  between  gewog  officials/extension  staff  and  lead 
farmers/CAHW, with clear demarcation of responsibilities to prevent overlap 
and duplication 
  Timeliness  and  sequencing  of  activities  across  components,  especially 
aligned  with  the  agriculture  calendar  –  business  strategies  and  plans  > 
group formation - agri-enterprise development > financing/infrastructure > 
production inputs…with appropriate extension services at all stages 
  M&E  and  KM  of  innovative  practices  for  improving  design  and  scaling  up 
across  project  districts,  with  the  inclusion  of  climate  and  gender  sensitive 
indicators 
DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITIES 
Output  1.1  Data  on  vulnerability,  agricultural  and  livestock  production  zoning, 
aggregation, processing centres and satellite markets made available 
A.  Undertake the Consolidated Livelihood Exercise for Analyzing Resilience (CLEAR) 
diagnostic tool with gender and youth disaggregated data and analysis 
36 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Output 1.2. Gender and youth inclusive Agriculture Resilience Plans developed for 
climate-resilient production 
B.  Formulate district and sub-district agriculture resilience plans (ARP) 
Output  1.3.  Diet  diversity  enhanced  through  diversified  food  production  (for  both 
market and household consumption) and increased nutrition education 
C.  Support  nutrition-sensitive  interventions  (home  gardens,  nutrition  education  and 
awareness,  water  harvesting/storage  tanks  and  selected  on-farm  and  off-farm 
activities)  to  improve  livelihoods  and  food  and  nutrition  security  of  vulnerable 
groups 
Output 1.4 Skills and approaches developed for increasing productivity and investment 
allocated to enhance commercialisation. 
D.  Invest in sustainable commercial farming systems of selected commodities 
(including in climate-resilient infrastructure) to enhance productivity and 
production expansion to support commercialization 
E.  Develop skills of smallholder farmers (women and men), cooperatives and youth-
led enterprises on climate resilient farming practices and technologies, including 
on permaculture, to ensure their economic empowerment 
37 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
COMPONENT 2. STRENGTHENED VALUE CHAIN COORDINATION AND MARKET 
LINKAGES 
Outcome 2: Fostered business-oriented environment for farmer groups to develop 
private sector enterprises in the agri-food sector and for engaging youth in lucrative 
commercial ventures 
Key Performance Indicators 
Outcomes and Outputs 
specific 
chain 
Value 
intervention 
strategies and plans formulated to guide 
capacities 
investment  planning  and 
enhanced 
investment 
plans. 
implement 
to 
Gender  and  Youth  inclusive  hubs  to 
support  a  robust  agri-business  sector 
established. 
Effective  and  inclusive  climate 
infrastructure 
resilient 
investments 
support 
to 
commercialization undertaken 
Establishment 
stakeholder  platforms 
business linkages fostered. 
of 
inclusive  multi-
facilitated  and 
  IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENT, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
  Component 2. STRENGTHENED VALUE CHAIN COORDINATION AND MARKET LINKAGES                                       
  Primary responsibility 
Activity 
  Agencies involved 
 Implementation Arrangement 
Build the skills of women, 
men and youth farmer groups 
and cooperatives and provide 
them with access to assets for 
diversification and 
commercialization of farm 
systems and products, 
including off-farm businesses 
(organic inputs, biochar, soil 
stimulants, bio-fertilizers, bio-
pesticides, etc.)  
38 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Establish gender and youth 
inclusive enterprise hubs for 
aggregation, storage, 
processing, packaging and 
marketing 
Finance small and medium-
scale infrastructure 
(aggregation and processing 
centers, cold storage, milk 
chilling centers and marketing 
facilities) 
Facilitate business linkages 
between producers, buyers, 
financiers, and local public 
stakeholders through multi-
stakeholder platforms (MSP) 
and business interactions 
(B2B) to meet local, national, 
regional and global consumer 
demand 
KEY SUCCESS FACTORS 
DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITIES 
Output  2.1:  Value  chain  specific  intervention  strategies  and  plans  formulated  to  guide 
investment planning and capacities enhanced to implement investment plans. 
A. 
Build  the  skills  of  women,  men  and  youth  farmer  groups  and  cooperatives  and 
provide  them  with  access  to  assets  for  diversification  and  commercialization  of  farm 
systems  and  products,  including  off-farm  businesses  (organic  inputs,  biochar,  soil 
stimulants, bio-fertilizers, bio-pesticides, etc.)  
Output  2.2  Gender  and  Youth  inclusive  hubs  to  support  a  robust  agri-business  sector 
established. 
B.  Establish  gender  and  youth  inclusive  enterprise  hubs  for  aggregation,  storage, 
processing, packaging and marketing 
39 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Output 2.3 Effective and inclusive climate resilient infrastructure investments to support 
commercialization undertaken 
C.  Finance  small  and  medium-scale  infrastructure  (aggregation  and  processing 
centers, cold storage, milk chilling centers and marketing facilities) 
Output  2.4  Establishment  of  inclusive  multi-stakeholder  platforms  facilitated  and 
business linkages fostered. 
D.  Facilitate business linkages between producers, buyers, financiers, and local public 
stakeholders  through  multi-stakeholder  platforms  (MSP)  and  business  interactions 
(B2B) to meet local, national, regional and global consumer demand 
COMPONENT 3: INNOVATIVE AND COMPETITIVE AGRI-FOOD SECTOR 
Outcome  3:  Enabling  financial  and  policy  environment  to  promote  a  competitive  and 
modernized food sector 
Project outputs under this component include: 
Outcomes and Outputs 
Key Performance Indicators 
Inclusive financial products and processes 
developed  &  financial  /business  literacy 
enhanced 
production, 
processing,  business  development  and 
expansion. 
support 
to 
Marketing 
digitalization. 
enhanced 
through 
Competitiveness of value chains 
and  market  share  in  domestic 
international  markets 
and 
improved 
through  regulation, 
standardization and certification 
40 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENT, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
  Component 3. Innovative and Competitive agri-food sector 
  Primary responsibility 
Activity 
Agencies 
involved 
  Implementation Arrangement 
Support  financial  institutions  to 
design  and  align  their  products 
and  processes 
to  enhance 
access  to  financial  services  for 
women,  men  and  youth 
in 
households, 
smallholder 
cooperatives, 
producers, 
aggregators and traders. 
  Develop digital technologies and 
real  time  marketing,  production 
and/or  logistics  data,  including 
custom  applications 
for  on-
demand  extension  and  agri-
food advisory services 
  Promote  branding  of  national 
through 
niche-products 
certification 
regulation 
and 
processes  to  ensure  products 
meet  internationally  recognized 
food standards 
KEY SUCCESS FACTORS 
DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITIES 
Output  3.1.  Inclusive  financial products  and  processes  developed  &  financial  /business 
literacy  enhanced  to  support  production,  processing,  business  development  and 
expansion. 
A. 
Support financial institutions to design and align their products and processes to 
enhance  access  to  financial  services  for  women,  men  and  youth  in  smallholder 
households, cooperatives, producers, aggregators and traders. 
41 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Output 3.2:  Marketing enhanced through digitalization. 
B. 
Develop digital technologies and real time marketing, production and/or logistics 
data,  including  custom  applications  for  on-demand  extension  and  agri-food  advisory 
services 
Output  3.3:        Competitiveness  of  value  chains  and  market  share  in  domestic  and 
international markets improved through regulation, standardization and certification 
Promote branding of national niche-products through certification and regulation 
C. 
processes to ensure products meet internationally recognized food standards 
. 
42 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
CHAPTER 9:  M&E, KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND GENDER 
9.1 Purpose and objectives 
The  objective  of  this  chapter  is  to  guide  the  implementation  of  the  project  planning, 
monitoring  and  Evaluation,  Knowledge  management  (KM)  and  gender  mainstreaming. 
The  detailed  strategies  and  implementation  arrangement  for  KM  and  gender  would  be 
guided by the project KM strategy and Gender and Social Inclusion Strategy.  
9.2 Planning 
The  Dzongkhags  with  relevant  sector  heads  and  technical  experts,  and  concerned 
agencies  like  ARDC,  RLDC,  RAMCO  and  FMCL  will  support  the  Gewogs  in  collection  of 
inputs for the preparation of the Dzongkhag level Annual Workplan and Budget (AWPB) 
and  Procurement  Plan  (PP).  WFP  TA  support  will  guide  the  AWPB  and  PP  development 
process. The PMU will compile the different Dzongkhag level AWPBs and prepare a single 
project  AWPB.  The  AWPB  will  be  approved  by  the  PSC.  The  AWPB  will  identify  all 
agencies and service providers responsible for delivering project activities, and estimated 
financial  outlays  for  the  year  including,  RGoB  and  beneficiary  contributions.  The  PP  will 
detail  all  procurements,  including  WFP’s  procurements,  to  be  undertaken  for  the  year 
and  the  modalities  governing  those  procurements.  Whenever  implementing  partners 
identify  the  need  to  change,  adopt  and  adjust  the  working  modality  and  annual  work 
plans  or  procurement  plans,  they  may  propose  such  changes  to  the  PMU,  to  be 
ultimately endorsed by the PSC and IFAD. 
9.3 Monitoring and Evaluation 
Drawing  on  the  BRECSA  M&E  system,  a  robust  geo-referenced  M&E  system  will  be 
established. The PMU will establish an M&E unit and develop the M&E system, which will 
support  progress  monitoring.  The  M&E  system  will  harmonize  with  RGoB’s  PLaMS  as 
mandated  for  all  projects,  as  well  as,  ensure  full  complementarity  between  IFAD,  WFP 
and the GAFSP M&E requirements. Additionally, the PMU M&E unit will design formats to 
capture and collect critical data not captured by PLaMS and for data from the field level, 
drawing  on  lessons  from  BRECSA  as  per  IFAD  project  management  requirements.  The 
M&E  system  will  also  serve  to  highlight  areas  where  immediate  intervention  and 
remedial  action  is  needed.  The  system  will  be  participatory  and  decentralized  involving 
key  target  groups  so  that  the  target  groups  will  participate  in  identification  of  project 
activities and monitoring implementation of project. 
The  logframe  will  constitute  the  basis  for  the  3  tier  M&E  system:  (i)  output  monitoring 
with  focus  on  physical  and  financial  inputs,  activities  and  outputs;  (ii)  outcome 
monitoring for the measurement of benefits at household and community levels; and (iii) 
impact  assessment  evaluating  project  impact  for  the  target  groups  in  comparison  with 
objectives.  The  system  will  be  compliant  with  IFAD  requirements,  and  relevant  data, 
analysis and reporting will be disaggregated by gender and age. The data will inform the 
preparation of above mentioned AWPBs and annual progress reports. The PMU M&E unit 
will carry out annual outcome surveys (AOS) to measure changes as a result of project 
interventions  to  provide  a  rapid  feedback  on  progress.  A  baseline  survey  will  be 
commissioned by the PMU at the start to assess the socio-economic status of households 
and  define  the  benchmark  against  which  project  performance  will  be  assessed.  The 
Women’s  Empowerment  in  Agriculture  Index  (WEAI)  and  the  Minimum  Diet  Diversity 
Indicator (MDD-W) will be included in the baseline survey and tracked at mid-term and 
completion. An end-of-project impact survey will be contracted to an external agency to 
assess the contribution of BRECSA in achieving its overall goal. 
. 
43 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
The  Dzongkhag  will  ensure  collection  of  data  at  the  activity  and  output  level  from 
village/gewog  and  compiled  validated  progress  in  the  prescribed  M&E  formats  will  be 
submitted  to  the  respective  component  managers  at  the  PMU  on  a  quarterly  basis. 
Component Managers will review progress, validate information and submit to M&EO for 
consolidation  and  documentation  of  the  half-yearly  and  annual  progress  reports. 
Submission  of  physical  and  financial  progress  report  at  all  stage  will  follow  prescribed 
M&E templates (attached in Annex 23) which will be similar to the AWPB template with 
slight  modifications  to  avoid  confusions  of  different  templates  and  for  consistent 
reporting on physical progress against the annual targets. The annual progress updates 
from  all  implementing  partners  will  be  submitted  to  the  PMU  within  two  weeks  after 
closure of the financial year. This will ensure PMU to complete the annual progress report 
within two months after the financial year closes. 
M&E officer will maintain an updated database of progress activities on a regular basis to 
generate  cumulative  progress  of  the  project  as  deemed  necessary  and  for  institutional 
memory in the event of unforeseen Human Resource changes. 
The  basic  M&E  framework  for  BRECSA  will  follow  a  systematic  collection,  analysis  and 
reporting  of  information/data  at  three  different  levels  of  project  implementation:  (i) 
outputs; (ii) outcomes; and (iii) impact. 
Output monitoring will measure the progress of activities and achievement of outputs 
against  annual  targets  in  the  AWPB  for  each  project  component.  This  can  be  linked  to 
the  financial  expenditure  on  the  concerned  activities  and  reported  as  part  of  M&E 
activity. The type of output data to be collected and monitored will be carefully merged 
with the project logical framework indicators and RIMS indicators. 
Outcome  monitoring  measures  the  immediate  changes  coming  about  as  a  result  of 
project interventions. The outcome indicators to be monitored are briefly outlined in the 
project  logical  framework.  Data  for  outcome  monitoring  of  the  project  will  be  collected 
through the conduct of Annual Outcome Surveys (AOS) starting from the second year of 
the project implementation. An AOS may also be carried out on a thematic basis in order 
to  focus  on  a  specific  area  of  project  intervention,  such  as  dairy  or  agriculture-based 
enterprises created as a result of project intervention. 
Impact evaluation is the process to assess the contribution of BRECSA in achieving the 
overall  goal  of  the  project.  It  will  consist  of  baseline  and  end-of-  project  surveys.  The 
project will undertake baseline  (at Project Year One) and  end-line (Last Project  Year  or 
PY  7)  study.  A  table  showing  RIMS  indicators  to  be  considered  during  the  baseline  and 
end-line study is given in annexure17. This survey will be coordinated by the PMU M&E 
unit  and  contracted  to  an  external  agency  with  specific  expertise  in  such  assessments. 
Information  to  be  collected  will  include  the  impact  level  indicators  of  IFAD’s  Results 
Impact  Management  System  (RIMS)  and  include  mandatory  indicators  relating  to 
household  assets,  food  security  and  child  malnutrition  (anthropometric  data  of  children 
under  five  years  of  age).  Data  will  also  be  collected  to  relate  changes  in  all  these 
indicators following participation in project activities and delivery of project outputs.  
9.4 Results and Impact Management System 
The  M&E  unit  at  PMU  will  also  prepare  and  submit  the  RIMS  report  as  per  IFAD’s 
guidelines. As far as possible to avoid duplication of efforts, indicators required for RIMS 
reporting  would  be  integrated  in  the  M&E  templates.  RIMS  looks  at  three  levels  of 
results: 
a.  First  Level  Results  correspond  to  the  project  activities  and  outputs,  derived  from 
the  project  logframe.  The  results  measure  financial  and  physical  progress,  mostly 
quantitative  and  reported  on  an  annual  basis,  which  can  be  captured  from  output 
44 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
monitoring.  BRECSA  will  only  report  on  the  first  level  results  of  the  RIMS  till  the  Mid 
Term Review (MTR) of the  project. 
b.  RIMS  second  level  results  correspond  to  project  outcomes,  measure  improved 
functioning  or  behavioral  change,  are  more  qualitative  and  normally  take  longer  to 
realize. This level corresponds to either the output or objective level of the project log-
frame.  The  RIMS  second  level  results  are  in  the  form  of  assessment,  looking  at  the 
extent to which a given project activity has successfully led to specific outcome, which is 
the assessment of effectiveness. It also looks at the extent to which benefits are likely to 
be  sustained  after  the  project  ends,  which  is  the  assessment  of  sustainability.  Various 
methods (such as studies, participatory approaches, questionnaire surveys, focus group 
discussions,  etc.)  can  be  used  to  measure  and  report  on  this.  Since  results  under  this 
level usually take longer time to realize, BRECSA will report on the Second Level Results 
post mid-term review of the project. 
c.  Third-level  results  correspond  to  project  impact,  which  measure  combined  effects 
of  the  first  and  second  level  results,  are  quantitative  (e.g.  households  reporting 
increased assets) and are measured usually at three points during project life (baseline 
or  benchmark,  mid-term  and  completion  or  end-line).  These  refer  to  the  goal  and 
objective level of the project log-frame. 
9.5 Learning, Knowledge Management and communication 
A  comprehensive  KM  action  plan  will  be  developed  during  the  first  year  of 
implementation.  BRECSA's  KM  activities  will  support  the  effective  flow  of  relevant 
information between project staff, beneficiaries and other stakeholders. The objective of 
knowledge  management  is  to  ensure  the  project  units  are  able  to  generate  and 
document the knowledge that is useful to build practical know-how that helps to improve 
project  performance  and  results.  Output,  outcome  and  impact  data  generated  by  the 
M&E  system  will  inform  high-quality  case  studies,  briefs  and  reports.  The  PMU  will 
document the emerging experiences, lessons and best practices and share them widely. 
Additional  technical  assistance  will  be  sourced  by  the  PMU  for  producing  knowledge 
products as needed. All knowledge products will be disseminated for enhancing learning, 
policy dialogue and potential scaling-up of successful interventions. 
The  PMU  will  continuously  endeavor  to  capture  and  disseminate  lessons  learned, 
successful  case  studies  and  good  practices.  The  project  will  adopt  various  knowledge 
sharing methods and tools including designing and facilitating knowledge events such as 
meetings and workshops at various level. Knowledge products will be developed through 
collaboration  with  relevant  RDCs  and  TA  on  a  regular  basis.  Among  others,  this  will 
include: 
  Case studies/articles reporting in the RNR newsletters (in English and Dzongkha). 
The RNR newsletter published on a monthly basis will dedicate pages for BRECSA 
as has been done with the earlier project. 
  A separate website for the project will be established as a knowledge sharing tool 
which will be regularly updated and its wider use will be encouraged. Information 
on  good  practices  and  innovations  will  also  be  posted  on  the  IFAD-  Asia  web 
portal  for  information  sharing  with  other  IFAD  programmes  in  the  Asia  Pacific 
region. 
  Special  effort  would  be  made  to  prepare  audio-visual  knowledge  products  and 
other  print  materials  such  as  briefs,  technical  manuals,  posters  on  key  project 
activities.  Reports  including  but  not  limited  to  progress  reports,  field  monitoring 
reports,  supervision/support  missions,  and  newsletters  will  be  archived  and 
disseminated for information sharing. 
45 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
  To  avoid  duplication  with  other  projects  in  the  region,  PMU  will  maintain  and 
update similar external funded program in the project funded area. This will also 
ensure complementarities of the  project activities with those of  other  projects in 
the region. 
  Developing skills and competencies of project staffs to improve human resources 
in  the  areas  of  knowledge  management.  Learning  events  on  specific  themes 
relevant to the project such as (but not limited to) value chain development, lead 
farmer  approach,  gender  mainstreaming,  and  climate  smart  agriculture  will  be 
organised. 
  Project will make available such materials and factsheets for providing firsthand 
information to visitors including mission members. 
While PMU will be responsible for the overall implementation of the strategy, it is highly 
recommended  that  reporting  on  the  above  KM  activities  becomes  part  of  the  regular 
monitoring  and  reporting  system  for  BRECSA.  As  such,  PMU  will  ensure  that  the  KM 
activities are reflected when and where relevant in the annual work plan and budget. 
Enhancing  Use  of  Knowledge  from  M&E:  BRECSA  will  use  its  M&E  data  and 
information  for  improved  learning,  enhancing  accountability  of  the  project  for  learning, 
use  the  knowledge  and  learning  from  M&E  for  project  planning,  implementation  and 
improved monitoring, and document innovations and success stories so as to contribute 
in  the  overall  local,  regional,  national  and  global  knowledge  pool  in  investing  in  rural 
people. 
9.10 Gender Mainstreaming 
Gender  mainstreaming  in  BRECSA  will  follow  a  Gender  and  Development  (GAD) 
approach that seeks to have both women and men participate, make decisions and share 
benefits  from  the  project.  This  approach  aims  at  meeting  practical  needs  as  well  as 
promoting  strategic  interests  of  women  and  men  and  is  in  line  with  the  IFAD  Gender 
Equality and Women’s Empowerment Policy and the Bhutan Gender Policy note. BRECSA 
will clearly identify the extent to which the project has reached women and the degree to 
which  they  have  benefited  from  project  activities  and  outputs.  This  involves  collecting 
gender  disaggregated  data  on  project  activities  and  outputs  to  see  if  women  have  fully 
participated  in  group  membership,  group  leadership,  training  and  other  livelihoods 
activities. Further, gender disaggregation to assess if women have benefited in terms of 
outcomes,  such  as  increasing  production,  or  impacts,  such  as  increased  income  and 
assets  shall  be  undertaken.  The  results  of  these  indicators  could  be  verified  through 
Annual  Outcome  Surveys  and/or  focused  group  discussion  by  M&E  or  project  staff 
visiting the fields. 
As  some  indicators  are  better  measured  on  a  household  basis,  these  need  to  be 
disaggregated by sex of the household head. 
The  Gender  and  Social  Inclusion  strategy  that  will  be  developed  as  part  of  the 
project will be the main guiding document for mainstreaming gender and poverty in the 
project  implementation.  This  document  will  clearly  underline  detailed  action  plans  and 
implementation modalities for mainstreaming gender and poverty. The strategy will have 
gender  check  list  in  all  components/subcomponents  or  activities  of  the  project.  The 
experiences of MAGIP can be drawn in preparing the strategy and action plan 
Over the course of project implementation detailed gender analysis (from the collection 
of  sex  disaggregated  data)  will  be  undertaken  periodically.  This  will  help  to  streamline 
service delivery based on the needs of the situation and generate information on activity 
profile and access and control aspects to develop and refine the gender strategy for the 
project. Thus, the gender and social inclusion strategy will be a dynamic document that 
will  be  updated  as  and  when  required9  by  the  PMO  based  on  the  experiences  with 
project implementation. 
The  Gender  focal  person  at  the  PMU  will  provide  input  for  decision-making  on  project 
interventions and ensure mainstreaming of gender and social development issues at the 
various levels of the project activities. 
46 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Gender  mainstreaming  in  project  management  will  ensure  the  following  key  activities 
and results: 
  Actions identified in the gender strategy are translated in the AWPB, M&E framework 
and financial reporting 
  Specific  targets  are  set  for  women  and  men  participants  in  different  activities  and 
components. 
  Ensure  gender  balance  in  project-related  decision-making  bodies  such  as  FGs, 
cooperatives, etc. with an emphasis in leadership positions. 
  Assess  training  needs  of  the  PMU,  Dzongkhag  and  Gewog  staff  on  gender 
sensitization and social inclusion and facilitate provision of need based training. 
  To the extent possible, gender balance is maintained in staffing of the PMU. Include 
responsibilities for gender mainstreaming in the Terms of Reference of all PMU Staff 
  The  PMU  organizational  set  up  and  work  environment  will  be  gender  sensitive  with 
adequate  enabling  environment  for  women  staff  to  work  with  dignity,  safety  and 
respect. 
9.10.1 Mainstreaming in project components 
Gender  mainstreaming  and  social  inclusion  in  project  components  would  be  ensured 
through  the  inclusion  of  sex-disaggregated  and  target  group  categorization  in  the 
activities  and  outputs  of  the  components  where  applicable.  Reporting  formats  including 
but not limited to AWPB and M&E templates will be designed to collect sex-disaggregated 
information.  Adequate  sensitization  and  capacity  building  will  be  provided  to  staff 
involved  in  collecting,  reporting  and  analyzing  data.  Some  of  the  gender  and 
vulnerability disaggregated data could include: 
  Women and men as a percentage of member of farmers groups, cooperatives and 
village level development committees; 
  Women and men as president or in leadership position in groups or committees; 
  Women and men as a percentage of beneficiaries of project-related training 
activities. 
9.10.2 Gender Responsive Planning and Budgeting (GRPB) 
BRECSA  will  attempt  achieving  substantial  results  and  impact  by  allocating  adequate 
financial  resources  under  different  components/sub-components  capable  of  benefiting 
the  poor  or  vulnerable  target  groups/households.  Ensuring  adequate  and  balanced 
funding  is  made  for  women  and  men  will  be  a  key  step  at  the  time  of  preparation  of 
annual work plan and budget. This will be in line with the Governments recent initiative 
on  GRPB  that  aims  to  analyze  how  effectively  governments  policies,  projects  and 
budgetary  allocations  responds  to  the  differentiated  needs  of  and  impacts  on  women, 
men, girls and boys and the extent to which they promote gender equality. 
9.10.3 Gender sensitive Monitoring and Evaluation 
The project will develop a gender sensitive M&E framework. The baseline for the project 
will cover information that will help the project to monitor progress with the focus on the 
gender  and  vulnerability  aspects.  Some  of  these  aspects  that  can  be  captured  may 
include: (i) main livelihood and income sources of men and women; (ii) expenditures by 
men  and  women;  and  (iii)  ownership  and  control  over  household  assets  by  men  and 
women. 
Special  studies  and  field  verifications:  BRECSA  will  also  endeavor  to  undertake  at 
regular intervals some special qualitative studies with quantitative data as applicable to 
assess the project influence/outcomes/impacts on some key areas or indicators. Some of 
these could be: 
  Changes in livelihood and income patterns of men and women from smallholders. 
  Changes in division of labour between women and men. 
47 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
  Changes in the leadership levels for women and men. 
  Differences in access to, and control of, resources between women and men. 
  Changes in decision making patterns between women & men at the household & 
community. 
  Changes in men’s and women’s attitudes, perceptions, practices, knowledge and 
feeling of empowerment and attainment of general wellbeing and happiness. 
48 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
CHAPTER10: GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF AWP&B 
10.1 Purpose and objective 
The  guidelines  outlined  in  this  section  will  detail  out  the  AWPB  processes.  This  is 
expected  to  help  the  project  implementers  in  conforming  to  the  set  targets,  outputs, 
outcomes and thus the project goals and objectives. 
The AWPB shall be the guiding document for the activities to be carried out during 
that particular financial year and shall serve the following purposes and objectives: 
  Provide the framework for planning the work and the budget required during 
that particular period of time. 
  Identify the goals, activities and resources required in that particular time period. 
  Set timelines/completion dates for each of the stated activities and outputs. 
  Provide transparency as the AWPB shall be circulated amongst all stakeholders 
who has a need and right to know what is being done with the program 
support during that particular time and space. 
  Serve as a necessary tool for planning, executing, implementation and 
monitoring & reporting of the program activities. 
The following listed documents shall be closely referred to while preparing the AWPB: 
  Annual Performance Agreement (APA) 
  Project Log-frame 
  Cost-tables 
  AWPB template 
  Financing plan 
  Financing rules in the procurement methods, 
  Financial Agreement (FA) 
  Previous Year project progress report. 
  KM & Gender Management Strategy. 
10.2 General Guidelines 
The AWPB preparation shall be guided by the following: 
  All  AWPB  should  be  prepared  in  the  prescribed  format/template  provided  by  the 
PMU. 
  All  AWPB  outcomes  and  outputs  should  be  aligned  to  the  planning  and 
monitoring system (PLaMS) of the RGoB. 
  All AWPB should be prepared based on the concept of result-oriented approach. 
  All AWPB should be prepared using both Cost Tables and Project Log frame. 
  The  respective  project  Dzongkhags  and  the  concerned  agencies  shall  prepare 
their draft AWPB by the mid of January of each financial year. 
  The  draft  AWPB  will  be  submitted  to  the  PMU  by  the  third  week  of  January  of 
each financial year. 
  The respective CMs shall scrutinize and review the AWPB and check conformity to 
the  project  goals  and  objectives.  This  shall  also  include  technical  review  of 
in  proposed  district-level  draft  AWPB  and  their 
sector-related  activities 
subsequent technical clearance. This step shall be completed by the first week of 
February. 
  The  reviewed  AWP&B  shall  then  be  presented,  discussed,  harmonized  and 
endorsed in the AWPB Workshop where all the RPIC members will be invited. The 
AWPB workshop will be conducted by the end of February each year. 
  The AWPB endorsed by RPIC shall then be submitted to the NPSC and IFAD 
for their concurrences prior to submission to the MoF.The NPSC shall be 
convened sometime in March-April of each year. 
  The final AWPB concurred by the IFAD shall be shared with all Dzongkhags and 
concerned agencies by the month of May each year. 
49 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
10.3  AWPB preparation: 
The planning process in BRECSA will entail seven steps: 1) the GEOs in consultation 
with  the  gewog  administrations,  communities  and  FGs/coops  will  prepare  a  draft 
AWPB and submit it to the Dzongkhag sector heads, 2) at the Dzongkhag level, the 
DAOs and DLOs will review and consolidate into a draft Dzongkhag AWPB and submit 
it to the PMU; 3) at PMU, the component Managers, in consultation with the Project 
Finance  Officer  and  other  technical  focal  persons,  will  review  the  draft  Dzongkhag 
and  Agencies  AWPB  and  consolidate  it  into  a  project  AWPB,  4)  the  draft  AWPB  will 
then undergo further review, discussion and endorsement during the annual Review 
&  Planning  Workshop  or  Annual  DPCC  meeting,  5)  the  DPCC  endorsed  AWPB  will 
then  be  presented  to  PSC  for  approval,  6)  submit  the  PSC  approved  AWPB  and 
procurement  plan  to  IFAD  for  final  endorsement  with  a  copy  to  Department  of 
National Budget (DNB), MoF, and finally 7) the PMU will share with the implementing 
agencies the AWPB which is endorsed by IFAD for implementation. The steps for the 
preparation  and  finalization  of  BRECSA  AWPB  alongwith  the  time  schedule  are 
presented in Figure 6. 
10.4 Changes in the AWP&B 
Under unavoidable circumstances should there be a need for changes to be 
incorporated into the final approved AWPB, the following due processes shall come 
into effect: 
  The  proposed  changes  should  be  submitted  to  the  PMU  with  proper  justification 
signed by the head of the agencies. 
  The concerned CMs at the PMU shall scrutinize the proposed changes and if 
reviewed positively, the proposed changes will be considered further. 
  If  the  proposed  changes  are 
inappropriate,  the  same  shall  be 
communicated  to  the  concerned  dzongkhags/agencies  no  later  than  2  weeks 
from the date of receipt of the request by the PMU. 
found 
  If  the  proposed  changes  are  found  appropriate,  the  PMU  shall  accord 
approval for the recommended changes. 
  The final approved AWPB shall then be forwarded back to the dzongkhags with a 
copy to the IFAD for information. 
50 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Figure 6: Steps for Preparation & Finalization of AWPB 
KEY AWPB ACTIVITIES 
TIME SCHEDULE 
Draft AWPB consolidation and 
Scrutiny at the PMU 
Beginning January 
Compilation of gewog AWPB at the 
Dzongkhag level 
Mid January 
Submission of Draft AWPB of 
Agencies to the PMU 
Beginning February 
Draft AWPB consolidation and 
Scrutiny at the PMU 
Mid February 
Convene Annual Review & Planning 
Workshop/RPIC meeting 
End February 
Present RPIC Endorsed AWPB & 
Procurement Plan to PSC for approval 
Beginning March 
Submit Approved AWPB & 
Procurement Plan to DNB and IFAD 
Mid March 
Share final concurred AWPB & 
Procurement Plan by IFAD to the 
Implementing Partners 
April/May 
Review & reprioritize activities after 6 
months (if required) by PMU 
December 
Activities Implementation and Reporting 
to PMU 
Quarterly 
51 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 1: Project Logframe 
52 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 2: Criteria for selection and identification of project interventions Matrix 
53 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 3: Cost Tables by Disbursement Category with financing rules 
54 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 4: Terms of Reference for PMU staff 
TOR FOR THE PROJECT DIRECTOR 
The PD will coordinate project management and ensure that implementation be realized according to 
the conditions of the FA and based on the PDR for BRESCA. The PD will oversee the establishment 
of  efficient  administrative,  financial  and  technical  management  procedures  to  serve  National, 
Dzongkhag  and  Gewog  implementation  needs.  The  PD  will  also  ensure  the  M&E  requirements  are 
developed and implemented in a timely fashion. 
In particular, the PD shall be responsible to: 
•  Make sure the business of the project is conducted in an efficient manner through: 
a.  Supervision and monitoring of project implementation; 
b.  Provision of guidance and capacity building for PMU staff; 
c. 
Installation and maintenance of appropriate systems and procedures (M&E, 
administrative, financial, operations and others); and 
Installation of check and balance and control mechanism for PMU operations; 
d. 
•  Develop  close  working  relationship  with  all  project  participants  and  stakeholders  to  ensure 
integration of program interventions congruent  with program goals, purpose and  objectives. The 
responsibility  involves  sensitization  of  program  entities,  keeping  open  lines  of  communication, 
initiating quick response mechanism and effective control system. 
•  Maintain close liaison with the PSC to facilitate the resolution of program issues and with the 
IFAD Focal Officers at the MoAF for proper coordination and facilitation at the national level. 
•  Ensure timely preparation of SOEs and WAs to ensure sufficient resources for program 
operations; this includes maintaining close liaison with the DPA, IFAD and MoAF’s PPD & AFD. 
•  Facilitate and support the conduct of missions, reviews, meetings and other program activities in 
ways that foster a joint learning process that identifies how the project could be improved further 
to achieve impact. 
•  Facilitate the conduct of annual audits and respond to audit queries in a timely manner. 
•  Ensure timely preparation of the AWPB by seeking inputs from all the stakeholders and present to 
approval bodies in a timely manner for review and approval. 
•  Ensure the prompt submission of AWPBs, procurement plans and progress reports. 
•  Ensure compliance with the provisions of the Loan Financing Agreement. 
•  Ensure that IFAD supervision missions are facilitated and provided with logistic support. 
•  Others as the PSC may require. 
55 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
TOR FOR MONITORING & EVALUATION AND GENDER OFFICER 
The M&E and Gender Officer shall report directly to the PD and shall be responsible for guiding, 
development and operation of the M&E and Gender cell of the program. 
Specifically, the M&E and Gender Officer is expected to: 
•  Set up the PME system and ensure it is implemented effectively by the key stakeholders 
•  Coordinate the project planning, such as consolidation of the AWPB, conducting, preparation and 
submission of project reports (such as Annual Progress Report, RIMS and AOS) and conducts of 
surveys (such as baseline, AOS, and end-line surveys) and project completion report (PCR). 
• 
Input all the key indicators (outputs, outcomes and impacts) of BRESCA to be captured in the 
PLaMS of RGoB 
•  Ensure timely updation of the project logframe. 
•  Responsible for timely data collection and entry, data analysis and report writing. Recommend 
measures to enhance program performance based on the analysis of reports. 
•  Closely  coordinate  with  project  Dzongkhags  and  other  agencies  of  the  RGoB  participating  in 
BRESCA  for  timely  generation  and  collection  of  project  data/results  for  which  a  system  will  be 
established. 
•  Coordinate all IFAD related compliance reporting and implementation of support/supervision 
mission, MTR, annual reviews and completion review. 
•  Act as counterpart to TAs on PME. 
•  Coordinate with all the component managers, implementing units on reportorial requirements on 
regular basis. 
•  Assist PD in the preparation and conduct of PSC and DPCC meetings. 
•  Undertake regular visits to the field to support implementation of M&E and to identify where 
• 
adaptations might be needed. 
Initiate and lead the coordination for implementation and updating of the KM strategy for the 
project 
•  Guide Assistant KM, Gender and M&E officer in the implementation and updating of the KM 
• 
strategy (including action plans) for the project. 
Integrate gender indicators into the M&E system and in the AOS surveys to ensure collection 
of gender segregated data on project activities and outputs 
•  Help Assistant KM, Gender and M&E officer in analysing gender disaggregated data and 
contribute to reporting on gender and KM in the annual progress report and RIMS. 
•  Conduct gender sensitization/gender capacity building trainings/workshops in the project 
areas at least once every financial year; 
•  Develop and maintain a knowledge database on gender and gender issues, impacts and 
strategies on respective sectors serviced by the project, and raise awareness amongst staff. 
•  Advise, initiate, support and advocate gender mainstreaming efforts in the project 
interventions 
•  Undertake special studies/assessments on gender related and other themes relevant to 
the project. 
•  Assists in developing and disseminating quality knowledge products depending on the target 
audience and information needs. The knowledge products could be in the forms of 
publications, documented case stories, photo documentation, videos, charts, manuals, etc. 
56 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
TOR FOR KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENTOFFICER 
The Knowledge Management (KM) officer shall report directly to the PD and also assist M&E and 
Gender Officer in the development and operation of the M&E, Gender and KM cell of the project. 
Specifically, the KM, Officer will perform the following tasks: 
•  Take lead in developing and disseminating quality knowledge products depending on the target 
audience  and  information  needs.  The  knowledge  products  could  be  in  the  forms  of 
publications, documented case stories, photo documentation, videos, charts, manuals, etc. 
•  Capture and disseminate lessons learned, successful case studies and good practices on 
a regular basis by adopting various knowledge sharing methods and tools 
•  Design and facilitate cross-project learning and best practice transfer within and outside project 
through workshop/meeting, documentation and sharing of lessons learned, media trip and 
learning routes. 
•  Create and maintain knowledge repositories to store and organize articles, reports and 
other resources related to the project. 
•  Coordinate with all the component managers and implementing units on reportorial requirements 
and on issues relating to project results, documentation, preparation/consolidation of learning and 
preparation/dissemination of communication/learning materials 
•  Assist the M&E and Gender officer (M&EGO) in the coordination of the project planning, such as 
consolidation  of  the  AWPB,  conducting,  preparation  and  submission  of  project  reports  (such  as 
Annual/Half Yearly Progress Report, RIMS and AOS) and conducts of surveys (such as baseline, 
AOS and end-line surveys) and project completion report (PCR). 
•  Assist M&EGO in timely data collection and entry, data analysis and report writing 
•  Analyse gender disaggregated data and contribute to reporting on gender and KM in the 
annual progress report and RIMS. 
•  Closely  coordinate  with  project  Dzongkhags  and  other  agencies  of  the  RGoB  such  as  FCBL 
participating  in  BRESCA  for  timely  generation  and  collection  of  project  data/results  for  which  a 
system will be established. 
• 
• 
Initiate and lead the coordination for implementation and updating of the KM strategy for the 
project. 
Integrate gender indicators into the M&E system and in the AOS surveys to ensure collection 
of gender segregated data on project activities and outputs 
•  Conduct gender sensitization/gender capacity building trainings/workshops in the project 
areas at least once every financial year; 
•  Develop and maintain a knowledge database on gender and gender issues, impacts and 
strategies on respective sectors serviced by the project, and raise awareness amongst staff. 
•  Support and advocate gender mainstreaming efforts in the project interventions 
•  Undertake special studies/assessments on gender related and other themes relevant to 
the project. 
57 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
TOR FOR PROJECT SUPPORT OFFICER 
The  Project  Support  Officer  (PSO)  will  provide  support  to  the  Project  Management  team  and  help 
them to deliver on the project outputs on time, within budget and required quality. She/he shall report 
directly to the PD. 
Specifically, the PSO shall carry out the following: 
•  Responsible for logistic arrangements of external and internal project meetings, workshops, study 
tours,  visits,  travels,  and  training  courses  to  ensure  that  they  are  properly  organised  and 
conducted and that minutes are accurately recorded and circulated to related people. 
•  Prepare contracts with project partners and counterparts upon requirements of the Project 
Manager, and follow up with finance team to ensure payments are made on time 
•  Prepare  contracts  with  suppliers,  service  providers,  and  consultants  upon  requirements  of  the 
Project  Manager,  ensure  the  compliance  with  contract  management  procedures  of  the 
organisation, and follow up with finance team to ensure payments are made on time 
•  Provide support to the monitoring and evaluation of the project and preparation of reports when 
required 
•  Coordinate  on  behalf  of  the  Project  with  various  stakeholder  institutions  such  as  Dzongkhags, 
Gewogs, RDC, RLDC, NSC, NSSC, NPPC, etc. who are involved in the project. 
•  Documentation of project meetings, workshops and preparing monthly updates to PD/RPIC/PSC. 
•  Facilitating workshops and meetings with the Project stakeholders. 
•  Making logistical arrangements and on-ground support to project activities at the National level 
•  Facilitate project meetings and other relevant events or forums on request including invitations, 
facilities booking, agenda production, minute-taking and issuing. 
•  Maintain Project Calendar. 
•  Arrange Project related travel and/or events. 
•  Generate simple documents such as letters, memos, spreadsheets and presentations. 
•  Assist the Project Team in planning and execution of work schedules, project reviews and project 
highlight reports. 
•  Responsible for ensuring that all project documentation is stored logically and securely in 
accordance with agreed document management processes. 
•  Liaise with the BRESCA Liaison office at the Ministry of Agriculture and Forests for necessary 
follow-up. 
•  Assist Finance Officer (FO) in the Procurement of goods, services and works for BRESCA in line 
with the loan agreement and the RGoB Financial Manual. 
•  Other responsibilities as the PD may assign. 
58 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
TOR FOR FINANCE OFFICER 
The Finance Officer (AO) will be responsible for Finance, Accounts and Procurement section of 
BRESCA. 
Specifically, the FO shall: 
•  Be responsible for proper implementation of payments including co-signatory of the project 
account. 
•  Facilitate preparation of Annual Budget for PMU and Dzongkhags for timely submission to DNB, 
Ministry of Finance. 
•  Monitor & ensure timely release of funds to the Implementing Units/Entities. 
•  Prepare WA and submit to DPA, MoF. 
•  Monitor the financial transactions of the implementing units/entities and ensure that the financial 
disbursements are made in compliance with RGoB financial rules and Regulations and as per the 
provisions of the Loan/grant Financing Agreement. 
•  Assist and provide guidance to the entities on financial reporting system. 
•  Prepare financial reports (interim and annual) and liaise with M&E cell for inclusion of financial 
report in the progress reports. 
•  Facilitate Audit in auditing the PMU accounts. 
•  Liaise with the IFAD focal officer at the DPA on submission of WA and Statement of Expenditure 
(SoE) to IFAD and 
•  Others as PD/PSC may assign. 
59 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
TOR FOR ACCOUNTS ASSISTANT 
The Accounts Assistant shall be responsible to assist the Finance Officer (FO) in day to day functions 
of the Finance section of the project. 
Specifically, the Accounts Assistant is expected to: 
•  Maintain books of accounts for the PMU as per RGoB Financial Rules & Regulation & as per the 
provisions of the Loan/grant Financing Agreement. 
•  Assist AO in preparation of Procurement Plan and Annual Work Plan & Budget. 
•  Collect expenditure statements from the Entities (Dzongkhags & others) for preparation of 
Withdrawal Application(WA) 
•  Disbursement of funds for the PMU. 
•  Assist AO in preparing financial report for submission to GNHC, MoF/IFAD 
•  Facilitate audit by providing all relevant documents. 
•  Prepare Statement of Expenditure (SoE) for the PMU 
•  Maintain Payment Log for the works, Goods & Services 
•  Prepare monthly fund reconciliation statement. 
•  Prepare consolidated monthly expenditure statements of PMU & Entities. 
60 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
TOR FOR ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT 
The Administrative Assistant shall be responsible for the overall administrative functions of BRESCA 
covering  procurement,  personnel,  travel,  property  maintenance,  human  resource  development  and 
others. 
Specifically, the Adm. Asst. is expected to: 
•  Assist AO in the formulation of the Procurement Plan for BRESCA in line with the loan 
agreement and the RGoB Financial Manual. 
•  Assist AO in procurement processes in keeping with the provisions of the RGoB Financial 
• 
Manual 2001 and the conditions in the Loan Financing Agreement. 
Initiate the formulation of HRD plan congruent with the Bhutan Civil Service Rules and 
Regulations 2010 or any amendments thereafter (BCSRR) and facilitate its implementation. 
•  Undertake personnel functions in accordance with the BCSRR 2010 or any amendments 
thereafter. 
•  Procurement of stationery, Equipment & Furniture, etc. for the PMU. 
•  Maintain Stock/Asset Register for PMU. 
•  Facilitate the processing of leaves, travel requests and the placement of program personnel. 
Initiate and facilitate the conduct of bidding processes in a manner consistent with the RGoB 
• 
Financial Manual and the Loan Financing Agreement. 
•  Coordinate with other focal points/component managers on administrative matters. 
•  Report regularly to the PD on matters related to administration. 
•  Other responsibilities as the PD may assign. 
61 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
TOR FOR COMPONENT MANAGER – AGRICULTURE PRODUCTION 
The Agriculture CM shall be the focal person for the Agricultural program component under BRESCA. 
He  will  be  responsible  for  the  planning,  implementation,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  all  activities 
related to the agricultural development. 
•  Coordinate,  in  conjunction  with  the  ARDC  and  the  project  area  (PA)  Dzongkhags,  the  lead 
farmer approach including training and the monitoring and evaluation of the overall system. 
•  Assist the PMU in technical review and clearance of proposals and requirements developed 
by the PA Dzongkhags and ARDC. 
•  Technical backstopping to the PD,  ARDC and Dzongkhag staff and implementation support. 
•  Based on the observation and evaluation of the agricultural program recommend to PMU 
measures to enhance its performance. 
•  Assist and facilitate the conduct of various farmers training to be conducted by the 
Dzongkhags as and when requested. 
•  Coordinate with other focal persons to ensure integration of above activities with the rest of 
program operations. 
•  Monitor the implementation of the planned agricultural activities in the PA on a quarterly basis 
and report and suggest to the PMU the progress and gaps in the field. 
•  Other responsibilities which the PD/PSC may assign. 
62 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
TOR FOR COMPONENT MANAGER – LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION 
The Livestock CM shall be the focal person for the livestock program component under BRESCA. He 
will be responsible for the planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of all activities related 
to the livestock development. 
•  Guide and assist in planning and development of annual work plan and budget of PA 
Dzongkhags related to livestock development. 
•  Facilitate technical review and clearance of proposals and requirements developed by the PA 
Dzongkhags and RLDC Kanglung, and ARDC  through PMU. 
•  Technical backstopping to the PD, FCBL/RAMCO, RLDC Kanglung, ARDC and Dzongkhag 
staff and implementation support. 
• 
Initiate,  in  conjunction  with  the  PA  Dzongkhags,  the  establishment  of  the  farmer  groups 
including  the  formulation  of  training  design  and  the  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  overall 
system. 
•  Based on the observation and evaluation of the livestock program recommend to PMU 
measures to enhance its performance. 
•  Assist and facilitate the conduct of various farmers training to be conducted by the 
Dzongkhags. 
•  Coordinate with other focal persons to ensure integration of above activities with the rest of 
program operations. 
•  Supervise project activities in the PA on a quarterly basis and report and suggest to the PMO 
on the progress and gaps in the field. 
•  Other technical responsibilities which the PD/PSC may assign. 
63 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
TOR FOR COMPONENT MANAGER – VALUE CHAIN AND MARKETING 
The CM for value chain and marketing shall be the focal person for the marketing program component 
under BRESCA. He will be responsible for the planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of 
all activities related to value chain development and marketing. 
•  Ensure liaison between the PMU and the project implementing partners mainly RAMCO and 
the PA Dzongkhags 
•  Support the PMU in project supervision. 
•  Guide and assist in planning and development of annual work plan and budget of 
FCBL/RAMCO related to value chain development and marketing. 
•  Technical backstopping to the PD, ARDC, RLDC Kanglung and Dzongkhag staff and 
implementation support. 
•  Assist  the  PMU  in  technical  review  and  clearance  of  proposals  related  to  value  chain 
development and marketing developed by the PA Dzongkhags, ARDCr and RLDC Kanglung. 
• 
• 
Initiate,  in  conjunction  with  the  PA  Dzongkhags,  strengthening  the  existing  farmers  groups 
and establishment of new farmer groups including the formulation of training design and the 
monitoring and evaluation of the overall system. 
Initiate and undertake relevant studies on value chain and disseminate the information to the 
marketing groups. 
•  Based on the observation and evaluation of the marketing program recommend to PMU 
measures to enhance its performance. 
•  Assist  and  facilitate  the  conduct  of  various  farmers’  training  to  be  conducted  by  the 
Dzongkhags. 
64 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 5: Project Organization Chart 
65 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 6: AWPB for the first Project Year 
66 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 7: An 18-month Procurement Plan 
67 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 8: Sample Chart of Accounts 
68 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 9: Designated Account reconciliation statement 
69 
CountryName of the Project:List other instruments if applicableFor the Period: Starting DateTo  End DateExpressed in Designated Account Denomination CurrencyNotesPART I (Advances and Expenditure)1.  Cumulative Advances by IFAD to the end of current Reporting period  / quarterTotal advances received from IFAD (into the DA or equivalent in Govt. Treasury) to the end of  current reporting period / Quarter. State last WA Number and Date through which advance was received2.  Cumulative Expenditure justified by IFAD  since project start till the beginning of Reporting QuarterTotal Amount of eligible Project expenditure justified / Reported in IFRs  till previous quarter end. This should not include direct payments / reimbursements to other accounts if any3.  Outstanding Advances to be accounted for (Line 1 minus Line 2)This  balancing figure should be matched to IFAD's Loan Account recordPART II (Designated Account - DA -  Activity)4.  DA balance at beginning of Reporting QuarterMatch to Report II (Ref. I)5a. Advances disbursed  by IFAD during the Reporting  QuarterTo support this  figure, please attach a List of WAs processed by IFAD. 5b. Add/Subtract cumulative adjustments, if any This may be reconciling items, e.g. funds recalled or any refund of ineligible expenditures during the quarter, if any.5c.  Total amount of Advances received during current reporting Quarter, net of adjustments (Line 5a plus Line 5b)6.  Outstanding Advances to be accounted for (Line 4 plus Line 5c) This is the total amouunt to be justified / accounted for. This should normally be same as Line 3. If not, difference to be explained in notes below7.  DA balance at end of Reporting Quarter Match to Report II (Ref. I)8a. Expenditure incurred during the Reporting QuarterMatch to Report II (Ref. II)8b. Add/Less Adjustments, if anyThis may be reconciling items, e.g.WAs submitted but not yet justified / recorded by IFAD at quarter-end. Adjustment details to be noted below8c. Total expenditure reported (net of adjustments) Expenditure (Line 8a plus 8b) Match to Report II (Ref. II)9. Total Advance accounted for: Add Line 7 and Line 8cThis should normally be same as Line 3 and Line 6. If not, difference to be explained in notes below10. Difference if any (Line 6 minus Line 9)This represents advance that has not yet been explained. This should ideally be zero. If not, explain reconciliation in note belowPART III (CASH FORECASTS and REPLENISHMENT REQUIREMENT)Match all figures  to Report I11. Net Forecast Spend from Designated Account Figures from Report I (REF V). This excludes planned direct payments and Reimbursements)12. Replenishment Requirement for Subsequent 2 Reporting QuartersFigures from Report Ref VII13. Advance Recovery, if anyRecovery will be processed during the 6 months preceding the Completion Date14. Disbursement requested this quarterGive WA Reference NumberNOTESExplanation for item 5b (if not zero):IFR, WA RefExplanation for item 8b (if not zero):IFR, WA RefExplanation for item 10 (if not zero):IFR, WA RefNote 1: IF the Reports II and II are in functional currency other than the DA currency, equivalent amounts in DA curency in this report and Report I should be prepared using forex rates on a FIFO basisDateApprover NameReport III: Designated Account Activity Statement IFAD Instrument number: 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 10: Checklist for Withdrawal Application 
IFAD Financing No.  
WA No. 
Reporting period [from ………to ……………] 
FORM 105 - CHECKLIST FOR WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION 
FORM 100 - APPLICATION FOR WITHDRAWAL 
1. Sequential numbering of withdrawal application 
Yes or No 
2. Withdrawal application amount tallies with sequentially numbered summary sheets 
3. Categories/subcategories charged according to schedule 2 of financing agreement 
4. Percentage of financing applicable for each category or subcategory 
5. Availability of funds in categories and the overall financing amount 
6. Currency of payment 
7. Completeness and accuracy of banking instructions 
8. Complete name and address of correspondent bank 
9. WA is signed by Authorized Representative 
STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURE 
1. Eligibility of expenditures claimed 
(a) Within SOE financial ceiling 
(b) Expenditures under specific category [-----] eligibility 
2. Form 102 signed by designated Project Accountant, Project Director, Authorized 
Representative 
3. Form 102 supported by signed Form 101 (for items reported in 2, but over the financial ceiling) 
  DESIGNATED ACCOUNT – REPLENISHMENT REQUESTS  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
1. Amount within ceiling figure agreed as a reasonable limit [-- US$ or --]; or per AWP/B period 
2. Amount at least equal to 20 per cent of the agreed limit; or per AWP/B programmeed requirements  Yes 
3. Amount agreed sufficient to cover a specific reporting period (revolving fund option) 
4. Exchange rate used 
5. Completeness of designated account banking and account details 
6. Enclosed designated account reconciliation and bank statements 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION (attached when/if required) 
1. Copy of contract 
2. Copy of invoice, certified by Programme Director 
3. Copy of bank guarantee and performance guarantee (for advance payment) 
4. Copy of delivery receipt 
5. Copy of evidence of payment 
6. Completed Form 101 
7. Completed Form 102 (A) 
PROCUREMENT 
1. Copy of ‘no objection(s)’ provided by IFAD (attached) 
2. Copy of Contract Payment Monitoring Form(s) (attached) 
  COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITION(S) FOR DISBURSEMENT  
1. In accordance with terms in section E of the Financing Agreement 
2. In accordance with terms in the Letter to the Borrower/Recipient 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
70 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
EXPENDITURE INCURRED/COMMITTED BEFORE PROGRAMME COMPLETION 
DATE 
Yes 
1. Expenditure verified as eligible: 
(a) contract signed before programme completion date 
(b) goods delivered before programme completion date 
(c) services completed and/or rendered before programme completion date 
Remarks: 
____________________ 
Prepared by: Project Accounts Officer 
Dated: 
_____________________ 
Certified by: Project Director 
Dated: 
71 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 11: Sample financial statement 
72 
Name of the Project:IFAD Instrument number:List other instruments if applicableFor the Period: Starting DateTOEnd DateActual SinceActual SinceActual for PeriodActual For YearInceptionActual for PeriodActual For YearInceptionTo-DateTo-DateTo-DateTo-DateABCDEFUses of Funds by Category:Category 1-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Category 2-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Category 3-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Category 4-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Category 5-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Category 6-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Category 7-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Category 8-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Total Funds Used by CategoriesII-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Uses of Funds by Component:Component 1-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Component 2-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Component 3-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Component 4-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Component 5-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Component 6-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Component 7-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Total Funds Used by Component (must be equal to II)III-                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Report I: Summary of Uses of FundsAuthorized SignatoryNameDesignationOrganization/ProjectIFAD LoanCurrencyIFAD GrantsCurrency\REF 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Report II: Funds Reconciliation Statement 
Name of the Project: 
IFAD Instrument number: 
List other instruments if applicable 
For the Period:  
Starting Date 
End Date 
 IFAD Loan  
 IFAD Grants  
 Currency  
 Currency  
PART I (Funds Status) 
1.  Cumulative project expenditure since inception to date 
                      -    
                      -    
2.  Cumulative funds received from IFAD till the end of reporting period 
                      -    
                      -    
3.  Funds receivable from IFAD  (Line 1 minus Line 2) 
                      -    
                      -    
PART II (Receivable from IFAD) 
4.  Total of Withdrawal Applications submitted but not yet cleared by IFAD (if not 
zero, give details below) 
                      -    
                      -    
5.  Add/Substract - Adjustments (if any) 
                      -    
                      -    
6.  Expenditure claimed as Reimbursement for the current reporting 
period 
                      -    
                      -    
7.  Funds required as Withdrawal from IFAD  (Line 4 Plus Line 5 Plus Line 
6)  
                      -    
                      -    
8. Difference, if any (Line 3 minus Line 7). (If not zero, please provide 
explanation) 
                      -    
                      -    
Details for Line 4: WAs submitted but not yet cleared by IFAD 
WA Ref No. 
Amount 
TOTAL 
                      -    
Explanation for Line 5 (if not zero): 
IFR & WA Ref. 
Explanation for Line 8 (if not zero): 
IFR & WA Ref. 
73 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
74 
Report III: Variance Analysis of Use of Funds - FYName of the Project:IFAD Instrument number:List other instruments if applicableFor the Period: FY Start DateToEnd DatePlannedActualBalancePlannedActualBalanceABC=A-BD=B/AEFG=E-FH=F/E Ref: AWP/ Forecast  Actual Cumulative year todate  AWPB Available Balance  Actual Progress against AWPB  Ref: AWP/ Forecast  Actual Cumulative year todate  AWPB Available Balance  Actual Progress against AWPB %age%ageExpenditure by Categories:Category 1-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Category 2-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Category 3-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Category 4-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Category 5-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Category 6-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Category 7-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Category 8-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              TOTAL      I -                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Expenditure by Components:Component 1-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Component 2-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Component 3-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Component 4-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Component 5-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Component 6-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              Component 7-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              TOTAL      II (must be equal to I)-                 -                 -                 -                 -              -              * Note: Provide reasons if the Cash Forecast is over and above AWPB Balance (i.e. the Forecast includes the Quarter 1 of the Subsequent AWPB)Organization/ProjectCurrencyCurrencyIFAD LoanIFAD GrantsAuthorized SignatoryNameDesignation 
Description: 
Specification: 
Identification Number: 
Location 
1    
2    
3   …………. 
  Initials 
of 
Net Book 
Value 
Nu. 
Property  Remarks 
  Officer   
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 12: Sample Fixed Asset register 
( Name of Office) 
FIXED ASSETS REGISTER   
Base 
Cost 
Other expenses 
Nu……… 
Nu…   
.. 
Nu…   
Total cost of 
acquisition 
Cost Sheet Ref. No./   
Vr.Ref.No………………………………………….. 
Date of commissioning………………………… 
.. 
Manufacturer/Contractors Name and 
Address………………………………….. 
Cost of 
Addition 
DISPOSED/TRANSFERRED 
CATEGORY: 
Acquisition 
Date of  Disposed/ 
Depreciatio
n 
Financia
l 
year 
Nu. 
Ref.  Cost 
No.  Nu. 
Disposal  transferred 
Transfer 
to 
Ref.  Amoun 
No. 
t Nu. 
75 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 13: Sample form for Record of Contracts 
IFAD Financing No. 
…………………………. 
Project Title 
…………………………….  
Monthly Reporting 
Period………………….. 
RECORD OF CONTRACTS 
Date: ………………………. 
(Month/Year) 
Page No. ……..of …………. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Name & 
6 
Description of   
Contract 
Serial 
No. 
% of 
Type of 
Date of  Address of  Works, Goods,  Country 
Financing  Procurement  Contract  Contractor/  Consulting/ 
of Origin 
Supplier  Other Services   
Performance, 
Contract Duration 
& Delivery Period 
Contract 
Category No. per 
Amount (in 
Schedule 2 of 
currency of 
the contract) 
IFAD Financing 
Agreement 
Remarks & 
Date of IFAD 
'No Objection' 
Certified by:  ………………………………………. 
Submitted by: …………………………………………………. 
Project Accountant 
Project Director 
76 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 14: Sample form for tracking contracts 
(Contract Number: as per contract register) 
Description of Contract: 
Procurement File No.: 
Date(s) of 'No Objection': 
Name and Address of 
Supplier: 
Comp.: 
Contract Officer: 
Bank 
Details: 
e-mail: 
Telephone: 
Documen
t 
Original Contract   
Amendment (AM-
1) 
Amendment (AM-
2) 
Amendment (AM-
23) 
Total Amount 
Contract 
Summary 
(ENTER CURRENCY) 
Contract Reference   
No. 
  Amount  Dates (Start/End) 
  Bank Securities or Bonds (--Currency) 
0 
Expir
y 
Documen
t 
Name of Financial 
Institution 
Date 
  Amount  Date   
Extension 
Advance 
Payment 
Performance 
Bond 
Other 
Monitoring of 
Payments 
(ENTER CURRENCY)  
Payment 
Schedule 
Progress 
Certificate 
Expected 
Milestone 
  Amount 
No. 
Dat
e 
Payments Issued   
Invoice 
Payment  Amount 
Cheque   
No. 
Date 
Paid 
or WA 
No. 
Balance Due on 
Contrac
t 
Total Amount 
Notes: 
0 
77 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 15: Staff and farmers groups/community training programme/ 
Calendar 
Training Topic 
2015
/ 
2016 
201
6/ 
201
7 
Proposed Year   
2017
/ 
2018
/ 
2019/  Key responsibility 
  2018  2019  2020   
78 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 16: Indicators for output, outcome and impact monitoring 
79 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 17: RIMS Indicators 
RIMS Indicators for BRECSA 
80 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 18: Template for AWPB 
PART I 
Country: 
Project Title: 
Project Number: Loan Number: 
Grant Number: 
Financial year: 
Planning period: 
Year of implementation: 
Total Project budget (in USD): 
Total expenditures to date (in USD): 
Date of loan effectiveness: 
Date of Project start: 
Project duration: 
Date of Project closing: 
Date of latest Logframe revision: 
Date of RIMS benchmark survey: 
Date of RIMS mid-term survey: 
Date of RIMS completion survey: 
Date of Mid-Term Review: 
Date of Completion Review: 
A. Background 
Government policies: 
Implementation arrangements: 
Target Group: 
Production factors/local economic context: 
A.  Achievements to date and proposed implementation focus for upcoming year Table 1 - 
Summary of main achievements to date 
% of achievement to date 
(estimation) 
Focus for new AWPB period? 
(Yes/No) 
Component 
Component 1: 
Component 2:  
   Component 3: 
81 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Changes in objectives: 
Changes in implementation strategy: 
C. Costs and financing 
Costs: 
Financing: 
Procurement Plan: 
Procurement Process 
A.  Expected benefits and target group outreach Table 
2 – Estimated outreach by Target Group “category” 
B.  Implementation support needs 
Capacity gap 
Capacity gap & mitigation 
measures 
Staff/person 
in need of 
capacity 
building 
Proposed 
capacity 
building 
measures 
Implementation Support requirement 
Implementation 
support needed 
from 
When is it 
In which 
specific area  needed? 
is it needed? 
82 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Detail Annual Workplan & Budget 
Financial Year: July 2023-June 2024 
  Total Prog. Target  
AWPB 2023-2024  
Funding Source for AWPB 2023-24   
  Timeframe   
Remark 
s 
Quant 
ity 
Budget 
(Nu.mil)  
Quant 
ity 
Budget 
(Nu.mil)  
% 
  Funding  
IFAD 
  Loan  
IFAD 
  Grant  
ASAP 
  Grant  
RGoB 
FCBL 
  Benef 
iciary  
Q  Q  Q  Q 
4  
2  
3  
1  
Sl. 
No. 
  Components  
/Sub- 
components/ 
Activities 
Indica 
tors 
Uni 
t 
PROCUREMENT PLAN 
Procurement Plan for Goods 
Procurement Plan for Works 
Procurement Plan for Services 
83 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 19: Template for Annual Progress Report 
Bhutan 
[Insert Name of Project] – [Insert loan/grant#] 
Annual Project Progress Report12 
[Insert Reference period –i.e. July 2023 to June 2024] 
[Insert pictures (s) showing some activities of the Project undertaken during the reporting period] 
Prepared by: [name of the M&E Officer] 
Date: [insert date of submission of the report] 
Outline of Progress Report: 
Table of content 
Currency equivalent, weights & measures 
Abbreviations & definitions 
Map of the country/Project areas 
A.  Project Background 
B.  Changes in Project Implementation context and design 
C.  Progress and Performance, by Components13 
C.1.1. Activities and Outputs: main achievements 
C.1.2. Progress towards Component Outcome (s) 
C.1.3. Convergence and partnership 
C.1.4. Grant activities 
C.1.5. Constraints/bottlenecks affecting Component Progress and Actions Taken 
D.  Progress towards Project purpose and goal 
E.  Project Sustainability 
F.  Project Management 
F.1. Project Steering & Coordination Management 
F.2. Human Resource Management 
F.3. Financial Management 
F.4. Procurement 
F.5. Monitoring & Evaluation, communication & knowledge management 
F.6. Gender 
G.  Follow-up of last mission recommendations 
H.  Summary of Lessons Learned 
I.  Conclusions and Recommendations for follow-up 
Annexes 
1.  Physical progress measured against AWPB 
2.  Financial progress 
3.  List of staff 
4.  List of Project Partners 
5.  Highlights of most significant innovations/case studies of successful interventions. 
6.  Photo gallery 
…………………………………………………………….. 
12 Semi-annual or Half-yearly progress report may use the same format; but in practice project may prefer to limit to 
reporting only the AWPB performance (physical and financial) to guide the project management and inform IFAD. 
13 Progress data should be both that of current year’s and cumulative. 
84 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
MAIN REPORT 
A.  Project Background 
[Provide a concise description of the basic background information and data regarding the 
Project. In particular: 
•  Project goal and specific objectives 
•  Project components/sub-components 
•  Target group and targeted area 
•  Main implementing partners 
Implementation strategy 
• 
•  Main implementing issues addressed by the Project 
• 
•  Total Project Costs 
Implementing period and status of implementation (pre or post –Mid-Term) 
This same text can be used later indifferent progress reports unless major changes occur 
in Project design –in that case this section should be revised] 
B.  Changes in Project Implementation context and design 
[Highlight changes and major events occurred in the Project implementation context during the 
period under review (i.e., changes in external factors, political stability….). Mitigating measures 
identified to address these events and changes should be reported. The section should also 
summarized changes occurred in Project design, and their justification. If no change occurred, 
just write that on major changes need to be reported] 
C.  Progress and Performance, by Components 
[The objective of this section is to provide a summary description of the overall Project 
performance. It should provide concise and to the point information on main achievements, 
shortcomings, issues faced and corrective action taken in terms of Project performance and 
progress towards desired results. In particular, for each component, the reader should gain 
understanding of: 
•  Strong aspects and achievements against objectives; 
•  Main shortcomings, if any; 
•  Major implementation issues and /or risk that affect Project implementation; and 
•  Key actions to be undertaken] 
C.1.1 Activities and Outputs: main achievements 
[Provide a brief overview of the main activities undertaken during the period under review. As 
details on physical progress measured against annual targets will be provided in Annex-1, there 
is no need to repeat all data in this section. Instead, highlight the following: Main areas of 
interventions for which physical achievements matched planned targets. E.g., “training in crop 
production completed as for planned figures”; “ construction/ rehabilitation of irrigation schemes 
was completed as planned”…).] 
[Areas of interventions for what outputs achieved did not match planned target. Example: “ the 
number of SHGs formed in target areas was 20% below expectations”. Explanations of 
deviations from planned targets should be provided] 
[Summary tables and graphs /figures can be added, in order to illustrate the information above] 
85 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
[Summarize the main problems affecting implementation progress in the Component under 
review. Any action taken during the period under review to face these issues should also be 
mentioned] 
C.1.2 Progress towards Component Outcome (s) 
According to the project log frame, the expected outcome(s) of component (x) is (are): 
[This section will become increasingly relevant as project advances in its lifecycle. Projects in the 
first  of  second  year  of  implementation  will  not  be  expected  to  report  significantly  on  progress 
towards outcomes, as it would be too early for substantial reporting. Yet, all projects are invited 
to  report  any  relevant  information,  reflection,  or  consideration  regarding  progress  towards 
component  objectives  as  described  in  project  Log  Frames  and  design  documents.  Project 
approaching  or  past  Mid-Term  will  be  expected  to  increasingly  focus  on  outcomes  and  provide 
updated information on progress towards desired objectives for each component, on unintended 
results,  on  factors  that  might  jeopardize  the  achievements  of  component  objectives,  and  on 
action s to be taken for improvement.] 
The  information  and  data  included  in  this  section  should  contribute  to  responding  to  the 
performance questions related to the components outcome. It should provide the evidence based 
on which the component performance is assessed.] 
[Also  describe  how  the  information  was  collected  via  annual  participatory  M  &  E  exercises, 
annual  surveys,  feedback  collected  from  partners  and  project  beneficiaries,  or  other  tools  such 
as  case  studies  or  qualitative  assessments.  If  during  the  period  under  review  the  project  has 
undertaken  a  mid-term  review,  the  main  findings  of  the  exercise  should  be  summarized  in  this 
section, if of relevance for the component described. Detailed information on outcome indicators 
will also be provided in Annex1.] 
[Summarize  the  main  problems  affecting  achievement  of  objectives  in  the  Component  under 
review.  Any  action  taken  during  the  period  under  review  to  face  these  issues  should  also  be 
mentioned] 
C.1.3 Convergence and partnership 
[Describe convergence achieved with other projects/programmes/schemes of government and 
various other agencies/departments the project has worked with over the reporting period 
including technical partnership, etc.] 
C. 1.4 Grant activities 
[Report here the IFAD grant project activities such as work plan and progress including 
outputs and outcomes with grant projects such as work with ICRISAT, etc.] 
C.1.5 Constraints/bottlenecks affecting Component Progress and Actions Taken 
D.  Progress towards project purpose and goal 
[Provide information on progress towards project overall purpose and contribution towards project 
goal (i.e: “ poverty reduction in targeted areas”. This section will be particularly relevant for projects 
that have passed mid-term. For example, if the project has undertaken a mid-term impact 
assessment or survey, findings can be compared with available baseline data to assess progress. 
PME and other qualitative tools can also provide relevant information,; relevant secondary data 
(such as, for example, unemployment rates in targeted areas, school enrolment rates, mother and 
child health data)can be used] 
E.  Project Sustainability 
[Provide information and share consideration on the likelihood of sustainability of project 
impact and benefits on targeted groups, on factors which might affect sustainability, and on 
corrective actions taken to mitigate the risks.Any action taken or results achieved during the 
period under review to implement project exit strategy should be described in this section.] 
86 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
F.  Project Management 
F.1. Project Steering and Coordination Management 
[Provide summary information on Project Steering Committee meetings organised and key 
decisions taken on project management at the PMO level and coordination meetings at the 
District/MPA levels; may also provide names of PSC members] 
F.2. Human Resource Management 
[ Highlight any important events or changes occurred in the area of human resource. This 
can include staff recruitment turnover, and retention, staff training, new incentive systems 
established. Any assessment of staff performance under taken should be mentioned and 
briefly summarized here.] 
F.3. Financial Management 
[Provide summary information on financial progress. Detail data of financial performance 
will be provided in annex. This section therefore provide a short overview of disbursement 
of costs and financing for the period under review. It should highlight any divergence of 
expenses versus budgets and reasons for deviations. If useful financial summary tables 
should be used to complement Annex 2] 
F.4. Procurement 
[Review progress of procurement carried out during the reporting period. Deviations from 
the initial procurement plan should be highlighted and explained. Also summarize key 
procurement made on behalf of the project and their status at the end of the reporting 
period. This will include all procurement of goods works and consulting and other services 
undertaken by the project since project start up] Summary table can be used to synthesized 
information. ] 
F.5. M&E, Communications, and Knowledge Management 
[Summarize main activities undertaken for project M&E. In particular surveys participatory 
M&E activities case studies or qualitative assessments undertaken during the period under 
review should be briefly described. Include a list of documentation produced during the 
reporting period and a short description of any knowledge sharing event organized or 
attended by project staff. Any other effort to share and exchange information and lessons 
learned should be highlighted. Relevant materials produced can be attached to the report. 
Provide information on how the project has followed up with the recommendations of the last 
supervision mission]. 
F.6. Gender :Brief outline of the gender strategy of the project; gender mainstreaming 
activities, outputs and outcomes, issues associated with gender policy, output and outcome 
based gender issues; gender impacts (intended and unintended); gender issues addressed 
in the current budget and its progress; and capacity building related to empowerment of 
women and gender mainstreaming in the project. 
G. 
Summary of Lessons Learned 
High light the main lessons learned and their implication in progress implementation. 
H.  Conclusions and Recommendations for follow-up 
[Highlight recommendations and corrective actions to take during the next reporting 
period. Specify how, who and when for each action.] 
87 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 20: Template for Annual Outcome Survey Report 
Outline for Annual Outcome Survey Report14 
Table of Contents 
List of Tables 
List of Figures 
Abbreviations 
Executive Summary 
(may also contain a comparative summary figures of project and non-project villages 
in a table form) 
PART I: INTRODUCTION 
1.1 An introduction of the project 
1.1.1  Socio-economic features of the project areas and people 
1.1.2  Project targets, components and activities 
1.1.3  Key objectives and outcomes with impacted results 
1.2 Introduction of the Annual Outcome Survey 
1.2.1  Rationale of the AOS 
1.2.2  Key thematic contents in the AOS 
1.3 Methodology of the AOS 
1.3.1  Sampling method 
1.3.2  Survey implementation 
1.3.3  Data analysis 
PART II: RESULTS OF THE ANNUAL OUTCOME SURVEY 
2.1 Description of the households in the survey (both from project and non-project 
areas) 
2.2 Survey evaluation on the results and impacts of the project activities 
Participation in project activities 
Livelihoods and income sources 
Food and nutritional security 
Access to health and health status of family 
Agricultural production and irrigation 
Livestock and fisheries 
Access to markets 
Access to rural financial services 
Enterprise development and employment 
2.2.1 
2.2.2 
2.2.3 
2.2.4 
2.2.5 
2.2.6 
2.2.7 
2.2.8 
2.2.9 
2.2.10  Access to natural resources 
2.2.11  Women empowerment 
PART III: CONCLUSION 
1.1 Contribution of the project to general development goal of the Eastern Region / 
Country / 
11th Five Year Plan Results 
1.2 Extent of poor people benefiting from the project 
1.3 Extent of women benefiting from the project 
1.4 Critical gaps identified and how the project intends to address in the coming year 
14 
and content of the Survey Report. 
A few relevant photographs (with appropriate captions) enhances the overall quality 
88 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 21: Gender and social inclusion strategy 
1. Introduction (0.5 or 3 short paragraphs page) 
General:  This  section  may  include  general  gender  situations  in  Bhutan  and  project  areas; 
government  policies  in  addressing  gender  issues  and  gender  mainstreaming;  emerging 
scenario on women empowerment; etc. 
Context:  The  context  section  should  include  a  very  short  summary  description  of  your 
project, its size, implementing partners,  objectives, and components. You might also like to 
include  a  description  of  the  main  achievements  of  the  project  in  terms  of  reaching  its 
objectives  as  well  as  the  main  challenges  in  achieving  the  objectives.  Reference  could  be 
made  to  the  Bhutan  Gender  Equality  Diagnostics  study  for  selected  sectors  (that  includes  a 
chapter on Agriculture and rural livelihoods), the Bhutan gender Policy Note,  IFAD Policy on 
Gender and Women’s Empowerment and the GM strategy for MAGIP. 
Rationale:  The  rationale  should  be  an  explanation  of  why  your  project  needs  to  address 
gender, and why you expect having a Gender  and social inclusion strategy will help achieve 
project objectives. Objectives should be clearly highlighted. They could include the conviction 
that investment in women will pay off in terms of improved project performance (deeper and 
more sustainable impacts), etc., as well as the requirements of the Government and that of 
IFAD. 
2.  Vision or Goal (30-40 words or less!) 
This  should  be  a  statement  of  the  ideal  situation  that  you  want  to  achieve  as  a  result  of 
gender  mainstreaming  at  one  level  beyond  above  or  beyond  your  control.  It  should  align 
directly  with  the  achievement  of  your  project  goal.  What  will  the  project  deliver  from  a 
gender perspective. 
3. Concepts 
This section can briefly outline some key gender and social inclusion concepts 
4. Gender Mainstreaming within project activities (3-5 pages) 
This section will detail out all the requirements to establish a more gender responsive project 
delivery mechanism. Each sub component will be elaborated here and will have a check list to 
help  field  level  implementers  to  ensure  that  their  implementation  is  gender  responsive.  It 
should  look  at  capacity  building/trainings  for  community  people,  the  quality  of  the  reports 
that  need  to  be  generated,  the  knowledge  products  developed  etc.  Matrix  outlining  the 
strategies and action plans for gender and social inclusion would be useful. 
4.  Gender mainstreaming at the organizational level ( 3 pages) 
This section should detail what are the requirements to establish gender responsive systems 
within the organization that will have an impact at the field level. It will look at project staff 
gender  sensitization,  selection  of  implementing  partners,  targeting  performance,  Human 
Resource service rules, etc. 
89 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
5.  Implementation (2 pages) 
This section should detail roles and responsibilities. It should also provide a time frame for 
the implementation of the strategy. 
6.  Costs and financing (2 pages) 
This  section  should  include  an  estimate  of  how  much  you  expect  it  to  cost  to  implement 
your strategy within the specific time frame, and how you will cover those costs. It should 
indicate  whether  costs  will  be  covered  through  project  financing,  in-kind  contributions, 
extra-budgetary resources, or other. 
7.  Risk Management ( 0.5 page ) 
This  section  should  outline  what  the  possible  risks  are  that  might  impede  the  successful 
implementation  of  your  project  gender  strategy,  for  example  frequent  turnover  of  staff.  It 
should also say what will be done to mitigate or minimise those risks, such as investment in 
long term staff development and promotion from within. 
8.  Results Framework (1 page) 
A results framework is a good tool for communicating the essence of your strategy and 
monitoring. The results framework can be developed using the following suggested format. 
Objective  Strategy  Activities  Required 
inputs 
Expected 
output 
Indicators  Assumptions  Time 
Responsibility 
90 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 22: Knowledge Management strategy 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT STRATEGY OUTLINE15 
1.  Introduction (0.5 pages) 
a.  Context 
The context section should include a very short summary description of your project, its 
size, implementing partners, objectives, components, at what point it is in the project life. 
You might also like to include a description of the main achievements of the project to 
date in terms of reaching its objectives as well as the main challenges the project is facing 
at present. The resources available are the Asia and Pacific Region KM Strategy and the 
IFAD KM Strategy http://www.ifad.org/pub/policy/km/e.pdf 
b.  Rationale 
The rationale should be an explanation of why your project needs to manage knowledge, 
and why you expect having a KM strategy will help achieve project objectives. Reasons will 
vary according to the stage in the project life cycle and the impetus behind the strategy. 
They could be IFAD requirements, government requirements, a conviction that investment 
in KM will pay off in terms of performance, a need to capture certain kinds of knowledge for 
policy makers, a desire to offer something to partners, an interest in identifying innovations 
for up scaling, etc. 
2.  Lessons Learned (1 page) 
This section may contain any experiences in your project or ongoing project or in your 
country project related to knowledge management. These may be experiences in either 
learning or sharing. It could even describe lessons learned as the result of the absence of 
learning or sharing. The strategy that follows should be one that can clearly be seen to 
have taken in to account those lessons and responded to them in some way. 
3.  Vision or Goal (30 words or less!) 
This should be a statement of the ideal situation that you want to achieve at one level 
beyond above or beyond your control. It should align directly with the achievement of your 
project goal. An example of a possible KM Strategy goal is “Development of value chains to 
reduce poverty reduction in ILRP project results in a clear understanding within ministry of 
agriculture of how to invest in the development of value chains in other provinces “or “All 
fisheries agency staff working in Outer Reef islands can find out what they need to know to 
assist the poorest fisherfolk.” 
4.  Expected Outcomes (0.5 pages) 
This section should describe what you can realistically hope to achieve with the successful 
implementation of the strategy in terms of change in people’s behaviour and attitudes, or 
change in physical, social or economic conditions. An example of an expected outcome that 
describes behavioural change might be, “local government looks to the project as a means 
of learning how to improve services to its farming households.” Or, “project 
implementation delays related to incomplete knowledge of procurement and disbursement 
procedures are eliminated”. 
91 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
5.  Activities and Outputs (2.0 pages) 
a.  Knowledge Management Culture 
Here you should describe what activities your project will undertake to create a culture of 
knowledge management. Outline the key measures that your project will take to induce 
behaviour that leads to learning, sharing and helping others to learn. In doing this you 
should describe how your project will provide incentives to staff, partners and stakeholders 
to behave pro-actively with respect to learning and sharing. Typically this section may 
cover recognition, terms of reference, training, and performance evaluation. 
b.  Knowledge Management Processes 
This section should describe activities that your project will implement to manage 
knowledge in connection with normal business processes in project implementation. The 
output associated with each activity should also be described. This section might also 
include description of activities related to other processes you introduce specifically to 
manage knowledge. For examples, of activities and outputs see part… 
c.  Knowledge Management Infrastructure 
This section should describe the means you will use to capture, store, share and use 
knowledge. Mostly it should refer to physical infrastructure. The section with this title in 
the IFAD knowledge management strategy describes information technology, like the 
internet and the office intranet. It also refers to information management procedures 
related to their use. 
d.  Partnerships for Knowledge Management 
This section should describe the partnerships that your project will build and rely on 
in its KM activities. It should highlight those partners whom you will work with 
towards your expected KM outcomes, and those whom you will be able to learn from 
or share with. 
e.  KM products dissemination and communication 
This section will describe how the project intends to disseminate the various knowledge 
products and undertake communication based on different target audiences. 
f.  Staff capacity building 
This section will describe various capacity building project needs and activities to be 
undertaken. 
6.  Implementation (1 page) 
a. Implementation steps and arrangements 
This section should detail roles and responsibilities. It should also provide a time frame 
for the implementation of the strategy. In other words, you should specify who will do 
each activity described above, and by when. 
b. Costs& Financing (0.5 pages) 
This section should include an estimate of how much you expect it to cost to implement 
your strategy within the specific time frame, and how you will cover those costs. It should 
indicate whether costs will be covered through project financing, in-kind contributions, 
extra-budgetary resources, or other. 
7.  Risk Management ( 0.5 pages ) 
This section should outline what the possible risks are that might impede the successful 
implementation of your project KM strategy, for example frequent turnover of staff. It 
92 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
should also say what will be done to mitigate or minimise those risks, such as investment 
in long term staff development and promotion from within. 
8.  Logical framework or Results Framework (1.0 page) 
A results framework or a logical framework is a good tool for communicating the essence of 
your strategy and monitoring 
93 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Physical Progress Measured against AWPB including RIMS indicators 
Annex 23: Key M&E formats 
Cumulative 
Achievement 
  Financ
  Phys
i 
ial 
  (Nu. 
Mil) 
cal 
  Remarks  
Sl. 
  No.  
  Components
/ 
  Sub-components/   
Activities 
  Indicators  
  Unit  
Total Prog. 
Target 
(Appraisal) 
  Quan
ti 
ty 
  Budge
t 
  (Nu.m
il) 
AWPB 2016-
17 
Progress 
  achievemen
Targ
et 
  Budge
t 
  (Nu.m
il) 
  Ph
ys 
ical 
t 
  Financ
ial 
  (Nu. 
mil) 
94 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 24: Key compliance chart with dates for submission 
Key activities 
July 
Aug    Sep  Oct 
Nov    Dec    Jan    Feb  Mar  Apr  May    Jun 
Annual Progress Performance Review 
AWPB preparation and submission 
Annual Progress Report submission 
Half-yearly Progress Report 
Annual RIMS Report submission 
Annual Outcome Survey Report submission 
Quarterly Results Report Preparation 
Quarterly  Review Meetings at PMO 
PSC / Coordination meeting 
Half yearly review meeting at Dzongkhag 
Data Collection for physical and financial 
progress 
95 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 25: List of PSC, DPCC, important contact numbers/address, etc. 
List of Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
Sl. 
No.   
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Name & Designation 
Responsibility 
Contact No. 
E-mail ID 
Dasho Secretary, MoAF 
Director General, DoA, MoAF 
Director General, DoL, MoAF 
Director, DAMC, MoAF 
Representative from DPA, MoF 
Representative from GNHC 
Chief, PPD, MoAF 
Programme Director, BRECSA 
Chairman 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Member Secretary 
List of Dzongkhag Project Coordination Committee (DPCC) 
Name & Designation 
Responsibility 
Contact No. 
E-mail ID 
Sl. 
No.   
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
96 
Kingdom of Bhutan 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture  
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 25: Detailed Cost Tables 
97 
Bhutan
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
25 April 12 May 2022
Document Date:
14/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003935
6281-BT
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
1/8
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Substantial
Moderate
Overall Summary
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Substantial
Moderate
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
High
Low
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Low
Moderate
Moderate
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Project Financial Management
Substantial
Overall
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Substantial
Moderate
Low
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Stakeholder Grievances
2/8
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
no risk envisaged at this stage
Governance
no risk envisaged at this stage
Macroeconomic
Risk:
The COVID 19 crisis has blocked export of agriculture produce and undermines the
momentum built on value chain development.
Mitigations:
The situation has improved and Bhutan is again exporting key commodities.
BRECSA will invest in enhancing productivity and marketing of key commodities to
meet domestic demand and export potential. Furthermore, the project is expanding
its food supply to school programme and hospitals.
Fragility and Security
no risk envisaged at this stage
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
The institutions responsible for agriculture at gewog level often have limited
capacity.
Mitigations:
BRECSA has envisioned focused TA support to build capacities and develop ARPs
in close coordination with district and gewog agriculture staff.
Policy Development and Implementation
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Non-conducive policies to support commercialisation of the agri-food sector
Mitigations:
BRECSA will work with PPD and BAFRA on regulation, standardization and
certification to ensure that the ´Bhutan Brand´ acquires a recognized seal to
support export potential
Risk:
3/8
Market dynamics of selected value chains might change
Mitigations:
The project will adopt a flexible approach to allow additional value chains (oilseeds,
green tea, honey and other NWFPs) to be included post the conclusion of the
CLEAR analysis and formulation of Agriculture Resilience Plans, as new
opportunities may arise and adjustments maybe required due to changing market
dynamics.
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Lack of technical capacity to respond to the identified market needs
Mitigations:
BRECSA will invest in multi-stakeholder platforms (MSP) to link producer’s group to
agribusinesses and markets, as well as create a MSP at the national central level
to identify and strengthen national, regional and international markets.
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Soil quality degradation due to commercial agriculture, excessive use of water and
other natural resources, wastage, chemical uses…
Mitigations:
Pre-screening of suitable site selection for prospective hubs and groups to be
supported by the programme to ensure that the commodities, scale and production
systems are appropriate and sustainable in the specific location. For livestock, strict
promotion of stall-based feeding systems and increased fodder/feed production to
reduce open grazing. 
The project will also promote sustainable production technologies 
including: water efficient technologies, erosion control via poly-tunnel and soil
nutrition management.
For climate-sensitive infrastructure, the project will follow the national requirements
for EIAs, and ensure proper monitoring.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Risk:
High
High
High
High
Poor soil fertility limits agricultural productivity. The following climate risks are
prevalent: i) droughts and floods due to erratic rainfall; ii) increasing day and night
temperature; iii) landslides; iv) shifting agroecological zones.
Mitigations:
BRECSA will promote a shift to regenerative and agroecological approaches for
building sustainable livelihoods and ecological resilience. This will be based on the
results of the CLEAR tool, and coupled with support to irrigation and water-use
efficiency, soil fertility management, renewable energy, and climate resilient value
chains.
Project Scope
Project Relevance
no risk envisaged at this stage
Moderate
Low
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Technical Soundness
Risk:
4/8
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Project is staffed with experienced and qualified accounts personnel. Staff from
Implementing Units request further FM training form IFAD. Project staff is not
aware of IFAD anti-corruption policy.
Mitigations:
Finance staff attend IFAD online FM training course. 
Project staff and stakeholders are advised to read IFAD policy on Preventing Fraud
and Corruption in its Activities and Operations. 
https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/40189695
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Risk:
Capacity of key implementing partners is variable.
Mitigations:
BRECSA has established an effective project management and implementation
mechanism with a well-staffed PMU and national agriculture agencies, Dzongkhag
and gewog staff, in support of farming communities. Targeted training in results
management will be undertaken, in addition to close monitoring by IFAD and WFP.
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
no risk envisaged at this stage
Project Financial Management
Overall
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
The risk that the institutional capacity and practices (including compliance with the
laws) are inadequate to conduct the procurement in a manner that optimizes value
for money with integrity at the local level.
Mitigations:
1). Review periodically the application procurement law, regulation and procedures
of the project. 
2). Review and clear project procurement plan (consolidated) encouraging the use
of competitive procurement methods 
3). Provide consolidated procurement information on project website (opportunities
and awards) 
Provide training at the local level to responsible officers
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Accountability and Transparency
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
The risk that accountability, transparency and oversight arrangements (including
the handling of complaints regarding, for example, SH/SEA and fraud and
corruption) are inadequate to safeguard the integrity of project procurement and
contract execution, leading to the unintended use of funds, misprocurement,
SH/SEA, and/or execution of project procurements outside of the required time,
cost and quality requirements.
5/8
Mitigations:
1). Provide confidential report of complains received, under investigation and
resolved. 
2). Establish appropriate level of procurement reviews post and prior based on risk 
3). Identify and report on risk flags during procurement supervision 
4). Use IFAD standard bidding documents which include provisions for prohibitive
action and safeguards
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
The risk that the implementing agency does not have sound processes,
procedures, systems and personnel in place for the administration, supervision and
management of contracts resulting in adverse impacts to the development
outcomes of the project.
Mitigations:
1). Retain procurement professional to support intermittently 
2). Periodic training and support to be provided to various implementing agencies
teams
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The risk that procurement processes and market structures (methods, planning,
bidding, contract award and contract management) are inefficient and/or anti-
competitive, resulting in the misuse of project funds or sub-optimal implementation
of the project and achievement of its objectives.
Mitigations:
1). Update procurement schedule in PP [Planned vs Actual] , utilize PP as
monitoring cum review tool. Encourage the staff directly involved to undertake the
World Bank promoted FREE certification courses in Public Procurement and
Contract Management.
Develop and operationalize procurement contract monitoring system [ICT system]
to integrate Planning, Procurement, and Financial Management functions. The
proposed system is expected to include already available procurement related data
in the existing eGP Platform and with the spill over activities in line with AWPB.
Develop and operationalize procurement contract monitoring system [MIS system]
to integrate Planning, Procurement, and Financial Management functions
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
The main risk of the project regarding biodiversity is coming from human-wildlife
conflicts. As Bhutan is a country with >70% forest cover, wildlife is regularly
crossing into agricultural fields and destroying crops.
Mitigations:
The agricultural resilience plans for each district is based on the application of
WFP's CLEAR tool. All biodiversity sensitive areas will be avoided. In addition,
following measures will be undertaken to avoid human-wildlife conflict: i) fencing-
continuation of electric fencing with proper maintenance mechanism; trail and
promotion of chain link fencing at certain places, ii) avoid palatable crops at high
wildlife affected areas, iii) awareness on bio fencing
6/8
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
The risk that the project may cause significant pollution to air, water, and land, and
inefficient use of finite resources that may threaten people, ecosystem services and
the environment at the local, regional, and global levels.
Mitigations:
The project is adopting a circular model that recycles all waste products.
Cultural Heritage
Risk:
The risk that the project may cause significant cultural or physical resource
degradation, including threats to or the loss of resources of historical, religious or
cultural significance.
Mitigations:
All cultural heritage sites will be avoided.
Indigenous People
Risk:
The risk that the project may cause significant adverse physical, social, or
economic impacts on indigenous peoples, or in threats to or the loss of resources
of historical or cultural significance to them.
Mitigations:
The are no indigenous peoples as such in the project areas.
Labour and Working Conditions
Risk:
The risk that the project may cause exploitative labour practices (e.g. forced or
child labour), gender based violence, discriminatory and unsafe/unhealthy working
conditions for people employed to work specifically in relation to the project,
including third parties and primary suppliers.
Mitigations:
BRECSA is a gender transformational project and complies with all requirements
for gender transformative projects.
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The risk that the project may cause significant adverse impacts on the physical,
mental, nutritional or social health/safety status of an individual, group, or
population, including as a result of gender based violence.
Mitigations:
BRECSA is a nutrition sensitive project which will enhance diet diversity and food
security of all beneficiaries, hereby contributing to their physical and mental well
being. Furthermore, BRECSA target 600 PXDs, corresponding to 25% of total
PWDs of the targeted areas, by providing direct support to improve their
livelihoods, income, living conditions and nutrition and health status.
7/8
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
The risk that the project may cause significant adverse physical, social, cultural or
economic impacts, especially for marginalized groups, from land acquisition, and
involuntary loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or means of
livelihoods.
Mitigations:
No physical resettlement is anticipated.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Risk:
While some activities do sequester carbon (like permaculture systems), the project
may actually have a positive carbon-balance (net GHG emissions) with
investments into the dairy value chain, infrastructure, irrigation (also small livestock,
terracing might be sources of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions).
Mitigations:
As Bhutan is a unique carbon sink with the forests absorbing large quantities of
CO2 from the atmosphere, the GHG emissions of the project will not be very
significant. In addition, the project is adopting a circular model with mitigation co-
benefits.
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Substantial
Substantial
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Climate change impacts leading to water scarcity/excess, pest infestations, soil
fertility erosion, cold snaps and damage from hailstones etc..
Mitigations:
(i) promotion of agro-ecological technologies; (ii) building interventions based on
results of CLEAR tool; (iii) promoting permaculture; (iv) investing in climate resilient
infrastructure; (v) investing on nutrition sensitive and climate smart value chains
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Project is staffed with experienced and qualified accounts personnel. Staff from
Implementing Units request further FM training form IFAD. Project staff is not
aware of IFAD anti-corruption policy.
Mitigations:
Finance staff attend IFAD online FM training course. 
Project staff and stakeholders are advised to read IFAD policy on Preventing Fraud
and Corruption in its Activities and Operations. 
https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/40189695
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
8/8
Increased road accidents from increased traffic flow
Mitigations:
BRECSA will conduct awareness sessions specifically on road traffic and
pedestrian safety in collaboration with local communities, government and
nongovernmental organizations, and schools. The events related to capacity
building, nutrition/climate/environment awareness, trainings will have a dedicated
session on road safety.
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Bhutan
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
25 April 12 May 2022
Document Date:
14/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003935
6281-BT
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
BRECSA EXIT AND SUSTAINABILITY STRATEGY 
1. 
BRECSA focuses on commercialization of the agricultural sector and invests in 
institutional/capacity development to ensure safe exit and the sustainability of project 
outcomes. The exit strategy will comprise a sequential phasing away from supported 
activities as linkages with the supported farmer groups/private sector entities are 
strengthened. A high level of participation from the Government, beneficiaries and 
partner institutions is planned from the outset to ensure ownership by local 
stakeholders. Strengthening local institutions, farmers and their groups and developing 
ownership is the most effective way to ensure sustainability beyond the implementation 
period. The programme will also strengthen the organisation capacity of RAMCO, ARDC 
and other partner organizations and stakeholders to not only support programme results 
but to also continue to fulfill their mandate to serve local communities beyond the 
programme period. 
2. 
The BRECSA Sustainability and Exit Strategy is built-in within its interventions. A 
detailed exit strategy for BRECSA will be prepared during PY4. A consultation workshop 
will be undertaken at the level of each district, in collaboration with all project partners, 
to flesh out and finalize the exit strategy. This will be coupled with possible risks and 
challenges, with the aim of identifying those early on to allow for elaboration of 
mitigation measures. The exit strategy will be coupled with a monitoring framework to 
ensure readiness.  The Table below presents the approach to BRECSA sustainability and 
exit strategy at the level of the three components of the project. 
Component 
Sustainability and Exit Elements 
Component 1 
Resilient Production 
Systems 
-  The CLEAR tool will ensure that BRECSA plans and maps out the 
spatial and temporal impacts of climate change on smallholder 
farmers and rural communities over the long term. This exercise 
will inform how food security is affected by climate risks, enabling 
climate resilient planning for placing commodities in their 
appropriate agroecological zone, as well as, for defining specific 
infrastructural needs as a response to anticipated climate impacts 
and identified commodity value chains. This will ensure long-
lasting sustainability of investments. 
-  Village level planning and implementation will be undertaken 
through Agriculture Resilient Plans, based on the results of the 
CLEAR tool. Gewog and Dzongkhag agricultural officers will be 
trained on updating those plans which will remain to be the main 
community-based instrument to identify priorities and needs.   
-  Training and mentoring of the most vulnerable groups will enable 
them to have sustainable self-employment. They will be provided 
with assets that will help increase their income and enhance their 
food and nutrition security. The mentoring will last till the 
households are generating income from the provided assets. This 
will ensure that the investment is sustainable over the long-run. 
Many of the vulnerable households will also be supported to 
become semi-commercial and benefit from the support that 
BRECSA is providing to this group of farmers.  
-  Fresh graduates will be trained by the project as extension 
agents/social mobilizers. This will help in inserting unemployed 
youth into the labour market, and ensure that they acquire skills 
to develop their own businesses in the future. 
-  A limited number of value chains has been chosen to ensure 
availability of adequate resources to establish these well. 
Production and marketing investments for crops and livestock is 
Component 2 
Strengthened Value 
Chain Coordination 
and Market Linkages 
designed to support value chain development planning over the 
long-term. 
-  Technical assistance support services in BRECSA are designed to 
promote responsiveness to the real needs, leading to enhanced 
capacities of farmers, coupled with knowledge, assets and tools to 
sustain their enterprises. 
-  The smallholders organized into professional Farms 
Organization/cooperatives as legal entities will generate demand 
for inputs/services (including financing)—based on clearly 
thought-out Strategic Investment Plans. Their capacities will be 
supported so that they become viable business enterprises. 
-  Productivity will be enhanced based on the results of the clear tool 
regarding agro-ecological suitability for the main commodities to 
be supported by BRECSA. This will ensure that investments in 
production are sustainable and risk to climate change impacts is 
reduced. 
-  Climate resilient production approaches (efficient irrigation, 
permaculture, biofertilizers…) will enhance the ¨Bhutan brand¨ 
and ensure better market accessibility and export potential. 
-  The value chain approach will lead to interweaving production, 
marketing and enterprise development to ensure benefits to 
farmers as well as the private sector, creating viable businesses to 
ensure sustainability. 
-  Youth businesses will become more viable and sustainable through 
the support provided through improved market access, linkages, 
transport efficiency and product quality, storage facilities to 
control post-harvest losses, contractual relationships and capture 
of premium prices. 
-  The services relevant to post-harvest handling, storage, 
processing and marketing within the hubs are primarily focused at 
the level of the value chains. As result, each stakeholder will have 
the required capacities to plan, invest and sustainably operate 
their farms or small businesses as integral component of the 
commercial value chains. The services will also ensure that all 
investments are socially and environmentally sustainable, in view 
of local economic and social structures, natural resource 
management, as well as changing climatic conditions. 
-  The infrastructure built under the project will have pre-set 
pathways to sustainability, leading towards a successful project 
exit. (1) the infrastructure will be demand driven, prioritizing the 
infrastructure that serves the needs of the value chain and the 
community best; (2) the owners and beneficiaries of the 
infrastructure will contribute to its financing; and (3) beneficiaries 
will contribute to an operation and maintenance fund, and 
agreements will be signed with the Gewog administration for 
sustainability. This is expected to stimulate ownership by target 
communities. 
-  Business-to-Business linkages—created for value chain 
development will be linked with these farmer organizations to 
enable smallholders to optimize yield and quality of their produce 
per acceptable standards. This will in turn give smallholders a fair 
price for their effort and the ability to plan and invest over the 
longer term. 
-  Enhanced institutional capacity of farmer groups will allow them to 
have more bargaining power and a greater capacity for market 
penetration.  
Component 3 
Innovative and 
competitive agri-food 
sector 
-  The MSPs at Central and District levels will bring together all 
relevant stakeholders that engage in the RNR sector including 
representatives of women and youth. The forums will have a 
linking, learning and problem-solving finding character, and at 
Thimphu level, will be chaired by MoAF - DAMC and co-chaired by 
the Bhutan Chamber of Commerce and Industry (BCCI). Giving a 
broad representation to the MSPs will ensure that their planning, 
strategies and priorities identified through the Strategic 
Investment Plans will be catered for at all levels to ensure that the 
identified commodities move to commercialization, accompanied 
by a long-term market exploration and export facilitation plan. 
-  All support to hubs will be based on market studies, proper 
business planning—with clear breakeven point and profitability of 
the institutions supported, rigorous oversight and reporting.  
-  A targeted technical service package is deployed for financial 
literacy, which will support long term financial sustainability of the 
smallholder operations and livelihoods. 
-  As follow up action to the value chain technical services, to ensure 
sufficient investment flow into the upgraded production systems, a 
financial support instrument is dedicated to semi-commercial 
farming who have difficulties in accessing finance to further 
develop their businesses. A Matching Grant will be provided, which 
will also act as a collateral. Those Grants will be extended to 
enterprise development in the value chains to strengthen market 
sustainability of the smallholder investments. The Matching Grants 
will be made available to farmers who demonstrate full viability 
and sustainability beyond the duration of BRECSA support. The 
semi-commercial farmers, with the new skills and capacities 
acquired through BRECSA, will independently maintain and further 
develop their upgraded agriculture operations.  
-  The user-friendly digital support tools will enhance inter-linkages 
among smallholders and their groups, support market access and 
create a cadre of youth who will be engaged in marketing over the 
long-run. Those tools will also ensure that farmers have access to 
market information to ensure fair prices. 
-  The policy work under BRECSA will support the promotion of 
Brand Bhutan’s organic and high-value agri-food products in 
regional and international markets. To this end, internationally 
recognised regulation, standardization and certification processes 
will be pursued. This sub-component will be led and managed by 
the Policy and Planning Division of MOAF, and will help in building 
the main pillar to ensure competitiveness of the agri-food sector in 
Bhutan within international markets. 
Bhutan
Building Resilient Commercial Smallholder Agriculture - GAFSP
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
25 April 12 May 2022
Document Date:
14/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003935
6281-BT
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
 Gender Transformative
 Youth Sensitive
1/2
 Nutrition Sensitive
 Persons with Disabilities
 Indigenous Peoples
 Climate Finance
 Adaptive Capacity
Situation
analysis
 National gender policies,
 National youth policies,
strategies and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems
and opportunities, by gender
strategies and actors
 Main youth groups
 Challenges and
opportunities by youth
group
 National nutrition
policies, strategies and
actors
 Key nutrition problems
and underlying causes, by
group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
 National policies,
strategies and actors
 Main groupings among
PwDs
 Context-based barriers
and opportunities for PwDs
 International standards,
national policies, strategies
and key IPs' organizations
 Main IPs communities,
demographic, social, cultural
and political characteristics
 Important livelihoods
constraints and opportunities
for IPs and their cultural
heritage
Theory of
change
Logframe
indicators
 Gender policy objectives
 Pathways to youth
(empowerment, voice,
workload)
socioeconomic
empowerment
 Gender transformative
 Youth employment
pathways
 Policy engagement on
included in project
objectives/activities
GEWE
 Outreach disaggregated
 Outreach
by sex, youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Women are > 40% of
outreach beneficiaries
 IFAD empowerment index
(IE.2.1)
disaggregated by sex,
youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Persons with new
jobs/employment
opportunities (CI 2.2.1)
Human
and
financial
resources
 Staff with gender TORs
 Funds for gender
 Staff with youth TORs
 Funds for youth
activities
 Funds for IFAD
empowerment index in M&E
budget
activities
 Nutrition pathways
 Causal linkage between
problems, outcomes and
impacts
 Pathways to PwDs’
 Pathways to IPs'
socioeconomic empowerment
using a twin-track approach
socioeconomic
empowerment
 Outreach disaggregated
by sex, youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Targeted support to
improve nutrition (CI 1.1.8)
Outcome level CIs
 CI 1.2.8 MDDW
 CI 1.2.9 KAP
 Staff or partner with
nutrition TORs
 Funds for nutrition
activities
 Outreach disaggregated
by sex, youth, disability and
IPs (if appropriate)
 Outreach indicator
disaggregated by sex, youth
and IPs
 IPs are > 30% of target
beneficiaries
 Staff with disability
inclusion-specific TORs
 Funds for disability
inclusion-related activities
(including accessibility)
 Staff with IPs-specific
TORs
 Funds for IPs related
activities, including FPIC
IFAD
Adaptation
Finance
$83,000
IFAD Mitigation
Finance
$0
$83,000
Total IFAD
Climate-
focused
Finance
ECG
Remarks
Gender
BRECSA will actively seek to transform gendered power dynamics by addressing social norms, practices, attitudes, beliefs and value systems that represent structural barriers to
women’s and girls’ inclusion and empowerment. The Policy priorities on GEWE will come out from the consultations for the development of gewog and dzongkhags Agriculture
Resilience Plans. The IE indicator is integrated and will be tracked at start-up, middle term and completion.
2/2
Nutrition
Nutrition is well integrated into the project design through a number of coherent pathways, such as nutrition awareness and capacity building, introduction of nutritious sensitive VC,
homestead gardens for vulnerable HHs, support to the national school feeding programme. Furthermore, the project will also develop first-of-its-kind country-level nutrition-sensitive
agriculture knowledge products inclusive of manuals, field-based SBC materials and social media campaigns to create momentum around nutrition awareness. BRECSA will also assess
the minimum dietary diversity of women (MDD-W) at the beginning, mid-term, and end of the project as part of the baseline survey.
Youth
Youth is well integrated. In addition to appropriate quotas and target, BRECSA will establishment youth-led Hubs (16 in total) and a number of technical assistance (TA) activities will be
undertaken to capacitate the different actors engaged in commodity production. The TA will cover permaculture, financial education and business literacy (FEBL) as well as
strengthening the institutional capacities of farmer groups and cooperatives in order to attract and retain youth on the selected value chains (dairy, poultry, high value commodities
(vegetables, ginger, turmeric, mushrooms, honey, etc.). Furthermore, BRECSA will support the establishment and functioning of sub-sector specific multi-stakeholder platforms (MSPs)
including representatives of women and youth. The CI 2.2.1 (persons with new jobs/employment opportunities) is included.
Persons with Disabilities
PWDs: BRECSA will target 600 differently abled persons (25 percent of the total population of PWDs in the targeted districts) and ensure that the three groups of differently abled
persons, mild, moderate and severe, are all included. The project will engage the differently abled persons directly in agriculture related income generating activities. In cases where the
differently abled person herself/himself is not able to engage in an income-generating activity, the caregivers will be engaged in an agri-related income-generating activity to enable the
household to generate more income and have better resources to take care of the differently abled persons. A service provider (an organization specialized in working with differently
abled persons) will be recruited to identify the target beneficiaries in the four Dzongkhags, obtain their consent to participate in the project, and assess the need for assistive devices or
technologies required to enable the person to be more functional. The service provider will counsel and mentor the person and their caregiver for a period of at least 6 months, providing
life skills, self-care and management techniques and on-going support to help the differently abled persons and the household reach a higher level of well-being. The service provider will
counsel and mentor the person and their caregiver for a period of at least 6 months, providing life skills, self-care and management techniques and on-going support to help the
differently abled persons and the household reach a higher level of well-being. The service provider will be responsible for organizing a total of eight Empowerment Forums for
Differently Abled Persons
Indigenous Peoples
NA
☐ No social inclusion themes
