Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme
(RCDP)
Final project design report
Main report and appendices
Document Date:
Project No.
Report No:
1100001728
3755-BA
20-May 2015
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division
Programme Management Department
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Contents
Currency equivalents
Weights and measures
Abbreviations and acronyms
Map of the Programme area
Cluster Map: Berries
Cluster Map: NTFP
Cluster Map: Vegetables
Executive Summary
Logical Framework
I.
Strategic context and rationale
A.
B.
Country and rural development context
Rationale
II.
Programme description
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Programme area and target group
Development objective and impact indicators
Outcomes/Components
Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies
III. Programme implementation
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Approach
Organizational framework
Financial management, procurement and governance
Supervision
Risk identification and mitigation
IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits and sustainability
A.
B.
C.
Programme costs and Financing
Summary benefits and economic analysis
Sustainability
i
v
v
vi
viii
ix
x
xi
xii
xvii
1
1
2
5
5
9
10
26
27
27
28
29
34
35
36
37
37
38
40
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
List of Tables
Table 1: Categorization by income per capita at household level valid for all RCDP sub-sectors 7
8
Table 2: Categorization of beneficiaries by land size by sub-sector and type of production
22
Table 3: Cost sharing of investment support
23
Table 4: Phasing of Business Proposals
36
Table 5: Risks and Mitigation Measures
37
Table 6: Project costs by components
38
Table 7: Total Costs by Financier
39
Table 8: Financial Profitability Indicators
40
Table 9: Sensitivity Analysis
53
Table 10: Absolute poverty rate in BiH (per cent)
Table 11: Target groups wealth ranking
55
Table 12: Categorization by income per capita at household level valid for all RCDP sub-sectors58
Table 13: Categorization of beneficiaries by land size by sub-sector and type of production
Table 14: Possible clusters in the berry sub-sector
Table 15: Possible clusters in the gherkin sub-sector
Table 16: Possible clusters in the greenhouse vegetables sub-sector
Table 17: Possible clusters in the open-field vegetables sub-sector
Table 18: Possible clusters in the NTFP sub-sector
Table 19: Possible clusters in all sub-sectors – TOP 12
Table 20: Comparison of Vegetable Production in BiH and RS (in Tn.)
Table 21: Supply of vegetables, 2011-2014
Table 22: Vegetables export–import, BiH 2012-2014 and share of RS in total export-import
59
61
62
62
62
63
64
105
108
2012-2014 (KM)
Table 23: Raspberry production in BiH (2011-2013)
Table 24: Berries trade in BiH (2009-2014)
Table 25: Export of berries (sorted by export value as of 2013, in BAM)
Table 26: SWOT Analysis – Raspberries sector in FBiH
Table 27: Risk assessment at design stage
Table 28: 18 months Procurement Plan
Table 29: 18 months Procurement Plan (cont.)
Table 30: Project costs by components
Table 31: Total Costs by Financiers
Table 32: Project components by year – total costs including contingencies
Table 33: Expenditures of accounts by financiers
Table 34: Project components by year – totals including contingencies
Table 35: Expenditure accounts by components – totals including contingencies
Table 36: Swot analysis of the fruits, vegetables and MAPS subsectors in BiH
Table 37: Financial Analysis of Crop Budget
Table 38: Financial Profitability Indicators
Table 39: Number of Farmers and Phasing In
Table 40: Number of Cooperatives and Phasing In
Table 41: Sensitivity Analysis
Table 42: Main threats and mitigation measures
Table 43: Reducing vulnerability to climate change
110
118
119
120
123
148
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
171
175
176
178
178
179
184
185
ii
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Table of Figures
Figure 1: Main technical functions and actors of the selected VC
Figure 2: Production of vegetables in BiH and contribution of RS 2011-2014
Figure 3: Share of RS in overall production of vegetable in BiH 2011-2013
Figure 4: Map of vegetable regions in Republika Srpska
Figure 5: Share of vegetable production per municipality in RS
Figure 6: Total export of vegetables from BiH and RS in KM 201-2014
Figure 7: Total import of vegetables from BiH and RS, 2012-2014 (in KM)
Figure 8: Export-import of certain vegetable crops in BiH, 2013 (in KM)
Figure 9: Export-import of certain vegetable crops in KM, BiH 2014
Figure 10: Export – import of certain vegetables in in KM, RS 2014
Figure 11: 2011-2013 Raspberry production in BiH
Figure 12: Berries trade in BiH (2009-2014)
Figure 13: BiH Berries - trade partners (2013)
99
105
106
107
107
108
109
109
110
110
119
120
121
iii
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendices
Appendix 1:
Country and rural context background
Appendix 2:
Poverty, targeting and gender
Appendix 3:
Country performance and lessons learned
Appendix 4:
Detailed project description
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
Appendix 6:
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management
Appendix 7:
Financial management and disbursement arrangements
Appendix 8:
Procurement
Appendix 9:
Project cost and financing
Appendix 10:
Economic and Financial Analysis
Appendix 11:
Draft Project Implementation Manual
Appendix 12:
Compliance with IFAD policies
Appendix 13:
Contents of the Project Life File
43
53
69
75
125
141
147
157
163
169
181
183
187
iv
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Currency equivalents
Currency Unit
US$1.0
EURO 1.0
Weights and measures
1 kilogram
1 000 kg
1 kilometre (km)
1 metre
1 square metre
1 acre
1 dunum
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
BAM Convertible Mark
BAM 1.566
BAM 1.956
1000 g
2.204 lb.
0.62 mile
1.09 yards
10.76 square feet
0.405 hectare
0.10 hectare
v
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Abbreviations and acronyms
APCU
AWPB
BDS
BiH
BP
CAP
CDP
COSOP
CPMT
DRC
EET
EFSE
ERP
ERR
ESMP
EU
FARMA
FBiH
FHH
FMA
FO
GDP
GIZ
GNI
GlobalGAP
HACCP
IFC
IFR
IPA
IPARD
IPSAS
IRM
IRR
ISA
KM
LAMP
LED
LPP
LRFDP
LSMS
M&E
MAFWM
MAWMF
MCO
MDG
Agriculture Projects Coordination Unit
Annual Work Plan and Budget
Business Development Services
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Business Proposal
Common Agricultural Policy
Cluster Development Program
Country Strategic Options Paper
Country Programme Management Team
Domestic Resource Cost
Energy Efficiency Team
European Fund for Southeast Europe
Effective Rate of Protection
Economic Rate of Return
Environmental and Social Management Plan
European Union
Fostering Agricultural Markets Activity
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Female-Headed Household
Financial Management Assessment
Farmers’ Organization
Gross Domestic Product
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
Gross National Income
Global Good Agricultural Practice
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points
International Finance Corporation
Interim Financial Report
Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance (to the EU)
Instrument for Pre-Accession Rural Development
International Public Sector Accounting Standards
Inter-cycle Review Mission
Internal Rate of Return
International Standards on Auditing
Convertible Mark
Linking Agricultural Markets to Producers Project (USAID)
Local Economic Development
Law on Public Procurement
Livestock and Rural Finance Development Project
Living Standard Measurement Survey
Monitoring and Evaluation
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management
Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry
Microcredit Organization
Millennium Development Goals
vi
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
MFI
MIDCA
MoFT
MOFTER
MTDS
MTR
NGO
NPV
NRP
NTFP
OFID
PA
PBAS
PCR
PCU
PDO
PEFA
PFI
PIM
PRSP
PSC
PY
RB-COSOP
RCDP
RS
REEP
RIMS
SDC
SIDA
SME
SP
SPSC
UNDAF
UNDP
UNFCCC
USAID
USD
VAT
VC
Microfinance Institution
Integrated Organisation Model Applied to Producer Organisations
Ministry of Finance and Treasury
Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations
Medium-Term Development Strategy
Mid-tern Review
Non-Governmental Organization
Net Present Value
Nominal Rate of Protection
Non-Timber Forest Products
OPEC Fund for International Development
Producers Association
Performance-Based Allocation System
Project Completion Report
Project Coordination Unit
Project Development Objective
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Participating Financial Institution
Project Implementation Manual
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Project Steering Committee
Project Year
Results-based country strategic opportunities programme
Rural Competitiveness Development Project
Republika Srpska
Rural Enterprise Enhancement Project
Results and Impact Management System
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
Swedish International Development Cooperation
Small and Medium Enterprise
Service Provider
State Project Steering Committee
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
United States Agency for International Development
United States Dollar
Value Added Tax
Value Chain
vii
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Map of the Programme area
viii
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Cluster Map: Berries
ix
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Cluster Map: NTFP
x
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Cluster Map: Vegetables
xi
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Executive Summary1
Rationale
During the next decade, the Government of Bosnia-Herzegovina (BiH) will face the challenge to
modernize its agricultural sector, based on the country’s comparative advantages in a context of
liberalized European and regional markets. While the agricultural sector is potentially well positioned
with several comparative advantages, in particular for fruits, vegetables, non-timber forest products
(NTFP) and organic products, both for export and domestic markets, the country is not yet reaping the
full benefits of trade liberalization processes and existing market potential. The Rural Competiveness
Development Programme (RCDP) would be one of the main IFAD tools to support entity
Governments to achieve the goal of modernizing food and agricultural systems; it is also aligned with
the Bosnia and Herzegovina development strategy, and the Results-based country strategic
opportunities programme (RB-COSOP 2013) with its goal to enable poor rural people to improve their
food security and increase their incomes through support to non-commercial and commercial farmers,
and to on- and off-farm enterprises.
Subsequently, the rationale for RCDP is based on the need for smallholder farmers, essentially the
needs of poor 'non-commercial' (whether registered or not2) t to: (a) access to more integrated forms
of production and marketing and so become more competitive while reaching a viable commercial
scale in a context of integrating regional markets; (b) increase their participation in decision making
processes and become more active stakeholders in local economic development through their
organisations; and (c) ensure the inclusiveness of poor farmers, women and youth men and women
through their organizations into sustainable opportunities of economic development.
RCDP will focus initially on the fruits, vegetables and Non Timber Forest Products (NTFP)
Subsectors, in which the best opportunities exist to realize a visible impact on rural poverty reduction
and economic growth. In order to achieve the necessary structural changes for sustainable subsector
development, RCDP is designed as a long-term intervention, to be implemented in two cycles of five
years each. Prior to the end of the first cycle, an Inter-cycle Review Mission (IRM) will assess
progress and prepare the next cycle3. At IRM, if new opportunities arise, additional Subsectors could
be included.
As a variation from a more conventional approach to development based on area development
approach, the strategic vision of RCDP is to use subsector development and programmatic
approaches in order to support structural improvements in core areas necessary to ensure
sustainable economic and social benefits.
Programme area and target group
RCDP will be implemented at national level through value chain clusters. Currently twelve clusters
have been pre-identified thus constituting the Programme area for its first cycle (see appendix 2 for
the list of clusters and municipalities). Given the focus on supporting the most vulnerable groups (poor
farmers, women and youth) the Programme will foster the inclusion of poor municipalities that have
the potential to be involved in the selected value chains in the context of larger clusters of
municipalities. Typically, these municipalities will be either close to the areas currently active in the
selected sub-sector value chains or municipalities where important 'poverty pockets' still subsist.
1Patrick Herlant (Mission Leader), Rodolfo Lauritto (Team Leader), Marco Camagni (VC expert – PTA), Fedja Begovic, (Value
Chain Specialist, coordinator complementary studies), Prayer Galletti Mattia (institutional specialist - PTA), Martin Mautner
(institutional specialist), Agnese Tonnina (EFA and COSTAB specialist), Zoran Pavlovic (Institutional Specialist), Tamara
Lampe (Programme officer) and Boris Tadic (agronomist).
2 Non-registered farmers  mostly have no access to subsidies
3 The programme will be implemented in 2 phases of 5 years. In FY4 the programme will be assessed –among other
parameters - against specific performance 'triggers' (included in the log-frame).
xii
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Detailed design report
Clusters will be identified on the basis of common characteristics in terms of socio-economic and
institutional potential.
Targeting. Particular emphasis is placed on the inclusion of poor farmers, women and youth, and
hence fosters the development of selected sub-sectors for its poverty reduction potential. Direct
beneficiaries will be rural poor, both women and men, young and adults, organized in Producers’
Associations (PAs) and Cooperatives active in the selected VCs. Individuals currently not associated
to PAs and co-operatives can be eligible, but they should have a real possibility to be incorporated to
these organisations and PAs and cooperatives are willing to associate these individuals. Among these
beneficiaries, the Programme will undertake the necessary efforts to reach out to three target groups:
the very poor, poor and borderline poor, analysing their specific constraints and challenges to
access the selected VCs, and specifically analysing constraints faced by women and youth4.
Subsequently, the targeting strategy will respond to these challenges, providing enabling measures
that could allow their access to project activities. Basically, RCDP will target poor, non-commercial
farmers that are not sufficiently incorporated into the supply systems that link them to the market and
support them to become competitive commercial farmers.
Number of Beneficiaries. The Programme will, over a period of 10 years, directly target
16,000 beneficiaries through the implementation of Business Proposals (BPs). Over the Programme
lifetime, 3,150 jobs would be created at post-harvest level (minimum 20% of jobs created for women).
Indirect beneficiaries will benefit from thriving VCs and private agribusiness investments, improved
subsector governance and upgraded collective marketing infrastructure. The estimated number of
indirect beneficiaries is minimum 5,000 (about 30% of the number of the total number of
beneficiaries).
Development objective
The goal of the Programme will be “to contribute to sustainable rural poverty reduction in Bosnia and
Herzegovina”. The Programme development objective will be to “enable smallholders to take
advantage of fruits, vegetable and non-timber forest products subsector development for the
sustainable improvement of their social and economic conditions and those of other poor rural
groups”.
The expected impact would be the effective incorporation of smallholders in dynamic fruit and
vegetable and NTFP subsectors and ensure that it has durably improved economic and social
perspectives for rural areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Programme has a clear emphasis on
social targeting and inclusiveness. Its strategic vision is to use a subsector development
approach in order to support a core of interventions necessary for sustainable structural changes and
leading to the expected economic and social benefits: tackle the related trade, policy and institutional
issues and promote local economic development; leverage private sector investments through
bankable BPs; ensuring social inclusiveness; promoting environmental friendly and climate-change
adaptation technologies; ensure adequate supply of specialized services; subsector governance by
private stakeholders and their professional organizations; and subsector performance monitoring and
accountability based on active participation of local authorities, beneficiaries and private stakeholders.
Components and Outcomes
Leverage points and guiding principles. RCDP's approach is based on the private-public
partnership model, whereby public funds are expected to be used to leverage private sectors’
investments in a win-win partnership. Business Proposals (BPs) within clusters and subsectors will be
prepared and implemented by different actors.
Component 1: Enabling Environment for Inclusive Subsector Development
Outcome 1 will be: “The improved policy and institutional environment attracts smallholders and
investors to the selected subsectors.” Five elements of the subsector development approach of RCDP
4 More details on poverty, targeting and gender are provided in Appendix 2.
xiii
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
will be implemented through the component: (i) subsector governance by all concerned private and
public stakeholders through consultations and joint strategic planning of interventions; (ii) developing
relevant institutions’ capacities in the subsectors to ensure adequate supply of specialized services;
and (iii) an enabling policy framework in order to tackle the related trade, policy and institutional
issues and promote local economic development, (iv) subsector performance monitoring and
accountability and (v) strengthening relevant institutions capacities.
The expected results are the following: (i) sstakeholder's platforms at cluster level and subsector level
improve value chain coordination and subsector governance, orient public policies and investments in
order to warrant long term subsector competitiveness; and (ii) appropriate technical and business
development services are made available at local and entity level.
As such, RCDP's approach is based on the private-public partnership model, whereby public funds
will be used to leverage investments from the private sector in a win-win partnership, the private
sector can expand its business and a higher number of small-scale producers can expand their
production and make it more profitable. As part of the efforts to create an enabling environment for
inclusive subsector development, RCDP will help to ensure adequate supply of specialized support
services, public and private.
Component 2: Sustainable inclusion of smallholders in the thriving/successful value chains
The outcome of component 2 will be the “Sustainable inclusion of poor smallholders and vulnerable
groups in selected subsectors.” The expected results are the following: (i) inclusive business
proposals developed and implemented; and (ii) very poor and poor farmers, women and youth have
successfully integrated into competitive and rewarding value chains.
This component intends to: (i) help improve the livelihood of small scale producers and poor collectors
through sustainable and profitable farming; (ii) consolidate their organisations and their capabilities to
identify forthcoming business opportunities (in terms of markets, marketing channels, new products
etc.) to expand their business; and (iii) have a voice and play an active role in the multi-stakeholders
coordination platforms, both at cluster level and at subsector level. RCDP will take advantage of
existing value chain dynamics in the selected value chains in which the private sector (i.e. agro input
dealers, collectors, processors, traders, wholesalers, retailers) is actively engaging with smallholders,
either organised or individually.
Business Proposals (BPs), allowing business partners (producers and agribusiness) to plan
coordinate and carry out mutually benefiting investments, will be the main project instrument under
Component 2. The BP will be the main instrument of BP business partners (small-scale producers and
collectors and their organisations, agribusiness companies) for the sustainable development of their
joint businesses in the selected sub-sectors and value chains. BPs will also frame partner's needs in
terms of capacity development and investments of which part will be addressed by public (project)
funds.
Programme coordination, monitoring and evaluation
The Lead Project Agencies shall be the Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management and
Forestry and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management of the Republika Srpska. In
each Entity, project coordination as well as fiduciary management will be entrusted to the existing
APCU and PCU. With the view to promoting structural change and sustainable sub-sector
development, a rigorous and outcome and impact-monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be
developed, for which project stakeholders will bear shared/ joint responsibility; the APCU and PCU will
however, besides overall coordination, maintain their ultimate responsibility for M&E. Furthermore, the
demand-driven nature of the Programme as well as its participatory approach that will ensure
beneficiaries take the lead in selecting, following-up and assessing performance of service providers
will require that PAs and cooperatives members become part of the M&E process of RCDP.
xiv
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Detailed design report
Implementation arrangements
The State Ministry of Finance and Treasury (MOFT) will have overall responsibility of RCDP and will
coordinate with the Entity Ministries of Finance which are responsible for externally-funded projects. A
Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the entity Ministry of Agriculture or its designated
representative would be set up in each Entity to provide overall guidance to the Programme at Entity
level. The PSC would meet once or twice per annum. Each PSC will ensure that (i) project activities
are in compliance with the Government and IFAD strategies and policies and goals and objectives
defined at project design; (ii) endorse strategic orientations taken up by the project (iii) review project
Entity level Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB); (iv) oversee the transparent selection of service
providers and partner institutions; (v) ensure that Programme interventions are coordinated with other
development programmes and projects and (vi) ensure adherence to the highest standards of
financial management and audit. As expected, the PSC should invite representatives from the private,
PAs and cooperative sectors the joint the Committee. A yearly inter-entity meeting (workshop) will
assess the 'state of play' of the programme in particular as regards sustainable subsector
development, performance and governance. The meeting will be co-chaired by the state-level Ministry
of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations and state-level Ministry of Finance and Treasury.
The scope of the RCDP, foresees a need for partnership development and strengthening of national
capacities. Most notably, the intensive planning, facilitation and coordination requirements envisaged
by the project will necessitate substantial field presence both for facilitation and follow-up/ monitoring.
The various responsibilities will be shared amongst the project stakeholders, detailed in the
agreements and terms of reference of the contractual arrangements.
The number of stakeholders and potential partnerships that will be facilitated and/ or supported by the
project anticipates a considerable increase in the number and types of implementation arrangements
(with service providers, implementation partners, etc.) that may have to be adopted by the project.
Effectively, the operating modalities of the proposed RCDP will likely represent a shift from previous
projects; it will be critical therefore, that this new generation of project will be matched with responsive
coordination and strengthened management capacity. It is further expected that the bulk of the
institutional strengthening activities will be provided by service providers contracted on the market.
Each organizational strengthening should be considered as a process, requiring an initial diagnostic
and needs assessment.
The APCU and PCU will be responsible for coordination and liaison with municipalities, clusters and
implementing partners, overall project management and monitoring, organizing start-up and annual
workshops, preparation of AWPBs, fiduciary management. The APCU and PCU will recruit through a
competitive process BFPs, technical advisory services, business development services and
organizational development services and will establish a roster of service providers which will be
made available to all BPs partners through a public Website or equivalent platform. BPs’ partners will
selected and enter into agreements with services providers of their choice. Complementary, the APCU
and PCU will establish the voucher scheme, which will be an instrument to pay for the services
rendered by the service providers to the BPs’ partners.
Programme costs and financing
The total project costs including physical and price contingencies are estimated at USD 61.45 million5
(BAM 106.6 million) over a ten-year period. A total of US$ 25.5 million of IFAD-financing is expected to
be mobilized over the ten-year period. RCDP will absorb the entire PBAS allocation of 2013-2015,
including a loan of US$ 12.25 million and a grant of US$ 500,000 specifically for inclusiveness-related
activities to be implemented under Result 2 of Component 2. Subject to performance and availability,
additional financing of US$ 12.75 million could be earmarked from the 2016-2018 PBAS cycle6, which
5 Project total costs may increase during implementation depending on the accessibility of credit funds provided by other IFAD
funded projects.
6 Additional financing from the 2016-2018 PBAS cycle will be subject to attaining the performance triggers (included in the
logical framework) and to country selection, applicable and available IFAD finance
xv
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
will be allocated for the co-financing of Cycle 2 of the Programme. Component 2, which is the main
investment component, represents 86% of total project costs.
IFAD loans will be used to fully finance: (a) Component 1; (b) Project Coordination Unit in both
Entities; and (c) to co-finance Business Proposals (BPs) implemented under Component 2. BPs are
expected to be financed according to the following allocation: (a) 38% from IFAD loans; (b) 5% from
Municipalities; (c) 17% from PAs; and (d) 39% from agribusiness and/or financial sector.
Benefits, sustainability and exit strategy
The RCDP is expected to primary generate substantial net incremental benefits for non-commercial
farmers investing in the three selected sub-sectors a) berries; b) vegetables; c) NTFP. Benefits would
directly accrue to farmers, women and youth through a comprehensive improvement of
sub-sectors’ value chains returns.
the
The main benefits of Component 1 would result in (i) increased capacity of specialized institutions and
service providers; (ii) structured and result-oriented policy dialogue/engagement at local and national
levels (empowerment of local actors). Main benefits of Component 2 would be: (i) expansion of
acreage of berries; vegetables and NTFP both for domestic and export markets; (ii) establishment of
agribusiness agreements between value chain actors in a minimum of 12 clusters; (iii) increased
revenues for about 16,000 direct beneficiaries, who will develop or upgrade their berries and
vegetable production; (iv) on an average additional national production of berries would be
7,600 tonnes per annum (40% increase of the current production, considering that 20% increase is
expected from new production and 20% increase is expected from improved yields); (v) institutional
strengthening of 120 PAs and 100 cooperatives; (vi) at wholesale and cooperative level, significant
investments in collection and processing facilities would be supported; (vii) priority target groups of
IFAD, including women, youth and rural poor would receive access; (viii) creation of 3,150 fulltime and
part-time jobs upstream and downstream in the value chains (estimated at 1 job per 5 farmers);
(ix) particular attention will be given to support climate change resilience.
Economic Rate of Return. On the basis of the above assumptions, the ERR of RCDP would be
36.6% and the Net Present Value (NPV) would amount to USD 53.1 million. The high ERR reflects the
ambition and potential leverage of RCDP; with an approach focused on clear comparative advantages
and existing economic dynamics in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Exit strategy. The exit strategy of RCDP is based on the following design features: (i) a focus on
value chain clusters and linkages within a comprehensive Subsector approach; (ii) the demand-driven
approach through private sector stakeholders, namely agribusinesses, POs, cooperatives and other
service providers; (iii) alignment with interventions of Municipalities and Cantons; (iv) support that is
mainly provided to smallholders on commercial terms; (v)focus on agribusiness activities that will be
fully integrated in the regional market economy; (vi) risk mitigation through institutional capacity
building of value chain stakeholders. Moreover, the operation will be implemented over a 10 years
period, what will allow for the activities implemented, VCs and clusters to consolidate.
xvi
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Logical Framework
Narrative Summary
Impact. The effective incorporation of smallholders in dynamic fruit, vegetable and non-timber forest products subsectors has durably improved economic and social perspectives of rural areas in
BiH.
Goal: Contribute  to  rural  poverty  reduction
in selected subsectors of BiH economy
Key Performance Indicators7
- Baseline and impact survey
- RIMS survey
Assumptions (A) / Risks (R)
Means of Verification
- Direct beneficiary households reporting increase of at
least 20% in HH asset ownership within 5 years of
project support, as compared to baseline (RIMS)
Project  Development  Objective. To  enable
smallholders  to  take  advantage  of  fruits,
vegetable  and  non-timber  forest  products
subsector  development  for  the sustainable
improvement  of  their  social  and  economic
conditions  and  those  of  other  poor  rural
groups
- 16,000 
additional 
to
producers
equivalent  number  of  HHs) receive project  services and
are sustainably  and  profitably involved in the  selected
subsectors.
((corresponding 
- Additional  volume  of  produce  exported :100%  increase
over current exported volumes
- Minimal  additional  revenues  at HH level:  USD  3,000  for
berries  (2  dunum),  USD  1500  open  field  vegetables  (1
ha), USD 4000 (600m2 greenhouse)
- Minimally  30%  participation  of  women  and  youth
participation in the VCs
Component 1. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Subsector Development
Improved  policy  and
Outcome  1: The 
institutional 
attracts
smallholders  and  investors  to  the  selected
subsectors
subsector pro-poor development
Subsector  stakeholder  platforms  generate  3  subsector
policy  development  proposals  with  their  corresponding
regulatory framework
- USD 29 million private investments leveraged in selected
environment 
- Baseline  and  impact  survey (resp:
8
)
A/PCU
- Export & production statistics
- Monitoring reports of facilitators
- M&E reports (Resp: A/PCU)
- Survey  on  inclusiveness  of  rural  poor
(Resp: A/PCU)
- Baseline and impact surveys
- Monitoring reports of facilitators
9
levels 
subsector 
Result  1:  Smallholders  Platforms  at  cluster
and 
improve  VC
coordination  and  subsector  governance,
inform public policies and orient investments
in  order  to  warrant  long-term  subsector
competitiveness
Result  2:  Appropriate 
technical  and
business  development  services  are  made
available at local and entity levels
- At  least  12  Cluster  stakeholder  platforms [8  by  FY4]
10
established and in operation
- Three  Subsector  Stakeholder  Platforms  established  and
in operation at county level
- Monitoring reports of facilitators
- M&E reports
- Business proposals
- Minutes of CSP/SSP meetings
- 60 public extension staff with  updated  skills  and
competencies
- Quality  and  outreach  of  advisory  services 
locally
provided responds to requirements of BPs
- A voucher scheme for BDS, organizational and technical
advisory  services  has  been  set  up  and  in  operation  by
FY3
- Extension  staff
gap
for  each  subsector and
competence
analysis 
training planning
- Reports  of  PAs  and  cooperatives  on
the performance of BDS services
- Monitoring reports on the quality of the
service providers
- M&E reports / MIDCA
11
for 
environment 
(A)  Willingness  of  National  and Entity
stakeholders to cooperate and to create an
enabling 
selected
subsectors
(A) Demand for subsector development
(A)  Readiness  of  local  authorities  and  of
private  sector  actors  to  play  a  lead  role  in
efforts 
inclusiveness  and
improve 
coordination along the value chain
to 
(A)  willingness  of  development  partners
and professional bodies to participate
(A) Existence of private and public advisory
services that respond  to the  current  needs
of the sector
(R)  Classic  procurement  and 
management system might create delays.
financial
7 Gender and age disaggregated data.
8 Setup and management of a robust and effective M&E and reporting system is the responsibility of the (Agriculture) Project Coordination Unit (A/PCU) – yearly analytical reporting on progress towards project targets is expected.
9 M&E 'baseline' policy, legal and institutional assessment (both at national and cluster level) as related to the selected subsectors (source EU sector studies preparing accession) 'final; policy, legal and institutional assessment (source: EU and
WB policy and institutional monitoring
10 Triggers aimed at assessing programme's progress against set targets – decision points to proceed with the second phase of the project highlighted
xvii
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Narrative Summary
Key Performance Indicators7
Means of Verification
Assumptions (A) / Risks (R)
Component 2: Sustainable inclusion of smallholders in the thriving/ successful value chains
Outcome  2: Sustainable  inclusion  of  poor
in
smallholders  and  vulnerable  groups 
selected subsectors
to
equivalent number of HHs) in VCs [4,000 by FY4], out of
which minimum 30% are women and youth
(corresponding 
smallholders 
- 16,000
involved
- Baseline and impact surveys
- Participatory monitoring of smallholder
participation in selected VCs
Result  1:
developed and implemented
Inclusive  business  proposals
- Over  the  project  lifetime,  3,150  jobs  created  at  post-
harvest level (minimum 20% of jobs created for women)
- Minimum  10%  increase  of  final  price/value  accruing  to
- M&E reports
- Update of financial models
smallholders
- 140  Business  Proposals  (BPs) [60  by  FY4] between
smallholders  and  other  value  chain  actors have  been
facilitated, implemented and remain in operation
- Minimum  60  PAs  and  cooperatives  received  BDS and
specialised extension services
- Minimum  60  PAs  and  cooperatives  benefitting  from
productive/value adding assets supported over the life of
the project
- Survey of inclusiveness of rural poor
- Minimum 20% increase in product added value
- 5,000 
farmers  adopt 
smallholder 
climate-friendly
Result  2: Poor  farmers,  women  and  youth
into
have
competitive  and  rewarding  fruit,  vegetable
and NTFP value chains
successfully 
integrated 
technologies
- Minimum  20%  annual  increase  in  sales  (volume  and
value) during the first 3 years of farmers newly involved
(through their BPs) in selected value chains
- At  least  30%  of  new  farmers  of  the  core  project  target
group (women, youth, rural poor) are durably generating
income from their activities in the selected value chains
- Reports  from  sector  stakeholders  on
the  relevance  and  appropriateness  of
the acquired value added assets
- 140 BPs adopt pro-poor inclusive measures
- Minimum  20%  of  youth  and  women  in  decision  making
positions in the PAs/Coops trained in management-
- Measurable  improvement  of  FO  performance  (based  on
MIDCA assessment)
- Monitoring  reports  of  facilitators  and
M&E
- Reports of service providers
- Reports from vulnerable groups
- Monitoring reports of service providers
- M&E reports
(A) Willingness of VC actors to improve the
coordination along the VC
(A)  Poor  farmers’  and  vulnerable  groups’
interest  and  readiness  to  coordinate  within
the selected VCs
(A)  Willingness  of  PAs,  cooperatives  and
municipalities  to  reach  out  to  rural  poor
people.
(A)  Necessary  BDS  clearly  defined  and
focused on increasing VC competitiveness
(A)  Private  and  public  value  chain
stakeholders  are  willing  to  leverage  public
funding that will be provided.
(R)  Classic  procurement  and 
management system might create delays.
financial
(A)  Smallholder  farmers  have  access  to
agri-business services and information
(A) Sound criteria for targeting are defined
(A)  Willingness  of  key  actors  to  adopt  an
inclusive approach
11 The Integral model of Diagnosis for Co-operatives and Associations (MIDCA) is a flexible tool that can be used to define, diagnose, and evaluate a cooperative organization or affiliation
http://www.progresonetwork.org/media/docs/MIDCA%20Manual.doc.
xviii
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
I.
Strategic context and rationale12
A. Country and rural development context
With a per capita Gross National Income (GNI) of US$ 4,780 in 2013, BiH is an upper middle-
1.
income country13. Its population was estimated to be 3.83 million in 201314 and 58% of the people live
in rural areas. Last Population Census was conducted in October 2013 but data are not officially
available yet. Previous census was conducted before the war, in 1991.
After a successful post-conflict reconstruction since 1995, the economy has picked up and
2.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth has averaged 2.5-3.0 % for the past two years with low
inflation, but GDP growth was almost negative during 2104. This annual average GDP growth has led
to a reduction in poverty of almost 4%, though the results achieved in terms of poverty reduction are
fragile and are being reversed as many Bosnian citizens live only just above the poverty line. Even
minor declines in economic growth can cause an increase in poverty.
The economy is characterised by a high level of informal employment, a high inactivity rate of
3.
people of working age (56%) and a high unemployment rate of youth (45-50%). The total ILO-defined
unemployment rate is 29%, while the official or registered unemployment rate is 46.1%15, and
unemployment amongst young people is twice the national average16. The service sector is the
largest contributor to employment with 49.3%, followed by the industry sector at 31.0% and agriculture
with 19.7% in 201017.
4.
Agriculture contributes with less than 10% of the GDP of the country. Cultivable land amounts
to 1 million ha18 but less than 20% of agricultural land is suited to intensive agriculture, most of this
located in lowlands and river valleys. As only about 1% of the arable land benefits from some kind of
irrigation, the agricultural sector is considerably exposed to climate change related risks19.
Approximately 500,000 smallholder farms continue to dominate the agricultural sector in BiH, 50%
own less than 2 ha and 89% own less than 5 ha20. Many of them are mixed farms, providing incomes
to people that have lost their jobs in the industrial sector during the 1990s. Farming is often a poverty
coping strategy or part-time source of revenues for rural households. Predominantly unreliable
wholesale linkages for processing, bulking and marketing are the main obstacle for farmers to expand
their business and youth to invest in agriculture. Other factors are the small size of farm holdings, low
yields, a low level of mechanization, and limited access to affordable credit. Within the sector, the
subsectors of fruits, vegetables and non-timber forest products (NTFP) are growing rapidly, both for
export and national markets and these subsectors are accessible to resource-constrained
smallholders with adequate technical and organizational support.
5.
Poverty in BiH is not so much about absolute destitution but it is rather defined by social-
exclusion and a lack of access to basic services and economic opportunities. BiH’s Social Exclusion
Index is 50.3%, indicating that half of the BiH population is, in some way, excluded within the society,
being denied access to social, economic and political rights. While there is little or no extreme poverty
in BiH, between 19 to 21 % of the households suffer from chronic material deprivation and between
20 to 30% are at risk of falling into material deprivation.
12 Details are presented in Appendix 1.
13 World Bank, Country Classification. 2013.
14 World Bank, 2013.
15“Progress towards the realization of the millennium development goals in Bosnia and Herzegovina 2010”, Ministry of Finance
and Treasury, and the United Nations Country Team. Sarajevo. July-August 2010.
16 UNDP, Human Development Report: The Ties that Bind, Social Capital in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2009.
17 Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina: Bosnia and Herzegovina in Figures 2010. Sarajevo, 2010.
18 BiH Strategic Plan for Harmonization of Agriculture, Food and Rural Development, 2008-2011.
19 Drought incidences have increased and these events can decrease yields by 30% (UNDP Climate Change Assessment).
20 BiH Agriculture, Food and Rural Development Harmonization Strategic Plan 2008-2010.
1
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
With a Human Development Index of 0.735, Bosnia and Herzegovina is ranked on 81st place
6.
out of 186 countries21, below than all its neighbour countries.
While the country has shown a general improvement along the years in the goal of reaching
7.
universal primary education, secondary school enrolment, child mortality, and child health, the country
has however fallen back on its Millennium Development Goals (MDG) indicators with regard to
employment of women and youth. Gender parity in education is high, especially in higher education,
but notwithstanding the legal and institutional framework to improve gender equality and the
empowerment of women actual positive changes in employment practices, income generation
opportunities and political participation remain modest.
The Dayton Peace Accords created a complicated governance structure for BiH’s three
8.
constituent peoples, Bosnians, Serbs and Croats, and 17 recognised minorities collectively referred to
as “Others”. This country structure consists of two Entities, Republika Srpska and the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH), ten cantons within the FBiH, the Brčko District in the northern part of
the country, and 143 municipalities (64 in the Republika Srpska and 79 in the Federation). Many
different layers of government structures, made of prime ministers, legislatures, ministers, presidents,
and constitutional courts govern BiH. This complex governance structure, complicated bureaucratic
apparatus and limited coordination between various levels of government compelled by weak rule of
law translates into an investment-unfriendly environment. They hinder BiH in its efforts to optimize
international trade relations and collaboration with neighbouring countries and the EU. BiH’s
accession to the EU and its associated requirements has provided a strong framework for broad
reform goals. Upon the signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SSA), Bosnia and
Herzegovina entered into the first contractual relation with the European Union22.
The foreign trade deficit has decreased significantly, but is still sizeable; Croatia is one of BiH’s
9.
major foreign trade partners. Its entry into the EU in July 2013 however affected significantly trade and
commerce with BiH, with particular impact on the agricultural sector as certain produce is no longer
eligible for export into the EU market due to the difficulty to set up state level instruments and enact
legislation (e.g. for animal products: dairy, poultry and eggs).
B. Rationale
10.
BiH has favourable agro-ecological and soil conditions for the production of a broad range of
vegetables and fruits. Climate variations between northern continental part of Bosnia and southern
Mediterranean part of Herzegovina enable provision and delivery of fruit and vegetables for the
market throughout most of the year but the country remains nevertheless a net importer for most fruits
and vegetables. These favourable conditions in combination with rather captive export markets
represent an important potential for the agricultural sector. BiH, with its abundant forest resources, is
also very suitable for the collection of wild fruits, mushrooms, medicinal and aromatic plants (MAPs)
thus constituting an important income generating activity for rural people, in particular those with small
revenues. MAPS are also premium products in domestic and export markets while their value chains
are often complementary to fruit value chains (using the same collection points and cold storage
facilities).
11.
Fruits’, vegetables’ and non-timber forest products’ (NTFP) subsectors offer particularly good
opportunities for rural poverty reduction, economic and export growth in the medium and long term.
These subsectors are attractive to smallholder farmers because of: (a) the possibility to maximize the
21.The HDI provides a comparative measure of quality of life in terms of life expectancy, literacy, education and the standard
of living for countries worldwide (UNDP, 2013).
22. The Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) is a new, third generation of European agreements offered exclusively
to the Western Balkans countries, in the framework of the Stabilisation and Association Process. The Agreement is signed for
an undefined period of time with a view to contributing to economic and political stabilisation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. States
which have become members through the EU fifth enlargement have signed Association Agreements (the so-called European
agreements). The basic difference between the two mentioned agreements is in the content of the “evolution clause” in the SAA
and in the emphasis on regional cooperation in Western Balkans (Official site of the Directorate for European Integration,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2015).
2
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
comparative advantages inherent to small farms in essentially based on family labour (b) their
capacity to generate income and employment; (c) their potential to earn a decent incomes on small
plots of land; (e) their attractiveness for mixed, part-time and even specialized farming; (f) the
possibility to maximize BiH’s agro-ecological potential and abundant forest resources; (g) the
presence of agribusinesses interested in setting up or strengthening supply chains for both processing
and fresh markets; (h) favourable market prospects, with produce that can be freely exported to the
EU and other international markets and characterized by a growing consumer demand; and (i) the
possibility to build up on successful initiatives developed by other development partners, including
USAID, SIDA, SDC, GIZ, CARITAS, OXFAM, etc. and local economic development (LED) agencies.
Agricultural production is mainly organized by the private sector. The majority of agricultural
12.
holdings are fragmented with a low level of adoption of modern agricultural practices. The agricultural
sector is characterized by relatively low levels of processing and reduced capabilities in terms of
marketing BiH produce.
During the next decade, the Government of Bosnia-Herzegovina (BiH) will face the challenge to
13.
modernize its agricultural sector, based on the country’s comparative advantages in a context of
liberalized European and regional markets. While the agricultural sector is potentially well positioned
with several comparative advantages, in particular for fruits, vegetables, non-timber forest products
(NTFP) and organic products, both for export and domestic markets, the country is not yet reaping the
full benefits of trade liberalization processes and existing market potential. The Rural Competiveness
Development Project (RCDP) would be one of the main IFAD tools to support entity Governments to
achieve the goal of modernizing food and agricultural systems. The responsibility for agricultural and
rural policy implementation resides at the entity-level ministries of agriculture. Decisions related to
local support measures (subsidies and eventual investments) are mainly taken at cantonal and
municipal level (in FBiH) or municipal level (in RS).
In alignment with the Bosnia and Herzegovina development strategy, and IFAD Strategic
14.
Framework 2011-2015, the overall goal of the Results-based country strategic opportunities
programme (RB-COSOP 2013) is to enable poor rural people to improve their food security and
increase their incomes through support to non-commercial and commercial farmers, and to on- and
off-farm enterprises.
The rationale for RCDP is based on the need for smallholder farmers, essentially the needs of
15.
poor 'non-commercial' (whether registered or not23) t to: (a) access to more integrated forms of
production and marketing and so become more competitive while reaching a viable commercial scale
in a context of integrating regional markets; (b) increase their participation in decision making
processes and become more active stakeholders in local economic development through their
organisations; and (c) ensure the inclusiveness of poor farmers, women and youth men and women
through their organizations into sustainable opportunities of economic development.
16.
A second set of challenges is to create economic opportunities for women and youth, in
particular in rural areas. Women equality indexes in BiH have been worsening since the Balkan wars,
deteriorating women's role and condition in Bosnian society. Conflict in BiH and the subsequent
migration of men led to a rise in the number of women-headed households representing eventually up
to a quarter of the HHs in rural areas. Many elderly women live alone in rural areas, surviving without
a pension or other regular income. The generally weak institutional setting and reduced number of
initiatives and programme in support of women leaves a gap in terms of protection of women’s rights
and promotion of gender equality.
17.
At farm level, women are generally involved in family agricultural production activities,
performing most of the work related to irrigation, berry picking and horticulture harvesting, hence
playing a very relevant role in the selected value chains .Women are often excluded from marketing
and commercialization activities, preventing them from accessing and controlling income generated
23 Non-registered farmers have no access to subsidies
3
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
by the produce. Besides lower education levels rural women’s also face constraints in terms of access
to organizations, such as producers’ organizations and social networks. To the exception of women-
led PAs, women’s contribution to the value chain is also often not recognized nor can they voice their
concerns or take part in decision-making processes. Among the constraints faced by rural women in
boosting their economic empowerment there is limited access to land (80% of the land is owned by
men), to training (e.g. modern farming techniques), and to finance. , as well as lower education levels
compared to their urban peers. The situation is different when women are employed by processing
and trading companies, where they perceive a salary.
18.
Youth unemployment rate is calculated to be around 50%. Young men and women in rural
areas face high levels of unemployment and very limited opportunities for self-employment leading, to
massive migration flows towards urban areas or abroad. Young people interviewed expressed an
overall sense of distrust in the capacity of local institutions to support their economic empowerment,
while voicing concerns over the widespread nepotism in the work place. Young people would be
willing to work or start their own businesses in agriculture, rural tourism, and others, but they face lack
of specific policies geared towards them, limited possibilities to access to credit, low levels of
education preparedness, as well as lack of possibilities for undertaking vocational training, blocking
their economic empowerment possibilities.
The development hypothesis on which RCDP is premised is that, with adequate support,
19.
smallholder farmers, men, women and young will be able to improve the competitiveness of their
farming activities and scale up their farms to viable commercial units. This will require: (i) linking them
to agribusiness partners and markets, technological innovation and business development services;
(ii) supporting the inclusion of small farmers’, women and youth in PAs and cooperatives24; and
(iii) strengthening PAs and cooperatives’ organizational, managerial and entrepreneurial skills. A
crucial dimension of a sustainable solution is to strengthen PAs and cooperatives by improving their
outreach to the poorer segments of population, strengthening their organizational capabilities and
enhancing their market power.
20.
In order to achieve structural changes in the targeted subsectors, RCDP is designed as a
long-term intervention, to be implemented in two cycles of five years each. Prior to the end of the first
cycle, an Inter-cycle Review Mission (IRM) will be organized to assess progress, adjust the approach
and prepare the next cycle. At IRM, if new opportunities arise, additional Subsectors could be
included.
Subsector approach
As a variation from a more conventional approach to development based on area development
21.
approach, the strategic vision of RCDP is to use subsector development and programmatic
approaches in order to support structural improvements in five core areas necessary to ensure
sustainable economic and social benefits, namely:



An enabling policy framework, at State and Entity levels in order to tackle the related trade,
policy and institutional issues, and at Canton and Municipality levels, which are responsible
for local economic development, are providing local subsidies and support mechanisms and
local policy dialogue/engagement;
Subsector governance by private stakeholders and their professional organizations, involved
ministries and municipalities through consultations and joint strategic planning of
interventions; coordination of RCDP activities with all involved development partners;
Subsector performance monitoring and accountability based on active participation of local
and country-level authorities, beneficiaries and private stakeholders/investors;
 Mobilization of the required private and public financial resources. The role of public
investments, including RCDP contribution, would essentially be to leverage private sector
24 PAs are rather loose organisations, which are registered but have no right to get into commercial activities.
4
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
investments. Public investments would be targeted according to priorities of private sector
stakeholders, while leveraging social inclusiveness and promoting environmental friendly and
climate-change adaptation technologies; and

Strengthening relevant institutions’ capacities in the subsector to ensure adequate supply of
specialized services; these would include specialized extension, business development
services (BDS), adaptive research, inclusive targeting and strengthened capacities to
contribute to the M&E system.
II. Programme description
A.
Programme area and target group25
RCDP will be implemented at national level through value chain clusters. Currently twelve
22.
clusters have been pre-identified thus constituting the project area for its first cycle (see Appendix 2
for the list of clusters and municipalities). Given the focus on supporting the most vulnerable groups
(poor farmers, women and youth) the project will foster the inclusion of poor municipalities that have
the potential to be involved in the selected value chains in the context of larger clusters of
municipalities. Typically, these municipalities will be either close to the areas currently active in the
selected sub-sector value chains or municipalities where important 'poverty pockets' still subsist.
Clusters will be identified on the basis of common characteristics in terms of socio-economic and
institutional potential.
23.
Value chains. RCDP will focus on the fruits, vegetables and Non Timber Forest Products
(NTFP) sub-sectors, in which the best opportunities exist to impact rural poverty and economic
growth. The selected value chains offer maximum potential for inclusion of the vulnerable groups in
nearly every municipality in both entities.
24. Within the fruit sub-sector, the focus will be on the soft fruit (berries), which ranks high as an
export product and provides excellent opportunities for inclusion of the vulnerable groups. Fruits
production includes in particular berries, cherries, apples, pears, plums, peaches, grapes and
apricots. The country is a growing producer of a broad range of berries, in particular raspberry and
strawberry, but also blueberry, blackberry, redcurrant, blackcurrant and others. In this respect, the
majority of activities will be related to raspberries, but also strawberries, blackberries and blueberries.
In the vegetable sub-sector the emphasis will be given to the production of gherkins (both open field
and greenhouse), greenhouse production of peppers, tomatoes and cucumbers, and open field
production (early potatoes, peppers for the processing industry, etc.). The NTFP sub-sector is strongly
export oriented and provides excellent opportunities through the collection of wild mushrooms, forest
fruit and medicinal and aromatic herbs for (landless) rural households. In order to ensure sustainability
of the NTFP sub-sector, the cultivation of selected crops, in combination with some value-adding
activities, will be promoted.
The cluster approach and geographic coverage. The selection of clusters will be based on
25.
eligibility criteria, to ensure that those with the strongest pro-poor agenda are chosen for project
support. One of the key criteria for selection of clusters will be the total number of poor and vulnerable
beneficiaries that could benefit from project interventions. This number will obviously be affected by
the two critical factors: (i) size of the proposed cluster, with respect to the number of municipalities,
and (ii) the existing level of activities, in terms of the number of operating FOs and agribusinesses
within the cluster. While the objective is to include the poor municipalities across the country, the final
selection of clusters will also depend on the local initiative and the interest to participate in and
support the project interventions. A preliminary identification of potential clusters has been
undertaken26, through a process of mapping and based on the following criteria: (i) agro-ecological
conditions; (ii) level of existing activity in the selected sub-sectors; (iii) labour availability and interest
25 Details are presented in Appendix 2.
26 The final selection of clusters will be an outcome of a validation exercise led by the APCU/PCU.
5
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
of the farmer organizations to get involved in the selected VCs; (iv) institutional capital, in terms of the
willingness of both the private and public sector to support the sub-sector development, as well as the
availability of relevant support services; (v) infrastructure, especially in terms of road network; and
(vi) presence of marketing infrastructure for storing, processing and/or packaging etc.. Based on this
analysis, maps were produced27 based on the listed criteria, suggesting the possible clusters for each
value-chain28. Physically, these sub-sector value chain clusters usually span up to 10 municipalities,
with favourable agro-ecological conditions for production and where private and public stakeholders
and actors are interlinked and willing to establish partnerships to mutually develop the value chain.
Ideally, the possible clusters should include some strong / very active municipalities, but also
bordering municipalities with potential for growth.
Specifically, in total there are six possible berry clusters, four in the Federation with
26.
36 municipalities and two in the RS with 28 municipalities. This implies that the average number of
municipalities per cluster is around eleven (11.7). However, within the possible clusters, some of the
municipalities may not be interested to participate in the project, while some new ones in the region
may be interested to step in.
The vegetables sub-sector was further split into the three most appropriate product
27.
categories: (i) gherkins; (ii) greenhouse production; and (iii) open-field production. The maps quickly
point the attention to areas where certain possibilities for cluster establishment exist. For gherkins,
northern parts of the country clearly demonstrate some advantages over the southern parts. However,
the sub-sector is still to develop, as there is no major concentration of the activities in a single part of
the country. The possible clusters for gherkin production are four, with 33 municipalities, around 8 on
average (8.25). There are two regions in the RS with 17 municipalities and two regions in FBiH with
16 municipalities. For greenhouse production, in total, there are six clusters with a total of 55
municipalities (an average of 9). In the Federation of BiH, there are 4 possible clusters with 38
municipalities, while in the RS the number is a bit smaller – 2 clusters with 17 municipalities.
Finally, in the vegetables sub-sector there have also been considered the value chain related to
28.
open field vegetable production. The envisioned crops include the production of early potatoes,
pepper and tomato production and similar. Compared to the other two types of vegetable production,
the map is significantly less promising, with most of the country being modestly suitable for this kind of
production, when combined with pro-poor targeting agenda. The exceptions are mostly in the north
and somewhat in the south, with very limited areas active in central-western parts of the country,
known for production of early potatoes. Altogether, these 5 potential (2 FBiH, 3 RS) clusters include a
total of 29 municipalities (14 FBiH, 15 RS), or on average about 6 municipalities per cluster.
29.
The third sub-sector selected for intervention under the RCDP project is the one for Non-Timber
Forest Products (NTFPs). This sub-sector is very important for the landless poor as it relies heavily on
the natural resources available in most parts of the country. Wild mushrooms, wild fruit and wild herbs
are found in abundance in BiH, and the differences in the use of these resources and the
development of the NTFP sector largely depends on the private sector initiative to organize the
collection processes in certain regions. Altogether, these 8 potential (5 FBiH, 3 RS) clusters include a
total of 45 municipalities (27 FBiH, 18 RS), or on average about 6 municipalities (5.6) per cluster.
In total, the proposed sub-sectors could include up to 26 clusters across the country. Given the
30.
project approach to work with a minimum of 12 clusters, the selection of clusters will be very
competitive. In total, the 12 pre-identified clusters suggested in the Appendix 2 include
142 municipalities (98 unique), which gives an average of about 12 municipalities per cluster. The
proposal includes 72 municipalities in FBiH (56 unique) and 70 municipalities in RS (42 unique). A
number of municipalities have more than 1 clusters identified, but the approach of the project will
remain focused on targeting the poor and vulnerable groups. To the extent possible, in case of an
overlap at the municipality level, the project will avoid working in the same local communities and if
27 See Appendix 2 on Cluster pre-identification
28 See Appendix 2.
6
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
this is not always possible, the single household will be eligible to benefit only from the intervention
related to one sub-sector.
The final decision on cluster composition should be made between the municipalities in the field
31.
and in the end the APCU/PCU will choose the most promising clusters.
Targeting strategy29
RCDP places particular emphasis on the inclusion of poor farmers, women and youth, and
32.
hence fosters the development of selected sub-sectors for its poverty reduction potential. RCDP direct
beneficiaries will be rural poor, both women and men, young and adults, organized in Producers’
Associations (PAs) and Cooperatives active in the selected VCs. Individuals currently not associated
to PAs and co-operatives can be eligible, but they should have a real possibility to be incorporated to
these organisations and PAs and cooperatives are willing to associate these individuals. Among these
beneficiaries, the Project will undertake the necessary efforts to reach out to three target groups: the
very poor, poor and borderline poor, analysing their specific constraints and challenges to access
the selected VCs, specifically analysing the constraints faced by women and youth30.
The targeting strategy will respond to these challenges, providing enabling measures that could
33.
allow their access to project activities. Basically, RCDP will target poor, non-commercial farmers that
are not sufficiently incorporated into the supply systems that link them to the market and support them
to become competitive commercial farmers. In the implementation of the Pilot on Pro-Poor Value
Chains in BiH by Oxfam Italy, the poverty characterization previously developed in IFAD designs was
taken a step further. In agriculture, the simultaneous analysis of land size and household income
constitutes a good starting point. The first table provides some indicative ranges for the income.
Table 1: Categorization by income per capita at household level valid for all RCDP sub-sectors
Categorization
Very poor
Poor
Borderline poor31
Not poor
Monthly income per capita
of the household (in KM)
Up to 200
201-400
401-500
Over 501
34.
The second table has been adapted from Oxfam’s Pilot experience (in the berries sector) to
also incorporate the vegetables sub-sectors of interest in RCDP. The main sub-sector of interest to
the project is the berry sub-sector. It includes production (cultivation) of various berry fruit, with focus
on raspberries. Other products of interest in this sub-sector are strawberries, blackberries and
blueberries, as well as currants.
35. Gherkins are highly profitable crops, similar to berries with regards to the contribution that these
can generate to the households’ sources of income. Greenhouses production can yield higher profits
despite the apparent smaller surfaces, while open field production (including, but not limited to,
peppers, tomatoes, potatoes, etc.) are generally less profitable, but also less labour intensive.
36.
Complementing this overall situation analysis, and in order to cover all sub-sectors of interest
for RCDP, the NTFP value chain is one in which the collectors’ income per capita is the only criteria
that applies. Collection from the wild very often constitutes an integral part of rural livelihoods in BiH,
although usually, the households have no land.
29 Inputs for this section are based on the methodology developed by Oxfam Italy, as part of the pilot value chain initiative
started in October 2014. This pilot initiative was financed by RLDP. In addition, a “Workshop on Pro-Poor Targeting in Rural
Areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina” was organized in Sarajevo on 15-16 April 2014.
30 More details on poverty, targeting and gender are provided in Appendix 2.
31 Generally, people in this target segment are not considered de facto poor, but vulnerable to falling back into poverty (below
poverty line) with the occurrence of external shocks.
7
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Table 2: Categorization of beneficiaries by land size by sub-sector and type of production
Average land
plot size
Berries
Greenhouses
Gherkins
Open field
Vegetables
Very poor
Up to 0.2 ha
Up to 300m2
Up to 0.2 ha
Up to 1 ha
Poor
0.21-0.5 ha
301-600m2
0.21-0.5 ha
Borderline poor
0.51-1 ha
601-1.200m2
0.51-1 ha
0.51-1 ha
1.1-3 ha
Not poor
Over 1.1 ha
Over 1,200m2
Over 1.1 ha
Over 3.1 ha
The categories presented in both tables (by income, and land size) are an indication of land
37.
productivity, adequate access to technology and specialised extension (among others), while the
ranges are based on profitability calculations for each crop.
In case that a single household falls into different categories based on the land / income
38.
criteria, priority should be given to the income per capita criteria, as it probably better reflects the
overall poverty situation at the household level. Nevertheless, both criteria should be included to
better inform the targeting process and unfolding of the strategy adopted under the intervention.
Implementation of the targeting approach. RCDP will select smallholders, organized in PAs
39.
and cooperatives, within the targeted value chain clusters, following clear criteria to ensure
transparency in selection and mitigate the risk of elite capture. Key actors in the targeting process are
local authorities at municipal level (extension workers, social service centres, employment bureau,
heads of the local communities, and others), as they hold the list of those people that are benefitting
from social security and are hence able to determine who belongs to the three target groups (very
poor, poor and borderline poor). The local authorities are also responsible for managing the entity-
level Farm registers, which are a valuable source of information and can be an excellent starting point
for project intervention. For the implementation of the targeting approach, questionnaires will be used.
The targeting process will include extensive communication with PAs and cooperatives, which
40.
will be, together with agribusinesses, the main partners for the inclusion of smallholders. In that
process, PAs and cooperatives will promote the inclusion in selected local communities by explaining
the ways smallholders can become a part of the existing value chain. Once the interest from the
farmers is established, PAs and cooperatives will be responsible for preparing the lists of farmers,
collecting the field questionnaires and organizing them into the database for further analysis32.
Eventually, PAs and cooperatives should be the ones to make the final selection of the farmers that
fulfil the targeting criteria, based on the knowledge of individual farmers in the field. This list will be
verified by the Business Facilitation Partners (BFPs) and/or the local facilitators (such as the local
development agency).
Local authorities will be partnering with LED/RED33/consultancy firm/NGO that will be hired to
41.
work on cluster development as BFPs. Facilitators from the consultancy firm/ NGO would support
local authorities in: (i) conducting training and awareness raising on the targeting approach and
principles; (ii) capacity support to municipalities /cluster stakeholders’ platforms to identify criteria and
set up and implement a transparent and fair targeting approach; (iii) support the selection of
beneficiaries’, so as to avoid exclusionary practices and elite capture; and (iv) follow up and
monitoring of targeting implementation and activities delivery.
Selection of PAs and Cooperatives. RCDP will work with PAs and Cooperatives that are
42.
active in the selected clusters. The vision of the Project is to facilitate emergence and growth of
cooperatives through technical and organizational support and funds to cofinance BPs. Minimal
eligibility criteria for PAs and cooperatives as project partners will be the following: (i) compliance with
current legislation of cooperative and governance principles; these conditions are different for PAs
32 Sample questionnaires have been prepared by Oxfam Italia during the implementation of the Pilot project. They include
questions on household assets and revenues, which are the basis for classifying the HHs into poverty categories.
33 LED Local Economic Development Agency, RED Regional Economic Development agency
8
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
and Cooperatives; (ii) at least one formal market channel established; (iii) number of members and
their categorization in poverty groups based on the landholding size; (iv) type of membership so as to
give preference to organizations with a favourable proportion of women and youth among their
members; (v) proven experience in developing concrete measures to include women among their
members, favouring their participation; (vi) examples of willingness to expand membership, in
particular reach out to smallholder farmers and rural poor; (vii) capacity to improve provision of
services and guaranteeing access to production factors by all members; and (viii) work towards social
and sustainable use of natural resources.
43.
Representatives of target groups and PAs and cooperatives, women and youth will participate
as full members in cluster stakeholder platforms to be established at cluster level. It will ensure they
can monitor progress in terms of local VC development, voice their concerns on VC issues, participate
in decisions taken in CSPs, interact with other partners in the cluster and VCs, etc.
Specific activities will be undertaken to ensure the organizational strengthening of PAs and
44.
cooperatives as well as to ensure inclusiveness and empowerment of rural poor, women and youth
through their organisations. Activities will include: (i) organizational strengthening of PAs and
cooperatives; (ii) information and mobilisation campaigns; (iii) business counselling for members of
PAs; (iii) matching grants to leverage investments; (iv) support to ensure active participation of women
and youth in PAs and cooperatives’ decision-making process; and (v) information campaign on rural
labour conditions, food safety, enforcement of regulations in agriculture and agribusinesses.
45.
Agribusinesses. The involvement of exporters, wholesalers and enterprises is crucial to
ensure effective access of smallholders to productive assets, finance, services and markets. Eligible
agribusiness companies should comply with the following criteria: (i) proven know-how and technical
expertise in the subsector; (ii) company’s willingness to use environmental friendly production
practices and compliance with social, labour and gender standards; (iii) company’s strategy is focused
on long-term presence and viable business relationships with producers; and (iv) proven experience
in or formal commitment to establishing business with small producers. Regarding the inclusion of
women and youth, the project will ensure that they effectively participate in and directly benefit from
the BPs and throughout the value chain and not just through specific activities specially tailored for
them. RCDP will prepare guidelines on proper governance and management, checks and balances
and monitor the process to ensure that PAs and cooperatives will be able to engage with agribusiness
companies on the basis of fair deals.
Number of Beneficiaries. The Project will, over a period of 10 years, directly target
46.
16,000 beneficiaries through the implementation of BPs. Over the project lifetime, 3,150 jobs would be
created at post-harvest level (minimum 20% of jobs created for women). Indirect beneficiaries will
benefit from thriving VCs and private agribusiness investments, improved subsector governance and
upgraded collective marketing infrastructure. The estimated number of indirect beneficiaries is
minimum 5,000 (about 30% of the number of the total number of beneficiaries).
Leverage points and guiding principles. RCDP's approach is based on the private-public
B. Development objective and impact indicators34
47.
partnership model, whereby public funds are expected to be used to leverage private sectors’
investments in a win-win partnership, whereby the private sector can expand its business while a high
number of small-scale producers can expand their production and make it more profitable. Business
Proposals (BPs) within clusters and subsectors will be prepared and implemented by different actors.
48.
The goal of the project will be “to contribute to sustainable rural poverty reduction in Bosnia and
Herzegovina”. The project development objective will be to “enable smallholders to take advantage of
fruits, vegetable and non-timber forest products subsector development for the sustainable
improvement of their social and economic conditions and those of other poor rural groups”.
34 Details are presented in Appendix 4.
9
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
The expected impact would be the effective incorporation of smallholders in dynamic fruit and
49.
vegetable and NTFP subsectors and ensure that it has durably improved economic and social
perspectives for rural areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The project has a clear emphasis on social
targeting and inclusiveness. Its strategic vision is to use a subsector development approach in
order to support a core of interventions necessary for sustainable structural changes and leading to
the expected economic and social benefits: tackle the related trade, policy and institutional issues and
promote local economic development; leverage private sector investments through bankable BPs;
ensuring social inclusiveness; promoting environmental friendly and climate-change adaptation
technologies; ensure adequate supply of specialized services; subsector governance by private
stakeholders and their professional organizations; and subsector performance monitoring and
accountability based on active participation of local authorities, beneficiaries and private stakeholders.
The adaptation of a sub-sector development approach will maximize impact on poverty reduction.
The Project will take advantage of existing value chain dynamics in the selected value chains
50.
where the private sector (i.e. agro input dealers, collectors, processors, traders, wholesalers, retailers)
is actively engaging with smallholders, either organised or individually. These business relationships
frequently provide in-kind credit for product pre-financing and technical assistance to smallholders.
The value added of the project stems from: (i) expanding the number of small-scale
producers/collectors benefitting from these opportunities in the selected subsector value chains
(maximise inclusion); (ii) enhancing the capacity of small-scale producers to develop their business
activities and to take decisions regarding the needed organisational structure (e.g. PA, cooperative)
and marketing and, whenever possible, processing and value adding strategies; and (iii) creating a
business environment attractive to private agribusiness investors.
The project is aligned with Bosnia and Herzegovina’s development strategy and IFAD Strategic
51.
Framework 2011-2015. The overall goal of the Results-based country strategic opportunities
programme (RB-COSOP 2013) is “to enable poor rural people to improve their food security and
increase their incomes through support to poor non-commercial and commercial farmers, and to on-
and off-farm enterprises. Within this frame, the Rural Competiveness Development Project (RCDP)
has been designed to be one of the main IFAD tools to achieve this goal.
52.
The justification for RCDP is based on the need for smallholder farmers in BiH to: (a) improve
their competitiveness and scale up their farm activities to viable commercial units in a context of local
and regional markets in view of potential EU accession; (b) through farmers organizations, increase
smallholder participation in decision making processes and help them become more active partners in
local economic development; (c) increase the outreach and inclusiveness of farmers’ organizations,
so as to provide opportunities for economic development to the very poor, as well as women and
youth. This will require supporting small farmers’ inclusion in Producers’ Associations (PAs) and
Cooperatives, strengthening their organizational, technical and business skills, linking them to
agribusiness partners, markets and business and financial development services. The project will
strengthen PAs and cooperatives by (i) improving their outreach to poorer segments of population,
(ii) strengthening their organizational and entrepreneurial capabilities and (iii) enhancing their market
power.
RCDP is designed as a long-term development intervention, to be implemented in two
53.
cycles of five years each.
C. Outcomes/Components
RCDP will adopt the following guiding principles: (a) establishing/strengthening local clusters of
54.
value chain stakeholders and scaling up value chain dynamics through partnerships between
inclusive PAs, cooperatives, agribusinesses, municipalities and LED Agencies; (b) using
straightforward and effective co-financing mechanisms that allows leveraging investments of local
public and private stakeholders, based on transparent cost-sharing of interventions; (c) targeting male
and female smallholder farmers, adults and young, creating incentives and conditions for the active
inclusion of vulnerable groups; (d) facilitating effective and sustainable agreements between
10
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
agribusinesses, PAs and cooperatives; (e) making available appropriate technical and business
development services at local level; (f) promoting the newest and environmental friendly technologies;
(g) promoting technologies and standards that conform EU and international market access
requirements; and (h) fostering the emergence of cooperatives of the social sector and with social
meaning.
55.
RCDP will be implemented through two components which are complementarity with each
other: (i) Enabling Environment for Inclusive Subsector Development; (ii) Sustainable inclusion of
smallholders in the thriving value chains.
Component 1: Enabling Environment for Inclusive Subsector Development
56. Outcome 1 will be: “The improved policy and institutional environment attracts smallholders
and investors to the selected subsectors.” Five elements of the subsector development approach of
RCDP will be implemented through the component: (i) subsector governance by all concerned private
and public stakeholders through consultations and joint strategic planning of interventions;
(ii) developing relevant institutions’ capacities in the subsectors to ensure adequate supply of
specialized services; and (iii) an enabling policy framework in order to tackle the related trade, policy
and institutional issues and promote local economic development, (iv) subsector performance
monitoring and accountability and (v) strengthening relevant institutions capacities.
Result 1: Stakeholders platforms at cluster level and subsector level improve value
chain coordination and subsector governance, orient public policies and investments
in order to warrant long term subsector competitiveness.
57.
RCDP's approach is based on the private-public partnership model, whereby public funds will
be used to leverage investments from the private sector in a win-win partnership, the private sector
can expand its business and a higher number of small-scale producers can expand their production
and make it more profitable. This model will translate into BPs within clusters and subsectors, to be
prepared, funded and implemented by different private and public partners, including the BP partners
themselves, the financial sector (banks, MFIs), municipalities and the project. In this context, RCDP
aims to provide an institutional space to ensure a continuous dialogue among all stakeholders to help
strengthening subsector development. Two new institutional settings, each of them having its own
membership and functions, will be established, namely: (i) the Cluster Stakeholders Platforms (CSP);
and (ii) the Subsector Stakeholder Platform (SSP)35.
Establishment of local Cluster Stakeholders Platforms. For each of the clusters envisaged
58.
under RCDP during Cycle 1 a Cluster Stakeholders’ Platforms (CSP) will be established with the aim
at supporting the development of clusters and selected value chains in their territories and enhance
cluster competitiveness. At local level, issues related to cluster development would be discussed and
analysed with the objective of identifying key priorities to be brought to the attention of municipal and
canton authorities.
The CSPs will: (i) validate and agree on key priority action for cluster development; (ii) identify
59.
and aggregate buyers’ demands for agricultural produce, producers’ demands for inputs, extension
and BDS services; (iii) identify financial gaps and sources of funds; (iv) promote horizontal and vertical
integration among value chain actors; (v) coordinate service delivery; (vi) ensure inclusiveness of poor
farmers, women and youth and enhance the pro-poor content in business proposals (BPs);
(vii) monitor progress achieved in each cluster and its impact on poverty reduction; and (viii) identify
constraints to the development of clusters and local issues for policy dialogue/engagement.
60.
The setting up of the CSP will be preceded by the approval of clusters by APCU/PCU (see
Component 2 for more details). Clusters will be promoted by the project (the APCU/PCU will be in
charge of reviewing the proposals, and open negotiations with municipalities prior to clusters selection
35 Any institutional innovation requires time for its establishment and even longer time for its consolidation, so platforms will
require continuous support by RCDP.
11
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
and approval), but clusters will be established by municipalities and local stakeholders. Clusters are
expected to be composed of local PAs, cooperatives, agribusinesses, traders, exporters,
municipalities, service providers, commercial banks and MFIs, Local Economic Development (LED)
agencies and other donor-supported projects operating in the value chains.
61.
At the initial steps, it is expected that the Business Facilitation Partner (BFP), hired by the
ACPU/CPU through a competitive process, will scout for relevant and eligible stakeholders from
producers’ organizations (PAs and cooperatives) and agribusinesses in quality of local 'VC
champions'. Subsequently, the BFP will sound out the interests of all stakeholders and the
Municipalities in particular, LEDs where they exist, local service providers, NGOs and donor-
supported projects active in the cluster, local branches of banks and MFIs and the initial meeting will
be convened. It is expected that the BFP will serve as the secretariat of the CSP but always with a
role as a facilitator, supporting stakeholders take the necessary steps to promote cluster development.
Individuals, firms or consortia of BFPs will be selected based on their expertise, knowledge and
62.
familiarity with value chains in the area to provide training, technical assistance and support to CSPs
on VC coordination and organization of the production, mobilization of private and public sector
investments, inclusion of poor smallholders, etc.
63.
Establishment of country-wide Subsector Stakeholder Platforms. For each of the three
selected subsectors a SSP will be established with the aim to improve sub-sector governance and
enhance sub-sector competitiveness. Overall the SSPs will identify key priority actions required to
improve the competitiveness of each subsector, including investments required in public goods
(marketing infrastructure) and public services (e.g. research and development of new varieties, policy
development). Additional functions will include: (i) identifying policy and regulatory issues regarding
the legal framework, public resources and fiscal incentives; (ii) formulating medium- and long-term
strategies for sub-sector development; (iii) contracting sector specific studies and market research for
domestic and international markets, when appropriate (iv) advocating sustainable subsector
development and providing advice to policy makers; and (v) enhancing pro-poor sub-sectors’ linkages
and impact.
64.
The establishment of the SSPs may follow the establishment of the CSPs when new platforms
need to be established (not the case of berries). While it is expected that each CSP at local level will
focus on issues related to the enhancement of the competitiveness of each cluster, the SSPs will
involve institutional actors grouped by the common interest to promote the subsector as a whole, and
bring relevant policy issues to the attention of policy makers.
In the initial steps, APCU/PCU will be responsible for identifying relevant stakeholders starting
65.
from those involved in the approved BPs in each cluster. Subsequently, the APCU/PCU will solicit the
Lead Implementation Agency (Ministry of Agriculture) to invite relevant stakeholders and convene the
initial meeting to establish the SSPs. After the establishment of the platform, APCU/PCU will continue
supporting the SSP, acting as secretariat, with responsibilities for convene platform’s members,
organize and coordinate meeting, agenda, minutes and their dissemination among members. Ideally,
the APCU and PCU will work together in this endeavour although initially, each SSP has been
considered specific for each Entity. Alternately, each Project Coordination Unit could carry out the
secretariat function on rotation basis. Meetings could be held on quarterly basis or more frequently
according to the emerging issues and the agreement reached among its members.
66. Membership could vary among SSPs based on the specificities of each sector and the
particular institutional framework in each Entity. Hence, an indicative list of potential members may
include: the Ministry of Agriculture; apex-level producers organizations (already nascent for the berry
sector); the private sector (input suppliers, processors, wholesale buyers, traders, exporters);
commercial banks; NGOs/donors with relevant activities in the subsector, etc.
It is expected that SSP’s members will joint efforts to: (i) avoid any crowding out of private
67.
financing from the financial and/or the business sector; (ii) allocate and channel public funds to
counterbalance financial market failures; (iii) building on existing product financing practices between
12
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
farmers and buyers; and (iv) building on existing practices on the supply of inputs, provision of
extension services, etc.
CSP and SSP Governance Issues. Both CSPs and SSPs will share a number of governance
68.
principles. To be successful and sustainable over time, these platforms should operate on the basis of
common and self-defined interests that will allow them to gradually increase their strength and sense
of ownership. Their agenda, initiatives and resolutions will be taken by their members and
consequently decisions need to be transparent and minutes of each meeting should be appropriately
recorded and circulated. The importance of effective communication among Platform's members is
crucial. In order to ensure it is effective, it is suggested that each Platform be composed of no more
than 20 members.
The capacity of platforms’ members to address issues of common interests, build mutual trust
69.
and consensus and deal with disagreements will be key elements to determine their success and
sustainability. After an initial period of handholding that may last one year or even longer according to
the specificities of each platform, it is expected that the role of BFPs in CSPs and the APCU/PCU in
SSPs may scale down to become just complementary to the functioning of the platforms. Participation
in each Platform will be voluntary
Any established platforms could become a legal entity or just remain as a forum for clusters and
70.
subsectors partners, depending on decisions by their members. It is actually expected that SSPs will
evolve from a kind of sector platform into a respected institution dealing with sectors’ relevant policy
issues; kind of useful lobbying institution, constantly trying to improve the subsector environment. The
stakeholders of these platforms will have most likely, due to their commercial activities, deep insights
into the actual development of the respective subsectors.
RCDP will allocate funds to support initiatives taken by each Platform (advocacy, meetings,
71.
studies, stakeholders’ forums, training sessions, etc.). Between 20,000 KM and 30,000 KM has been
allocated annually to support each CSP and SSP respectively. Same as BPs to be co-financed by
RCDP, funds will be provided on a matching basis, initially established as 90:10 percent, to gradually
declining over time until each platform relies on its own funds contributed by partners.
Effective monitoring of VC and (sub) sectors’ performance. An effective way to set an
72.
agenda for policy dialogue between stakeholders and local and country authorities is to monitor and
assess the performance of the subsectors. This performance monitoring will be an important area in
which SSPs contribution will be required.
Participatory VC and subsector performance monitoring and a revision of internal accountability
73.
mechanisms will be undertaken annually to review project achievements (part of TORs of platforms).
Accountability will rather be an outcome of progressively integrating more and more stakeholders in
cluster and subsector decisions making processes. Special studies will be undertaken to examine
specific aspects related to subsector development (e.g. possibilities and investments required for
in-country transformation and the elaboration of specific B2B products), planning, M&E, learning and
knowledge management36.
74. Monitoring VCs and subsectors performance requires a starting point and reference standards,
which should be established at the beginning of the process and take a form of a baseline reference
to follow-up, monitor and assess performance. This baseline reference will identify specific sub-sector
performance indicators so that the performance monitoring can be guided by a specific set of
expected results, outputs and indicators. During implementation, performance monitoring would be
complemented by VC and subsectors analyses and participatory self-evaluation.
Sector and subsector monitoring will be coordinated by the PCU/APCU, but should be assisted
75.
primarily by external BDS providers. Data collection will be actively assisted by local authorities
(municipality level), local NGOs, rural organizations and others. This support from existing local
36 Details are presented in Appendix 6.
13
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
stakeholders will foster greater ownership and learning as a desired side-effect. Substantial insider
knowledge about the VC and subsector performance will be made available and will be an input for
RCDP’s own monitoring and reporting. The emphasis on subsector development in conjunction with
the long-term perspective for the project provides the necessary space for initiating change and
effectively monitoring project outcomes and impact.
Key data will be shared on a regular basis with APCU/PCU and business development service
76.
providers. Results from the performance monitoring will allow partners further improve their
competitiveness.
77.
Empowering SSPs to engage on policies affecting (pro-poor) subsector development
and the allocation of public sector investments. Successful policy engagement will depend on
RCDP's capacity to approach policy makers providing supporting evidence of the issues raised,
documenting the emerging achievements with impact data and business models, analyzing
opportunities and threats for further subsector development. Policy engagement will take place by
facilitating the initiatives of RCDP's stakeholders involved in SSPs at State/Entity level to engage in
policy dialogue with decision-makers in both Entities to promote the agenda of selected subsectors.
The agenda for policy dialogue/engagement will derive from the needs of the subsector and
78.
(sub) sectors’ performance, adequately monitored and assessed. Focus will likely lie on tackling
trade-related issues, market regulations on input and output markets, issues of quality standards and
requirements, certifications, and on other enabling measures to enhance the subsector's
competitiveness in national, EU and non-EU markets.
At local level, it is expected that cluster stakeholders platforms will also engage in dialogue with
79.
relevant authorities (Municipalities, Local Development Authorities, and in FBiH Cantons) on more
localized issues related to VCs and cluster development, new investments, public-private partnership,
access to local development funds, inclusiveness and poverty-focus of cluster development activities,
initiatives that incorporate women and youth women and men.
80.
It is not enough with establishing a space for engaging in policy dialogue; it is also necessary to
develop capacity of partners to engage in policy dialogue and allocate fund to facilitate the functioning
of the platforms.
81.
Policy dialogue will be supplemented by the preparation of related studies on specific issues of
VCs and subsectors which limit their development and which need to be addressed by policy-makers
to further consolidate subsector development. Potential environmental impact should be a topic of
research. Provision has been made to support these studies. The studies can be proposed by CSP,
SSP and the APCU/PCU and even by Entity authorities, when relevant for decision-making. These
studies may include, among others, subsector studies, marketing studies, impact assessments,
comparative studies on legislations, regulations and standards, learning and policy notes, and specific
case studies regarding the VCs and subsectors.
82.
The PCU/APCU will have the main responsibility for contracting through a competitive process
consulting firm, universities and research institutions to carry out the studies. Provision has also been
made to finance technical assistance from universities in the two Entities which will involve young
university graduates as interns. RCDP will also provide technical assistance support and funds to hold
workshops and carry out specialized training, information and communication campaigns. Priority
would be given to strengthening collaboration with other development partners, as several of them are
already involved in policy dialogue and stakeholder consultations regarding the selected subsectors.
Result 2: Appropriate technical and business development services are made
available at local and entity level.
83.
RCDP will help to ensure adequate supply of specialized support services, public and private.
As part of the efforts to create an enabling environment for inclusive subsector development,
14
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
In order to implement BPs proposed by originators (promoters, VC champions) at cluster level,
84.
quality production related advisory services, business development services and organizational
development services will be required. The Project will support the provision of a broad range of
technical advisory and business development services to PAs and cooperatives, this mainly through a
functional voucher system aimed at strengthening both the supply and demand for the range of
services essential for the implementation of Business Proposals and sustained subsector
development.
85.
Supply of extension and business development support service to farmers and their
organisations, both public and private, varies according to the entity considered: (i) fully financed
public extension service in Republika Srpska; (ii) 'farmer-centred' extension services, helping
members and their organizations and benefiting from permanent employment arrangements with
cooperatives37; (iii) public business development service providers tasked with regional economic
development; (iv) specialised private (technical) advisory services; (v) private business development
service providers; and (vi) private advisory services linked to commercial enterprises (tasked with
promoting and selling inputs and securing and buying agricultural produce). In general, extension
services are assisting farmers to produce more and better products, whereas BDSs are mainly
supporting agro-processors.
86.
The public extension service in the RS is thus essentially focussed on supporting primary
production38. Their responsibilities include the formulation of basic 'business plans' (mostly oriented in
function of specific subsidies) and providing other advisory services for farmers, but these services
are generally not market driven. In the RS, this service is provided by 77 staff members on entity
level; out of them only 13 extension workers are dealing with fruits and vegetables. In general, the
service is poorly equipped, underfunded and understaffed. In FBiH, the system, originally established
at the canton level with no central service, is largely non-operational due to large administrative
burden placed on the extension agents (processing/documenting of canton-level subsidy systems)
and/or generally limited interest on behalf of cantonal authorities39 to support the agriculture sector.
Some municipalities finance extension officers to implement their municipal action plan for agriculture
and livestock. These officers usually focus on technical issues, generally lacking expertise on issues
regarding processing and marketing of fruits, vegetables and NTFP, farm management, BDS and
cooperative management.
Public BDS providers in BiH consist of relatively important regional development agencies like
87.
SERDA and REDAH, usually initiated and seed-financed by the EU and other donors. These
institutions have been established for strengthening, coordination and promotion of economic
development in identified macro-regions. However, due to limited own funding, these agencies often
remain dependent on donor-funded projects. Today these agencies exist just in FBiH as RS did not
accept projects covering both entities. In practice, with a few exceptions, these agencies had only a
limited impact on economic development. In parallel to these bigger agencies, many municipalities in
FBiH have set-up small local development agencies to promote economic development, including
agrifood and to get access to project funding40.
88.
Private BDS providers are available in most competence areas from marketing, branding and
market research to legal and financial advice; however the majority of these BDS offer their services
in the bigger cities like Sarajevo, Banja Luka, Mostar, Bihac and a few others. They can easily be
found under business directories in the internet. The outreach of these private BDS to rural areas
remains however limited the constraint being their relatively high cost (based on private sector going
rates) to smallholder farmers and their organizations.
37 Project support will be taken as ‘incremental’ and in no case it could be used to finance staff and services that are already
financed by PAs and cooperatives (see table below).
38 Extension offices were established throughout BiH with EU support.
39 Each Canton has its own government including a cabinet of 'sector' ministers
40. RAZ in the municipality of Zepce, ALDI in Gorazdi and the wood cluster in Prijedor are positive examples of public local
economy facilitators.
15
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
89.
Private advisory services are usually linked to companies that commercialize agricultural
inputs or buy up specific agricultural produce. Their role is to secure that farmers are growing the right
quality/quantity of produce.
90.
RCDP will support access to a business development services covering in a broad range of
subjects and competence areas; management, costing (product costing, gross margin calculations,
marginal cost analysis, social return on investment etc.), accounting, branding and the development of
marketing strategies, design of effective out-grower supply chains, service contracts, revision of
existing management structures and systems, formulation and implementation of action plans, quality
certification of products (e.g. Global Gap, Organic, HACCAP, ISO, and others), supply chain
management, logistics, design of improved handling and inventory management systems, feasibility
analysis, financial analysis, personnel management, cash flow management and other topics. As an
initial step, RCDP will carry out an awareness-raising campaign in the rural areas about services
available showing what impact different service providers could have to boost businesses.
Requirements for training, technical advisory and business development services will be
91.
identified jointly the BPs stakeholder and agribusiness, helped in this by specialists (BFPs and other
subject matter specialists), and detailed in the BPs.
RCDP will help ensuring the supply of specialized technical and business development services
92.
in order to bridge production and business 'gaps'. This by promoting the use of innovative
technologies and developing financial, business and organisational skills. The Project will foster
capacity development of specialized service providers, in particular those extension and technical
assistance services and business development services relevant for the implementation of the
Business Proposals (be they technical e.g. post-harvest management or organisational).
For the provision of technical advisory services to small farmers the Project will support the
93.
development of: (a) qualified, 'farmer centred' extension services by through the training of trainers,
lead farmers and groups of farmers through specialized consultants; and the dissemination of
technologies and good practices in events organized by lead farmers, which can be identified by PAs
and cooperatives from their own members or lead farmers from their area of coverage (b) the setup of
a voucher system and (c) help increasing the local outreach of public technical advisory services
For what concerns Public extension services RCDP will support the strengthening of technical
94.
advisory services' capacities and outreach at local level. Public extension services in the Republika
Srpska, as well as the canton and municipal level public extension services in FBiH, will receive
training in different fields (production, processing and marketing of fruits, vegetables and NTFP, farm
management, BDS and cooperative management) in order to strengthen their market orientation.
Funds have been allocated to provide training over three years. The training will strengthen their
capacity to deliver advice in the selected value chains. The participation of these services in project
activities will be left to the decision of BPs’ partners, who will decide if they wish to make use of their
services, free of charge as they are financed by public funds, to provide any support to the
implementation of their BPs.
95.
Setup of a functional voucher system. The APCU/PCU will setup a voucher scheme to
strengthen the capacity and outreach of both the required technical advisory and the BDS services at
(sub) sector level.
The voucher scheme is a mechanism in which BP partners will get an entitlement (a voucher)
96.
to hire services from a broad range of pre-qualified service providers (instead of money), with the
voucher then to be redeemed for cash from the APCU/PCU. The ultimate purpose of the voucher
scheme is to empower PAs, cooperatives and BP partners to decide on how they wish to fulfil their
business requirements (in terms of extension, of specialised technical advisory, of BDS); to negotiate
services and to enter into agreement with service providers; to follow-up on and to assess the quality
and efficiency of the rendered services. The scheme will also empower PAs and cooperatives in doing
business procurement and thus stimulate entrepreneurship by giving them the equivalent of cash (the
voucher).
16
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
97.
The voucher scheme will make services more affordable (but not free of charge) for
smallholders. The system will enable smallholders’ organisations and stakeholders to choose the
services they require from a repertory of service providers. The scheme will allow beneficiaries to
choose the training, technical assistance and advisory services required to implement their BPs
among the various private service providers across the country and hiring these BDS providers at a
privately negotiated price. BP partners will select the service providers from a list (roster) of
pre-qualified consultants, consultancy firms and consortia.
Part of the service cost will be financed by RCDP (. This will also encourage the service
98.
providers’ sector to broaden the scope of their services (and eventually develop new services by
ensuring a market for service-provision) to assist smallholders along the value chain. Through this
scheme the service providers will be able to reach out to new clients, mainly consisting of PAs and
cooperatives that previously did not have the means to afford such services. Vouchers can build
additional demand for services and thus accelerate the consulting market development if smallholders
are not already using these service providers.
99. Operationally, the APCU/PCU will set up the scheme, define procedures and prepare guidelines
on how the scheme will be implemented, on how it will be administered (including control mechanism)
and how its performance will be evaluated. A contract or an agreement between BPs’ partners and
services providers will regulate the relationship between the parties.
100. The management arrangements will be the following: (i) call for application targeted at
interested service providers, individuals, firms and consortia interested in providing service to PAs,
cooperatives and BP stakeholders (by APCU/PCU); (ii) pre-qualification of suitable candidates (by
APCU/PCU with ad hoc independent specialized support). Applicants will undergo a short
accreditation process handled by an ad hoc small commission of specialists. Eligibility criteria and the
process of pre-selecting candidates should ensure that the roster includes a wide range of services so
as to broaden the choice for the stakeholders; (iii) setup a roster of pre-qualified candidates (eligible
consultants under the voucher scheme), which will be made accessible to all BP stakeholders in the
Website of the Ministry of Agriculture and also in the project Website (by APCU/PCU)41; (iv) PAs,
cooperatives and other stakeholders that had submitted a successful application to APCU/PCU
choose one or several consultants or consultancies from the official roster. Prices may or may not be
indicated in the BP; (v) PAs or cooperatives and the service provider(s) sign a contract/agreement
describing the required services and expected results. A copy will be send to APCU/PCU. In return the
PAs or cooperatives will receive a voucher in the agreed value from APCU/PCU; (vi) after the services
are completed the consulting services, the PAs or cooperatives will hand over the voucher instead of
cash to the consultants or consultancies; and (vii) the consultants or consultancies will go to the
APCU/PCU and cash it in while submitting a short report about the services done.
101. The APCU/PCU will be in charge of maintaining and updating the roster of pre-qualified
consultants and firms based on performance evaluation of services. The roster will be updated from
time to time with a new call for interest to expand the supply of qualified service providers.
102. Follow-up and monitoring of services will be a primary responsibility of BP partners, although a
role for monitoring will be reserved for the ACPU/PCU (M&E officer and/or consultants hired for that
purpose), which should also involve in follow-up on the implementation of the services. To ensure
understanding of the voucher scheme the APCU/PCU will hold workshops to explain in detail all
necessary steps to set up and run such a scheme.
41 Based on previous experience with setting up a voucher system REDAH could support the project in setting up a small
commission of experts who will examine the qualifications of the consultants. As 'selection' service provider REDAH could
benefit from a fee for each tested candidate.
17
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Component 2: Sustainable inclusion of smallholders in the thriving/successful value
chains
103. The outcome of component 2 will be the “Sustainable inclusion of poor smallholders and
vulnerable groups in selected subsectors.” Main objectives of Component 2 will be: (i) to help
improve the livelihood of small scale producers and poor collectors through sustainable and profitable
farming; (ii) consolidate their organisations and their capabilities to identify forthcoming business
opportunities (in terms of markets, marketing channels, new products etc.) to expand their business;
and (iii) have a voice and play an active role in the multi-stakeholders coordination platforms, both at
cluster level and at subsector level . RCDP will take advantage of existing value chain dynamics in the
selected value chains in which the private sector (i.e. agro input dealers, collectors, processors,
traders, wholesalers, retailers) is actively engaging with smallholders, either organised or individually.
104. Business Proposals (BPs), allowing business partners (producers and agribusiness) to plan
coordinate and carry out mutually benefiting investments, will be the main project instrument under
Component 2. The BP will be the main instrument of BP business partners (small-scale producers and
collectors and their organisations, agribusiness companies) for the sustainable development of their
joint businesses in the selected sub-sectors and value chains. BPs will also frame partner's needs in
terms of capacity development and investments of which part will be addressed by public (project)
funds.
105. Two are the elements of the subsector development approach of RCDP that will be
implemented through the component: (i) mobilization of the required private and public financial
resources; and (ii) Subsector performance monitoring and accountability based on active participation
of local & country-level authorities, beneficiaries and private stakeholders/investors;
Result 1: Inclusive business proposals developed and implemented
106. Project promotion and awareness campaign, confirmation of preselected VCs and
clusters. During the initial stage of implementation APCU/PCU will hold several workshops across the
country, at least 5 in each Entity, to promote the project and explain its approach; guiding principles;
target groups; pro-poor and inclusive approaches; strategies and implementation modality; value
chains, clusters and subsector approaches; pre-identified municipalities and clusters of municipalities;
public-private linkages, leverage points etc. These events will follow the pre-identified clusters within
each Entity and focus on value-chains that are specific to these clusters
107. After the start-up workshop, the ACPU/CPU will contract a specialized consultancy services to
update the baseline poverty information and repeat the exercise conducted during the design to pre-
identify and pre-select promising clusters, which included a scoring of municipalities with potential to
integrate clusters. This exercise will help confirming the proposed clusters or otherwise inform the
selection of new clusters. Based on the information obtained from the exercise, ACPU/CPU will
promote inter-municipal coordination in regions where opportunities exist to establish a cluster. This is
considered a key step in the cluster identification and development process to ensure municipalities
have a better understanding of the potential for cluster formulation in their regions. Municipalities will
submit their application to ACPU/CPU for the approval of their clusters. As a final step of this process,
the APCU/PCU will review the applications, negotiate with cluster applicants to make sure all project
criteria are met and makes the final selection of clusters. In this process, APCU/PCU may initiate the
revision of the cluster participants, if necessary.
108. Eventually, a minimum of 12 clusters are expected to be established around the country
(probably six in each entity). It is expected that most clusters will have from 5 to 10 municipalities.
109. Local authorities will be partnering with qualified organisation or consortia of organizations
(LED, RED, consultancy firms, NGOs), which will be hired to work on cluster development as
Business Facilitation Partners (BFPs). Facilitators from these firms / NGO would support local
authorities in: (i) conducting training and awareness raising on targeting principles; (ii) capacity
support to municipalities /stakeholders’ platform in setting up transparent and fair targeting criteria;
18
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
and (iii) carry out beneficiaries’ selection process, so as to avoid exclusionary practices and elite
capture.
110. Selection and training of Business Facilitation Partners (BFPs) on participatory
formulation of inclusive BPs. In each Entity APCU/PCU will select through a competitive process a
qualified organisation or a consortium of organizations to perform the role of Business Facilitation
Partner (BFP) at cluster level for each of the three pre-identified sub-sectors (fruits, vegetables and
NTFPs). A combination of subsectors should be explored and highly encouraged by APCU/PCU when
a consortium has the experience and capability to serve more than a subsector. Main role of BFPs will
be to identify viable business cases and eligible partners (producers, buyers) in one or more than one
sub-sector and facilitate the participatory process of identifying and developing as many win-win,
viable and bankable BPs as possible. The establishment of consortia of organizations that could
ensure a better coverage of the region will be encouraged, particularly when it will better serve with its
human, logistic and financial resources an specific region or sub-sector.
In the selection of BFPs, APCU/PCU will take into account: (i) how candidates are planning to
111.
operate; (ii) their experience in facilitating win-win public-private partnerships and pro-poor and
inclusive approaches, particularly inclusive business relationships between poor small-scale farmers
and buyers; (iii) commitment to gender equality and engagement with youth (iv) knowledge of
sub-sectors and value chains; and. (v) expertise in providing business development support services
to small scale producers’ organizations and facilitating participatory business development processes.
Additional selection criteria will take into account the geographic presence, particular knowledge of a
specific territory, technical expertise offered by the candidate organization or consortia, experience
working with one or more of the pre-selected sub-sectors, implementation capacity to cover one or
more value chain, clusters and sub-sector.
112. BFPs induction workshop (induction training). Soon after the BFPs selection process has
been completed, an induction workshop will be held in each Entity to provide BFPs with background
information on: (i) the overall project proposal; (ii) approach and strategies; (iii) guidance on the
facilitation role each BFP is expected to play at cluster level, (iv) the role of partners in clusters, value
chains and BPs; (v) how the process of identification, preparation and submission of BPs is expected
to be implemented, and (vi) BPs’ scope and minimal content. Particular attention will be given to:
(a) the project targeting methodology and eligibility criteria for producers organisations and private
companies; (b) how to maximise inclusiveness and pro-poor nature of BPs in order to gain the support
by the project; and (c) BPs’ funding strategies, which will necessarily require the combination of
private and public financing, in addition to project funds.
113. A proper induction workshop of BFPs combined with close monitoring by the APCU/PCU during
implementation should ensure consistent and coherent project implementation across the two entities
and for the three pre-selected sectors.
114. BP targeting. The Project will undertake, in consultation with PAs organizations and
municipalities, specific actions to reach out to rural poor, youth and women. Priority will be given to
specific partnerships that will ensure an equitable access of poor groups to project support. It will be
the role of the BFPs to monitor the effectiveness of the efforts aimed at ensuring an inclusive targeting
and that these specific target groups benefit from funds allocated by the Project to motivate their
participation (top-up of 20%). Young landless farmers may rent land on long term lease or apply for
publically-owned land in their municipalities. As part of their commitment in cluster development,
municipalities are expected to expedite the process and facilitate access to land, especially for young
people, who may or may not become registered farmers, and women, particularly female-headed
households. The project has allocated funds under a “starter package” for production that can be
adapted to better suit the needs of poor/vulnerable groups.
Identification and preparation of BPs with support of BFPs. The BP will be developed
115.
starting from market opportunities, hence the “BP originator(s)” will likely be the actor(s) who is(are) in
close contact with that potential market, i.e. is performing the marketing and selling function of that
19
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
particular product in the selected cluster. Three different actors or stakeholders can be BP’s
originator(s): (i) eligible producers’ cooperatives with extended membership and related governance
structure bulking production from members and non-members, usually called ‘cooperants’; (ii) eligible
intermediaries (e.g. traders, lead farmers) linked to producers associations (PAs) and/or individual
farmers; and (iii) eligible private agribusiness companies (collectors, processors, wholesale buyers
and exporters) sourcing from organised or individual producers or collectors.
116. BFPs will be in charge of performing a preliminary screening of potential BP originators in each
cluster on the basis of few eligibility criteria, specific for each category (see appendix 4 for more
details). Basically cooperatives should be in line with the legislation and internationally agreed
cooperative principles; be able to provide evidence of past consistent sales to a national or export
market and/or market opportunity identified; profile of their membership; be open and willing to
expand membership and to reach out to new farmers, in particular women and young men and
women; be open and willing to improve their services and access to production factors, and work
towards social and sustainable use of natural resources. Meanwhile, agribusiness companies should
have proven know-how, technical expertise and economic activities in the subsector; business
practices that are environmentally friendly; comply with social standards (labour, gender); business
strategies based on long-term investments and viable business relationship with suppliers (producers,
collectors, PAs and cooperatives); and demonstrate commitment to establish long-term business
engagement with poor small producers and collectors.
117. Only those BP originators that comply with the eligibility criteria will be able to proceed with the
preparation of a BP. The BP originator, with the support of the BFP, is supposed to lead the
preparation of the BP. As expected, the BP will respond to its priorities and business development
plans. Ultimately, there would be the BP originator who will submit the BP to different sources of
funding, including the project.
118. The BP will include activities and investments to be funded complementarily by a number of
different private and public financing sources, including the BP partners themselves, the financial
sector (banks, MFIs), municipalities and the project. As a general principle, funds from the project will
be used only to co-finance services and investments on public and semi-public42 goods and services
required to turn small-scale producers/collectors and their organisations into a more viable actor in the
value chains. It is expected that funds from municipalities will be used for the same purpose.
Conversely, as part of viable and bankable BPs, complementary investments in private goods
required by the VC business partners will be provided by other private market-based financial
sources.
119. BPs should be prepared in a very participatory way by involving stakeholders during the whole
process and ensuring their buy-in on the BP objectives, targets, implementation arrangements and
are supposed to be demand-driven (based on and tailored to the specific needs of the parties
involved). BFP should carefully play its role of facilitator creating the enabling conditions (e.g. trust) for
the dialogue between the parties.
120. As a general reference, they can include some or all of the following business / value chain
development strategies: (i) Process/product upgrading aims at “doing things better and/or bigger”.
These may include enhancing the efficiency of production processes such as using better inputs
(e.g. better quality of seeds) or reducing costs, which can lead to greater margins or more productivity
(higher yields), and hence larger volumes of produce sold; (ii) Functional upgrading which looks at the
opportunities of a particular actor to move up the VC by taking on new value-adding functions
(bulking, transporting, grading, processing and marketing). It implies a careful assessment of
additional costs and risks, as well as potential benefits. Partnerships (e.g. joint ventures) with other
VC actors already performing these functions could also be explored as part of the upgrading
strategy; and (iii) helping to formalize through written contracts horizontal and vertical integrations
42 A “semi-public” good is a good that is owned and used collectively by a group of individuals for a common purpose. Typical
example is a productive or processing equipment or infrastructure used by a group of farmers.
20
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
between organized producers and Pas and cooperatives and its members, a processing company
and its producers/collectors, and actors in the same VC.
121. Among the eligible activities the BPs could include advisory activities and investments in
areas such as: (a) technical advisory services and training to the producers (collectors) to adopt or
upgrade their technologies and farming (collection) practices in order to meet market requirements
and standards and cope with environmental sustainability and climate change; (b) obtain and renew
certification labels and comply with quality standards of buyer and/or of the end market (e.g. Global
Gap, Organic, HACCAP, ISO, organic, fair trade and others); (c) on-farm investments required to
ensure production (seedlings, pesticides, fertilizers, on-farm irrigation schemes, etc.); (d) investment
in collective productive infrastructure and equipment such as collection centres, storage rooms,
warehouses, transport, and post-harvest equipment for grading, sorting, aggregating, and processing
small producers’ produce –provided that they are ultimately owned and managed by farmer’s groups;
(e) institutional and organizational strengthening of eligible PAs and cooperatives; (f) business
development services (BDS) to enhance PA and cooperatives business management capacity; and
(g) BDS and support (e.g. co-funding business to business trips, participation in fairs) to the
agribusiness companies for market intelligence and marketing activities.
122. Mainstreaming climate-change resilience and adaptation. The Project will facilitate access
to technologies and strengthening of capacities to adapt to climate-change at small-farm level, for
example, promoting technologies for efficient irrigation and efficient use of energy sources, promoting
equipment and technologies to reduce weather-related vulnerabilities at small farms level, introduce
eco-labels to market local products, promote organic production. A top-up of 20% would be provided
by the Project to encourage that during the preparation of BPs partners are motivated to include
investments in climate change resilient, environmentally friendly, organic production, and energy
efficient infrastructure and technologies.
123. Cost sharing of BPs. The main principle of the project is that each BP should include a cost
sharing arrangement among different financing sources from the project and municipalities (public
sector) and producers organisation, agribusiness partner and a financial institution, if necessary (the
private sector). During BPs’ preparation, all possible financing sources, private and public, will be
identified and contributions and disbursement schedule from each source will be established. As a
rule of thumb the project will co-finance extension and advisory services costs, and productive,
processing and marketing assets. Working capital requirements might be provided by BP partners
through value chain finance mechanism (contract farming) already well-established in the country, or
by borrowing from the financial sector.
124. Main activities to be financed will include: (a) financing of training and capacity building;
(b) financing of the ‘starter packages’ for new producers belonging to project target groups. (seedlings
or seeds, drip irrigation system, pesticides, fertilizers and other items relevant for specific value-
chains) for new producers (i.e. additional poor farmers included in the value chains) with the
remaining to be funded by municipalities (10%) and beneficiaries (50%); (c) financing of investments.
The project will finance the cost of collective equipment and collective post-harvest handling and
processing facilities (70%) that are considered semi-public goods. The balance will be provided by
beneficiary producer organisations through own resources or loans from the financial sector; and
(d) financing climate-smart investments in areas in which the production in the selected value-chains
is already developed and the existing producers meet the poverty criteria. The Project would provide
an additional grant incentive (10% of the total amount) for investments in climate change resilience
and adaption (see Cost sharing of Investments in table hereunder).
125. The project will not finance individual working capital for producers already engaged in the
value chains. There is the evidence that financing mechanisms already exist in the value chain. These
requirements are usually financed with short-term loans from the financial sector (bank or MFI) or
through advance payments arrangements with buyers.
21
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
126. Finally, the Project would provide an additional (top-up) grant incentive (10% of the total
amount) for investments that enhance the inclusion of vulnerable groups and rural poor in BPs.
The two additional 10% top-up grants can be combined if appropriate. See table 3 below for more
details.
Table 3: Cost sharing of investment support
Activity
Starter package for new poor
producers (inputs, irrigation)
Training and capacity building (private
extension services, BDS,
organizational strengthening, market
intelligence, certification)
Collective production equipment
Collective processing facilities
Investments that promote climate-
change resilience and adaptation
Inclusion of vulnerable groups:
investment support
Public sector
Project
40%
Municipality
10%
Private sector
Producers and agribusiness43
Individual producers 50%
10%
10%
Agribusiness company 80%
Coop 20%
PA 20%
Coop 30%
PA 30%
Coop 30%
20%
70%
70%
70%
70%
70%
top up of 10%
top up of 10%
127. Role of the financial sector. In some cases BPs will be funded exclusively through a
combination of funds provided by BP actors, i.e. farmer organisation and agribusiness. In other cases,
additional financing from the financial sector, for example to cover cash flow requirements for the
purchase of products, will be needed. These needs should be identified during the preparation of the
BP, and it will be left to the cooperatives to explore possible financial sources.
128. BP assessment and approval. The project will establish a BP Assessment Committee (BAC)
with the specific task of reviewing and assessing BPs. The Committee will be composed of three to
four members: a representative of a development organisation with strong pro-poor orientation; a
representative of a financial institution; and an agribusiness specialist hired to provide technical
advice to the project and a VC specialist when necessary.
129. The BAC will review the viability and the pro-poor nature of each BP and provide a written
technical opinion to the APCU/PCU. This opinion can be positive, hence the BP is subsequently
submitted for final approval or partially positive. When a BP is considered partially positive because it
does not meet the quality standards, it will be send to the BP applicants with specific
recommendations for improvement.
130. Main criteria for assessment will include: (i) formal buy-in and commitment of the parties
involved in the BP supported by a formal agreement (e.g. contract agreements); (ii) financial viability
and sustainability of the proposed business; (iii) number of new small producers/collectors reached
and incorporated in the BP, with particular emphasis on number of women and youth; (iv) expected
increase in the volume of production purchased from small producers; (iv) win-win (pro-poor) features
of the proposed business (i.e. duration, existence of a transparent price setting mechanism, suitable
payment terms, risk mitigation measures, amount of value-added shifter closer to the farm-gate);
(v) grievance mechanism foreseen to settle potential disputes among parties; (vi) share of total cost of
(investments, working capital and technical assistance requirements covered by the agribusiness
company or farmers organizations from their own funds; and (viii) when necessary, review any
specific evidence of the availability of funds to finance working capital and/or investments.
43 It is expected that a portion of these funds will be provided by other actors within or outside the value chain such as
financial institutions (banks, MFIs) and other private companies (buyers, traders, exporters, processors etc.). However it is
impossible to estimate this at this stage.
22
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
131. BFPs, BP originators and the BCP will ensure that there will not be any transfer of land rights
from farmers to private companies envisaged in the BP.
132. BP approval. Following the assessment of BPs, BP originators and their business partners will
be formally invited to present their BPs to the BAC committee. The presentation will be carried out by
BP partners themselves to ensure their full participation in its preparation, understanding and
ownership of the BP. The BFP that facilitated the preparation of the BP will attend the presentation just
to support the BP originator if needed. The BAC approval process will be chaired by APCU/PCU.
133. BP implementation with the support of selected BFPs44. The project will hire BFPs to
support the implementation of BPs. Depending on the quality of the services provided by BFPs during
the identification, preparation and approval of BPs, the same BFP could be hired to facilitate its
implementation. If that is not the case, another BFP will be selected from a roster of service providers
established by ACPU/PCU through a competitive process, which will be available in the Website of
the Ministry of Agriculture.
134. Main functions of the BFP during this phase will be to: (i) monitor compliance with project
targeting methodology and criteria to ensure project target group are effectively included, participate
and benefit from the implementation of BPs; (ii) monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of activities
implemented (training, technical assistance and business development services provided,
development support, quality of assets purchased etc.); (iii) facilitate dialogue and conflict resolution
between parties if necessary; (iv) facilitate clustering and bundling of BP activities in order to achieve
economies of scale and reduce administrative costs.
135. Phasing of BPs. It is expected that the project will gradually expand the number of clusters
until reaching a minimum of 12 clusters. This expansion in the number of BPs identified, prepared and
approved will grow accordingly. Over the ten years duration of the project it is estimated that a total of
140 BPs will be implemented, involving all three types of BP originators: 55 originated by producers’
cooperatives, 45 by intermediaries and 40 by agribusiness companies. Over 15,000 poor small
producers and collectors will be directly benefitting from the implementation of the BPs.
Table 4: Phasing of Business Proposals
Approved BPs
Y1
Y2
Y3
Y4
Y5
Y6
Y7
Y8
Y9 Y10
Total
Clusters
BPs Coop
BP funds
No. Beneficiaries
BPs Intermediaries
BP funds
No. Beneficiaries
BPs Agribusiness
BP funds
No. Beneficiaries
Total BPs
Total BP funds
Total  beneficiaries
4
4
558 000
400
3
211 500
150
3
486 000
600
10
1 255 500
1 150
6
7
976 500
700
5
352 500
250
5
810 000
1 000
17
2 139 000
1 950
8
7
976 500
700
6
423 000
300
5
810 000
1 000
18
2 209 500
2 000
10
7
976 500
700
6
423 000
300
5
810 000
1 000
18
2 209 500
2 000
10
3
418 500
300
2
141 000
100
2
324 000
400
7
883 500
800
10
3
418 500
300
2
141 000
100
2
324 000
400
10
883 500
800
12
8
1 116 000
800
7
493 500
350
6
972 000
1 200
21
2 581 500
2 350
12
8
1 116 000
800
7
493 500
350
6
972 000
1 200
21
2 581 500
2 350
12
8
1 116 000
800
7
493 500
350
6
972 000
1 200
18
2 581 500
2 350
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12
55
7 672 500
5 500
45
3 172 500
2 250
40
6 480 000
8 000
140
17 325 000
15 750
136. Result monitoring. The project will ensure a close monitoring of the implementation of BPs in
order to ensure that each BPs’ party is actually delivering according to its commitment; verify that poor
small-scale producers and collectors are effectively benefitting from the economic benefits generated
and that also the social benefits (related to the inclusion of specific target groups is achieved as
planned). The project will also produce a number of knowledge products (guidelines, manuals, case
studies and a collection of lessons learnt) to inform about good practices and so provide guidance to
the Government and other stakeholders to replicate and scale-up the approach.
44.Coordinated service delivery (support to development of necessary competences at FO level, hiring of technical and BDS
service providers through the voucher system, mobilizing resources according to cost sharing and financing agreements
23
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Result 2: Very poor and poor farmers, women and youth have successfully integrated
into competitive and rewarding value chains.
137. Rationale. Very poor and poor farmers need to reach a certain viable, commercial scale to be
able to integrate competitive value chains and so benefit from rewarding markets. As these producers
are mostly not registered (limited by the scale of their production) they often fall outside specific
support mechanisms, be these at national or at municipal level. Very poor farmers may also face
difficulties in accessing land on a long term basis, or, as in the case of female-headed households
face difficulties with land titling (customary inheritance benefiting male descendants) The way forward
for very poor and poor farmers, women and youth is then mainly through their integration in functional
farmer organization. Existing organizations are however often characterised by their small
membership base and generally weak governance structures. This limits their appetite for taking up
risk ability to develop commercial ventures and increase their outreach to poor farmers.
138. Cooperatives are also very varied in nature; the law on cooperatives allowed five people to
establish a cooperative, practise that somehow played against the concept of cooperatives as part of
the 'social economy' organizations . Most of them thus operate more as limited liability companies
(cooperatives are cheaper to register, have lower operating costs and can eventually access
government subsidies or/and donor support,). These cooperatives usually rely on non-members
(“cooperants”) to develop their enterprises. Their activities typically include collecting and marketing of
produce and as such their activities do not differ much from purely commercial ventures. Investments
in this type of cooperatives should thus be carefully weighed against potential benefits for the very
poor and poor farmers (e.g. in terms of enhanced market access).
139. Cooperatives owned and run by small farmers thus typically mix with the above described
cooperatives. In order to fulfil their potential as social enterprises cooperatives that are effectively
owned by small farmers (or Producer Associations) will benefit from project support to develop their
capacities and increase their outreach to very poor, poor, women and youth.
140.
Improvement of women and youth's participation in rewarding VCs. A wide range of
opportunities for increasing involvement of women in value chains and for gender equity exists.
Increasingly women become also part of farmers' organizations management structures. (With
regards to upstream activities it emerges from the gender value chain analyses carried out for the
design, that women's involvement in has markedly increased in the collection of NTFPs and
productive side of the VC but decreased on the marketing side of the equation..
141. These observations are strong arguments for the need of the project to fund, at a very early
step of project implementation, in-depth studies on conditions and existing socio-economic
opportunities for women in order to boost their participation in rewarding VCs. Funds from the grant
have been allocated by RCDP to analyse the roles and power structures that determine relationships
between stakeholders in the selected value chains.
142. A preliminary analysis will inform about the obstacles that prevent poor farmers and particularly
women and youth from participating in and benefitting from rewarding VCs, identifying the specific
constraints to their participation and the specific measures needed to ensure their access to
rewarding VCs. CSPs will be the forum where specific measures should be discussed and agreed.
143. RCDP, the cluster platforms that the project will help establish, and the selected BFPs will
undertake the necessary efforts to reach out to poor and very poor farmers being the latter groups the
most likely excluded from PAs and Cooperatives.
144. Actions will include ‘production starter packages’ for very poor and poor farmers, specific funds
to incentive participation of women and youth in BPs (‘top up’), facilitating land access by
municipalities, specific training and awareness campaigns to solicit the interest of marginalised groups
and others. Actions should be set up in association and coordination with PAs, cooperatives and in
close collaboration with municipalities. Women and youth’s involved in producers’ organizations
should benefit from complementary skill development training to feel in competence and knowledge
24
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
gaps (e.g. participatory planning, leadership skills, etc.). In municipalities with a significant number of
poor and vulnerable households wishing to become value chain participants, the “production starter
packages” may be adapted to better suit the needs of poor and vulnerable farmers.
In addition to the different mechanisms, tools and partners’ efforts to ensure project activities
145.
reach the very poor and poor farmers, women and youth, a grant of US$ 500,000 has been allocated
to finance specific activities to ensure inclusiveness, monitoring the inclusion of the project target
groups and to finance the initial project information campaign.
Induction training by BFPs and APCU/PCU on inclusive VC development and targeting.
146.
Similar to the workshop organized to the benefit of the BFP (on targeting and inclusive VC
development), BFPs (with the eventual support of APCU/PCU) will organize workshops for all
stakeholders involved in local value chains and clusters (private sector, PAs and cooperatives,
Municipalities, youth and women’s organisations) to ensure inclusive targeting and monitoring,
pro-poor and inclusive approaches, the implementation of enabling measures for women and youth to
actively participate in BPs and project activities, make a proper use of top-up funds and starter
packages to ensure inclusiveness, and set a monitoring system able to portray this dimension.
Workshops could be carried out by an organization/NGO with experience in poverty targeting and
gender able to portray.
147. Organizational strengthening of PAs and cooperatives (capacity development in a broad
perspective). RCDP’s vision is to enhance market power of small farmers in the value chain through
strengthening of PA and cooperatives. Based on needs assessment, systematic efforts should be
undertaken to strengthen PAs and cooperatives organizational capabilities and skills so that they can
– among others, represent small farmers and in general act as exponents of the social economy. The
Project will actively support cooperatives willing to, broaden their membership (to 15 members and
more), engage at cluster platform level and ultimately prepare business proposals. Cooperatives and
PAs would be assisted to become more business-oriented and more active engaging more members,
particularly the small famers.
148. Specifically, RCDP will: (a) support the transition from Producers Associations to commercial
entities, namely farmers' cooperatives and farmer owned companies to become more business
oriented and ensure sustainability over time; (b) support the gradual consolidation of producers'
organizations into apex organizations; and (c) strengthen the capacities of producers' organizations
(farmers’ cooperatives and agribusinesses) to submit and implement BPs with the support of the
BFPs. The bulk of the organizational strengthening will be supplied by service providers contracted
through competitive process and will be broad in scope, going beyond the specific activities
implemented by the project to develop capacity and institutions that will be available at local level.
149. Training requirements will be identified by the producers' organizations, facilitated by BFPs.
This training and capacity development will include capacity building of PAs and cooperatives and
advisory services in production related advisory services, business development services and
organisational development services. It will include membership increase and participation,
leadership, good governance, business development, branding development and marketing
strategies, design an effective out-grower supply, quality certification of products (e.g. Global Gap,
organic, HACCP, ISO, and others), supply chain management, logistics, inventory management,
strengthening of management structures and systems, financial management and communication
skills, inclusiveness, sustainability and others. The ultimate objective is to have stronger, more
commercially-oriented and more inclusive, sustainable, local grassroots organizations which set their
own goals collectively, take informed decisions and have increased negotiation skills to participate in
decision-making instances at value chain and cluster levels.
150. As planned, the training will be organized in modules arranged according to the needs and
strength of each participating organization. Modules will be spread along 18 months for PAs and
organisations. Training and technical assistance support for the organisations will be supplied by
service providers, which will be selected from the roster of services established by APCU/PCU, while
25
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
the services will be paid with vouchers administered by APCU/PCU. Funds have been allocated to
cover a significant number of organizations with different level of strength.
151. Participatory impact result monitoring as regards to the inclusiveness and pro-poor
approaches developed by the intervention, knowledge management and promotion.
Monitoring of inclusiveness and gender issues. Monitoring of inclusiveness will be undertaken to
look at impact of the interventions on the core target group. A civil society organization or NGO with
experience in poverty targeting and gender will be contracted by APCU/PCU: (a) to develop tools and
methodologies that enable BFPs to reach out to rural poor people, women and youth; (b) to support
define and implement, mechanisms and activities to enable them to participate in the RCDP, (c) to
support the build-up of capacity at APCU, PCU, municipalities, other cluster development
stakeholders and implementing agents in the field of poverty targeting and gender; (d) to provide
necessary backstopping on targeting and inclusiveness during implementation; and (e) to monitor
inclusiveness and to support reporting on achievements and progress; and (e) ensure that
disaggregated information can feed the RCDP M&E system. The service provider will operate under
the direct supervision of the gender officer and close cooperation with cluster development facilitators.
The service provider will build on the knowledge developed by Oxfam Italy pilot activity in 2014.
152. Monitoring of inclusiveness will include: (a) definition of baseline for each selected cluster and
at subsector level in terms of each category of beneficiaries (very poor, poor, borderline poor), gender
focused analysis, (b) facilitators’ training and mentoring to define monitoring tools in each Cluster
development plan, (c) survey on inclusiveness at the end of each programme cycle and definition of
recommendations. As part of the induction training (workshop), the project will ensure the
training/awareness to key actors about the targeting criteria.
D.
Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation
153. The Lead Project Agencies shall be the Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management and
Forestry and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management of the Republika Srpska. In
each Entity, project coordination as well as fiduciary management will be entrusted to the existing
APCU and PCU.
154. With the view to promoting structural change and sustainable sub-sector development, a
rigorous and outcome and impact-monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be developed, for
which project stakeholders will bear shared/ joint responsibility; the APCU and PCU will however,
besides overall coordination maintain their ultimate responsibility for M&E.
155. Critically, RCDP will thus have to shift its attention towards project coordination, monitoring and
evaluation of all project supported activities. The demand-driven nature of the project as well as its
participatory approach that will ensure beneficiaries take the lead in selecting, following-up and
assessing performance of service providers will require that PAs and cooperatives members become
part of the M&E process of RCDP. Participatory result monitoring as regards to inclusiveness and
pro-poor approaches, or to take informed decisions at policy level will require to setting up of a
consistent M&E system that will ensure actors and partner are part of the system, generate, collect,
and review information on their own activities and that the information fluxes from the field and is
channelled to the decision makers.
Inputs to M&E will be provided at decentralized level by the clusters, whose M&E capacity will
156.
be supported by BFPs and service providers, ensuring that disaggregated information on targeting
effectiveness on different target groups are provided, as well as capturing project outcomes/impacts
on different beneficiaries’ groups.
157. Monitoring of activities will be a participatory endeavour, directly involving rural organizations,
so as to foster project ownership and shared learning processes. Specifically, ACPU/CPU will be
responsible for M&E, coordinating the facilitation work and project monitoring and evaluation. Funds
have been allocated to finance: (a) equipment; (b) management support; (c) a MIS and monitoring
26
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
and evaluation system. Detailed cost for project management and coordination are presented in
COSTAB tables as well as in Appendix 5. Details on M&E are presented in Appendix 6.
E.
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies
158. The design of RCDP is based on lessons learned from: (a) past and ongoing IFAD-funded
projects in BiH, in particular the ongoing Rural Livelihood Development Project (RLDP); (b) past and
present VC and local development interventions led by USAID, SIDA, SDC-Caritas and UNDP; (c) a
Pro-Poor Value Chain Development pilot project, financed by RLDP and designed and implemented
by Oxfam Italy. The pilot started in August 2014 principally in order to prepare the design of RCDP;
(d) a recent survey on livelihoods of women and youth in BiH.
159. The Mid-term review (MTR) of RLDP observed operational gaps essentially related to: (a) a
weak articulation between project components (notwithstanding the underlying value-chain
philosophy); (b) insufficient efforts to include the rural poor, (insufficient attention to targeting resulted
in an ad hoc selection of beneficiaries both in the RLDP and REEP, failing short to meet the desired
target groups, particularly the very poor. Responsibilities, check and balances among actors involved
should also be defined; municipalities hold the register of the community members registered to the
social security system, but the selection should be validated by the PCU or an implementing partner
with sound experience in social inclusion); and (c) overemphasis on investments in rural infrastructure
particularly in roads. This resulted in the implementation of an incomplete and unfocused value chain
approach, insufficiently reaching out to the rural poor, hindering the project in its achievement of its
poverty reduction objectives.
160. These lessons learned were integrated in RCDP design, namely: (i) a strong focus on
inclusiveness and direct targeting mechanism to reach the rural poor, this with active involvement of
municipalities and Producers’ associations; (ii) a clear focus on promising and dynamic Subsectors
with opportunities and advantages for poor smallholders; (iii) focussed value-chain and subsector
development approaches in order to establish strong market linkages through the setup of cluster
stakeholder platforms, co-financing of Business proposals that are to be jointly developed between
cooperatives, PAs, SMEs and municipalities and subsector stakeholder platforms; (d) internally
consistent project approach through mutually reinforcing project components; and (e) allocation of the
majority of project funding to financially and economically sound BPs that will generate long term
economic benefits at local and country level.
161. The design of RCDP is compliant with relevant IFAD policies, including IFAD’s Strategic
Framework 2011-2015, Rural Enterprise Policy, Private Sector Development and Partnership
Strategy, Rural Finance Policy, Gender Policy, Youth Policy Brief, Targeting Strategy, and
Environmental and Social Review Policy. Compliance with these policies is detailed in Appendix 12.
III. Programme implementation45
162. The scope of the RCDP, foresees a need for partnership development and strengthening of
national capacities. Most notably, the intensive planning, facilitation and coordination requirements
envisaged by the project will necessitate substantial field presence both for facilitation and follow-up/
monitoring. The various responsibilities will be shared amongst the project stakeholders, detailed in
the agreements and terms of reference of the contractual arrangements.
163. The number of stakeholders and potential partnerships that will be facilitated and/ or supported
by the project anticipates a considerable increase in the number and types of implementation
arrangements (with service providers, implementation partners, etc.) that may have to be adopted by
the project. Effectively, the operating modalities of the proposed RCDP will likely represent a shift from
previous projects; it will be critical therefore, that this new generation of project will be matched with
responsive coordination and strengthened management capacity.
45 Details are presented in Appendix 5.
27
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
It is expected that the bulk of the institutional strengthening activities will be provided by service
164.
providers contracted on the market. Currently, public extension services are available only in RS and
need to be strengthened. It is important to respect the fact that when it comes to organizational
strengthening no blueprint approach is effective. Each organizational strengthening should be
considered as a process, requiring an initial diagnostic and needs assessment.
165. With respect to the Business Proposals (BPs), these will be approved by the APCU/PCU upon
a thorough assessment by a technical committee of three independent experts based on a set of
criteria: e.g. the formal buy-in and commitment of the business parties involved in the BP, the financial
viability and sustainability of the proposed business; the number of new small producers/collectors
reached, especially the number of women and rural poor, win-win (pro-poor) features of the proposed
business model (including no transfer of land rights from the farmers to the private company),
percentage of the total cost of the BP covered by the agribusiness company or farmers organizations
with their own funds or through a complementary loan from a financial institution.
166. The project will ensure a close monitoring of the actual implementation of BPs to ensure that
each BP party is actually delivering as planned and poor small-scale producers and collectors are
effectively benefitting. In addition, the project will produce a number of knowledge products
(guidelines, manuals, case studies and lessons learnt) to identify good practices and document the
experience in order to provide guidance to the Government and other stakeholders to replicate and
scale-up the approach.
167. Overall, the APCU/PCU will have the main responsibility to contract service providers through a
competitive process. Three modalities of service providers can be selected, according to the specific
services required: (i) individual; (ii) single private or public service provider (consulting companies,
regional development agencies, NGOs, Universities); or (iii) a consortia of service providers, the latter
being needed because the broad range of training needs (organizational development, technical and
business-related aspects), or a wide geographical coverage may require different service providers.
In addition, RCDP will be responsible to scout and contract informal farmers' leaders, pioneers,
168.
innovators who can be contracted as extension agents and community organizers.
A. Approach
169. During the first cycle, the Project would work in 12 VC clusters starting their establishment from
PY1, after the baseline poverty information will be updated and the municipality scoring exercise will
be repeated, in order to reflect the changes in the clusters pre-identified since project design. The
exercise should confirm the clusters pre-identified. After their establishment a municipal level, the
clusters will be developed with the support of the BFPs.
170. The vision of the Project is to take advantage of existing value chain dynamics in BiH. The
agribusiness sector is already engaging with smallholders in establishing contractual relationships and
for example using in-kind credit for product pre-financing and provision of extension and technical
assistant to farmers (‘cooperants’). Benefiting from these processes, RCDP main contribution would
be to consolidate the perspectives for sustainable subsector development by: (i) expanding the
number of small farmers benefitting from the opportunities offered in the selected subsector
(ii) maximising the inclusion and participation of poor smallholders in profitable value chains, including
women and youth; (iii) enhancing the capacity of small farmers to develop their business activities and
to take decisions regarding the needed organisational structure (e.g. PAs and cooperatives) and
marketing strategies (including value adding). The ultimate objective is to help improve the livelihood
of small scale farmers through sustainable and profitable farming and consolidate their organisations
and their capabilities to identify and seize forthcoming business opportunities (markets, marketing
channels, products etc.), develop their business, play an active role in the cluster coordination
platforms while benefitting in the long run from the sustainable development of the subsector.
28
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
B. Organizational framework
Overall responsibility and orientation
171. The State Ministry of Finance and Treasury (MOFT) will have overall responsibility of RCDP
and will coordinate with the Entity Ministries of Finance which are responsible for externally-funded
projects. An Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the entity Ministry of Agriculture or its
designated representative would be set up in each Entity to provide overall guidance to the Project at
Entity level. The PSC would meet once or twice per annum. Each PSC will ensure that (i) project
activities are in compliance with the Government and IFAD strategies and policies and goals and
objectives defined at project design; (ii) endorse strategic orientations taken up by the project
(iii) review project Entity level Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB); (iv) oversee the transparent
selection of service providers and partner institutions; (v) ensure that Project interventions are
coordinated with other development programmes and projects and (vi) ensure adherence to the
highest standards of financial management and audit. As expected, the PSC should invite
representatives from the private, PAs and cooperative sectors the joint the Committee. A yearly inter-
entity meeting (workshop) will assess the 'state of play' of the programme in particular as regards
sustainable subsector development, performance and governance. The meeting will be co-chaired by
the state-level Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations and state-level Ministry of Finance
and Treasury.
In each Entity, project coordination as well as fiduciary management will be entrusted to the
Project coordination
172.
existing APCU and PCU. These units will demonstrate a clear orientation towards and renewed
emphasis on targeting and social inclusiveness in line with the IFAD RB-COSOP (2013-2018).
173. Given the scope of RCDP, both Units will be required to develop new partnerships with state
and non-state service providers and facilitators while building up their management capacity in
several areas. Among others, the intensive planning, facilitation and coordination activities envisaged
by the Project will not only require substantial field presence but also strong capabilities in facilitation,
follow-up and impact monitoring. The number of stakeholders and potential partnerships that will be
facilitated and/or supported by the Project anticipates a considerable increase in the number and
types of implementation arrangements and agreements with service providers, implementation
partners, etc., that may have to be adopted by the Project. Effectively, the operating modalities of the
proposed RCDP will likely represent a shift from previous projects; it will be critical therefore, that this
new generation of Project will be matched with responsive coordination and strengthened
management capacity.
174. The APCU and PCU are already established and are implementing other IFAD funded projects
in the country. Both APCU and PCU are headed by Directors appointed by the respective entity
Minister of Agriculture and their appointment has been acceptable to IFAD. Salaries of the staff of both
Units are already financed by other IFAD funded project and will be for the next four years; only
supplementary staff specifically hired to carry out specialized functions for RCDP will be funded by
this project. The APCU and PCU Director report to the respective entity Minister of Agriculture. The
additional staff to be hired by the APCU and PCU will include: Business Development Officers, and
M&E/Targeting Gender Officer. The A/PCU director will be tasked with policy dialogue and process
facilitation at the SSP. For this he can eventually solicit specialised Short-Term support.
175. APCU and PCU will be responsible for coordination and liaison with municipalities, clusters and
implementing partners, overall project management and monitoring, organizing start-up and annual
workshops, preparation of AWPBs, fiduciary management. The APCU and PCU will recruit through a
competitive process BFPs, technical advisory services, business development services and
organizational development services and will establish a roster of service providers which will be
made available to all BPs partners through a public Website or equivalent platform. BPs’ partners will
selected and enter into agreements with services providers of their choice. Complementary, the APCU
29
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
and PCU will establish the voucher scheme, which will be an instrument to pay for the services
rendered by the service providers to the BPs’ partners. While the voucher scheme will be
administered by APCU and PCU, it will be basically an empowerment instrument for business
partners to ensure they select and negotiate service contents and price with the service providers of
their choice, evaluate their performance and deliver the voucher for the providers to cash according to
the administrative arrangements made by APCU and PCU to cash the vouchers.
176. They will also be responsible for providing logistical and administrative support to IFAD and
Entity joint supervision missions, mid-term review and project completion missions. Detailed
responsibilities are described in Appendixes 5, 6 and 7. The APCU and PCU will be responsible for
ensuring the systematic collection of baseline data, monitoring and evaluation, policy facilitation,
progress reporting and liaison with the Government.
Implementation of Component 1
177. Policy dialogue/engagement. At national or subnational level subsector stakeholder
platforms, involving all key stakeholders, will oversee and coordinate activities in the respective
subsectors, as well as work on all relevant policy issues, including regional trade issues and
opportunities, regulatory frameworks, and core project risks. The APCU and PCU will contact
professional organizations in the subsectors in order to provide logistic and financial support to
facilitate meetings and the functioning of the platforms, in close collaboration with other development
partners, as several initiatives are ongoing. At local level, cluster stakeholders’ platforms will be
established with the support of RCDP and BFPs in collaboration with public and private stakeholders.
Municipalities, LED agencies will provide logistical support to this process and will be members of
them. The CSP will function at local-level and be involved in participatory evaluation of project
activities and progress.
178. Cluster Development Facilitation. The facilitation role will be played by BFPs from a LED,
RED, NGO or a consortium of development actors to be contracted by RCDP, through a competitive
process. BFPs will work closely with municipalities at cluster level and will reporting to Municipalities
and the project. The consultancy firm or NGO will put an individual or a team of facilitators who would
carry out its services on full-time or part-time bases according to the size of the cluster and
requirement for services. Probably, the BFPs or consortium will cover more than one municipality and
cluster what would increase coverage and make more efficient and effective the delivery of services.
Implementation of Component 2
Identification and planning of activities. Activities of component 2 will be implemented on the
179.
basis of Business Proposals (BPs), with the facilitation of BFPs. Each BP will determine the volume of
activities, the contributions of municipalities, cooperatives and agribusiness, as well as the volume of
subsidies to be accorded by the Project. Marketing facilities will be identified and prioritized at
cluster level. Procurement will be organized at local level or by the APCU/PCU. Given the small scale
of the interventions, no significant negative environmental impacts are expected from the investments
in rural infrastructure. However, all approved designs should meet requirements of the environmental
legislation of the FBiH and the RS. Submission of required documents and expenses for
Environmental Assessment as per the existing legislation will be the responsibility of participating
municipalities or local private stakeholders.
180. BFPs will be chosen according to a proven track record in facilitating contract farming
arrangements for pro-poor value chain development. Although the design mission is attaching some
suggested TORs for BFPs, they will be updated and finalised at a very early stage of project
implementation. BFPs will be one of the first categories of services to be hired, through a competitive
process, by APCU/PCU. As in every TOR and BFPs’ TOR are not the exception, a special place on
them will be reserved for the specific support required from the BFPs to ensure the implementation of
inclusive targeting and following up on its implementation. A BFP could continue working with the
30
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
same cluster and BP based on its performance, but it can also happen that a new service provider
could provide the support and facilitation to the implementation of the BP.
181. Responsibilities of Municipalities. The Municipalities will: (i) facilitate inclusive targeting of
vulnerable groups and youth; (ii) provide funding and logistics to their relevant departments and
development associations to implement their core mandate as far as facilitating VC cluster
development processes and agribusiness development are concerned; (iii) give access to their
facilities for meetings; (iv) provide incentives and enabling measures for agribusinesses development
and investments of smallholders; (v) for commercial infrastructure and facilities, provide the land and
contribute to investments, organize procurement and implementation; and (vi) facilitate programming
and implementation.
182. Partnerships. RCDP will build on the positive experiences of USAID’s FARMA and LAMP
projects and the work of the SIDA, SDC, GIZ, CARITAS, OXFAM, etc. and RED/LED agencies, Czech
Development Agency, Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA) and the Swiss
Development Cooperation (SDC). In addition, EU, World Bank and IFC’s investments in technical
capacity building regarding Food Safety Standards in the country will be utilized for the benefit of
smallholders by IFAD projects. RCDP will also build on its lessons from the grant provided to Oxfam
Italy to pilot territorial marketing and explore the potential for branding products. The modalities and
partnerships proposed by the project, are based on existing modalities and dynamics, though with
some adaptation where appropriate to enhance feasibility.
183.
Implementation partners Actors in the implementation of the project will comprise the following:
Government (Entity-level); Ministry of Agriculture (Lead Implementation Agency), Project Coordination
Unit (PCU) in the Federation and Agricultural Project Coordination Unit (APCU) in RS, are mandated
by the government for day-to-day coordination of the project; primary target group project
beneficiaries (including smallholder farmers, PAs, Cooperatives); identified service providers
(specialized individuals, companies and consortia) and implementing partners (including local
development agencies, NGOs, other development partners); agribusinesses; local government
(Municipalities, Cantons); Project Steering Committee (PSC) and others. APCU and PCU
184. Moreover, the project will support the establishment of Cluster Stakeholder Platforms (CSP)
and Subsector Stakeholders Platform (SSP). The cluster serves as a stakeholder platform for
participatory planning and monitoring progress of value chains, clusters and subsector development,
targeting and inclusiveness. CSP will eventually feed into the country level (SSP) planning and
monitoring process.
The planning process
185. AWPB. The AWPB represents the key planning document for the Project and its
implementation. The AWPB is driven by a participatory process particularly from the second year on,
with feedback provided by the clusters, and thus encouraging the demand-driven nature of the project
and bottom-up prioritisation.
186. Based on inputs from the stakeholder, the APCU/PCU will prepare spate Annual Work Plan and
Budget (AWPB) in a format acceptable to IFAD and submit it to the Project steering committee (PSC)
for approval and to IFAD for its non-objection at least two months before the beginning of the relevant
fiscal year. The AWPB will represent the key planning document for the Project. The AWPB process
will be based on proposals from stakeholder platforms at cluster level and will be initiated in
September each year and will be prepared in participation with all stakeholders and finalized with the
approval of the PSC. If required, the PCUs may propose adjustments in the AWPB during the relevant
Project Year, which shall become effective upon approval by the respective PSC and IFAD. The PIM
provides the overall format of the AWPB.
187. Considering that the AWPB has to be reviewed and approved by the Entity-level PSC (review
and validation) and IFAD (review and approval) before the beginning of the fiscal year (30 to 60 days
prior the commencement of the fiscal year), the elaboration of the AWPB should formally initiate few
31
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
months earlier. As expected, the work of the Business Facilitation Partners (BFPs) and the CSPs at
cluster levels will inform the identification, prioritisation and planning of BPs and complementary
activities that will be part of the AWPB. During the implementation year, flexibility to proactively
respond to realities of implementation will be considered, and proposed adjustments to the AWPB can
be made and informed to IFAD and Entity-level PSCs. The final Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
will outline further guidelines and details for the overall format of the AWPB, and more importantly, on
the process for its elaboration.
188. Cluster level. A concentration of activities implicating the key cluster stakeholders will be
initiated with the purpose of establishing the planning and implementation process at cluster level,
namely undertaking diagnostic mapping of the subsector and value chains, identifying M&E
responsibilities and setting-up the M&E system, etc. contributing to establishing the baseline situation.
The process will ensure that the project is carried out to respond to bottom-up and demand driven
needs. This strategic planning phase is a critical stage, in which the Cluster Development Plan (CDP)
will be elaborated, and first BPs will be identified, initiated, formulated and submitted to the BAC for
approval.
189. During PY1, most of the preparatory actions will be implemented and several of the key
mechanisms and systems for project implementation will be set up, so ACPU/PCU will have a central
role in the planning process at the initial steps of RCDP. From the second year on, CSPs’ partners at
cluster level should take the lead in the planning process as most of the activities to be implemented
will be identified and prioritised at that level and counterpart funds for co-financing BPs will be agreed
at cluster level. As expected, the Cluster Development Plans should serve as inputs to integrate
demands from clusters and for APCU/PCU to aggregate all demands under a single Entity-level
AWPB. At national level planning consolidation of local-level needs, progress and realities of project
implementation (including challenges and constraints faced) are expected to take place, resulting in
the process of elaboration of the AWPB. It is at this stage that the PCU, APCU and Government will
have the overall oversight and leadership responsibilities to ensure the relevancy and articulation of
the AWPB. In the subsequent project implementation years, operationalization of CDPs will be closely
monitored at the cluster level; the project's performance, and output level and results monitoring will
be discussed twice-yearly, or quarterly as the need arises, and will inform the following year's planning
for the cluster.
Monitoring and evaluation
190. Objectives and principles of the M&E system. The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system
aims to provide accurate and reliable data to ensure the effectiveness of project management, the
achievement of the project objectives and targets and the sustainability of benefits provided through
project interventions and activities. The key functions of the M&E system are to ensure that the project
activities: (i) are being implemented according to plan; (ii) have the intended impact on the
beneficiaries; (iii) are being effective in delivering benefits and that the benefits are being sustainably
managed and owned by communities; (iv) are relevant to the needs of, and prioritized by, the
beneficiaries; and (v) are being monitored so as to identify problems and risks early and ensure the
progress of the project is on track.
191. The M&E system will be customized to the needs of the project and aligned with its objectives
and expected results. To ensure that the objectives, outcomes and results are achieved, project
management will track results at the output level, and place repeated emphasis on the outcome level
analysis and tracking. This would enable results-based management that makes use of this
information and implements timely and adequate improvements or adjustments to project
components. In addition, the effectiveness and sustainability of the benefits of the project should be
closely monitored, both at the local/ cluster level, and at the national subsector level, to measure
subsector development and performance. The SPSC will have responsibility for M&E oversight on
both technical and policy-related progress and results which are critical for subsector development.
32
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
192. The emphasis on bottom-up and joint/ shared responsibility for M&E will contribute to building a
culture of real ownership, responsibility and accountability for delivering on results that are sustainable
and will encourage continuity beyond project completion. Thus the identification of meaningful
indicators, including performance indicators, to be validated through a participatory process, is a
means to ensure relevancy of the project interventions (meeting the priority needs) and effective
overall M&E. Finally, the M&E system needs to be cognizant of targeting-related issues. Large
sections of the population are currently vulnerable including women and the youth, and need
enhanced support to ensure their participation in agricultural and marketing activities.
193. The Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be a key management tool for the Project and
will serve the primary purpose of providing data and feedback to improve the effectiveness, efficiency,
sustainability, relevance and impact of Project activities. The overall responsibility for the M&E
activities will lie with APCU/PCU, which will be responsible for: (a) collecting and analysing the data
gathered from all implementing partners and service providers; (b) organize impact evaluations
(c) monitor service provider for inclusiveness and impact monitoring. The M&E Officer will be
responsible for ensuring consistency, accuracy and timeliness of all reporting undertaken under the
Project. All M&E activities will be in line with the IFAD Guidelines for Project M&E and IFAD RIMS first
and second level Indicators Handbook. All indicators will be disaggregated according to gender, age
and socio-economic status of beneficiaries to the extent possible so as to enable a proper
assessment as to whether the Project is indeed reaching its intended target groups.
194. Management information system (MIS). In order to promote the M&E system as a decision-
making tool, M&E information must be easily accessible to government, PCU and APCU and other
project stakeholders, including beneficiaries. A centralized computerized database or MIS that
contains all relevant data (project inputs, outputs and outcomes) collected by project stakeholders and
consolidated by the PCU and APCU should be designed and developed, customized for the project.
This MIS will be maintained by the respective M&E Officers in the PCU and APCU with assistance of
all project team members and project implementation partners.
195. Capacity building for M&E. The capacities of project stakeholders responsible for M&E will be
further assessed, and where needed, provision will be made to provide training and develop simple
tools and mechanisms to facilitate more efficient and effective M&E.
196. An Inter-cycle Review Mission (IRM) will be conducted during project year five, to assess the
progress, achievements, constraints and emerging impact and likely sustainability of Project activities
and to provide detailed planning for the next cycle of five years. The IRM will be carried out jointly by
the APCU/PCU and IFAD.
197. At the end of the project a completion evaluation will be conducted, as an input into the Project
Completion Report (PCR) through a formal survey preferably undertaken by a neutral agency with
no previous involvement in project implementation. IFAD itself may also undertake a formal Evaluation
of the project through its Independent Office of Evaluation (OE).
Learning and knowledge management
198. Given the innovative character RCDP, the analysis, synthesis and dissemination of Project
experiences and achievements will be important. Provision has been made for preparation of case
studies of success and failure and for brief Learning Notes on key aspects of the project in order to
inform policy dialogue The APCU/PCU will have the main responsibility for commissioning these
studies with the assistance of the M&E Officers. Provision has also been made to involve young
University graduates as interns in the process and to commission technical assistance from the
Universities in the two entities. These Learning Notes will be presented in donor forums in
coordination with the State Ministry of Finance and Treasury (MOFT) and presented in other
knowledge enhancing forums
33
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
C.
Financial management, procurement and governance
Financial management46
199. Country context. In accordance with IFAD guidelines, a Financial Management Assessment
(FMA) has been undertaken as part of project design. The inherent risk of BiH is assessed as
medium. The fiscal structure is highly decentralized as defined in the country’s constitution. According
to the Corruption Perception Index published by Transparency International, BiH has improved
3.2 (2011) to 4.2 in 2012 and 2013. But at the same time, World Banks’ Doing Business ranking has
slightly decreased from 104 in 2014 to 107 in 2015. The first Public Expenditures and Financial
Accountability (PEFA) assessment report also identified areas in the public management system that
require further improvement.
200. Project risk. The proposed project will take advantage of the established Project coordination
units: PCU in FBiH and APCU in RS. The financial management arrangements, and capacity of the
existing APCU/PCU are adequate to meet IFAD requirements and the initial risk rating is considered as
medium-low. Given the proper implementation of the mitigation actions, the residual risk will be further
decreased to low.
201. Anticorruption. IFAD’s applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or
coercive actions in projects financed through its loans and grants. 'Zero tolerance' means that IFAD
will pursue all allegations falling under the scope of this policy and that appropriate sanctions will be
applied where the allegations are substantiated. All project staff, project parties and all stakeholders
must be made aware of IFAD’s as well as the national anticorruption policies and whistle blowing
procedures47.
202. Proposed financial management arrangements. The proposed FM-arrangements including
budgeting, accounting, internal controls, flow of funds, financial reporting, and audit arrangements will
follow the FM arrangements already in place in the APCU/PCU with some adjustments.
203. Accounting. The APCU/PCU will maintain its accounting records in accordance with
IPSAS-cash basis of accounting. The accounting systems will be further fine-tuned during the project
start-up as necessary to fully automate the generation of reports required under the project. In order
to ensure: (a) efficiency; (b) reliability of financial reports; and (c) compliance with applicable laws and
regulations including the conditions set forth in the financing agreement. The APCU/PCU will ensure
that adequate Internal Controls are maintained through the project implementation by all implementing
entities and project partners.
204. Flow of funds. Separate bank accounts will be opened and maintained for each financing
source and for each entity, FBiH and RS. Accordingly, there will be two designated accounts for the
IFAD loan (in EUR) and two designated accounts for the IFAD grant (in EUR), and four operating
accounts in BAM to receive financing from the respective designated accounts in a commercial bank
acceptable to IFAD. In addition, there will be separate accounts for the government contribution and
counterpart contribution. The IFAD financing shall be disbursed against duly certified withdrawal
applications in accordance with the IFAD disbursement procedures.
205. Financial Reporting. Financial reports will link each transaction to a financier and compare
incurred expenditures with planned amounts: actual vs. budget for a reporting period and cumulative
vs. appraisal. The APCU/PCU will provide IFAD with consolidated financial reports within agreed
timeframes as follows: (a) semi-annual consolidated Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) as agreed with
IFAD; (b) annual consolidated Financial Statements within four months after the end of the fiscal year,
prepared in compliance with IPSAS (cash) and IFAD requirements; (c) annual consolidated audit
report and a management letter within six months after the end of the borrower’s fiscal year.
46 Details are presented in Appendix 7.
47 Agency for the Prevention of Corruption and Coordination of the Fight against Corruption.
34
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
206. External audit. All audits of externally financed projects implemented by the Government in the
country are covered by an umbrella agreement with one audit firm procured and contracted by the
state Ministry of Finance. Accordingly, APCU/PCU will prepare their respective annual financial
statements in a timely manner which will be audited by the selected auditor in accordance with
International Standards on Auditing (ISA). The terms of reference for the audit will be agreed with
IFAD on annual basis. The consolidated audit report covering the whole project, together with the
separate audit reports for APCU and PCU, including the management letters covering the audit
observations on internal controls, will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of fiscal year.
Procurement48
207. Country Assessment. Bosnia and Herzegovina has established modern public financial
management systems and a country-wide Law on Public Procurement (LPP) became operative in
January 2005..However, it is not yet being consistently implemented at the State or Entity levels while,
the first Public Expenditures and Financial Accountability (PEFA) report (2014) identified competition,
value for money and controls in procurement as an area that requires improvement. As a result, the
IFAD procurement guidelines will be adopted for the proposed project.
208.
Implementation arrangement. The APCU/PCU will be mainly responsible for the procurement
under the project in accordance with IFAD procurement guidelines, IFAD procurement handbook and
the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. For each contract to be financed by the IFAD
financing, the different procurement methods, the need for prequalification, estimated costs, prior
review requirements, and time frame will be agreed between the Borrower and IFAD project team in
the Procurement Plan. The end-users will be included in developing the TORs to the extent possible.
In selected cases the project will also allow for procurement with community participation where the
procurement activities will be undertaken by municipalities, producers associations, co-operatives etc.
in accordance with IFAD procurement guidelines.
209. Procurement Plan, Reporting and contract management: The APCU/PCU will prepare an
AWPB and a Procurement Plan in a format acceptable to IFAD for the first 18 months of project
implementation. The procurement plan will be updated annually and will provide the basis for the
procurement methods and prior/post review threshold. Procurement progress reports will be
generated by the APCU/PCU and submitted to IFAD, as part of the semi-annually and annual
progress reports. In addition, all contracts will be listed in the Register of Contracts in a format agreed
with IFAD and maintained by the APCU/PCU.
D.
Supervision
210. The Project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Project supervision and implementation support
missions will be conducted every six months. The composition of the mission in terms of expertise will
be based on the annual supervision plan. The mission will also comprise the civil society organization
or NGO/service provider recruited to develop methodologies and monitor project impact to reach out
to rural poor people. The supervision plan will highlight in addition to the routine supervision tasks, the
main thematic or performance area that requires strengthening and will deploy additional expertise for
the purpose.
211. One of the semi-annual supervision missions will be scheduled to coincide with an annual inter-
entity review workshop, to be scheduled in close coordination with the APCU and the PCU at the end
of the financial year and be attended by stakeholders at both State and Entity level. This annual
review workshop will provide an opportunity for the supervision mission to work closely with all
stakeholders to identify progress, constraints, and to facilitate review and approval. A financial
management specialist will participate in annual IFAD supervision missions to supervise and provide
implementation support to the project
48 Details are presented in Appendix 8.
35
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
E. Risk identification and mitigation
212. This section identifies the risks with the greatest likelihood of occurring and the highest potential
impact on the achievement of the Project Outcomes.
Table 5: Risks and Mitigation Measures
Risk
PCU/APCU
unprepared /
incapable to take up
new role (e.g. policy
dialogue/
engagement)
Implications
Delayed establishment
of the Subsector
Stakeholders’ Partners
(SSPs).
Slow engagement in
policy dialogue
Volume and nature of
financial transactions
may exceed the
current capacity of
the APCU/PCU.
Slow disbursement
and project
implementation as well
as increased fiduciary
risk.
Traditional
procurement by
APCU/PCU not
adequate.
Procurement requires
increased involvement
at the end-user level in
order to avoid delays in
implementation.
Mitigation Measures
Main role for policy engagement/dialogue rest on stakeholders;
line Ministries and government authorities in both Entities within
the framework of SSPs. The APCU/PCU has a facilitating role for
VC and subsectors’ actors to engage in policy dialogue and
A/PCU directors can solicit specialized process management
support .
Demand-driven approach to develop business proposals.
The APCU/PCU technical and FM staffing arrangements will be
reviewed, missing positions to be filled as appropriate and
procedures manuals to be revised to reflect the project activities.
Flow of funds arrangements at PAs and cooperatives level to be
simplified (through use of technical service providers and
facilitating institutions, transferring responsibility for some
procurement to PAs and cooperatives, etc.).
A full implementation of the voucher scheme should reduce
number of transactions in key project activities (identification,
preparation and implementation of BPs).
Allow for procurement with community participation, where
municipalities, and in specific cases producers associations and
co-operatives undertake procurement.
Voucher scheme may provide PAs and cooperatives more
familiarity with procurement of support services
Service providers establish consortia that allow cluster
stakeholders to expand coverage (in number of municipalities and
BPs by consortium) and reduce number of biddings
Market risks inherent
to the selected
subsectors
Profitability in selected
subsector might
change.
Modification of the value chains within the three selected
subsectors approach with flexibility with respect to the choice of
value chains.
Involvement of private sector in agribusiness linkages
Variable quality of
technical advisory
services
Smallholders do not
obtain targeted yields
and revenues.
Flexible approach combining private and public services and
private BDS building up on pragmatic field solutions (combination
of public and private support mechanisms)
slower than expected
project implementation
Service follow-up, monitoring and performance assessment (by
BPs’ partners and ACPU/CPU) help them to hire individuals, firms
and consortia that provide quality services
Refining criteria for cluster selection based on improved field
knowledge and know-how at local level.
Confirmation of pre-selected municipalities and clusters is
planned to be implemented soon after the start-up workshops
Degradation, loss of
the biodiversity,
reduction of the crop
Destruction of crops
leading to interrupted
or broken value and
supply chains
Sensitization on sustainable harvest technique, cluster
development plan consider sustainability of the harvest and
training of the collectors
DRR activities to marginalize the impact of natural hazards,
organizational strengthening of PAs and cooperatives, cluster
platforms and SSP to build up necessary resilience (so they can
'bounce back' quickly without losing market share)
Some specific investments (greenhouses, drip irrigation, etc.) to
adapt to climate events and reduce production risks
Initial selection of
clusters does not
fulfil expectations in
terms of dynamism/
stakeholder
involvement
Impact on the
environment of the
NTFP collection
Natural disaster
Natural
events/Climate
change effects
36
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits and sustainability
A.
Programme costs and Financing49
213. The total project costs including physical and price contingencies are estimated at
USD 61.45 million50 (BAM 106.6 million) over a ten-year period. Project costs by components are
summarized in the table below. Component 2, which is the main investment component, represents
86% of total project costs. A complete set of summary and detailed costs tables are attached in
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
Rural Competitiveness Development Project (RCDP)
Appendix 9.
Components Project Cost Summary
Table 6: Project costs by components
A. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development
1. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development_FBiH
2. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development_RS
Subtotal Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development
B. Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains
1. Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains_FBiH
2. Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains_RS
Subtotal Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains
C. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
1. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation_FBiH
2. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation_RS
Subtotal Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
(BAM '000)
Foreign
Local
Total
Local
(USD '000)
Foreign
Total
2,210.00
1,503.00
3,713.00
55,346.80
35,835.94
91,182.74
4,322.28
3,730.31
8,052.58
102,948.32
8.05
3,375.06
106,331.44
-
-
-
-
-
-
157.29
149.77
307.06
307.06
-
27.31
334.37
2,210.00
1,503.00
3,713.00
55,346.80
35,835.94
91,182.74
4,479.56
3,880.08
8,359.64
103,255.38
8.05
3,402.38
106,665.81
1,273.26
865.93
2,139.19
31,887.31
20,646.39
52,533.70
2,490.22
2,149.16
4,639.39
59,312.28
4.64
1,944.50
61,261.41
-
-
-
-
-
-
90.62
86.29
176.91
176.91
-
15.74
192.64
1,273.26
865.93
2,139.19
31,887.31
20,646.39
52,533.70
2,580.84
2,235.45
4,816.29
59,489.19
4.64
1,960.23
61,454.06
214. A total of US$ 25.5 million of IFAD-financing is expected to be mobilized over the ten-year
period. RCDP will absorb the entire PBAS allocation of 2013-2015, including a loan of
US$ 12.25 million and a grant of US$ 500,000 specifically for inclusiveness-related activities to be
implemented under Result 2 of Component 2. Subject to performance and availability, additional
financing of US$ 12.75 million could be earmarked from the 2016-2018 PBAS cycle51, which will be
allocated for the co-financing of Cycle 2 of the project.
215.
IFAD loans will be used to fully finance: (a) Component 1; (b) Project Coordination Unit in both
Entities, and (c) to co-finance Business Proposals (BPs) implemented under Component 2. BPs are
expected to be financed according to the following allocation: (a) 38% from IFAD loans; (b) 5% from
Municipalities; (c) 17% from PAs; and (d) 39% from agribusiness and/or financial sector.
216. As mentioned, IFAD will also provide a grant of US$ 500,000 which will be used to finance
inclusiveness impact monitoring. The loan will be disbursed during the first 5 years of the project.
217. The Government of BiH will finance taxes and duties on imported goods, and Value Added Tax
(VAT) for a total amount of up to US$ 4.7 million. This is an estimate as the bulk of project funds will
be channeled to co-finance BPs, which will be formulated during the implementation so it is not
possible at this stage establish which kind of investments will be included in the BPs and in
consequence calculate taxes.
49 Details are presented in Appendix 9.
50 Project total costs may increase during implementation depending on the accessibility of credit funds provided by other IFAD
funded projects.
51 Additional financing from the 2016-2018 PBAS cycle will be subject to attaining the performance triggers (included in the
logical framework) and to country selection, applicable and available IFAD finance.
37
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Table 7: Total Costs by Financier
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
Rural Competitiveness Development Project (RCDP)
Components by Financiers
(USD Million)
A. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development
1. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development_FBiH
2. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development_RS
Subtotal Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development
B. Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains
1. Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains_FBiH
2. Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains_RS
Subtotal Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains
C. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
1. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation_FBiH
2. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation_RS
Subtotal Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Total PROJECT COSTS
IFAD LOAN CYCLE IFAD LOAN CYCLE IFAD LOAN CYCLE IFAD LOAN CYCLE
1_FBiH
1_RS
2_FBiH
2_RS
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
IFAD Grant
%
Amount
Government
%
Amount
Municipalities
%
Amount
Private Sector
%
Amount
Total
Amount
%
0.38
-
0.38
5.88
-
5.88
0.84
-
0.84
7.09
27.6
-
16.4
17.9
-
10.9
29.9
-
16.5
11.5
-
0.27
0.27
-
4.17
4.17
-
0.72
0.72
5.16
-
29.2
11.8
-
19.6
7.7
-
32.0
14.3
8.4
0.47
-
0.47
5.63
-
5.63
1.75
-
1.75
7.85
34.1
-
20.3
17.1
-
10.4
62.7
-
34.7
12.8
-
0.29
0.29
-
3.26
3.26
-
1.35
1.35
4.91
-
31.6
12.8
-
15.4
6.0
-
59.6
26.7
8.0
0.29
0.21
0.50
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.50
21.3
22.2
21.6
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.8
0.23
0.16
0.39
2.36
1.52
3.88
0.21
0.19
0.40
4.67
17.0
17.0
17.0
7.2
7.2
7.2
7.4
8.4
7.8
7.6
-
-
-
0.95
0.61
1.56
-
-
-
1.56
-
-
-
2.9
2.9
2.9
-
-
-
2.5
-
-
-
18.04
11.68
29.72
-
-
-
29.72
-
-
-
54.9
55.0
54.9
-
-
-
48.4
1.37
0.93
2.30
32.86
21.24
54.10
2.79
2.26
5.05
61.45
2.2
1.5
3.7
53.5
34.6
88.0
4.5
3.7
8.2
100.0
B.
Summary benefits and economic analysis52
218. The RCDP is expected to primary generate substantial net incremental benefits for
non-commercial farmers investing in the three selected sub-sectors a) berries; b) vegetables;
c) NTFP. Benefits would directly accrue to farmers, women and youth through a comprehensive
improvement of
the sub-sectors’ value chains returns.
219. The main benefits of Component 1 would result in (i) increased capacity of specialized
institutions and service providers; (ii) structured and result-oriented policy dialogue/engagement at
local and national levels (empowerment of local actors). Main benefits of component 2 would be:
(i) expansion of acreage of berries; vegetables and NTFP both for domestic and export markets;
(ii) establishment of agribusiness agreements between value chain actors in about 12 clusters;
(iii) increased revenues for about 16,000
220. direct beneficiaries, who will develop or upgrade their berries and vegetable production; (iv) on
an average additional national production of berries would be 7,600 tonnes per annum (40% increase
of the current production, considering that 20% increase is expected from new production and 20%
increase is expected from improved yields); (v) institutional strengthening of 120 PAs and 100
cooperatives; (vi) at wholesale and cooperative level, significant investments in collection and
processing facilities would be supported; (vii) priority target groups of IFAD, including women, youth
and rural poor would receive access; (viii) creation of 3,150 fulltime and part-time jobs upstream and
downstream in the value chains (estimated at 1 job per 5 farmers); (ix) particular attention will be
given to support climate change resilience.
221. The financial and economic analysis is presented in Appendix 10. RCDP interventions are
analysed using seven illustrative crop models: (a) raspberries model; (b) strawberries model;
(c) blackberries model; (d) blueberries model; (e) gherkins open field model; (f) potatoes open field
model; (g) paprika for industry open field model. Considering that farmers investing in greenhouse will
have the possibility to grow more than one crop during the year; also two representative greenhouse
models were developed: (a) cucumbers and tomatoes greenhouse model; (b) cucumbers and paprika
for the fresh market greenhouse model. Furthermore; in order to show the impact that the project will
have not only on the target group but also on other actors of the value chain; two cooperative models
were designed: a) berries cooperative model, b) vegetables cooperative model. These models were
used as building blocks for the economic evaluation of the value chain analysis. All the technical
assumptions within the models have been elaborated jointly with the team members on the basis of
field surveys, national statistics, international and national expert consultation. The analysis builds
52 Appendix 10 summarizes the financial and economic analysis.
38
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
upon the precautionary principle, accounting for project benefits in a realistic and conservative
manner. A cash-flow analysis is finally carried out to present the “with” and “without” project analysis.
Summary results from the financial models are presented in Table 8. Overall, all financial models,
designed to simulate benefits of the Project, indicate that profitability of the targeted interventions is
positive; in case a) market access is ensured; b) farmers adopt good technologies; c) the VC
approach functions properly; d) farmers have access to in-kind loans from buyers such as Pas,
cooperatives or agribusinesses.
Table 8: Financial Profitability Indicators
Net Income (year 4)
BAM/dunum
Net Present
Value
BAM/dunum
Internal Rate of
Return (%)
Return to
Family Labour
BAM/Day
B/C Ratio
Raspberries
Blueberries
BlackBerries
Strawberries
Potatoes_Open Field
Paprika_Open Field
Gherkins_Open Field
3,887
5,168
3,317
2,555
942
1,589
3,052
11,935
14,454
7,991
5,265
1,918
2,654
4,509
85%
68%
56%
93%
89%
90%
107%
Net Income (year 4)
BAM/300m2 GH
Net Present
Value
BAM/300m2 GH
Internal Rate of
Return (%)
Paprika+Cucumber GH
Tomato+Cucumber GH
4,374
4,583
3,355
6,205
29%
44%
Net Income (year 4)
BAM
Net Present
Value BAM
Internal Rate of
Return (%)
Berries Cooperative
Vegetables Cooperative
72,360
31,502
134,396
78,527
35%
57%
138
157
109
116
113
85
95
2.26
2.22
1.86
1.38
1.65
1.54
1.9
Return to
Family Labour
BAM/Day
99
118
Return to
Family Labour
BAM/Day
-
-
B/C Ratio
1.42
1.49
B/C Ratio
1.06
1.04
222. The economic benefits were calculated for a 20-year period. The physical inputs and
productions established in the financial analysis provided the basis to determine the viability of the
project investment in terms of opportunity costs and quantifiable benefits to the economy as a whole.
The opportunity cost of capital is 10%. Project inputs and outputs traded are valued at their respective
market prices, and goods are expected to move freely within the Project area in response to market
demand. The economic analysis is based on direct costs and benefits, while social and indirect
benefits have not been taken into account of the “average farmer” compared to the best farmer. The
economic analyses include the investment and incremental recurrent costs of Project components.
The Project financial costs have been converted to economic values by removal of price
contingencies, taxes and duties. In order to avoid double counting, the final aggregation considered
only those costs that were not included in the financial models.
223. Economic Rate of Return. On the basis of the above assumptions, the ERR of RCDP would
be 36.6% and the Net Present Value (NPV) would amount to USD 53.1 million. The high ERR reflects
the ambition and potential leverage of RCDP; with an approach focused on clear comparative
advantages and existing economic dynamics in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
224. Sensitivity Analysis. In order to test the robustness of this result, a sensitivity analysis has
been carried out. It shows the economic impacts that a decrease in project benefits - of up to -50% -
will have on the project’s viability. Similarly, it shows how the economic viability of the project will be
affected with an increase – of up to +50% - in project costs and with one and/or two years delay in
project implementation. Finally, the results show that the project remains economically viable after the
variations.
39
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Table 9: Sensitivity Analysis
Assumptions
Related Risk
ERR
NPV $ Million
Project Base Case
36.6%
53.1
Beneficiaries do
not adopt new
and more
environmental
friendly
technologies.
Price and market
fluctuations. Low
crop yields
Weak quality of
extension
services. Weak
cooperation
within the VC.
Procurement
risks. Low
management
capacity.
Capacity of PCU
& APCU to
implement the
project and
cooperate on
common
activities.
-20%
-50%
20%
50%
1 year
2 years
32.9%
40
25.2%
20.1
33.6%
29.9%
50.5
46.6
31.9%
44.5
28.0%
36.7
Decrease in Project Benefits
Increase in Project Costs
Delays in Implementation
C.
Sustainability
Exit Strategy
225. The exit strategy of RCDP is based on the following design features: (i) a focus on value chain
clusters and linkages within a comprehensive Subsector approach; (ii) the demand-driven approach
through private sector stakeholders, namely agribusinesses, POs, cooperatives and other service
providers; (iii) alignment with interventions of Municipalities and Cantons; (iv) support that is mainly
provided to smallholders on commercial terms; (v)focus on agribusiness activities that will be fully
integrated in the regional market economy; (vi) risk mitigation through institutional capacity building of
value chain stakeholders. Moreover, the operation will be implemented over a 10 years period, what
will allow for the activities implemented, VCs and clusters to consolidate.
Climate Change Adaptation
226. Sustainability is at the centre of design considerations for the interventions funded through
RCDP. The support provided through RCDP will enhance climate change resilience of smallholders
within the fruits, vegetables and NTPF subsectors by: (i) mainstreaming commercial climate resilient
production technologies; (ii) promoting training support and knowledge sharing amongst smallholder
famers; consequently, there is considerable potential for replication and up-scaling as these lessons
learned are transferred to other localities; (iii) promoting more efficient water use in irrigation;
(v) encouraging the active participation of government and municipality staff in the implementation of
RCDP interventions and the development of planning and strategies for climate change adaptation
that is country-specific and aligned with national priorities. The sustainability of the Project results will
40
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
largely depend on the effectiveness of stakeholder involvement, the appropriateness of the
implementation of the adaptation measures whilst using proven technologies and practices, adequate
technical, legal and institutional capacity and expertise at the national and municipality levels.
227. Environmental and Social Scoping Measures. Based on the relatively minor negative impacts of
the targeted economic activities on the environment, the Project has been classified for the purposes
of environmental scrutiny as Category B. To ensure environmental and social safeguards compliance,
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will be developed and monitored for the main
marketing facilities, and each of the value chain. Details on environmental concerns are examined in
Appendix 12. The Project will only have positive social impacts. It will not have negative effects on
indigenous population groups. Monitoring will be done of labour condition of smallholders, youth and
female labour in the targeted value chains.
41
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background
A. Country Economic Background
With a per capita Gross National Income (GNI) of US$ 4,780 in 2013, BiH is an upper middle-
1.
income country53. Its population was estimated to be 3.83 million in 201354 and 58% of the people live
in rural areas. Last Population Census was conducted in October 2013 but data are not officially
available yet. Previous census was conducted before the war, in 1991.
After a successful post-conflict reconstruction since 1995, the economy has picked up and
2.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth has averaged 2.5-3.0 % for the past two years with low
inflation, but GDP growth was almost negative during 2104. This annual average GDP growth has led
to a reduction in poverty of almost 4%, though the results achieved in terms of poverty reduction are
fragile and are being reversed as many Bosnian citizens live only just above the poverty line. Even
minor declines in economic growth can cause an increase in poverty.
The economy is characterised by a high level of informal employment, a high inactivity rate of
3.
people of working age (56%) and a high unemployment rate of youth (45-50%). The total ILO-defined
unemployment rate is 29%, while the official or registered unemployment rate is 46.1%55, and
unemployment amongst young people is twice the national average56. The service sector is the
largest contributor to employment with 49.3%, followed by the industry sector at 31.0% and agriculture
with 19.7% in 201057.
Agriculture contributes with less than 10% of the GDP of the country. Cultivable land amounts to
4.
1 million ha58 but less than 20% of agricultural land is suited to intensive agriculture, most of this
located in lowlands and river valleys. As only about 1% of the arable land benefits from some kind of
irrigation, the agricultural sector is considerably exposed to climate change related risks59.
Approximately 500,000 smallholder farms continue to dominate the agricultural sector in BiH, 50%
own less than 2 ha and 89% own less than 5 ha60. Many of them are mixed farms, providing incomes
to people that have lost their jobs in the industrial sector during the 1990s. Farming is often a poverty
coping strategy or part-time source of revenues for rural households. Predominantly unreliable
wholesale linkages for processing, bulking and marketing are the main obstacle for farmers to expand
their business and youth to invest in agriculture. Other factors are the small size of farm holdings, low
yields, a low level of mechanization, and limited access to affordable credit. Within the sector, the
subsectors of fruits, vegetables and non-timber forest products (NTFP) are growing rapidly, both for
export and national markets and these subsectors are accessible to resource-constrained
smallholders with adequate technical and organizational support.
5.
Poverty in BiH is not so much about absolute destitution but it is rather defined by social-
exclusion and a lack of access to basic services and economic opportunities. BiH’s Social Exclusion
Index is 50.3%, indicating that half of the BiH population is, in some way, excluded within the society,
being denied access to social, economic and political rights. While there is little or no extreme poverty
in BiH, between 19 to 21 % of the households suffer from chronic material deprivation and between
20 to 30% are at risk of falling into material deprivation.
53 World Bank, Country Classification. 2013.
54 World Bank, 2013.
55“Progress towards the realization of the millennium development goals in Bosnia and Herzegovina 2010”, Ministry of Finance
and Treasury, and the United Nations Country Team. Sarajevo. July-August 2010.
56 UNDP, Human Development Report: The Ties that Bind, Social Capital in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2009.
57 Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina: Bosnia and Herzegovina in Figures 2010. Sarajevo, 2010.
58 BiH Strategic Plan for Harmonization of Agriculture, Food and Rural Development, 2008-2011.
59 Drought incidences have increased and these events can decrease yields by 30% (UNDP Climate Change Assessment).
60 BiH Agriculture, Food and Rural Development Harmonization Strategic Plan 2008-2010.
43
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background
6. With a Human Development Index of 0.735, Bosnia and Herzegovina is ranked on 81st place
out of 186 countries61, which places it below all its neighbouring countries.
7. While the country has shown a general improvement in the goal of reaching universal primary
education, secondary school enrolment, child mortality, and child health, the country has however
fallen back on its Millennium Development Goals (MDG) indicators with regard to employment of
women and youth. Gender parity in education is high, especially in higher education, but
notwithstanding the legal and institutional framework to improve gender equality and the
empowerment of women actual positive changes in employment practices, income generation
opportunities and political participation remain modest.
The Dayton Peace Accords created a complicated governance structure for BiH’s three
8.
constituent peoples, Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats, and 17 recognised minorities collectively referred to
as “Others”. This country structure consists of two Entities, Republika Srpska and the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH), ten cantons within the FBiH, the Brčko District in the northern part of
the country, and 143 municipalities (64 in the Republika Srpska and 79 in the Federation). Many
different layers of government structures, made of prime ministers, legislatures, ministers, presidents,
and constitutional courts govern BiH. This complex governance structure, complicated bureaucratic
apparatus and limited coordination between various levels of government, compelled by weak rule of
law, translates into a rather investment-unfriendly environment. This hinders BiH in its efforts to
optimize international trade relations and collaboration with neighbouring countries and the EU. BiH’s
accession to the EU and its associated requirements has provided a strong framework for broad
reform goals. Upon the signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA), Bosnia and
Herzegovina entered into its first contractual relation with the European Union62.
9.
The foreign trade deficit has decreased significantly, but is still sizeable; Croatia is one of BiH’s
major foreign trade partners. Its entry into the EU in July 2013 however affected significantly trade and
commerce with BiH, with particular impact on the agricultural sector as certain produce is no longer
eligible for export into the EU market due to the difficulty to set up state level instruments and enact
legislation (e.g. for animal products: dairy, poultry and eggs).
10. Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA)63. The EU and BiH signed a Stabilization
and Association Agreement (SAA) in June 2008. Pending effectiveness of the SAA, an Interim
Agreement regulates trade relations. The EU is the first trading partner of BiH representing 63% of
imports, and 73% of its exports. Most Bosnian products can enter the EU duty-free. BiH is however
not reaping the full benefits of these agreements as, due to the absence of full EU-compliant food
safety institutions and regulatory frameworks; a range of products remains banned from EU markets,
in particular dairy, meat and processed food. Since Croatia’s entry to the EU in June 2013, BiH is not
able to export some products to this country anymore (exports to Croatia represent 14.6% of BiH’s
total exports).
B. Agriculture and Rural Poverty
11. Agriculture contributes less than 20% to GDP. Cultivable land amounts to 1 million ha64 but less
than 20% of land is suited to intensive agriculture, most of it located in lowland valleys. About
61.The HDI provides a comparative measure of quality of life in terms of life expectancy, literacy, education and the standard of
living for countries worldwide (UNDP, 2013).
62. The Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) is a new, third generation of European agreements offered exclusively
to the Western Balkans countries, in the framework of the Stabilisation and Association Process. The Agreement is signed for
an undefined period of time with a view to contributing to economic and political stabilisation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. States
which have become members through the EU fifth enlargement have signed Association Agreements (the so-called European
agreements). The basic difference between the two mentioned agreements is in the content of the “evolution clause” in the SAA
and in the emphasis on regional cooperation in Western Balkans (Official site of the Directorate for European Integration,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2015).
63 The SAA is signed with countries that have made sufficient progress in terms of political and economic reforms and
administrative capacity.
64 BiH Strategic Plan for Harmonization of Agriculture, Food and Rural Development, 2008-2011.
44
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background
515,000 smallholder farms dominate agricultural production in BiH. They are65 engaged primarily in
cereal production for home consumption, small-scale vegetable, fruit and livestock production. Only
about 1% of all arable land benefits from some kind of irrigation. Consequently, the agricultural sector
is considerably exposed to climate change related risks66. Livestock production contributes to about
one third of the agricultural GDP67 Recognizing the importance of livestock for poverty reduction and
as rural safety net, IFAD successfully supported restocking after the war. Overall crop and livestock
yields68 still are far below their technical potential. Vegetable yields are one-fifth of those in Southern
EU member states with similar agro-ecological conditions. Labour productivity is limited by the size of
the landholdings, relatively low levels of mechanization and the use of extensive production systems.
Limited investment capacity of farmers, limited access to reliable output markets, to technological
innovation and to business development services (BDS) constraint the risk adverse smallholders from
expanding their farms and reaching full potential and obliges youth to leave rural areas.
12. Extension offices were established throughout BiH with EU support69. Their responsibilities
included designing business plans and providing advisory services for farmers. In the RS, the system
includes 9 regional branches and a central unit in Banja Luka. Though appreciated and operational,
the service is poorly equipped, underfunded and understaffed. Some municipalities finance their own
extension officers to implement their municipal action plan for agriculture and livestock. In FBiH, the
system was originally established at canton level with no central service. It is non-operational due to
limited interest from the cantons. Also here, municipalities and projects undertake local initiatives.
The transition from a centralized to a free-market economy has induced profound changes in
13.
the business environment for both non-commercial and commercial smallholders70 and agro-
processors. Trade liberalization has increased exposure to regional competition, while input prices
have often increased71. Over the last decades, the agricultural and livestock subsectors have suffered
from a lack of investments and the disappearance of well-established marketing linkages. Unreliable
wholesale linkages for processing, bulking, storage and marketing are now a main obstacle for
farmers to expand their business. Government support to the sector is mainly targeted at expanding
agricultural production72 on commercial farms and forcibly reduced in times of economic downturn.
Uncertainties related to shifting policies and annual subsidies are further eroding farmers’ incentives
to respond to market opportunities. These subsidies were also used as social safety net to target the
rural poor.
14. Access to credit with affordable terms is limited because of the uneven coverage of financial
institutions, with most of them concentrated in urban areas and better-off municipalities, but also by a
pattern of risk avoidance by commercial banks. These difficulties are even more pronounced when it
comes to agricultural credit or financing for off-farm enterprises. In July 2013, MCOs charge interest
rates from 8% to 20%, while commercial banks charge interest rates between 6% and 8%. These
rates are considered to be unaffordable by both commercial and non-commercial smallholders. BiH is
a post-conflict country with many of its smallholders still in the learning mode. In addition, the farm or
herd size is often too small, so that the need for investments and credit at an affordable rate is
significant. Smallholders cannot be competitive in the EU market in their current state with high costs
of production, small farm or herd size, weak linkages to output markets and limited creditworthiness.
15. Notwithstanding the above the agricultural sector in BiH is relatively well endowed. The country
benefits from a moderate continental climate with favourable conditions for a range of crop and
livestock enterprises, climatic conditions allow for an earlier agricultural season than northern EU
65 Dimitrievski, D., Agriculture in the process of adjustment to the common agricultural policy, Skopje, 2010.
66 UNDP Climate Change Assessment. Drought incidences have increased and can decrease yields by 30% to 95%.
67 European Commission, Agricultural and Rural Development, Bosnia and Herzegovina, July 2009.
68 World Bank: Protecting the Poor during the Global Crisis: 2009 Bosnia and Herzegovina Poverty Update, 18 Dec. 2009.
69 World Bank: Agricultural Sector Policy Note for Bosnia and Herzegovina - Trade and Integration Policy Notes, May 2010.
70 The classification into ‘commercial’ and ‘non-commercial’ or “registered” and “non-registered” is mainly based on the number
of assets and production factors – e.g. holdings that have less than 5 cows are considered non-commercial.
71 World Bank, Agricultural Sector Policy Note for BiH, May 2010.
72 For the period 2005-2010 between 50 to 70% of the agriculture budget has been used in subsidies while measures for
market support and to agriculture in general remained modest making up only 10% of the budget.
45
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background
countries, shipping costs are relatively low and land and labour costs remain competitive. BiH also
has competitively-priced electricity, thanks to its well-developed hydroelectric capacity. Nevertheless,
BiH has an overall self-sufficiency rate of only 35 to 40% for food, with the exception of potatoes, eggs
and lamb. Therefore, significant growth potential exists. The country has a strong comparative
advantage for labour-intensive productions that require limited area of land to earn a decent family
income, for example vegetables, fruits, berries and honey. Competitiveness is an issue because of
weak market linkages in neighbouring countries. In order to preserve their preferential market access
to EU and other export markets, farmers have to meet the required quantity, quality and food safety
standards, and need to be integrated in marketing channels. To seize opportunities in high value niche
markets73, farmers will have to adopt technological innovations and adapt their business model to
those specific market requirements.
C. Rural Development Strategies
The Medium-Term Strategy of Agricultural Sector in FBiH (2006-2010) supported: (i) the return
16.
of refugees and displaced persons; (ii) sustainable development of natural resources;
(iii) mprovement of the profitability and competitiveness of agriculture and food industries;
(iv) trengthening of cooperatives, enterprises and producer organisations and linking them with the
food industry; (v) development of land markets through land consolidation; (vi) increasing quantity and
quality of food to meet domestic and export demands; (vii) the institutionalisation of the sector in line
with EU requirements; (viii) state-level agriculture and rural development policies; and (ix) promotion
of exports of agricultural and food products.
It was followed by the RS Rural Development Strategy (2009-2015), which includes a Strategy
17.
for Agriculture Development. Its goal is to improve the well-being of rural households and to
strengthen rural communities via measures that will increase employment on and outside farms and
increase the quality of rural life and work in general. These strategies foresee the following:
(a) improvement of competitiveness of agriculture and forestry; (b) rational management of natural
resources; and (c) rural economic diversification. Within this frame, priorities include: (i) on-farm
investments; (ii) investments in processing and marketing of agricultural products; (iii) support to
farmers organisations; (iv) human resource enhancement in rural areas; (v) support to the rural
finance sector especially for capital investments in agriculture; (vi) diversification of non-agricultural
and agricultural activities in rural areas; (vii) the set-up and development of micro, small and medium-
sized enterprises; (viii) construction and maintenance of rural infrastructure; (ix) support to rural
tourism; and (x) support for local rural development initiatives.
18.
The strategies of FBiH and RS are constructed around 4 similar priorities namely:




improving competitiveness of the agricultural and food sector;
institutional development and improvement of legal frameworks in order to stimulate
agricultural and rural development,
sustainable use of natural resources; and
improvement of rural livelihoods and diversification.
19. An entity-level budget analysis illustrates that funding earmarked to rural development and
environmental protection is often targeted towards direct production support to registered farmers.
When it comes to support for non-commercial farmers, funding is rather limited74 . As registration
implies paying taxes on sales small farmers do not register.. These non-commercial farmers can
increase their possibilities of mobilizing support by joining an FO,  diversifying their sources of income
or by scaling up production.
73 Berries, dried mushrooms, nuts, organic products or off-season vegetables.
74 Registration as a commercial farmer is a precondition for most categories of support
46
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background
D.
Producers’ Organisations, Cooperatives and Agribusiness
20. Producers’ Associations are considered Civil Society Organizations (CSO) and operate under
the State Law on Associations and Foundations adopted in 2001. Civil society organizations are not-
for-profit membership organizations established by a minimum of 3 natural citizens, residents of BiH,
or legal persons (in any combination) to further a common or public interest goal. Estimates suggest
that there are more than 8,000 such civil society organizations in Bosnia and Herzegovina covering
various sectors. Consequence of this undistinguishable status from classic NGOs and other type of
associations, Producers’ Associations, which most often operate at Municipality level are hardly
recognized, even by Municipality authorities, except when they are benefiting from eventual donor
support. There could be around 200 PAs in FBiH and around 70 in RS, a large part of which are dairy
r or bee-keepers associations, also as a result of the efforts invested in these sectors by post-war
donors and administration.
21. Some recently established fruits and/or vegetables producers’ association operate at national
level , with the support of important donors/projects such as FARMA, UNDP, Caritas or Oxfam. In that
case, the Farmers’ Association appears to be a first step of organization (for training, negotiating
activities) and may lead to the establishment of a Cooperative.
22. Associations are exempt from paying tax on donations, grants, membership fees and on any
profits from economic activities directly related to the achievement of the organization’s goals. For all
other economic activities, associations are treated the same as any other profit-making enterprise and
revenue from all activities not related to the organization’s goals are liable to tax on profits at the
standard rate.
23. Cooperatives are a legacy of the agricultural system of the socialist era and have become part
of the country’s organizational 'tradition'. “Old cooperatives” from the socialist era still exist, but are
mostly inactive and often dealing with problems relating to the status of their assets. “New
cooperatives” (formed after the end of the war) are mostly involved in marketing and input supply,
exploiting the economies of scale not available to small individual producers. Most of these have a
small membership base, often only the mandatory 5 founding members required by the law. To a large
extent these “new cooperatives” are, in reality, limited liability share companies formed as
cooperatives for a variety of reasons. It is cheaper and less time consuming to register as a
cooperative than as a company75. Cooperatives have lower operating costs than companies76.
Additionally, cooperatives have the advantage of having access to government subsidies and support
(also from donors), generally unavailable to companies.
24.
The legal framework for cooperatives has been established by The General Law on
Cooperatives, a state law approved in 2003. This new law, modelled on current European practice,
strives to install the principles of voluntarism, democracy, freedom and transparency, and regulates all
aspects of cooperative operations (creation, membership, record keeping, operations, property rights,
management and profit distribution). Nevertheless, this law has been shaped to encompass various
forms of cooperatives (e.g. youth, house, savings cooperative) besides the purely agricultural
cooperatives. Presently, about 800 cooperatives pertain to this legal framework, of whom only 550 are
agricultural cooperatives. Monitoring of these cooperatives is mainly limited to checking their
compliance to  legal obligations related to biennial auditing of its operations, not concerned by the
degree of implementation of cooperation principles. Only 150 cooperatives are estimated to be active
in the whole BiH. In 2008 Republic of Srpska issued a specific Law on Agriculture Cooperatives which
is largely in harmony with the BiH Cooperative Law of 2003. This law does not allow legal bodies
(such as companies, or d.o.o.) to be a founding member of a cooperative and considers the property
75 Registering a cooperative costs about BAM 1,500 and can take up to 30 days; while registering a company costs about BAM
4,000-5,000 and can take up to 60 days.
76 Cooperatives have no legal obligation to have formal employees compared to companies (d.o.o.) which must have at least
three employees for which they have to pay social security contributions amounting to some 40% of salary.
47
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background
of the “old cooperatives" from socialist era, as common property subject to state (or Municipality)
control, which has proved to be controversial.
25. Apex Cooperative Organizations exist at the three levels of BiH. Cooperative Union of Bosnia
Herzegovina (BHCU) is the state level apex cooperative organization: according to their location,
cooperatives can become members, on a voluntary basis and for a limited fee, of their respective
entity union of cooperatives: the Republic of Srpska Cooperative Union (RSCU), regrouping 64
agricultural cooperatives, or the Federation of BiH Cooperative Union (FBiHCU), regrouping no more
than 30 agricultural cooperatives (out of 78). Besides auditing the cooperatives of which they have
the delegated responsibility, these two entity cooperative unions share the same objectives and
purpose in terms of advocacy and lobbying for their members and while carrying out activities related
to education, information and capacity building. They have equal representation in the BHCU
Assembly, and function according to a system of alternating presidency. Three members of BHCU
Assembly are women. As an apex organization, BHCU has the authority to work with the national
government to pass laws that regulate cooperative practices and to set standards for auditing
cooperatives. It also represents cooperatives abroad and collaborates with international organizations.
26.
“New cooperatives” operate mainly in the dairy, fruit/vegetable and MAPs value chains, they act
as aggregators for small/medium holder production. In such cases, the cooperative serves members
(who own a share in the cooperative and have decision making powers) as well as non-members
(called cooperants or contractors) who are only suppliers of produce to the cooperative. The members
benefit from the profits the cooperative generates from its aggregator activities while the 'cooperants'
mainly benefit from the access to market provided by the cooperative77. This is evidently quite far from
the operating rules and principles characterising EU cooperatives.
27. Agribusiness. These stakeholders (agro processors, traders and exporters) buy up agricultural
produce from smallholders and other farmers,  process the raw material (e.g. freezing) and then
export the processed produce . They often pre-finance and sometimes co-finance smallholders the
necessary inputs for production to. Agribusiness has currently the following qualifications:
(i) experience in business development, management and marketing including sales; (ii) market
knowledge based on own market research; (iii) market linkages. These skills concerning RCDP are
underdeveloped.
E.
Public and private Business Development Service providers
28.
In BIH, Business Development Services (BDSs) are offered by private and public sector
providers. Whereas extension services are aiming to improve the production on the field, BDSs are
focusing on the downstream of the value chain and include product development, quality certification,
production / productivity enhancement, branding, marketing and many other topics. The by the project
foreseen Business Facilitation Partners are in essence also private BDS providers that will focus their
facilitation on establishing linkages between FOs and agribusiness in order to develop commercial
activities in selected VCs (e.g. by supporting the design of Business Proposals for RCDP support).
29. Business Development Services provided by the public sector. The public sector has
several BDS providers such as regional and local development agencies in the FBiH and RS. Over
the years, the government, heavily supported by the donor community, especially the EU, established
several development agencies and similar institutions. Several of them have not survived after the
international funding came to an end. Main active business development agencies in the FBiH are the
following:

The Economic Region Development Agency (SERDA d.o.o), located in Sarajevo;
77 However, many aggregator cooperatives find it necessary to involve themselves with production, often through the contract
farming modality with cooperants (supplying them with inputs, usually on credit basis, and technical advice)in order to meet the
stringent quality, quantity and regularity of supply requirements of present-day processors.
48
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background



The Regional Development Agency for Herzegovina (REDAH), including the Regional
Information Centre (RIC) and the Centre for Rural Development and Agriculture Herzegovina
(CRRP). REDAH is located in Mostar;
The Northeast Regional Development Association (NERDA), based in Tuzla; and
The Regional Development Agency for Central BiH (REZ RDA), based in Zenica.
These institutions have been established with the aim to strengthen, coordinate and promote
30.
economic development at macro-regional level. The ultimate purpose is to stimulate economic
development by developing a strategic vison while providing support to private actors, businesses,
NGOs and governments wishing to work jointly on issues related to poverty reduction, economic
sustainability, and the stability of the country. The implementation of donor driven projects such as
"Business Environment Strengthening for more SMEs in Tuzla and Neighbouring Municipalities" are
typical examples of their work.
31.
The setup of these (business development) agencies followed the EU regional development
approach purposefully not limiting its action to the entities they were localized in, the This approach
was nevertheless rejected by the RS, which also abolished the Banja Luka Regional Development
Agency. To replace this last agency the RS created the Agency for Development of Small and
Medium Enterprises (RARS). It was established in 2004 with the aim of providing support for the
establishment and development of small and medium enterprises. The agency currently has 33 staff
and is coordinating the work of 13 local development agencies in the RS, including the City
Development Agency Banja Luka (CIDEA), the Agency for Economic Development of the City of
Prijedor (PREDA-PD)“, the Agency for Development of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises of the
City of Bijeljina, the Agency for Development of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises of the City of
Trebinje, the Development Agency of Municipality Modriča, the Agency for Economic Development of
Municipality Mrkonjic Grad Mrkonjić Grad, the Agency for Development of Small and Medium-Sized
Enterprises (APIS) Srbac, the Local Development Agency Kozarska Dubica, the Agency for
Development of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Doboj, the Agency for Development of Small
and Medium-Sized Enterprises Ugljevik, the Development Agency of Municipality Čelinac, and the
Development Agency of Municipality Ljubinje. In municipalities in which there are no local
development agencies, RARS cooperates with municipal departments for development. A substantial
portion of their budget is funded by international donors through projects.
32. Municipalities as public sector providers. Many municipalities have set-up small local
development agencies to get access to project funding. The head of these agencies is usually the
economic advisors in the municipality.
The Development Agency Zepce (RAZ d.o.o.) is a small development agency, but quite active
33.
in supporting and promoting local business activities. Currently RAZ is working actively with two berry
associations in the municipality of Zepce. ALDI in Gorazdi and the wood cluster in Prijedor exhibit a
similar model of local network of local stakeholders.
The RS approach is different from the FBiH as the authorities tried to keep the local
34.
development competencies within the Economic Unit in the municipalities In FBiH the post of
economic advisor of the municipality has been outsourced to a local development agency. Although
both Entities are implementing different approaches for development competencies, the roles and
competencies of the economic advisors are quite similar.
35. Other actors. Chambers of Commerce in both Entities have a good reputation among business
stakeholders and their activities have had a significant impact on business activities. The Chambers
provide training to members companies and share information on different topics of economic
development. By contrast, these chambers do not perform well in promote matchmaking events and
in economic cooperation between members’ companies.
36. Another agency with an interesting role in business development in the selected value chains is
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Export Promotion Agency (BHEPA), founded in 2008. BHEPA is a
49
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background
national agency operating within the Foreign Trade Chamber of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its primary
role is to assist all B&H’s companies to access and expand export markets by promoting BiH’s
products and capabilities internationally. Notwithstanding, only a small number of companies is
familiar with the activities of and services offered by BHEPA. Like other government organisations, the
agency is understaffed, has a limited budget and needs more capacity building. Employees lack
entrepreneurial spirit and do not understand what is needed to sell Bosnian products abroad.
37. Another approach to promote public sector business development services was the recent
establishment of three Innovation Centres in Mostar, Zenica and Banja Luka, under a project funded
by the EU. Their purpose is to promote entrepreneurship and education, business incubation and
knowledge to foster economic growth.
F.
Specific constraints in fruits and vegetables subsectors
In the project's targeted fruits and vegetable subsector, smallholder farmers and the rural poor
38.
currently face the following challenges:




Access to land. Very poor people tend to be landless or have access only to very small plots
of land. In the case of women, access to land is even more problematic, due to inheritance
laws and land titles in the name of male relatives. Without formal land ownership, ability to
use land as collateral for accessing credit is also a constraining factor.
Access to credit. Current interest rates range between 9 and 15%, with no distinguishing
difference for the use of the credit (commercial or individual use). Commercial banks have
very limited products to support agricultural-related activities, particularly at the level of small
farmers. Microcredit institutions are present in the country, though do not have adequate
presence in the rural areas; whilst they offer credit on less stringent terms (e.g. collateral
requirements), interest rates are around 24% per annum, with a credit ceiling of
approximately 10,000 KM (approx. EUR 5,000).
Legislative framework. In some cases, current legislation governing producers' associations
(PAs) hampers poorer people’s ability to gather into groups, pool resources and build a critical
mass to sell their produce. Whilst PAs have a larger constituency base and can be very
inclusive-oriented, they are constrained by law to be real economic actors that are able to
make 'profit'. As such, this legal framework reduces the potential benefits deriving from being
a member of a PA, making the value chain longer and increasing the number of actors
involved.
Entrepreneurship and business skills. Currently, the costs (financial and non-financial
transaction costs) to register or set-up an enterprise are relatively high with cumbersome
procedures that require specialised business skills or knowledge.
50
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 1: Country and rural context background
Country Economic Background Sheet
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Land area (km2 thousand) 2012 1/
Total population (million) 2012 1/
Population density (people per km2) 2012 1/
Local currency Convertible Marks (BAM)
Social Indicators
Population growth (annual %) 2012 1/
Crude birth rate (per thousand people) 2012 1/
Crude death rate (per thousand people) 2012 1/
Infant mortality rate (per thousand live births) 2012 1/
Life expectancy at birth (years) 2012 1/
Total labour force (million) 2012 1/
Female labour force as % of total 2012 1/
Education
School enrolment, primary (% gross) 2012 1/
Adult illiteracy rate (% age 15 and above) 2012 1/
Nutrition
Daily calorie supply per capita
Malnutrition prevalence, height for age (% of children under 5)
2012 1/
Malnutrition prevalence, weight for age (% of children under 5)
2012 1/
Health
Health expenditure, total (as % of GDP) 2012 1/
Physicians (per thousand people) 2012 1/
Population using improved water sources (%) 2012 1/
Population using adequate sanitation facilities (%) 2012 1/
Agriculture and Food
Food imports (% of merchandise imports) 2012 1/
Fertilizer consumption (kilograms per ha of arable land) 2012 1/
Food production index (2004-2006=100) 2012 1/
Cereal yield (kg per ha) 2012 1/
Land Use
Arable land as % of land area 2011 1/
Forest area as % of total land area 2011 1/
Agricultural irrigated land as % of total agric. land 2011 1/
51
3.83
75
GNI per capita (USD) 2012 1/
GDP per capita growth (annual %) 2012 1/
Inflation, consumer prices (annual %) 2012 1/
Exchange rate:  USD 1 = BAM 1.56588
Economic Indicators
GDP (USD million) 2012 1/
GDP growth (annual %) 1/
2002
2012
0
9
10
6
76
Sectoral distribution of GDP 2012 1/
1.45 % agriculture
39 % industry
% manufacturing
% services
n/a
2
n/a
9
2
3
n/a
99
95
18
n/a
105
3 004
20
43
n/a
Consumption 2012 1/
General government final consumption expenditure
(as % of GDP)
Household final consumption expenditure, etc. (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic savings (as % of GDP)
Balance of Payments (USD million)
Merchandise exports 2012 1/
Merchandise imports 2012 1/
Balance of merchandise trade
Current account balances (USD million)
before official transfers 2012 1/
after official transfers 2012 1/
Foreign direct investment, net 2012 1/
Government Finance
Cash surplus/deficit (as % of GDP) 2012 1/
Total expense (% of GDP) a/ 2012 1/
Present value of external debt (as % of GNI) 2012 1/
Total debt service (% of GNI) 2012 1/
Lending interest rate (%) 2012 1/
Deposit interest rate (%) 2012 1/
4 600
-1
2
16 853
5.3
-1
8
25
12
67
23
79
-2
5 162
10 024
-4 862
-4 066
-1 633
-350
-2
40
46
6
7
3
a/ Indicator replaces "Total expenditure" used previously.
1/ World Bank, World Development Indicators database CD ROM 2014-2015
51
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
A.
Poverty context
BiH has relatively strong social indicators, with most of the population having access to water,
1.
sanitation and health care. The country is placed 81st in UNDP’s Human Development Index (HDI)
ranking, with an Index of 0.735 in 2013. Poverty is not so much about absolute destitution, but is
rathercharacterized by social exclusion and a lack of access to basic services and public goods that
make up an acceptable standard of living. The most recent poverty analysis in the country indicates
that there is little or no extreme (food) poverty. However, between 19 to 21% of households suffer
from chronic material deprivation and between 20 to 30% are at risk of falling into material
deprivation78. During the period 2001-2007, absolute poverty dropped from 19.1% to 14.0%, but has
increased again to 16% in 2010 and 17.9% in 201179 (Table 1). The country is thus unlikely to achieve
its MDG regarding the eradication of poverty, extreme hunger and unemployment set for 2015. As
well, progress in poverty alleviation has been uneven between urban and rural areas, and many poor
households have a high dependency ratio, low levels of educational attainment, limited access to a
regular income from formal employment, pension or remittances.
Thecountry has alsofallen back on its MDG indicators, especially with regards to employment
2.
and women’s share in the non-farm sector. Official or registered unemployment for women now
stands at just above 40%80, and unemployment amongst young people is also reported to be
approximately twice as high as amongst the population as a whole81.
Table 10: Absolute poverty rate in BiH (per cent)
Total
Urban
Rural
Source: a: computations from the LSMS-2001 and HBS. b: HBS 2011 preliminary data.
2010a
16
10
21
2011/2012
17.9b
NA
NA
2001
19.1
14.5
19.4
2007
14
8.2
17.8
2004
17.7
11.3
22
2015 Target
12
B. Agriculture and rural poverty
Poverty in BiH is characteristically a rural phenomenon. Despite the overall decrease of the
3.
national poverty level, the country has witnessed an uneven progress between urban and rural
development. This discrepancy results from the slow growth in the agricultural and non-farm rural
sectors against the rapid growth in higher-wage sectors in urban areas (such as the financial sector,
manufacturing sector and the retail trade sector). Rural poverty in BiH is distinct from urban poverty
and is characterized by a largely informal labour sector, social exclusion, income-poverty an aging
population and high migration phenomena of the youth – towards cities or abroad.
About 75% of poor households in BiH live in rural areas82. The most recurrent types of rural
4.
poor are the following: (i) unemployed or with limited employment opportunities, especially rural youth;
(ii) households (HH) with insufficient assets or without access to pensions or remittances; and
(iii) female-headed households (FHH) who earn on average 20% less than male-headed HHs. Rural
poverty correlates strongly with altitude and uneven access to land, irrigation, equipment, finance and
markets. Rural communities suffer from limitations constraining agricultural production and general
well-being, such as harsh climatic conditions, ineffective market linkages and underdeveloped rural
infrastructure.
78 IFAD study – Gender-sensitive poverty and livelihoods analysis. January 2011.
79 This figure does not include the Household Budget Survey 2007 according to which 2 million people are vulnerable.
80 Progress Towards the Realization of the Millennium Development Goals in Bosnia and Herzegovina 2010. Ministry of
Finance and Treasury and the United Nations Country Team. Sarajevo. July-August 2010.
81 UNDP: Human Development Report: The Ties that Bind, Social Capital in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2009.
82 Household Budget Survey 2007
53
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
Agriculture contributes to just under 10% of the GDP of the country. Cultivable land amounts to
5.
1 million ha83 but less than 20% of agricultural land is suited to intensive agriculture, most of this
located in lowland river valleys. Due to underdeveloped irrigation infrastructure, only about 1% of the
arable land benefits from some kind of irrigation. As a consequence of this, the sector is considerably
exposed to climate change related risks84.
6.
Smallholder farms continue to dominate agricultural production in BiH. There are some
515,000 privately-owned smallholder farms85 engaged primarily in cereal production for home
consumption, and small-scale horticulture and livestock production. It is estimated that landholding
size is about 0.59 ha per capita. Overall agriculture sector’s productivity is very low86. Crop and
livestock yields are below potential (vegetable yields are one-fifth of those in the Southern European
member states with similar geographic and climate conditions) while labour productivity is also limited
– amongst other factors – by the size of the landholdings and the relatively low levels of
mechanization.
Limited access to technological innovation and to effective business development services
7.
(BDS) further constrains smallholders from reaching their competitive potential in 2000. Extension
offices were established throughout BiH with EU support87. Their responsibilities included designing
business plans and providing other advisory services for farmers. In the RS, the system is still in place
and includes 9 regional-based advisors in most areas, assisted by a central support unit in Banja
Luka. Though appreciated, the service is poorly equipped, underfunded and understaffed. In FBiH,
the system was originally established at the canton level with no central service. It is largely non-
operational due to limited interest from the cantons. Some municipalities financed their own extension
officers to implement their municipal action plan for agriculture and livestock.
The agriculture sector has consistently suffered from a lack of investment, resulting in outdated
8.
and deficient rural (market) infrastructure. The lack of storage, processing and transport facilities is
considered one of the main obstacles to developing value-adding activities.
C.
Profile of the rural poor
9.
The rural poor of BiH comprises three sub-groups, dependent on their assets and capacity for
commercial production; these are: (i) the very poor, including the landless and elderly, who generally
have no productive assets and whose livelihoods are based on remittances, collection of non-timber
forest products, etc.; (ii) the borderline poor, with landholdings of approximately 0.1 to 0.2 ha and who
may have 1 or 2 cows; and (iii) the poor, made up of farmers engaged in mixed farming on less than
4 hectares of land, though with limited opportunities for deriving additional income.
The poorest subsistence farmers (sub-groups (i) and (ii) above) have marginal production, if
10.
any. The main on-farm income is generated from milk production and horticulture crops and non-
timber forest products, but income is limited due to the subsistence nature of production, low
productivity, lack of quality produce and weak marketing linkages. In addition, the smallholders and
subsistence farmers lack access to credit, improved agricultural inputs and know-how (especially as
many of these farmers were not traditional farmers) to further develop and commercialise their farms
for higher yields and profitability. These households can have high dependency rates and have either
no or only a single non-farm income-earner in the family. These families often engage in seasonal
casual labour for additional income, rely on forest products and depend on various social protection
benefits. Effectively, this group could gain significant benefits from participation in farmers/producers’
organisations, which could assist them in addressing some of the constraints of small-scale
production.
83 BiH Strategic Plan for Harmonization of Agriculture, Food and Rural Development, 2008-2011.
84 Drought incidences have increased and these events can decrease yields by 30% to 95%, according to the UNDP Climate
Change Assessment.
85Dimitrievski, D. Agriculture in the process of adjustment to the common agricultural policy, Skopje, 2010.
86 WB: Protecting the Poor during the Global Crisis: 2009 Bosnia and Herzegovina Poverty Update, 18 Dec. 2009.
87 WB, Agricultural Sector Policy Note for Bosnia and Herzegovina - Trade and Integration Policy Notes, May 2010.
54
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
Table 11: Target groups wealth ranking
Characteristics
Very poor
Borderline poor
Poor
TARGET GROUPS WEALTH RANKING
Occupation source and
livelihoods
Substantially dependant
on remittances or
pensions
Women: include war
widows and elderly
Subsistence farming
farming their own land
and producing a small
surplus for sale
Copying strategy
Assets availability
they are generally not
part of any group or
association
Landless
Source of water for
irrigation is distant,
generally a river.
Production surplus
No surplus
Proximity to markets
and intermediaries
Live in very remote
areas
Access to financial
services
None
Women: unpaid workers on the family plot, in charge
of all reproductive activities
Generally part of a
producers’ association
Land between 0,1 and
0,2 ha
1-2 cows
Source of water for
irrigation is distant,
generally a river.
Little surplus is sold on
local markets one to one
Live in remote areas
Possibility to access to
microcredit loans
Generally part of a
producers’ association
AND a cooperative
Land between 0,3 and 4
ha
4-5 cows
Have a reliable water
source at their disposal
Surplus is sold through
cooperatives or
companies
Live in remote areas but
can access markets
Possibility to access to
microcredit loans and
commercial loans
Vulnerability
Extreme climatic events, such as droughts and flood, which affect yields and cost of
inputs
The third category of smallholder farmers include those who have access to bigger parcels of
11.
land, either through immediate family or relatives who have left land behind or by renting it from
neighbours. Farmers in this group usually have surplus production for marketing purposes. These
farmers can have mix of income sources including often income from wage-labour in the formal
sector, which enables them to securely access credit and to be less risk averse. Typically these
farmers opt for increased number of livestock or for further engagement in higher value niche crops
such as horticulture and fruits (berries in particular). In addition, these smallholders are actively
seeking ways to diversify their farming activities and are likely to benefit from incremental investments
in farming enterprises. This group might already engage in small-scale commercial fruit or vegetable
production (typically 0.3-0.5 ha orchards), and are also likely to participate actively in farmers'
organisations, thus capitalising on trainings; they are often more willing and likely to be credit-worthy
to take credit for on-farm investments. These smallholder households have fewer dependents and
may have technical, administrative or business skills acquired from past employment.
D.
Findings from the pre-project focus groups
A preparatory study88 was conducted in four municipalities (Bratunac, Foca, Konjic and
12.
Srebrenica) during October 2014 to assess the current poverty situation with special focus on gender
and youth, which are involved in production of fruits and vegetables. The survey sample with face to
88 The study included face-to-face interviews and focus group discussions, amongst a total sample population of 315 people
(48% women, 31% men, and 21% youth) from the municipalities of Bratunac, Foca, Konjic, and Srebrenica.
55
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
face interviews was conducted for 315 people, 48% of whom were women, 31% men and 21% youth
– selection criteria included those involved in non-commercial farming and who have less than 2 ha of
land. In addition, 39 focus group sessions with 4 to 6 participants per group were also held,
comprising 16 women's focus groups, 10 men and 13 youth groups. A sample survey and
complementary focus group sessions were held to obtain more precise insight on the current
livelihood situation of women, men and young people (between 18 and 25 years of age) in rural areas,
and to identify the key challenges and possible solutions that could improve their socio-economic
situation as perceived by the respondents (taking into consideration the social roles and power
relations within the household and with local communities).
The survey and focus group discussions yielded confirmation of the challenges and constraints
13.
faced by rural smallholder households, and concerns of women and youth in particular. Some
interesting findings are the following:
14.
Demographics and economic activity:




The average number of HH members is 4.15;
In 24% of HHs, at least one member migrated for: (i) seeking employment opportunities;
(ii) studies; and/ or (iii) for marriage;
At the HH level, income earned by men only was 38%; 37% of HHs reported income earned
by women and men, though in 70% of the cases women tended to earn less than the men;
women were found to be the only income earners in 17% of the cases,
In 48% of household, income is jointly managed;
 Main sources of income were the following: wages (39%); pension/ disability benefits (30%);
social assistance benefits (18%); agriculture only (13%);

Access to and control over resources: farming land as well as dwellings were found to be
owned by male household members; in 20% of the cases, where families were headed by
women, assets were owned and controlled by women solely, and in these cases there was
also a direct correlation with women as sole breadwinners within the family.
 Whilst 81% of interviewees are involved in some form of agricultural activity, 46% of these are
engaged in subsistence farming and 54% in semi-commercial or small-scale farming; the
marketing of products is done primarily through collection points, dairies and cold storage
facilities; 37% of those engaged in agricultural activity also said they were involved in off-farm
activities in the form of seasonal or part-time employment or self-employment;


Farmers expressed they are price takers, with limited or no bargaining power;
31% of those engaged in agriculture are members or cooperants of Farmers Organizations;
the perceived value-added of being part of a FO includes benefits in the form of trainings,
extension services, access to information, access to production subsidies; of the 69% not yet
affiliated with an FO, 43% expressed willingness to become a member and 57% expressed
no interest due to distrust or non-perception of its added value;
 When the analysis investigated women’s strategic roles in society, women’s participation in
farmers’ organizations’ decision making processes was found to be particularly low, with
exception made for women’s associations that have emerged in recent years with donor or
community support.

Access to loans – only 35% of interviewees have managed to obtain credit through a formal
financial institution;
 Willingness to remain in rural areas – 55% of interviewees expressed interest in remaining in
the rural areas citing some of the following reasons: limited opportunities in urban areas;
better opportunities offered by the farming sector given the context of high national
unemployment and widespread poverty; agriculture presents a 'safe' source of income; the
45% who do not see a real future in the rural areas cited the following reasons: agriculture is
56
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
not enough as an only source of HH income; social events are scarce; poor rural
infrastructure is a constraint; limited economic opportunities in rural areas;
A sense of discrimination was voiced by 36% of the women, correlated mainly with: (i) sense of
15.
powerlessness in decision making processes and very limited political participation; (ii) lack of sense
of belonging to the local community; and (iii) weak protection policies. When asked whether women
considered agriculture as an important source of livelihood, they confirmed this to be highly relevant,
expressing a special interest for farming/collection of medical herbs, organic production, and berries
mainly.
E.
16.
Project target group
RCDP direct beneficiaries will be rural poor, both women and men, organized in Producers’
associations (PAs) and Cooperatives active in the selected value chains, or with the potential to
be included in them – both at production or value addition stages. The Project would target
16,000 direct beneficiaries over a period of 10 years. Indirect beneficiaries will benefit from
better collective infrastructure or improved subsector governance.
Among these beneficiaries, the Project will undertake the necessary efforts to reach out to the
17.
three target groups (the very poor, poor and borderline poor), analysing their different challenges in
accessing the VC and singling out the specific problems faced by women and by youth. The targeting
strategy will respond to these challenges, providing enabling measures that could allow their access
to project activities.


Very poor are usually non-registered or registered but not commercial farmers89. Either way,
they are likely not to be part of rural organizations, facing the risk of being excluded from
RCDP opportunities. To that extent organizations outreach to additional members will be
promoted, increasing their capacity to attract and retain the very poor. In order for them to be
able to join the organizations, a set of enabling measures will be identified and put in place.
Special efforts would be undertaken to reach landless people, including advocacy actions for
municipalities to give land to youth or women, in order to offer them the opportunity to engage
in one of the value chains selected for the cluster. For instance, they may rent land or apply
for the use of publically owned land at their municipalities. As part of fulfilling their
commitments, municipalities will be expected to expedite these processes and facilitate
access to land especially for young people and rural poor.
Poor and borderline poor tend to be organized in PAs and cooperatives; hence most of the
targeting focus will be geared towards rural organizations’ selection process, as explained
below.
 Women and youth tend to be also excluded from rural organization, hence enabling
measures will include i) setting up quotas for women/youth in rural organizations ii) use the
presence of women and youth as a selection criteria for organizations to benefit from RCDP
iii) preferential access to the project for women groups iv) provide specific enabling measures
to ensure women’s active participation in PA/Cooperatives (trainings on communication,
leadership, access to communal lands, etc.) and other measures. In order to tackle intra-
household dynamics that hamper women’s participation in rural organizations, as well as their
access to additional income that can be generated by increased production in VC, household
methodologies will be used. These methodologies are implemented through PAs/
cooperatives and enable greater productivity thanks to more equitable workload distribution
and joint planning of household members, also resulting in improved condition of women.
89 Farm registers are kept at entity level (inputs are made at municipal level) and the registration process is fully voluntary for
the farmers. The household that is registered needs to pay social and health contributions for the head of the household (and/or
its members), if the agriculture is their only source of income. However, if the household is not registered, it cannot claim any
subsidies from the government. In the RS, there is further distinction between the non-commercial and commercial farmers. For
commercial farmers who meet certain thresholds, the subsidy levels are sometimes twice as high as for the non-commercial
farmers.
57
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
18.
RCDP Targeting strategy implementation will select smallholders, organized in PAs and
cooperatives, within the targeted value chain clusters, following clear criteria to ensure transparency
in selection and mitigate the risk of elite capture.
Key actors in the targeting process are local authorities at municipal level (extension workers,
19.
social service centres, employment bureaus, heads of the local communities, and others), as they
hold the list of those people that are benefitting from social security systems and are hence able to
determine who belongs to the three target groups. The local authorities are also responsible for
managing the entity-level Farm registers, which are a valuable source of information and can be an
excellent starting point for project intervention. In addition, the targeting process will include extensive
communication with FOs, who will be responsible for collecting the field questionnaires and organizing
them into the database, for further analysis. At the same point, FOs should be the ones to make the
final selection of the farmers that fulfil the targeting criteria, as not all of them will be good producers in
reality (some may be simply looking for donation that they will sell).
Targeting strategy90
20.
RCDP places particular emphasis on the inclusion of poor farmers, women and youth, and
hence fosters the development of selected sub-sectors for its poverty reduction potential. RCDP direct
beneficiaries will be rural poor, both women and men, young and adults, organized in Producers’
Associations (PAs) and Cooperatives active in the selected VCs. Individuals currently not associated
to PAs and co-operatives can be eligible, but they should have a real possibility to be incorporated to
these organisations and PAs and cooperatives are willing to associate these individuals. Among these
beneficiaries, the Project will undertake the necessary efforts to reach out to three target groups: the
very poor, poor and borderline poor, analysing their specific constraints and challenges to access
the selected VCs, specifically analysing the constraints faced by women and youth.
The targeting strategy will respond to these challenges, providing enabling measures that could
21.
allow their access to project activities. Basically, RCDP will target poor, non-commercial farmers that
are not sufficiently incorporated into the supply systems that link them to the market and support them
to become competitive commercial farmers. In the implementation of the Pilot on Pro-Poor Value
Chains in BiH by Oxfam Italy, the poverty characterization previously developed in IFAD designs was
taken a step further. In agriculture, the simultaneous analysis of land size and household income
constitutes a good starting point.
22.
The table below provides some indicative ranges for the income.
Table 12: Categorization by income per capita at household level valid for all RCDP sub-sectors
Categorization
Very poor
Poor
Borderline poor91
Not poor
Monthly income per capita
of the household (in KM)
Up to 200
201-400
401-500
Over 501
Table 13 has been adapted from Oxfam’s Pilot experience (in the berries sector) to also
23.
incorporate the vegetables sub-sectors of interest in RCDP. The main sub-sector of interest to the
project is the berry sub-sector. It includes production (cultivation) of various berry fruit, with focus on
raspberries. Other products of interest in this sub-sector are strawberries, blackberries and
blueberries, as well as currants.
90 Inputs for this section are based on the methodology developed by Oxfam Italy, as part of the pilot value chain initiative
started in October 2014. This pilot initiative was financed by RLDP. In addition, a “Workshop on Pro-Poor Targeting in Rural
Areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina” was organized in Sarajevo on 15-16 April 2014.
91 Generally, people in this target segment are not considered de facto poor, but vulnerable to falling back into poverty (below
poverty line) with the occurrence of external shocks.
58
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
24. Gherkins are highly profitable crops, similar to berries with regards to the contribution that these
can generate to the households’ sources of income. Greenhouses production can yield higher profits
despite the apparent smaller surfaces, while open field production (including, but not limited to,
peppers, tomatoes, potatoes, etc.) are generally less profitable, but also less labour intensive.
25.
Complementing this overall situation analysis, and in order to cover all sub-sectors of interest
for RCDP, the NTFP value chain is one in which the collectors’ income per capita is the only criteria
that applies. Collection from the wild very often constitutes an integral part of rural livelihoods in BiH,
although usually, the households have no land.
Table 13: Categorization of beneficiaries by land size by sub-sector and type of production
Average land
plot size
Berries
Greenhouses
Gherkins
Open field
Vegetables
Very poor
Up to 0.2 ha
Up to 300m2
Up to 0.2 ha
Up to 1 ha
Poor
0.21-0.5 ha
301-600m2
0.21-0.5 ha
0.51-1 ha
Borderline poor
0.51-1 ha
601-1.200m2
0.51-1 ha
1.1-3 ha
Not poor
Over 1.1 ha
Over 1,200m2
Over 1.1 ha
Over 3.1 ha
The categories presented in both tables (by income, and land size) are an indication of land
26.
productivity, adequate access to technology and specialised extension (among others), while the
ranges are based on profitability calculations for each crop.
In case that a single household falls into different categories based on the land / income
27.
criteria, priority should be given to the income per capita criteria, as it probably better reflects the
overall poverty situation at the household level. Nevertheless, both criteria should be included to
better inform the targeting process and unfolding of the strategy adopted under the intervention.
Implementation of the targeting approach. RCDP will select smallholders, organized in PAs
28.
and cooperatives, within the targeted value chain clusters, following clear criteria to ensure
transparency in selection and mitigate the risk of elite capture. Key actors in the targeting process are
local authorities at municipal level (extension workers, social service centres, employment bureau,
heads of the local communities, and others), as they hold the list of those people that are benefitting
from social security and are hence able to determine who belongs to the three target groups (very
poor, poor and borderline poor). The local authorities are also responsible for managing the entity-
level Farm registers, which are a valuable source of information and can be an excellent starting point
for project intervention. For the implementation of the targeting approach, questionnaires will be used.
The targeting process will include extensive communication with PAs and cooperatives, which
29.
will be, together with agribusinesses, the main partners for the inclusion of smallholders. In that
process, PAs and cooperatives will promote the inclusion in selected local communities by explaining
the ways smallholders can become a part of the existing value chain. Once the interest from the
farmers is established, PAs and cooperatives will be responsible for preparing the lists of farmers,
collecting the field questionnaires and organizing them into the database for further analysis92.
Eventually, PAs and cooperatives should be the ones to make the final selection of the farmers that
fulfil the targeting criteria, based on the knowledge of individual farmers in the field. This list will be
verified by the Business Facilitation Partners (BFPs) and/or the local facilitators (such as the local
development agency).
Local authorities will be partnering with LED/RED93/consultancy firm/NGO that will be hired to
30.
work on cluster development as BFPs. Facilitators from the consultancy firm/ NGO would support
local authorities in: (i) conducting training and awareness raising on the targeting approach and
92 Sample questionnaires have been prepared by Oxfam Italia during the implementation of the Pilot project. They include
questions on household assets and revenues, which are the basis for classifying the HHs into poverty categories.
93 LED Local Economic Development Agency, RED Regional Economic Development agency
59
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
principles; (ii) capacity support to municipalities /cluster stakeholders’ platforms to identify criteria and
set up and implement a transparent and fair targeting approach; (iii) support the selection of
beneficiaries’, so as to avoid exclusionary practices and elite capture; and (iv) follow up and
monitoring of targeting implementation and activities delivery.
Selection of PAs and Cooperatives. RCDP will work with PAs and Cooperatives that are
31.
active in the selected clusters. The vision of the Project is to facilitate emergence and growth of
cooperatives through technical and organizational support and funds to cofinance BPs. Minimal
eligibility criteria for PAs and cooperatives as project partners will be the following: (i) compliance with
current legislation of cooperative and governance principles; these conditions are different for PAs
and Cooperatives; (ii) at least one formal market channel established; (iii) number of members and
their categorization in poverty groups based on the landholding size; (iv) type of membership so as to
give preference to organizations with a favourable proportion of women and youth among their
members; (v) proven experience in developing concrete measures to include women among their
members, favouring their participation; (vi) examples of willingness to expand membership, in
particular reach out to smallholder farmers and rural poor; (vii) capacity to improve provision of
services and guaranteeing access to production factors by all members; and (viii) work towards social
and sustainable use of natural resources.
Representatives of target groups and PAs and cooperatives, women and youth will participate
32.
as full members in cluster stakeholder platforms to be established at cluster level. It will ensure they
can monitor progress in terms of local VC development, voice their concerns on VC issues, participate
in decisions taken in CSPs, interact with other partners in the cluster and VCs, etc.
Specific activities will be undertaken to ensure the organizational strengthening of PAs and
33.
cooperatives as well as to ensure inclusiveness and empowerment of rural poor, women and youth
through their organisations. Activities will include: (i) organizational strengthening of PAs and
cooperatives; (ii) information and mobilisation campaigns; (iii) business counselling for members of
PAs; (iii) matching grants to leverage investments; (iv) support to ensure active participation of women
and youth in PAs and cooperatives’ decision-making process; and (v) information campaign on rural
labour conditions, food safety, enforcement of regulations in agriculture and agribusinesses.
Agribusinesses. The involvement of exporters, wholesalers and enterprises is crucial to
34.
ensure effective access of smallholders to productive assets, finance, services and markets. Eligible
agribusiness companies should comply with the following criteria: (i) proven know-how and technical
expertise in the subsector; (ii) company’s willingness to use environmental friendly production
practices and compliance with social, labour and gender standards; (iii) company’s strategy is focused
on long-term presence and viable business relationships with producers; and (iv) proven experience
in or formal commitment to establishing business with small producers. Regarding the inclusion of
women and youth, the project will ensure that they effectively participate in and directly benefit from
the BPs and throughout the value chain and not just through specific activities specially tailored for
them. RCDP will prepare guidelines on proper governance and management, checks and balances
and monitor the process to ensure that PAs and cooperatives will be able to engage with agribusiness
companies on the basis of fair deals.
F.
The cluster approach and geographic coverage.
RCDP will be implemented at national level though value chain clusters. Although in principle
35.
all municipalities in both Entities are eligible to participate in project activities, given the focus on
supporting the most vulnerable groups (poor farmers, women and youth) the project will foster the
inclusion of poor municipalities but that do have the potential to be involved in the selected value
chains in broader clusters of municipalities. Typically, these municipalities will be either close to the
areas currently active in the selected sub-sector value chains or municipalities where important
'poverty pockets' still subsist. Clusters will be identified on the basis of common characteristics in
terms of socio-economic and institutional potential.
60
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
Clusters of municipalities will be identified based on common characteristics and interest. The
36.
selection of clusters will be based on eligibility criteria, to ensure that those with the strongest pro-poor
agenda are chosen for project support. One of the key criteria for selection of clusters will be the total
number of poor and vulnerable beneficiaries that could benefit from project interventions. This number
will obviously be affected by the two critical factors: (i) size of the proposed cluster, with respect to the
number of municipalities, and (ii) the existing level of activities, in terms of the number of operating
FOs and agribusinesses within the cluster. While the objective is to include the poor municipalities
across the country, the final selection of clusters will also depend on the local initiative and the interest
to participate in and support the project interventions.
37.
A preliminary identification of potential clusters has been undertaken, through a process of
mapping and based on the following criteria: (i) agro-ecological conditions; (ii) level of existing activity
in the selected sub-sectors; (iii) labour availability and interest of the farmer organizations to get
involved in the selected VCs; (iv) institutional capital, in terms of the willingness of both the private
and public sector to support the sub-sector development, as well as the availability of relevant support
services; (v) infrastructure, especially in terms of road network; and (vi) presence of marketing
infrastructure for storing, processing and/or packaging etc.. Based on this analysis, maps were
produced based on the listed criteria, suggesting the possible clusters for each value-chain.
Physically, these sub-sector value chain clusters usually span up to 10 municipalities, with favourable
agro-ecological conditions for production and where private and public stakeholders and actors are
interlinked and willing to establish partnerships to mutually develop the value chain. Ideally, the
possible clusters should include some strong / very active municipalities, but also bordering
municipalities with potential for growth.
38.
Specifically, in total there are six possible berry clusters, four in the Federation with
36 municipalities and two in the RS with 28 municipalities. This implies that the average number of
municipalities per cluster is around eleven (10.7). However, within the possible clusters, some of the
municipalities may not be interested to participate in the project, while some new ones in the region
may be interested to step in.
Table 14: Possible clusters in the berry sub-sector
Cluster
Entity
Region
# of
municipalities
Municipalities
Average
score
1
2
3
4
5
6
FBiH
NW FBiH
RS
Eastern RS
FBiH
NE FBiH
RS
NW RS
FBiH
FBiH
Central
FBIH 1
Central
FBIH 2
7
13
4
15
10
15
Velika Kladuša, Cazin, Bužim, Bosanska Krupa,
Bosanski Petrovac, Ključ and Sanski Most
Rogatica, Višegrad, Novo Goražde, Rudo, Čajniče,
Foča, Zvornik, Bijeljina, Šekovići, Vlasenica, Milići,
Bratunac and Srebrenica
Banovići, Živinice, Tuzla and Čelić.
Banja Luka, Prijedor, Gradiška, Srbac, Laktaši,
Derventa, Doboj, Modriča, Petrovo, Teslić, Kotor
Varoš, Čelinac, Ribnik, Mrkonjić Grad and Šipovo
Visoko, Breza, Kakanj, Vareš, Zenica, Žepče,
Zavidovići, Maglaj, Tešanj and Doboj-Jug
Bugojno, Jajce, Dobretići, Donji Vakuf, Gornji Vakuf,
Vitez, Travnik, Novi Travnik, Prozor-Rama, Busovača,
Fojnica, Kiseljak, Kreševo, Jablanica and Konjic
23.0
21.8
22.0
20.5
21.0
20.9
Note: This list is provisional, based on the assessment conducted in May 2015.
39. Within the possible berry clusters (identified above), some of the municipalities may not be
interested to participate in the project, while some new ones in the region may be interested to step in.
The final decision on cluster composition should be made between the municipalities in the field and
in the end the A/PCU will choose the most promising clusters.
The vegetables sub-sector was further split into the three most appropriate product
40.
categories: (i) gherkins; (ii) greenhouse production; and (iii) open-field production. The maps quickly
point the attention to areas where certain possibilities for cluster establishment exist. For gherkins,
northern parts of the country clearly demonstrate some advantages over the southern parts. However,
the sub-sector is still to develop, as there is no major concentration of the activities in a single part of
the country. The possible clusters for gherkin production are four, with 33 municipalities, around 8 on
61
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
average (8.25). There are two regions in the RS with 17 municipalities and two regions in FBiH with
16 municipalities.
Table 15: Possible clusters in the gherkin sub-sector
Cluster
Entity
Region
# of
municipalities
Municipalities
1
2
3
4
FBiH
NE and
Central
FBiH
NW
RS
RS
NW and
Central
NE and
Eastern
12
4
9
8
Gračanica, Kalesija, Sapna, Srebrenik, Tuzla,
Živinice, Doboj Istok, Doboj Jug, Maglaj, Tešanj,
Zavidovići and Žepče
Velika Kladuša, Cazin, Bužim and Bihać
Gradiška, Kostajnica, Kozarska Dubica, Novi Grad,
Oštra Luka, Prijedor, Doboj, Čelinac and Teslić
Bijeljina, Lopare, Ugljevik, Zvornik, Bratunac, Milići,
Srebrenica and Višegrad
Average
score
16.7
17.5
16.3
15.8
For greenhouse production, in total, there are six clusters with a total of 55 municipalities (an
41.
average of 9). In the Federation of BiH, there are 4 possible clusters with 38 municipalities, while in
the RS the number is a bit smaller – 2 clusters with 17 municipalities.
Table 16: Possible clusters in the greenhouse vegetables sub-sector
Cluster
Entity
Region
# of
municipalities
Municipalities
Average
score
1
2
3
4
5
6
FBiH
FBiH
FBiH
RS
FBiH
RS
Southern
FBiH
NE and
Central
FBiH
NW FBiH
NE and
Eastern
RS
Central
FBiH
NW and
Central
RS
5
14
5
4
14
13
Čapljina, Čitluk, Grad Mostar, Ljubuški and Stolac
Čelić, Doboj Istok, Gračanica, Gradačac, Srebrenik,
Tuzla, Živinice, Kakanj, Maglaj, Tešanj, Usora, Zavidovići,
Zenica and Žepče
Bihać, Bužim, Cazin, Sanski Most and Velika Kladuša
Bijeljina, Bratunac, Foča and Ugljevik
Bugojno, Donji Vakuf, Gornji Vakuf, Jablanica, Konjic,
Prozor-Rama, Breza, Ilidža, Ilijaš, Novi Grad Sarajevo,
Visoko, Vogošća, Foča-Ustikolina and Goražde
Banja Luka, Gradiška, Kostajnica, Kozarska Dubica,
Laktaši, Prijedor, Srbac, Brod, Doboj, Modriča,
Pelagićevo, Šamac and Teslić
18.8
18.7
18.2
17.3
17.2
16.7
Finally, in the vegetables sub-sector there have also been considered the value chain related to
42.
open field vegetable production. The envisioned crops include the production of early potatoes,
pepper and tomato production and similar. Compared to the other two types of vegetable production,
the map is significantly less promising, with most of the country being modestly suitable for this kind of
production, when combined with pro-poor targeting agenda. The exceptions are mostly in the north
and somewhat in the south, with very limited areas active in central-western parts of the country,
known for production of early potatoes. Altogether, these 5 potential (2 FBiH, 3 RS) clusters include a
total of 29 municipalities (14 FBiH, 15 RS), or on average about 6 municipalities per cluster.
Table 17: Possible clusters in the open-field vegetables sub-sector
Cluster
Entity
Region
# of
municipalities
Municipalities
1
2
3
4
5
FBiH
RS
RS
FBiH
RS
Southern
and CW
FBiH
NW RS
NE RS
NE FBiH
SE RS
11
7
5
3
3
Glamoč, Kupres, Čapljina, Čitluk, Grad Mostar, Grude,
Ljubuški, Posušje, Ravno, Stolac, Široki Brijeg
Banja Luka, Gradiška, Kostajnica, Kozarska Dubica,
Laktaši, Prnjavor, Srbac
Bijeljina, Donji Žabar, Pelagićevo, Šamac, Ugljevik
Domaljevac-Šamac, Odžak, Orašje
Berkovići, Istočni Mostar, Ljubinje
Average
score
18.8
18.0
18.0
17.0
16.3
62
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
The third sub-sector selected for intervention under the RCDP project is the one for
43.
Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs). This sub-sector is very important for the landless poor as it
relies heavily on the natural resources available in most parts of the country. Wild mushrooms, wild
fruit and wild herbs are found in abundance in BiH, and the differences in the use of these resources
and the development of the NTFP sector largely depends on the private sector initiative to organize
the collection processes in certain regions. Altogether, these 8 potential (5 FBiH, 3 RS) clusters
include a total of 45 municipalities (27 FBiH, 18 RS), or on average about 6 municipalities (5.6) per
cluster.
Table 18: Possible clusters in the NTFP sub-sector
Cluster
Entity
Region
1
2
3
4
5
FBiH
NW FBiH
RS
FBiH
FBiH
NE and SE
RS
Central
FBiH
Southern
FBiH
RS
NW RS
# of
municipalities
4
13
13
10
5
Municipalities
Bihać, Bužim, Cazin, Velika Kladuša
Foča, Milići, Rogatica, Rudo, Sokolac, Srebrenica,
Šekovići, Zvornik, Berkovići, Bileća, Ljubinje, Nevesinje
and Trebinje
Bugojno, Fojnica, Gornji Vakuf, Travnik, Zenica, Žepče,
Breza, Hadžići, Ilijaš, Kladanj, Tuzla, Visoko and Vogošća
Čapljina, Mostar, Grude, Jablanica, Konjic, Ljubuški,
Posušje, Prozor, Stolac, Široki
Banja Luka, Čelinac, Gradiška, Kotor Varoš, Kozarska
Dubica
Average
score
20.8
18.9
17.6
17.2
16.2
In total, the proposed sub-sectors could include up to 26 clusters across the country. Given the
44.
project approach to work with a minimum of 12 clusters, the selection of clusters will be very
competitive. In total, the 12 pre-identified clusters suggested in the Appendix 2 include 142
municipalities (98 unique), which gives an average of about 12 municipalities per cluster. The
proposal includes 72 municipalities in FBiH (56 unique) and 70 municipalities in RS (42 unique). A
number of municipalities have more than 1 clusters identified, but the approach of the project will
remain focused on targeting the poor and vulnerable groups. To the extent possible, in case of an
overlap at the municipality level, the project will avoid working in the same local communities and if
this is not always possible, the single household will be eligible to benefit only from the intervention
related to one sub-sector.
63
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
Table 19: Possible clusters in all sub-sectors – TOP 12
Cluster
Sub-sector
Entity
Region
# of
municipalities
List of municipalities
Average
score
per cluster
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Berries
FBiH
NW FBiH
Berries
RS
Berries
FBiH
Eastern
RS
Central
FBIH 2
Berries
RS
NW RS
Gherkins
FBiH
Gherkins
RS
Greenhouse
FBiH
Greenhouse
RS
Open-field
FBiH
NE and
Central
NW and
Central
NE and
Central
FBiH
NW and
Central
RS
Southern
and CW
FBiH
Open-field
RS
NW RS
NTFP
FBiH
NTFP
RS
Central
FBiH
NE and
SE RS
7
13
15
10
12
9
14
13
11
7
13
13
Velika Kladuša, Cazin, Bužim,
Bosanska Krupa, Bosanski
Petrovac, Ključ and Sanski Most
Rogatica, Višegrad, Novo
Goražde, Rudo, Čajniče, Foča,
Zvornik, Bijeljina, Šekovići,
Vlasenica, Milići, Bratunac and
Srebrenica
Bugojno, Jajce, Dobretići, Donji
Vakuf, Gornji Vakuf, Vitez, Travnik,
Novi Travnik, Prozor-Rama,
Busovača, Fojnica, Kiseljak,
Kreševo, Jablanica and Konjic
Banja Luka, Prijedor, Gradiška,
Srbac, Laktaši, Derventa, Doboj,
Modriča, Petrovo, Teslić, Kotor
Varoš, Čelinac, Ribnik, Mrkonjić
Grad and Šipovo
Gračanica, Kalesija, Sapna,
Srebrenik, Tuzla, Živinice, Doboj
Istok, Doboj Jug, Maglaj, Tešanj,
Zavidovići and Žepče
Gradiška, Kostajnica, Kozarska
Dubica, Novi Grad, Oštra Luka,
Prijedor, Doboj, Čelinac and Teslić
Čelić, Doboj Istok, Gračanica,
Gradačac, Srebrenik, Tuzla,
Živinice, Kakanj, Maglaj, Tešanj,
Usora, Zavidovići, Zenica and
Žepče
Banja Luka, Gradiška, Kostajnica,
Kozarska Dubica, Laktaši,
Prijedor, Srbac, Brod, Doboj,
Modriča, Pelagićevo, Šamac and
Teslić
Glamoč, Kupres, Čapljina, Čitluk,
Grad Mostar, Grude, Ljubuški,
Posušje, Ravno, Stolac, Široki
Brijeg
Banja Luka, Gradiška, Kostajnica,
Kozarska Dubica, Laktaši,
Prnjavor, Srbac
Bugojno, Fojnica, Gornji Vakuf,
Travnik, Zenica, Žepče, Breza,
Hadžići, Ilijaš, Kladanj, Tuzla,
Visoko and Vogošća
Foča, Milići, Rogatica, Rudo,
Sokolac, Srebrenica, Šekovići,
Zvornik, Berkovići, Bileća, Ljubinje,
Nevesinje and Trebinje
23.0
21.8
20.9
20.5
16.7
16.3
18.7
16.7
18.8
18.0
17.6
18.9
The final decision on cluster composition should be made between the municipalities in the field
45.
and in the end the APCU/PCU will choose the most promising clusters.
64
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
G. Gender94
46. Generally, the typical scenario in BiH agriculture (for what concerns the production level and
division of labor within the household) is such that men are usually more involved in physically
demanding or machine-based activities (such as soil preparation), while the women are tasked with
delicate operations, such as planting, weed control and harvesting. Men usually find themselves
covering leadership positions in cooperatives. This is mainly attributable to cultural norms, affecting
the different roles of women and men also in the agricultural and rural development sectors. The role
of men with regards to decision-making in agricultural institutions is also a reflection of the
membership situation in cooperatives, predominantly with men joining as members on behalf of the
farming household. This implies that if a change is sought at management level (with an increased
number of women in decision-making positions in cooperatives), promoting membership of women
can be a more conducive strategy in this direction.
Although a number of women participate in the work of cooperatives, and they are working on
47.
very difficult and demanding jobs, their real needs, thoughts and attitudes are not recognized as a
priority, their voices are not heard yet, and they are hardly to be found in decision-making positions.
There is a clear need for organizing and joining women in farmers' associations or cooperatives, but
because of the lack of information that is still predominant in the rural areas, because of cultural and
norm barriers, as well as stereotypes diffused in Bosnia and Herzegovina, many women do not have
enough motivation to fight for their own rights at a personal as well as professional level.
48. Women are largely excluded from the decision-making processes, because their work is not
sufficiently valued and considered as an integral part of the family business, and their role is typically
not seen and recognized as one of an agricultural worker or farm manager. Furthermore, decision-
making power is related to ownership over assets. Men are the ones who, in 80% of cases, own
property, have ownership over the farms. This is among another root cause behind the reduced
recognition in monetary terms for the work undertaken by the women in the household.
Social and economic subordination of women is often regarded as something ‘natural’, that is,
49.
due to the patriarchal mentality that is still traditionally present in rural areas; women in fact usually
cover the role of unpaid labour within the household.
In the majority of cases, male heads of households make up for membership of the farmers'
50.
associations and cooperatives (since one membership is accepted for each household), and cover
leadership roles within these organizations. Being the member also implies the possibility to
participate directly in the work of the organization, as well as in meetings.
Although some degree of progress emerges from the gradual increase in number of women
51.
involved in the work of agricultural associations and cooperatives, the difference is significantly
noticeable in the functioning of cooperatives established/managed by women, compared to those
established/managed by men. The cooperatives established by men typically include a very small
number of women, mainly in the form of seasonal labor, often without being able to participate in
decision-making processes of the organization.
52. Women in farmers’ organizations. This group consists of women who express a strong
willingness and the need for a commercial form of organization, because they typically own the
property, have a higher volume of production, level of education, have attended a training course for
business development. Women that fall within this category are usually members of a given
organization, more empowered economically, and with better access to financial resources. As
94.A total of 150 persons (125 women and 25 men) were interviewed through face-to-face and telephone interviews.
Specifically, interviewees included: (a) 100 respondents at household level (85 women and 15 men) involved in agriculture,
(b) 20 women members of FOs, (c) 10 women involved in decision making bodies in the rural areas (including in FOs
management and executive boards, and FO members), (d) 5 men involved in FO decision-making functions (this with a view to
compare the views of men and women on decision making processes and functions), (e) 15 telephone interview respondents
(10 women and 5 men) from FOs in other regions of the country (to attempt to have a better representation and situational
snapshot across the country). The Guidelines were used to guide the process.
65
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
opposed to those women who mainly depend on the male-of-the families’ earnings, economically
empowered women have better opportunities both on a personal and professional level.
However, production is mainly organized by the private sector and the majority of agricultural
53.
holdings are fragmented. There are few cases of intensive processing of products (also in the case of
vegetables or even raspberries, mainly sold for the fresh or fresh frozen market, and in the second
case only partially processed into jams and juices on relatively smaller scales) and adoption of
modern agricultural practices. The agricultural sector is still insufficiently organized, also with regards
to placement of products in the market. Although involved in the operation of cooperatives, most of
these women are still not capable enough for primary processing products, and their further
finalization (readiness for final market). In this case, the recommendation is that of promoting the
diversification and multi-functionality of farms, because agriculture contributes not only to food
production, but also secures products and services for the market.
54. Women who are not involved in farmers’ organizations. Agricultural (and other rural
development related) subsidies and incentive mechanisms do not sufficiently take into account
different needs of women and men, and the fact that men are in the majority of cases the owners of
the farms. This contributes towards a further inequality among women and men in the rural areas. For
women to be able to equally avail of their rights, they should own some assets, which is possible
through employment and access to economic resources.
55.
In most cases, these women are excluded from the labor market. They lack the necessary
knowledge and skills. Financial incentives are often inaccessible to them, which is caused largely
because of the distance and remoteness from the main centres and institutions to support women,
and because these women are generally not economically autonomous, largely dependent male
family members, who are in the majority of cases heads of households and property owners. Women
who are not heads of households and who are not part of an agricultural association or a cooperative
are generally treated as additional workforce, and as such they lack any decision-making power
compared to the male members of the households.
Female-heads-of-households. The situation is reversed – e.g. higher participation of women
56.
in production as well as marketing functions – in the case of female heads of households. In these
cases, ownership of land and other farming equipment is in the name of the women in the household.
Gender and targeting issues in selected value chain
The sections below provide the gender and targeting analysis for the three sub-sectors of
57.
interest in RCDP: (i) (a) Non-timber forest products; (ii) berries; and (iii) vegetables.
58.
It should be noted that the findings emerging from this analysis are representative of the
general situation in the country, though the situation may widely vary among country regions. In
general, the participation of women and youth within the three sub-sectors of interest is in the form of
seasonal work, production tasks (including harvesting), and of a lesser degree in marketing activities.
With regards to youth, no particular distinction is to be found between male and female participation.
The share of women, men and youth participation along the different functions of the value chains is
often very much correlated to types and volumes of production, as well as amounts of resulting
revenue / profit from the sale of produce.
59. When it comes to agricultural production destined for the market, more than 70% of the
workforce is composed of males. With regards to the transportation and marketing of products, men
are significantly over-represented as transport of large quantities generally requires major physical
strength, and male are better positioned also (generally) in negotiation and determination of farm-gate
price with buyers (also mostly men). There is a correlation between households with an above-than-
average education level (compared to the ‘rural area’ standard), also among the younger members of
the family, and cases where women - together with their spouses – are more involved in decision-
making processes. A higher degree of decision making on behalf of women is also found in the case
of female-headed households. It is important to note that a wide range of opportunities for women's
66
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
increased involvement and for gender equity in value chains exists, and some positive examples
around the country attest to this fact. These are cases were women are integral part of management
structures within farmers' organizations (including cooperatives) or even processing firms. While the
number of these cases is still a minority compared to the general situation, these examples show that
the traditions and norms in the BiH society are slowly undergoing transformation.In general, with
regards to upstream activities in the value chains, and as emerges from the gender value chain
analyses seen above, women's involvement is increased in collection (for NTFPs) and productive
activities (for all sub-sectors analyzed in this report), and reduced with regards to marketing functions.
With regards to the private sector, women's participation/involvement is generally viewed of greatest
value in (manual) processes that require major attention to detail, such as in the case of sorting,
grading of medicinal herbs, or even in the fruits and vegetables sub-sector. Generally speaking,
women's participation in the private sector is low. However, and as mentioned above, some excellent
examples are nowadays emerging where companies are increasingly involving women in decision-
making processes, and as part of the management structures.An entry point for increased women's
involvment in value chains is where women cover managerial positions either at farmers' organization
or processing and other private companies' levels
In these cases, situations are observed where major attention is given to women's participation
60.
in trainings, collective action, decision-making processes, and others. Increasing the membership of
women is possible through women’s organizations, especially those with a mandate focused on
contributing towards women’s empowerment. Women who are members of farmers’ organizations
usually have something in common: supporting family members, where the women’s role as wives,
mothers and housewives, is valued and respected, and where the role as bread winner in the family is
recognized. This recognition serves as an ulterior incentive and motivation for women to gain
increased profits from their farming activities, in the shared interest of the household. It is in this
context that participation in farmers’ organizations is an important entry point for women’s access to
education and training, including in the field of improved business skills, negotiating skills and others.
When it comes to designing the specific interventions at local level, the recommended approach is
that of analyzing roles and power structures revolving around the value chain of interest, and among
the involved actors. Some concrete examples are given based on some of the emerging findings from
the gender value chain analysis.
The analysis of the NTFP sub-sector reveals that most of the collection of fruit is undertaken
61.
by women. This implies that if, a training curricula needs to be developed to improve harvesting
techniques among collectors, and also to reduce the over-exploitation of natural resources (a major
threat to biodiversity preservation), location and time of these training sessions need to be carefully
accounted for to maximize women's participation since these types of training sessions are likely to be
mostly beneficial to them.The analysis of the berries sub-sector reveals women's increased
involvement and decision-making with regards to planting and fertilising activities, or even at
processing level; despite this, access to training for women is generally inferior to that of men. The
intra-household decision-making processes clearly show that though formally men of households are
in charge, family farming in BiH is predominant, hence most probably choice of varieties, crops and
new technology adoption is the result of consultative processes within the households. Again,
trainings will need to be conceived and organized accordingly, to ensure that the key training
messages are delivered to those mostly involved in each activity.The analysis of the vegetable
sub-sector shows a major involvement of women in production, marketing, as well as primary
processing functions. This implies that trainings and specialized extension services should be tailored
to this knowledge.Other mechanisms or incentives should be incorporated as part of the
implementation processes to ensure increased gender equity. This may include - but may not be
limited to - matching grant schemes with increased co-financing ratios where support is directed
towards women (in cases where this is generally inferior), criteria for the selection of farmers'
organizations where women cover managerial positions, or even formation of women as part of
training of trainers programmes under the project. Complementing the above, and in order to improve
the position of women and youth in rural areas, some possible measures (some of which are go
67
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
beyond the scope of action of RCDP, but may be achieved through synergies in the field with local
authorities or other development actors involved also in social community development activities) may
include:





improvement of social services (such as rural kindergartens and centres for the elderly) to
better balance work and family responsibilities;
strengthening the participation of rural women and youth in decision-making processes at all
levels;
ensuring adequate, professional and free training and consultancy services to initiate, develop
and improve businesses/start-ups;
promotion of rural women’s networks with local, regional or sectorial initiatives, and other
forms of association;
strengthened capacity, organizational and financial potential of women's organizations
(agricultural cooperatives or associations of women) through technical assistance and direct
financial support, to enable these to better provide services members and suppliers.
68
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 3: Country performance and lessons learned
Appendix 3: Country performance and lessons learned
A. Country performance
IFAD’s assistance to BiH commenced in 1996, soon after peace was restored. To date, its BiH
1.
portfolio comprised 6 projects valued at US$ 167 million of which US$ 70 million IFAD funding. The
first two IFAD-supported projects focused on emergency relief and rehabilitation. They contributed
significantly to the post-war revival of rural livelihoods through herd restocking with the distribution of
15,000 high-quality dairy cows and 13,000 sheep of improved breeds. IFAD’s second generation
projects have mainly focused on poorer and disadvantaged municipalities. Support to smallholders95
was mainly operationalized through the provision of organizational and technical support to Producers
Associations (PA). For example, the Livestock and Rural Finance Development Project (LRFDP) has
succeeded in developing farmer’s small-scale commercial livestock operations by strengthening
linkages along the dairy chains. This approach was replicated by subsequent IFAD interventions for
fruits, vegetables, non-timber forest and organic products. Conform to the 2005 COSOP, the third
generation of IFAD interventions supported income diversification, strengthening of rural livelihoods in
the context of economic transformation, and preparing for EU accession.
The 3 projects under this COSOP were: the Rural Enterprise Enhancement Project (REEP)
2.
from 2008 to 2012, the Rural Livelihoods Development Project (RLDP) from 2010 to 2015, and the
Rural Business Development Project (RBDP) from 2014 to 2018.
Lessons learned on the efficiency of implementation of IFAD projects in
B.
Bosnia and Herzegovina
The design of RCDP is based on lessons learned from: (a) past and ongoing IFAD-funded
3.
projects in BiH, in particular the Rural Enterprise Enhancement Project (REEP), closed in 2013, and
the ongoing Rural Livelihood Development Project (RLDP); (b) past and present VC and local
development interventions led by USAID, SIDA, SDC-Caritas and UNDP; (c) a Pro-Poor Value Chain
Development pilot project, financed by RLDP and designed and implemented by Oxfam Italy. The pilot
started in August 2014 principally in order to prepare the design of RCDP; (d) a recent survey on
livelihoods of women and youth in BiH.
The main lessons learnt by REEP regarding design of strategy and approach can be
4.
summarised as follow: (i) outreach focus of the value chains should be incorporated at design and the
methodology for inclusion of the poor segment households should be made very explicit and clear;
(ii) to avoid spreading projects efforts and effectively establish the forward and backward linkages the
project should be conceived more clearly around the pro-poor value chains it wishes to develop;
(iii) the importance of linking entities in any value chain segments should be highlighted as otherwise,
in spite of enhanced capacities of individual entities in different segments of potential value chains
their backward and forward linkages may not adhere to the project approach thus diluting
effectiveness and impact; (iv) value chain models and flow of incremental benefits to target group
should be effectively monitored; (v) a cluster based approach should be adopted instead of spreading
resources over large geographical area to develop momentum for creating linkages between the
various segments of value chains; (vi) adopting an inclusive and pro-poor value chain approach while
providing broad support at the household level economic activities can decisively contribute to the
expected outreach and towards the project goals. For this an inclusive value chain approach should
be based on meeting market demand by assembling relatively small volumes of marketable surplus of
a large number of poor farmers. Produce like small fruits, berries are usually compatible and
conducive to pro-poor value chain development; (vii) the preconditions for the development of
pro-poor value chains should be the object of proper VC studies and participatory planning.
95 The classification into ‘commercial’ and ‘non-commercial’ is mainly based on the availability of assets and production factors
– e.g. holdings that have less than 5 cows are considered non-commercial.
69
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 3: Country performance and lessons learned
The Mid-term review (MTR) of RLDP observed operational gaps essentially related to: (a) an
5.
absence of an effective articulation mechanism between project components (notwithstanding the
underlying value-chain philosophy); (b) weak description of the target group; (c) insufficient efforts to
include the rural poor, (insufficient attention to targeting resulted in an ad hoc selection of beneficiaries
both in the RLDP and REEP, failing short to meet the desired target groups, particularly the very poor;
(d) overemphasis on investments in rural infrastructure particularly in roads; and (e) responsibilities,
checks and balances among actors involved were not well defined.
This translated into the implementation of an incomplete and unfocused value chain approach,
6.
insufficiently reaching out the rural poor, which hindered the project from achieving its expected
poverty reduction objectives. To tackle this issue, in April 2014 IFAD organized a workshop, together
with in-country counterparts and partners, entitled “Pro-Poor Targeting in Rural Areas in Bosnia and
Herzegovina”, the purpose of which was to develop a collective systemic change perspective of how
to target poor smallholders and vulnerable rural households more effectively and inclusively.
Following the workshop, it was expected that RLDP refocused its resources to demonstrate the
feasibility of pro-poor value chain approaches to be achieved by developing two 'inclusive value chain
clusters,' one in FBiH and one in the RS, with the support of an institutional service provider
competent in pro-poor value chain development.
To attain project objectives, RLDP was recommended to sharpen tis poverty reduction focus
7.
while leveraging the outreach of its support interventions to the intended beneficiaries. Among others,
the project was recommended to put the emphasis on: (i) technical assistance, through specialized
institutional service providers, to support inclusive PAs to develop sound business plans and foster
their emergence as collective marketing platforms, starting from July 2014; (ii) extending matching
grant support to PAs that were capable of demonstrating sound business plans, to be reflected in
revised eligibility and selection criteria; (iii) support those SMEs that could demonstrate backward
linkages to project-supported PAs in a more structural approach to marketing; and (vi) prioritize
investments in marketing infrastructure that effectively complements (and leverages) the development
of inclusive value chains.
8.
Another lesson learnt by (past and) ongoing projects was the need for APCU/PCU, the two
coordination teams to: (i) recruit the targeting and gender officers; and (ii) thoroughly upgrade the
M&E and reporting systems to be able to monitor and report on projects' outcomes in terms of
inclusive value chain development, outreach, targeting of the intended project beneficiaries and
progress towards the final project goals and objectives. RLDP’s design provided for the recruitment
full-time experienced targeting and gender officers in both FBiH and RS to deliver on the targeting and
gender objectives. They were to be responsible for undertaking targeting studies during the early
stages of project start up, developing targeting and gender action plans, and facilitating workshops.
Both the APCU and PCU failed to appoint full-time experienced targeting and gender officers. The
M&E officers have assumed the function for gender mainstreaming but had no specialist experience
in the topic and have not received any training to develop their capacities. As a result of the lack of
dedicated attention to these subjects, serious gaps have emerged.
9.
As stressed by the Mid-term Review, there was a gradual shift from PCU and APCU's
coordination functions, as foreseen at design, to taking up a role in project implementation. This,
accompanied by gaps in understaffing, capacities, and implementation mechanisms. This raised
serious concerns for this project (RLDP) as well as the forthcoming project, the Rural Business
Development Project (RBDP) which is expected to start soon. Moreover, from an implementation point
of view, there was an overall lack of understanding of the value chain approach among PCU and
APCU staff, as well as poor coordination among project staff, leading to lack of capacity to organize
coordinated delivery of support to beneficiaries for pro-poor value chain development interventions.
These lessons learnt were integrated in RCDP design, namely: (i) a strong focus on
10.
inclusiveness and direct targeting mechanism to reach the rural poor, this with active involvement of
municipalities and Producers’ associations; (ii) a clear focus on promising and dynamic Subsectors
with opportunities and advantages for poor smallholders; (iii) focussed value-chain and subsector
70
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 3: Country performance and lessons learned
development approaches in order to establish strong market linkages through the setup of cluster
stakeholder platforms, co-financing of Business proposals that are to be jointly developed between
cooperatives, PAs, SMEs and municipalities and subsector stakeholder platforms; (d) internally
consistent project approach through mutually reinforcing project components; and (e) allocation of the
majority of project funding to financially and economically sound BPs that will generate long term
economic benefits at local and country level.
Institutional memory and continuity have been enhanced across multiple generations of
11.
IFAD-financed projects in BiH, through retention of the existing structures for coordination and
management, and namely in the form of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in the Federation and
the Agricultural Project Coordination Unit (APCU) in RS. The primary function of the PCU/ APCU was
therefore envisaged as one of coordination, monitoring, consolidation and reporting, and with
provision of guidance to, and oversight on the multiple project stakeholders implicated in the
implementation of project activities (comprising contracted service providers, municipalities, project
beneficiaries and as well the private sector). Efficiency in implementation therefore, is linked to the
capacity for effective coordination.
12.
Past performance in terms of timely disbursement and in achieving results, indicates that
implementation capacity across the project-implicated actors has been mixed, especially in the
context of the complexity of value chain development and the need to establish very strong and
related linkages across interventions, activities and actors. On an ad hoc basis and in terms of
outputs, contracting of service providers for carrying out infrastructure works and for very specific
technical assistance and training has been relatively satisfactory. The challenge however, has been in
consolidating and leveraging achievements to an appreciable scale that would ensure the
complementarity of interventions and their sustainability; as well, establishing real linkages across
interventions in the implementation cycle has not been obvious and needs attention. Past
implementation arrangements were not designed with enough emphasis on building regular and
predictable field-level assistance and advisory services (technical and management/organizational),
nor with consistent follow-up and solid monitoring.
Recommendations: in addition to the need for more visible and active field presence; greater
13.
clarity is required to define responsibilities, including M&E responsibilities across project actors.
Furthermore, project support to beneficiaries/ recipients, and the contracting of service providers,
needs to be better conditioned on performance and results. Implementation would benefit from
promoting deeper commitment of stakeholders and actors through partnerships, and tangible
contribution (financial or in-kind) from these partners should be encouraged.
As the sector matures and investments in developing the value chain sector increase, there is
14.
need for early identification of service providers/ implementation partners with strong sector
experience and understanding of their comparative advantages, so as to build on the existing
processes, support and results in the sector (leveraging). Given the scale and scope of interventions
envisaged, the APCU/PCU should be capacitated and prepared to substantially increase outsourcing
the implementation of activities, and managing the contracts and/ or framework agreements with
project-implicated actors, allowing for some adaptation and flexibility. Cross-dialogue will also be
required to improve linkages.
C.
Lessons learned in Extension and Business Development Services
In terms of the quality of contracted service providers in RLDP, the main issues which have
15.
emerged were: (i) support was provided at production level through training –though limited by lack of
physical access to improved technologies; (ii) there was a lack of support to PAs and Cooperatives to
develop sound business and marketing plans and combine profit-maximization objectives with social
goals ; and (iii) current implementation modalities and approaches did not enable the coordinated
delivery of services as envisaged under the project under the foreseen value chain t approach, thus
hindering the project's likelihood of achieving development goals.
71
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 3: Country performance and lessons learned
Extension (technical advisory) services are supporting farmers to produce more and better
16.
products, whereas Business Development Services are mainly supporting agro-processors. BiH has
both public and private sector actors providing these kind of services.
17.
The public extension service in the RS is thus essentially focussed on supporting primary
production96. Their responsibilities include the formulation of basic 'business plans' (mostly oriented in
function of specific subsidies) and providing other advisory services for farmers, but these services
are generally not market driven. In the RS, this service is provided by 77 staff members on entity
level; out of them only 13 extension workers are dealing with fruits and vegetables. In general, the
service is poorly equipped, underfunded and understaffed. In FBiH, the system, originally established
at the canton level with no central service, is largely non-operational due to large administrative
burden placed on the extension agents (processing/documenting of canton-level subsidy systems)
and/or generally limited interest on behalf of cantonal authorities97 to support the agriculture sector.
Some municipalities finance extension officers to implement their municipal action plan for agriculture
and livestock. These officers usually focus on technical issues, generally lacking expertise on issues
regarding processing and marketing of fruits, vegetables and NTFP, farm management, BDS and
cooperative management.
18.
Private advisory services are also mostly limited in man-power and it is estimated that there
are no more than 20 well trained experts in fruits and vegetables for the whole country. Some of these
experts are associated in professional organizations. As farmers are often reluctant to pay for
extension service, most of private extension workers cooperate with donor-funded interventions to
pay part of the fees not covered by the farmers. Private advisory services are usually linked to
companies that commercialize agricultural inputs or buy up specific agricultural produce. Their role is
to secure that farmers are growing the right quality/quantity of produce.
Public BDS providers in BiH consist of relatively important regional development agencies like
19.
SERDA and REDAH, usually initiated and seed-financed by the EU and other donors. These
institutions have been established for strengthening, coordination and promotion of economic
development in identified macro-regions. However, due to limited own funding, these agencies often
remain dependent on donor-funded projects. Today these agencies exist just in FBiH as RS did not
accept projects covering both entities. In practice, with a few exceptions, these agencies had only a
limited impact on economic development. In parallel to these bigger agencies, many municipalities in
FBiH have set-up small local development agencies to promote economic development, including
agrifood and to get access to project funding98.
Private BDS providers are available in most competence areas from marketing, branding and
20.
market research to legal and financial advice; however the majority of these BDS offer their services
in the bigger cities like Sarajevo, Banja Luka, Mostar, Bihac and a few others. They can easily be
found under business directories in the internet. The outreach of these private BDS to rural areas
remains however limited the constraint being their relatively high cost (based on private sector going
rates) to smallholder farmers and their organizations.
21.
A first step in this Project could be to do an awareness raising campaign about available
services or a kind of a "roadshow" in the rural areas showing what impact different service providers
could have to boost businesses.
Private sector service providers, for extension as well as business development, will be paid by
22.
vouchers so that the beneficiaries have a free choice with whom to cooperate.
96 Extension offices were established throughout BiH with EU support.
97 Each Canton has its own government including a cabinet of 'sector' ministers
98. RAZ in the municipality of Zepce, ALDI in Gorazdi and the wood cluster in Prijedor are positive examples of public local
economy facilitators.
72
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 3: Country performance and lessons learned
D. Cooperatives
23.
Cooperatives are very variable in nature and potential. Three main types can be roughly
identified: (i) cooperatives that have started to expand their membership beyond the initial founders
and that claim to adopt a EU-compatible membership and governance model, which should receive
immediate and close support to help them to achieve their goals, (ii) cooperatives that have been
used as a way to develop their control on the VC and notably their marketing activities, by a very
reduced number of individuals who had acquired by themselves an advanced level of
professionalization, these persons don’t need a lot of support for themselves apart from specific BDS
(accounting and management training and advisory service, etc.), but they often have had to develop
a network of suppliers in order to acquire a critical mass to negotiate with their clients, and the
members of this network would need an intensive support, both technical (with the help of the leading
farmers at the head of the Coop) and economical (in relation to their marketing choices), in order to
level up these farmers, in the trail of the leading farmer(s), and allow them to organize better, with or
in parallel to the existing restricted Cooperative, and (iii) Cooperatives that act in all ways as private
actors of the VC providing marketing facilities to individual farmers, and should benefit of the same
support as the one designed for SMEs.
73
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
A.
Project description
Development objective and impact indicators
Leverage points and guiding principles. RCDP's approach is based on the private-public
1.
partnership model, whereby public funds are expected to be used to leverage private sectors’
investments in a win-win partnership, whereby the private sector can expand its business while a high
number of small-scale producers can expand their production and make it more profitable. Business
Proposals (BPs) within clusters and subsectors will be prepared and implemented by different actors.
The goal of the project will be “to contribute to sustainable rural poverty reduction in
2.
Bosnia and Herzegovina.” The project development objective will be to “enable smallholders to
take advantage of fruits, vegetable and non-timber forest products subsector development for
the sustainable improvement of their social and economic conditions and those of other poor
rural groups”.
The expected impact would be the effective incorporation of smallholders in dynamic fruit and
3.
vegetable and NTFP subsectors and ensure that it has durably improved economic and social
perspectives for rural areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The project has a clear emphasis on social
targeting and inclusiveness. Its strategic vision is to use a subsector development approach in
order to support a core of interventions necessary for sustainable structural changes and leading to
the expected economic and social benefits: tackle the related trade, policy and institutional issues and
promote local economic development; leverage private sector investments through bankable BPs;
ensuring social inclusiveness; promoting environmental friendly and climate-change adaptation
technologies; ensure adequate supply of specialized services; subsector governance by private
stakeholders and their professional organizations; and subsector performance monitoring and
accountability based on active participation of local authorities, beneficiaries and private stakeholders.
The adaptation of a sub-sector development approach will maximize impact on poverty reduction.
The Project will take advantage of existing value chain dynamics in the selected value chains
4.
where the private sector (i.e. agro input dealers, collectors, processors, traders, wholesalers, retailers)
is actively engaging with smallholders, either organised or individually. These business relationships
frequently provide in-kind credit for product pre-financing and technical assistance to smallholders.
The value added of the project stems from: (i) expanding the number of small-scale
producers/collectors benefitting from these opportunities in the selected subsector value chains
(maximise inclusion); (ii) enhancing the capacity of small-scale producers to develop their business
activities and to take decisions regarding the needed organisational structure (e.g. PA, cooperative)
and marketing and, whenever possible, processing and value adding strategies; and (iii) creating a
business environment attractive to private agribusiness investors.
The project is aligned with Bosnia and Herzegovina’s development strategy and IFAD Strategic
5.
Framework 2011-2015. The overall goal of the Results-based country strategic opportunities
programme (RB-COSOP 2013) is “to enable poor rural people to improve their food security and
increase their incomes through support to poor non-commercial and commercial farmers, and to on-
and off-farm enterprises. Within this frame, the Rural Competiveness Development Project (RCDP)
has been designed to be one of the main IFAD tools to achieve this goal.
6.
The justification for RCDP is based on the need for smallholder farmers in BiH to: (a) improve
their competitiveness and scale up their farm activities to viable commercial units in a context of local
and regional markets in view of potential EU accession; (b) through farmers organizations, increase
smallholder participation in decision making processes and help them become more active partners in
local economic development; (c) increase the outreach and inclusiveness of farmers’ organizations,
so as to provide opportunities for economic development to the very poor, as well as women and
75
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
youth. This will require supporting small farmers’ inclusion in Producers’ Associations (PAs) and
Cooperatives, strengthening their organizational, technical and business skills, linking them to
agribusiness partners, markets and business and financial development services. The project will
strengthen PAs and cooperatives by (i) improving their outreach to poorer segments of population,
(ii) strengthening their organizational and entrepreneurial capabilities and (iii) enhancing their market
power.
RCDP is designed as a long-term development intervention, to be implemented in two
7.
cycles of five years each.
Outcomes/Components
RCDP will adopt the following guiding principles: (a) establishing/strengthening local clusters of
8.
value chain stakeholders and scaling up value chain dynamics through partnerships between
inclusive PAs, cooperatives, agribusinesses, municipalities and LED Agencies; (b) using
straightforward and effective co-financing mechanisms that allows leveraging investments of local
public and private stakeholders, based on transparent cost-sharing of interventions; (c) targeting male
and female smallholder farmers, adults and young, creating incentives and conditions for the active
inclusion of vulnerable groups; (d) facilitating effective and sustainable agreements between
agribusinesses, PAs and cooperatives; (e) making available appropriate technical and business
development services at local level; (f) promoting the newest and environmental friendly technologies;
(g) promoting technologies and standards that conform EU and international market access
requirements; and (h) fostering the emergence of cooperatives of the social sector and with social
meaning.
9.
RCDP will be implemented through two components which are complementarity with each
other: (i) Enabling Environment for Inclusive Subsector Development; (ii) Sustainable inclusion of
smallholders in the thriving value chains.
Component 1: Enabling Environment for Inclusive Subsector Development
10. Outcome 1 will be: “The improved policy and institutional environment attracts smallholders
and investors to the selected subsectors.” Five elements of the subsector development approach of
RCDP will be implemented through the component: (i) subsector governance by all concerned private
and public stakeholders through consultations and joint strategic planning of interventions;
(ii) developing relevant institutions’ capacities in the subsectors to ensure adequate supply of
specialized services; and (iii) an enabling policy framework in order to tackle the related trade, policy
and institutional issues and promote local economic development, (iv) subsector performance
monitoring and accountability and (v) strengthening relevant institutions capacities.
Result 1: Stakeholders platforms at cluster level and subsector level improve value chain
coordination and subsector governance, orient public policies and investments in order to
warrant long term subsector competitiveness.
11.
RCDP's approach is based on the private-public partnership model, whereby public funds will
be used to leverage investments from the private sector in a win-win partnership, the private sector
can expand its business and a higher number of small-scale producers can expand their production
and make it more profitable. This model will translate into BPs within clusters and subsectors, to be
prepared, funded and implemented by different private and public partners, including the BP partners
themselves, the financial sector (banks, MFIs), municipalities and the project. In this context, RCDP
aims to provide an institutional space to ensure a continuous dialogue among all stakeholders to help
strengthening subsector development. Two new institutional settings, each of them having its own
76
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
membership and functions, will be established, namely: (i) the Cluster Stakeholders Platforms (CSP);
and (ii) the Subsector Stakeholder Platform (SSP)99.
Establishment of local Cluster Stakeholders Platforms. For each of the clusters envisaged
12.
under RCDP a Cluster Stakeholders’ Platforms (CSP) will be established with the aim at supporting
the development of clusters and selected value chains in their territories and enhance cluster
competitiveness. At local level, issues related to cluster development would be discussed and
analysed with the objective of identifying key priorities to be brought to the attention of municipal and
canton authorities. The CSPs will: (i) validate and agree on key priority action for cluster development;
(ii) identify and aggregate buyers’ demands for agricultural produce, producers’ demands for inputs,
extension and BDS services; (iii) identify financial gaps and sources of funds; (iv) promote horizontal
and vertical integration among value chain actors; (v) coordinate service delivery; (vi) ensure
inclusiveness of poor farmers, women and youth and enhance the pro-poor content in business
proposals (BPs); (vii) monitor progress achieved in each cluster and its impact on poverty reduction;
and (viii) identify constraints to the development of clusters and local issues for policy
dialogue/engagement.
13.
The setting up of the CSP will be preceded by the approval of clusters by APCU/PCU (see
Component 2 for more details). Clusters will be promoted by the project (the APCU/PCU will be in
charge of reviewing the proposals, and open negotiations with municipalities prior to clusters selection
and approval), but clusters will be established by municipalities and local stakeholders. Clusters are
expected to be composed of local PAs, cooperatives, agribusinesses, traders, exporters,
municipalities, service providers, commercial banks and MFIs, Local Economic Development (LED)
agencies and other donor-supported projects operating in the value chains.
Individuals, firms or consortia of BFPs will be selected based on their expertise, knowledge and
14.
familiarity with value chains in the area to provide training, technical assistance and support to CSPs
on VC coordination and organization of the production, mobilization of private and public sector
investments, inclusion of poor smallholders, etc.
15.
Establishment of country-wide Subsector Stakeholder Platforms. For each of the three
selected subsectors a SSP will be established with the aim to improve sub-sector governance and
enhance sub-sector competitiveness. Overall the SSPs will identify key priority actions required to
improve the competitiveness of each subsector, including investments required in public goods
(marketing infrastructure) and public services (e.g. research and development of new varieties, policy
development). Additional functions will include: (i) identifying policy and regulatory issues regarding
the legal framework, public resources and fiscal incentives; (ii) formulating medium- and long-term
strategies for sub-sector development; (iii) contracting sector specific studies and market research for
domestic and international markets, when appropriate (iv) advocating sustainable subsector
development and providing advice to policy makers; and (v) enhancing pro-poor sub-sectors’ linkages
and impact. Overall the SSPs will identify key priority actions required to improve the competitiveness
of each subsector, including investments required in public goods (marketing infrastructure) and
public services (e.g. research and development of new varieties).
16.
The establishment of the SSPs may follow the establishment of the CSPs when new platforms
need to be established (not the case of berries). While it is expected that each CSP at local level will
focus on issues related to the enhancement of the competitiveness of each cluster, the SSPs will
involve institutional actors grouped by the common interest to promote the subsector as a whole, and
bring relevant policy issues to the attention of policy makers.
17. Membership could vary among SSPs based on the specificities of each sector and the
particular institutional framework in each Entity. Hence, an indicative list of potential members may
include: the Ministry of Agriculture; apex-level producers organizations (like for the berry sector); the
99 Any institutional innovation requires time for its establishment and even longer time for its consolidation, so platforms will
require continuous support by RCDP.
77
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
private sector (input suppliers, processors, wholesale buyers, traders, exporters); commercial banks;
NGOs/donors with relevant activities in the subsector, etc.
CSP and SSP Governance Issues. Both CSPs and SSPs will share a number of governance
18.
principles. To be successful and sustainable over time, these platforms should operate on the basis of
common and self-defined interests that will allow them to gradually increase their strength and sense
of ownership. Their agenda, initiatives and resolutions will be taken by their members and
consequently decisions need to be transparent and minutes of each meeting should be appropriately
recorded and circulated. The importance of effective communication among Platform's members is
crucial. In order to ensure it is effective, it is suggested that each Platform be composed of no more
than 20 members.
After an initial period of handholding that may last one year or even longer according to the
19.
specificities of each platform, it is expected that the role of BFPs in CSPs and the APCU/PCU in SSPs
may scale down to become just complementary to the functioning of the platforms. Participation in
each Platform will be voluntary
Any established platforms could become a legal entity or just remain as a forum for clusters and
20.
subsectors partners, depending on decisions by their members. It is actually expected that SSPs will
evolve from a kind of sector platform into a respected institution dealing with sectors’ relevant policy
issues; kind of useful lobbying institution, constantly trying to improve the subsector environment. The
stakeholders of these platforms will have most likely, due to their commercial activities, deep insights
into the actual development of the respective subsectors.
RCDP will allocate funds to support initiatives taken by each Platform (advocacy, meetings,
21.
studies, stakeholders’ forums, training sessions, etc.). Between 20,000 KM and 30,000 KM has been
allocated annually to support each CSP and SSP respectively. Same as BPs to be co-financed by
RCDP, funds will be provided on a matching basis, initially established as 90:10 percent, to gradually
declining over time until each platform relies on its own funds contributed by partners.
Effective monitoring of VC and (sub) sectors’ performance. An effective way to set an
22.
agenda for policy dialogue between stakeholders and local and country authorities is to monitor and
assess the performance of the subsectors. This performance monitoring will be an important area in
which SSPs contribution will be required.
Participatory VC and subsector performance monitoring and a revision of internal accountability
23.
mechanisms will be undertaken annually to review project achievements (part of TORs of platforms).
Accountability will rather be an outcome of progressively integrating more and more stakeholders in
cluster and subsector decisions making processes. Special studies will be undertaken to examine
specific aspects related to subsector development (e.g. possibilities and investments required for
in-country transformation and the elaboration of specific B2B products), planning, M&E, learning and
knowledge management100.
24. Monitoring VCs and subsectors performance requires a starting point and reference standards,
which should be established at the beginning of the process and take a form of a baseline reference
to follow-up, monitor and assess performance. This baseline reference will identify specific sub-sector
performance indicators so that the performance monitoring can be guided by a specific set of
expected results, outputs and indicators. During implementation, performance monitoring would be
complemented by VC and subsectors analyses and participatory self-evaluation. Key data will be
shared on a regular basis with APCU/PCU and business development service providers. Results from
the performance monitoring will allow partners further improve their competitiveness.
25.
Empowering SSPs to engage on policies affecting (pro-poor) subsector development
and the allocation of public sector investments. Successful policy engagement will depend on
RCDP's capacity to approach policy makers providing supporting evidence of the issues raised,
documenting the emerging achievements with impact data and business models, analyzing
100 Details are presented in Appendix 6.
78
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
opportunities and threats for further subsector development. Policy engagement will take place by
facilitating the initiatives of RCDP's stakeholders involved in SSPs at State/Entity level to engage in
policy dialogue with decision-makers in both Entities to promote the agenda of selected subsectors.
The agenda for policy dialogue/engagement will derive from the needs of the subsector and
26.
(sub) sectors’ performance, adequately monitored and assessed. Focus will likely lie on tackling
trade-related issues, market regulations on input and output markets, issues of quality standards and
requirements, certifications, and on other enabling measures to enhance the subsector's
competitiveness in national, EU and non-EU markets.
At local level, it is expected that cluster stakeholders platforms will also engage in dialogue with
27.
relevant authorities (Municipalities, Local Development Authorities, and in FBiH Cantons) on more
localized issues related to VCs and cluster development, new investments, public-private partnership,
access to local development funds, inclusiveness and poverty-focus of cluster development activities,
initiatives that incorporate women and youth women and men.
It is not enough with establishing a space for engaging in policy dialogue; it is also necessary to
28.
develop the capacity of SSPs’ partners to engage in policy dialogue, and allocate fund to facilitate the
functioning of the platforms. Policy dialogue will be supplemented by the preparation of related
studies on specific issues of VCs and subsectors which limit their development and which need to be
addressed by policy-makers to further consolidate subsector development. Potential environmental
impact should be a topic of research. Provision has been made to support these studies. The studies
can be proposed by CSP, SSP and the APCU/PCU and even by Entity authorities, when relevant for
decision-making. These studies may include, among others, subsector studies, marketing studies,
impact assessments, comparative studies on legislations, regulations and standards, learning and
policy notes, and specific case studies regarding the VCs and subsectors.
29.
The PCU/APCU will have the main responsibility for contracting through a competitive process
consulting firm, universities and research institutions to carry out the studies. Provision has also been
made to finance technical assistance from universities in the two Entities which will involve young
university graduates as interns. RCDP will also provide technical assistance support and funds to hold
workshops and carry out specialized training, information and communication campaigns. Priority
would be given to strengthening collaboration with other development partners, as several of them are
already involved in policy dialogue and stakeholder consultations regarding the selected subsectors.
Result 2: Appropriate technical and business development services are made available at local
and entity level.
As part of the efforts to create an enabling environment for inclusive subsector development,
30.
RCDP will help to ensure adequate supply of specialized support services, public and private.
In order to implement BPs proposed by originators (promoters, VC champions) at cluster level,
31.
quality production related advisory services, business development services and organizational
development services will be required. The Project will support the provision of a broad range of
business development services to PAs and cooperatives, this mainly through a functional voucher
system aimed at strengthening both the supply and demand for a broad range of services essential
for sustained subsector development.
32.
Supply of extension and business development support service to farmers and their
organisations, both public and private, varies according to the entity considered: (i) fully financed
public advisory and extension service in Republika Srpska,; (ii) private extension services benefiting
from permanent employment arrangements with cooperatives, helping members and their
organizations to build up internal capacity and extension know-how101; (iii) public business
development service providers tasked with regional economic development; (iv) specialised private
(technical) advisory services; (v) private business development service providers; and (vi) private
101 Project support will be taken as ‘incremental’ and in no case it could be used to finance staff and services that are already
financed by PAs and cooperatives (see table below).
79
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
advisory services linked to commercial enterprises promoting and selling inputs and securing and
buying agricultural produce
In general, extension services are assisting farmers to produce more and better products,
33.
whereas BDSs are mainly supporting agro-processors. The public extension service in the RS is
thus essentially focusing its support to primary production102. Their responsibilities include the
formulation of basic 'business plans' (mostly oriented in function of specific subsidies) and providing
other advisory services for farmers, but these services are generally not market driven. In the RS, this
service is provided by 77 staff members on entity level; out of them only 13 extensionists are dealing
with fruits and vegetables. In general, the service is poorly equipped, underfunded and understaffed.
In FBiH, the system, originally established at the canton level with no central service, is largely non-
operational due to large administrative burden placed on the extension agents
(processing/documenting of canton-level subsidy systems) and/or generally limited interest on behalf
of cantonal authorities103 to support the agriculture sector. Some municipalities finance extension
officers to implement their municipal action plan for agriculture and livestock. These officers usually
focus on technical issues, generally lacking expertise on issues regarding processing and marketing
of fruits, vegetables and NTFP, farm management, BDS and cooperative management.
Public BDS providers in BiH consist of relatively important regional development agencies like
34.
SERDA and REDAH, usually initiated and seed-financed by the EU and other donors. These
institutions have been established for strengthening, coordination and promotion of economic
development in identified macro-regions. However, due to limited own funding, these agencies often
remain dependent on donor-funded projects. Today these agencies exist just in FBiH as RS did not
accept projects covering both entities. In practice, with a few exceptions, these agencies had only a
limited impact on economic development. In parallel to these bigger agencies, many municipalities in
FBiH have set-up small local development agencies to promote economic development, including
agrifood and to get access to project funding104.
Private BDS providers are available in most competence areas from marketing, branding and
35.
market research to legal and financial advice; however the majority of these BDS offer their services
in the bigger cities like Sarajevo, Banja Luka, Mostar, Bihac and a few others. They can easily be
found under business directories in the internet. The outreach of these private BDS to rural areas
remains however limited the constraint being their relatively high cost (based on private sector going
rates) to smallholder farmers and their organizations.
36.
Private advisory services are usually linked to companies that commercialize agricultural
inputs or buy up specific agricultural produce. Their role is to secure that farmers are growing the right
quality/quantity of produce.
37.
RCDP will support the provision of a broad range of business development services in a
broad range of subjects and competence areas; management, costing (product costing, gross margin
calculations, marginal cost analysis, social return on investment etc.), accounting, branding and the
development of marketing strategies, design of effective out-grower supply chains, service contracts,
revision of existing management structures and systems, formulation and implementation of action
plans, quality certification of products (e.g. Fair Trade, Global Gap, Organic, HACCAP, ISO, and
others), supply chain management, logistics, design of improved handling and inventory management
systems, feasibility analysis, financial analysis, personnel management, cash flow management and
other topics. As an initial step, RCDP will carry out an awareness-raising campaign in the rural areas
about services available showing what impact different service providers could have to boost
businesses.
102 Extension offices were established throughout BiH with EU support.
103 Each Canton has its own government including a cabinet of 'sector' ministers
104. RAZ in the municipality of Zepce, ALDI in Gorazdi and the wood cluster in Prijedor are positive examples of public local
economy facilitators.
80
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Requirements for training, extension and business development services will be identified by
38.
specialists (BFPs and other subject matter specialists), BPs stakeholder and agribusiness and
detailed in the BPs.
Production related advisory services, extension and dissemination of technologies. To
39.
provide qualified support to small farmers, their organisations and other stakeholders, the Project will
support: (a) the provision of qualified, “farmer centred” extension services to PAs and/or cooperatives;
(b) the training of trainers, lead farmers and groups of farmers through specialized consultants; and
(c) to demonstrate and disseminate technologies and good practices in events organized by lead
farmers, which can be identified by PAs and cooperatives from their own members or lead farmers
from their area of coverage.
Private advisory services. RCDP will help to ensure the supply of specialized technical and
40.
business development services to bridge the production and business gaps by fostering and
extending the use of innovative technologies, practices and financial, business and organisational
skills. The Project will promote capacity development of specialized service providers, in particular
extension and technical assistance services and business development services in relevant technical,
organisational, cooperative and post-harvest related fields, including pro-poor approach and
inclusiveness.
Public extension services. Strengthened the technical advisory services capacities and
41.
outreach at local level. Public extension services in the Republika Srpska, as well as the canton and
municipal level public extension services in FBiH, will receive training in different fields (production,
processing and marketing of fruits, vegetables and NTFP, farm management, BDS and cooperative
management) in order to strengthen their market orientation. Funds have been allocated to provide
training over three years. The training will strengthen their capacity to deliver advice in the selected
value chains. The participation of these services in project activities will be left to the decision of BPs’
partners, who will decide if they wish to make use of their services, free of charge as they are
financed by public funds, to provide any support to the implementation of their BPs.
Setup of a functional voucher system. The APCU/PCU will setup a voucher scheme to
42.
strengthen the capacity and outreach of required services at (sub) sector level.
The voucher scheme is a mechanism in which BP partners will get an entitlement (a voucher)
43.
to hire services from a broad range of pre-qualified service providers (instead of money), with the
voucher then to be redeemed for cash from the APCU/PCU. The ultimate purpose of the voucher
scheme is to empower PAs, cooperatives and BP partners to decide on how they wish to fulfil their
business requirements (in terms of extension, of specialised technical advisory, of BDS); to negotiate
services and to enter into agreement with service providers; to follow-up on and to assess the quality
and efficiency of the rendered services. The scheme will also empower PAs and cooperatives in doing
business procurement and thus stimulate entrepreneurship by giving them the equivalent of cash (the
voucher).
44.
The voucher scheme will make services more affordable (but not free of charge) for
smallholders. The system will enable smallholders’ organisations and stakeholders to choose the
services they require from a repertory of service providers. The scheme will allow beneficiaries to
choose the training, technical assistance and advisory services required to implement their BPs
among the various private service providers across the country and hiring these BDS providers at a
privately negotiated price. BP partners will select the service providers from a list (roster) of
pre-qualified consultants, consultancy firms and consortia.
45.
As part of the service, cost will be financed by RCDP (ensuring the market for service
providers); it will also encourage the service providers’ sector to broaden the scope of their services
(and eventually develop new services) to assist smallholders along the value chain. Through this
scheme the service providers will be able to reach out to new clients, mainly consisting of PAs and
cooperatives that previously did not have the means to afford such services. Vouchers can build
81
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
additional demand for services and thus accelerate the consulting market development if smallholders
are not already using these service providers.
46. Operationally, the APCU/PCU will set up the scheme, define procedures and prepare guidelines
on how the scheme will be implemented, on how it will be administered (including control mechanism)
and how its performance will be evaluated. A contract or an agreement between BPs’ partners and
services providers will regulate the relationship between the parties.
The management arrangements will be the following: (i) call for application targeted at
47.
interested service providers, individuals, firms and consortia interested in provide services to PAs and
cooperatives and other BP partners (by APCU/PCU); (ii) pre-qualification of suitable candidates (by
APCU/PCU with ad hoc independent specialized support). Applicants will undergo a short
accreditation process handled by an ad hoc small commission of specialists. Eligibility criteria and the
process of pre-selecting candidates should ensure that the roster includes a wide range of services so
as to broaden the choice for the stakeholders; (iii) setup a roster of pre-qualified candidates (eligible
consultants under the voucher scheme), which will be made accessible to all BP stakeholders in the
Website of the Ministry of Agriculture and also in the project Website (by APCU/PCU)105; (iv) PAs,
cooperatives and other stakeholders that had submitted a successful application to APCU/PCU
choose one or several consultants or consultancies from the official roster. Prices may or may not be
indicated in the BP; (v) PAs or cooperatives and the service provider(s) sign a contract/agreement
describing the required services and expected results. A copy will be send to APCU/PCU. In return the
PAs or cooperatives will receive a voucher in the agreed value from APCU/PCU; (vi) after the services
are completed the consulting services, the PAs or cooperatives will hand over the voucher instead of
cash to the consultants or consultancies; and (vii) the consultants or consultancies will go to the
APCU/PCU and cash it in while submitting a short report about the services done.
48.
The APCU/PCU will be in charge of maintaining and updating the roster of pre-qualified
consultants and firms based on performance evaluation of services. The roster will be updated from
time to time with a new call for interest to expand the supply of qualified service providers.
Follow-up and monitoring of services will be a primary responsibility of BP partners, although a
49.
role for monitoring will be reserved for the ACPU/PCU (M&E officer and/or consultants hired for that
purpose), which should also involve in follow-up on the implementation of the services. To ensure
understanding of the voucher scheme the APCU/PCU will hold workshops to explain in detail all
necessary steps to set up and run such a scheme.
Component 2: Sustainable inclusion of smallholders in the thriving/successful value chains
50.
The outcome of component 2 will be the “Sustainable inclusion of poor smallholders and
vulnerable groups in selected subsectors.” Main objectives of Component 2 will be: (i) to help
improve the livelihood of small scale producers and poor collectors through sustainable and profitable
farming; (ii) consolidate their organisations and their capabilities to identify forthcoming business
opportunities (in terms of markets, marketing channels, new products etc.) to expand their business;
and (iii) have a voice and play an active role in the multi-stakeholders coordination platforms, both at
cluster level and at subsector level . RCDP will take advantage of existing value chain dynamics in the
selected value chains in which the private sector (i.e. agro input dealers, collectors, processors,
traders, wholesalers, retailers) is actively engaging with smallholders, either organised or individually.
51.
Business Proposals (BPs), allowing business partners (producers and agribusiness) to plan
coordinate and carry out mutually benefiting investments, will be the main project instrument under
Component 2. The BP will be the main instrument of BP business partners (small-scale producers and
collectors and their organisations, agribusiness companies) for the sustainable development of their
joint businesses in the selected sub-sectors and value chains. BPs will also frame partner's needs in
105 Based on previous experience with setting up a voucher system REDAH could support the project in setting up a small
commission of experts who will examine the qualifications of the consultants. As 'selection' service provider REDAH could
benefit from a fee for each tested candidate.
82
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
terms of capacity development and investments of which part will be addressed by public (project)
funds.
Two are the elements of the subsector development approach of RCDP that will be
52.
implemented through the component: (i) mobilization of the required private and public financial
resources; and (ii) Subsector performance monitoring and accountability based on active participation
of local & country-level authorities, beneficiaries and private stakeholders/investors;
Result 1: Inclusive business proposals developed and implemented
53.
Project promotion and awareness campaign, confirmation of preselected VCs and
clusters. During the initial stage of implementation APCU/PCU will hold several workshops across the
country, at least 5 in each Entity, to promote the project and explain its approach; guiding principles;
target groups; pro-poor and inclusive approaches; strategies and implementation modality; value
chains, clusters and subsector approaches; pre-identified municipalities and clusters of municipalities;
public-private linkages, leverage points etc. These events will follow the pre-identified clusters within
each Entity and focus on value-chains that are specific to these clusters.
Local authorities will be partnering with qualified organisation or consortia of organizations
54.
(LED, RED, consultancy firms, NGOs), which will be hired to work on cluster development as
Business Facilitation Partners (BFPs). Facilitators from these firms / NGO would support local
authorities in: (i) conducting training and awareness raising on targeting principles; (ii) capacity
support to municipalities /stakeholders’ platform in setting up transparent and fair targeting criteria;
and (iii) carry out beneficiaries’ selection process, so as to avoid exclusionary practices and elite
capture.
Selection and training of Business Facilitation Partners (BFPs) on participatory
55.
formulation of inclusive BPs. In each Entity APCU/PCU will select through a competitive process a
qualified organisation or a consortium of organizations to perform the role of Business Facilitation
Partner (BFP) at cluster level for each of the three pre-identified sub-sectors (fruits, vegetables and
NTFPs). A combination of subsectors should be explored and highly encouraged by APCU/PCU when
a consortium has the experience and capability to serve more than a subsector. Main role of BFPs will
be to identify viable business cases and eligible partners (producers, buyers) in one or more than one
sub-sector and facilitate the participatory process of identifying and developing as many win-win
viable and bankable BPs as possible. The establishment of consortia of organizations that could
ensure a better coverage of the region will be encouraged, particularly when it will better serve with its
human, logistic and financial resources an specific region or sub-sector.
In the selection of BFPs, APCU/PCU will take into account: (i) how candidates are planning to
56.
operate; (ii) their experience in facilitating win-win public-private partnerships and pro-poor and
inclusive approaches, particularly inclusive business relationships between poor small-scale farmers
and buyers; (iii) commitment to gender equality and engagement with youth (iv) knowledge of sub-
sectors and value chains; and. (v) expertise in providing business development support services to
small scale producers’ organizations and facilitating participatory business development processes.
Additional selection criteria will take into account the geographic presence, particular knowledge of a
specific territory, technical expertise offered by the candidate organization or consortia, experience
working with one or more of the pre-selected sub-sectors, implementation capacity to cover one or
more value chain, clusters and sub-sector.
BFPs induction workshop (induction training). Soon after the BFPs selection process has
57.
been completed, an induction workshop will be held in each Entity to provide BFPs with background
information on: (i) the overall project proposal; (ii) approach and strategies; (iii) guidance on the
facilitation role each BFP is expected to play at cluster level, (iv) the role of partners in clusters, value
chains and BPs; (v) how the process of identification, preparation and submission of BPs is expected
to be implemented, and (vi) BPs’ scope and minimal content. Particular attention will be given to:
(a) the project targeting methodology and eligibility criteria for producers organisations and private
companies; (b) how to maximise inclusiveness and pro-poor nature of BPs in order to gain the support
83
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
by the project; and (c) BPs’ funding strategies, which will necessarily require the combination of
private and public financing, in addition to project funds.
BP targeting. The Project will undertake, in consultation with PAs organizations and
58.
municipalities, specific actions to reach out to rural poor, youth and women. Priority will be given to
specific partnerships that will ensure an equitable access of poor groups to project support. It will be
the role of the BFPs to monitor the effectiveness of the efforts aimed at ensuring an inclusive targeting
and that these specific target groups benefit from funds allocated by the Project to motivate their
participation (top-up of 20%). Young landless farmers may rent land on long term lease or apply for
publically-owned land in their municipalities. As part of their commitment in cluster development,
municipalities are expected to expedite the process and facilitate access to land, especially for young
people, who may or may not become registered farmers, and women, particularly female-headed
households. The project has allocated funds under a “starter package” for production that can be
adapted to better suit the needs of poor/vulnerable groups.
Identification and preparation of BPs with support of BFPs. The BP will be developed
59.
starting from market opportunities, hence the “BP originator(s)” will likely be the actor(s) who is(are) in
close contact with that potential market, i.e. is performing the marketing and selling function of that
particular product in the selected cluster. Three different actors or stakeholders can be BP’s
originator(s): (i) eligible producers’ cooperatives with extended membership and related governance
structure bulking production from members and non-members, usually called ‘cooperants’; (ii) eligible
intermediaries (e.g. traders, lead farmers) linked to producers associations (PAs) and/or individual
farmers; and (iii) eligible private agribusiness companies (collectors, processors, wholesale buyers
and exporters) sourcing from organised or individual producers or collectors. The BP originator, with
the support of the BFP, is supposed to lead the preparation of the BP. As expected, the BP will
respond to its priorities and business development plans. Ultimately, there would be the BP originator
who will submit the BP to different sources of funding, including the project.
BFPs will be in charge of performing a preliminary screening of potential BP originators in each
60.
cluster on the basis of few eligibility criteria, specific for each category.
The BP will include activities and investments to be funded complementarily by a number of
61.
different private and public financing sources, including the BP partners themselves, the financial
sector (banks, MFIs), municipalities and the project. As a general principle, funds from the project will
be used only to co-finance services and investments on public and semi-public106 goods and services
required to turn small-scale producers/collectors and their organisations into a more viable actor in the
value chains. It is expected that funds from municipalities will be used for the same purpose.
Conversely, as part of viable and bankable BPs, complementary investments in private goods
required by the VC business partners will be provided by other private market-based financial
sources. BPs should be prepared in a very participatory way by involving stakeholders during the
whole process and ensuring their buy-in on the BP objectives, targets, implementation arrangements
and are supposed to be demand-driven (based on and tailored to the specific needs of the parties
involved). BFP should carefully play its role of facilitator creating the enabling conditions (e.g. trust) for
the dialogue between the parties.
As a general reference, they can include some or all of the following business / value chain
62.
development strategies: (i) Process/product upgrading aims at “doing things better and/or bigger”.
These may include enhancing the efficiency of production processes such as using better inputs (e.g.
better quality of seeds) or reducing costs, which can lead to greater margins or more productivity
(higher yields), and hence larger volumes of produce sold; (ii) Functional upgrading which looks at the
opportunities of a particular actor to move up the VC by taking on new value-adding functions
(bulking, transporting, grading, processing and marketing). It implies a careful assessment of
additional costs and risks, as well as potential benefits. Partnerships (e.g. joint ventures) with other
106 A “semi-public” good is a good that is owned and used collectively by a group of individuals for a common purpose. Typical
example is a productive or processing equipment or infrastructure used by a group of farmers.
84
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
VC actors already performing these functions could also be explored as part of the upgrading
strategy; and (iii) helping to formalize through written contracts horizontal and vertical integrations
between organized producers and Pas and cooperatives and its members, a processing company
and its producers/collectors, and actors in the same VC.
Among the eligible activities the BPs could include advisory activities and investments in
63.
areas such as: (a) technical advisory services and training to the producers (collectors) to adopt or
upgrade their technologies and farming (collection) practices in order to meet market requirements
and standards and cope with environmental sustainability and climate change; (b) obtain and renew
certification labels and comply with quality standards of buyer and/or of the end market (e.g. Fair
Trade, Global Gap, Organic, HACCAP, ISO, organic, fair trade and others); (c) on-farm investments
required to ensure production (seedlings, pesticides, fertilizers, on-farm irrigation schemes, etc.);
(d) investment in collective productive infrastructure and equipment such as collection centres,
storage rooms, warehouses, transport, and post-harvest equipment for grading, sorting, aggregating,
and processing small producers’ produce –provided that they are ultimately owned and managed by
farmer’s groups; (e) institutional and organizational strengthening of eligible PAs and cooperatives;
(f) business development services (BDS) to enhance PA and cooperatives business management
capacity; and (g) BDS and support (e.g. co-funding business to business trips, participation in fairs) to
the agribusiness companies for market intelligence and marketing activities.
64. Mainstreaming climate-change resilience and adaptation. The Project will facilitate access
to technologies and strengthening of capacities to adapt to climate-change at small-farm level, for
example, promoting technologies for efficient irrigation and efficient use of energy sources, promoting
equipment and technologies to reduce weather-related vulnerabilities at small farms level, introduce
eco-labels to market local products, promote organic production. A top-up of 20% would be provided
by the Project to encourage that during the preparation of BPs partners are motivated to include
investments in climate change resilient, environmentally friendly, organic production, and energy
efficient infrastructure and technologies.
Cost sharing of BPs. The main principle of the project is that each BP should include a cost
65.
sharing arrangement among different financing sources from the project and municipalities (public
sector) and producers organisation, agribusiness partner and a financial institution, if necessary (the
private sector). During BPs’ preparation, all possible financing sources, private and public, will be
identified and contributions and disbursement schedule from each source will be established. As a
rule of thumb the project will co-finance extension and advisory services costs, and productive,
processing and marketing assets. Main activities to be financed will include: (a) financing of training
and capacity building; (b) financing of the ‘starter packages’ for new producers belonging to project
target groups. (seedlings or seeds, drip irrigation system, pesticides, fertilizers and other items
relevant for specific value-chains) for new producers (i.e. additional poor farmers included in the value
chains) with the remaining to be funded by municipalities (10%) and beneficiaries (50%); (c) financing
of investments. The project will finance the cost of collective equipment and collective post-harvest
handling and processing facilities (70%) that are considered semi-public goods. The balance will be
provided by beneficiary producer organisations through own resources or loans from the financial
sector; and (d) financing climate-smart investments in areas in which the production in the selected
value-chains is already developed and the existing producers meet the poverty criteria. The Project
would provide an additional grant incentive (10% of the total amount) for investments in climate
change resilience and adaption (see Cost sharing of Investments in table hereunder).
Finally, the Project would provide an additional (top-up) grant incentive (10% of the total
66.
amount) for investments that enhance the inclusion of vulnerable groups and rural poor in BPs.
The two additional 10% top-up grants can be combined if appropriate.
Role of the financial sector. In some cases BPs will be funded exclusively through a
67.
combination of funds provided by BP actors, i.e. farmer organisation and agribusiness. In other cases,
additional financing from the financial sector, for example to cover cash flow requirements for the
85
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
purchase of products, will be needed. These needs should be identified during the preparation of the
BP, and it will be left to the cooperatives to explore possible financial sources.
BP assessment and approval. The project will establish a BP Assessment Committee (BAC)
68.
with the specific task of reviewing and assessing BPs. The Committee will be composed of three to
four members: a representative of a development organisation with strong pro-poor orientation; a
representative of a financial institution; and an agribusiness specialist hired to provide technical
advice to the project and a VC specialist when necessary. The BAC will review the viability and the
pro-poor nature of each BP and provide a written technical opinion to the APCU/PCU. This opinion
can be positive, hence the BP is subsequently submitted for final approval or partially positive. When
a BP is considered partially positive because it does not meet the quality standards, it will be send to
the BP applicants with specific recommendations for improvement. BFPs, BP originators and the BCP
will ensure that there will not be any transfer of land rights from farmers to private companies
envisaged in the BP.
BP approval. Following the assessment of BPs, BP originators and their business partners will
69.
be formally invited to present their BPs to the BAC committee. The presentation will be carried out by
BP partners themselves to ensure their full participation in its preparation, understanding and
ownership of the BP. The BFP that facilitated the preparation of the BP will attend the presentation just
to support the BP originator if needed. The BAC approval process will be chaired by APCU/PCU.
BP implementation with the support of selected BFPs107. The project will hire BFPs to
70.
support the implementation of BPs. Depending on the quality of the services provided by BFPs during
the identification, preparation and approval of BPs, the same BFP could be hired to facilitate its
implementation. If that is not the case, another BFP will be selected from a roster of service providers
established by ACPU/PCU through a competitive process, which will be available in the Website of
the Ministry of Agriculture. Main functions of the BFP during this phase will be to: (i) monitor
compliance with project targeting methodology and criteria to ensure project target group are
effectively included, participate and benefit from the implementation of BPs; (ii) monitor the
effectiveness and efficiency of activities implemented (training, technical assistance and business
development services provided, development support, quality of assets purchased etc.); (iii) facilitate
dialogue and conflict resolution between parties if necessary; (iv) facilitate clustering and bundling of
BP activities in order to achieve economies of scale and reduce administrative costs.
Phasing of BPs. It is expected that the project will gradually expand the number of clusters
71.
until reaching a minimum of 12 clusters. This expansion in the number of BPs identified, prepared and
approved will grow accordingly. Over the ten years duration of the project it is estimated that a total of
140 BPs will be implemented, involving all three types of BP originators: 55 originated by producers’
cooperatives, 45 by intermediaries and 40 by agribusiness companies. Over 15,000 poor small
producers and collectors will be directly benefitting from the implementation of the BPs.
Result monitoring. The project will ensure a close monitoring of the implementation of BPs in
72.
order to ensure that each BPs’ party is actually delivering according to its commitment; verify that poor
small-scale producers and collectors are effectively benefitting from the economic benefits generated
and that also the social benefits (related to the inclusion of specific target groups is achieved as
planned. ). The project will also produce a number of knowledge products (guidelines, manuals, case
studies and a collection of lessons learnt) to inform about good practices and so provide guidance to
the Government and other stakeholders to replicate and scale-up the approach.
Result 2: Very poor and poor farmers, women and youth have successfully integrated into
competitive and rewarding value chains.
Rationale. Very poor and poor farmers need to reach a certain viable, commercial scale to be
73.
able to integrate competitive value chains and so benefit from rewarding markets. As these producers
107.Coordinated service delivery (support to development of necessary competences at FO level, hiring of technical and BDS
service providers through the voucher system, mobilizing resources according to cost sharing and financing agreements
86
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
are mostly not registered (limited by the scale of their production) they often fall outside specific
support mechanisms be these at national or at municipal level. Very poor farmers may also face
difficulties in accessing land on a long term basis, or, as in the case of female-headed households
face difficulties with land titling (customary inheritance benefiting male descendants) The way forward
for very poor and poor farmers, women and youth is then mainly through their integration in functional
farmer organization. Existing organizations are however often characterised by their small
membership base and generally weak governance structures. This limits their appetite for taking up
risk ability to develop commercial ventures and increase their outreach to poor farmers.
Cooperatives are also very divers in nature; the law on cooperatives allowed five people to
74.
establish a cooperative, – practise that played against the concept of cooperatives as 'social
economy' organization . Most of them thus operate more as limited liability companies (cooperatives
are cheaper to register, have lower operating costs and eventually can access government subsidies
or/and donor support,). These cooperatives usually rely on non-members (“cooperants”) to develop
their enterprises. Their activities typically include collecting and marketing of produce and as such
their activities do not differ much from purely commercial ventures. Investments in this type of
cooperatives should thus be carefully weighed against potential benefits for the very poor and poor
farmers (e.g. in terms of enhanced market access).
Cooperatives owned and run by small farmers thus typically mix with the above described
75.
cooperatives. In order to fulfil their potential as social enterprises cooperatives owned by small
farmers (or Producer Associations) will benefit from project support to develop their capacities and
increase their outreach to very poor, poor, women and youth.
Improvement of women and youth's participation in rewarding VCs. A wide range of
76.
opportunities for increasing involvement of women in value chains and for gender equity exists.
Increasingly women become also part of farmers' organizations management structures. (With
regards to upstream activities it emerges from the gender value chain analyses carried out for the
design, that women's involvement in has markedly increased in the collection of NTFPs and
productive side of the VC but decreased on the marketing side of the equation. These observations
are strong arguments for the need of the project to fund, at a very early step of project
implementation, to carry out in-depth, studies on conditions and existing socio-economic opportunities
for women in order to boost women participation in local economies and rewarding VCs. Funds from
the grant have been allocated by RCDP to analyse roles and power structures determining relations
between stakeholders in the selected value chains.
A preliminary analysis will inform about the obstacles that prevent poor farmers and particularly
77.
women and youth from participating in and benefitting from rewarding VCs, identifying the specific
constraints to their participation and the specific measures needed to ensure their access to
rewarding VCs. CSPs will be the forum where specific measures should be discussed and agreed.
RCDP, the platforms that the project will help establish, and BFPs will undertake the necessary efforts
to reach out to poor and very poor farmers being the latter groups the most likely excluded from PAs
and Cooperatives.
Actions will include ‘production starter packages’ for very poor and poor farmers, specific funds
78.
to incentive participation of women and youth in BPs (‘top up’), facilitating land access by
municipalities, specific training and awareness campaigns to solicit the interest of marginalised groups
and others. Actions should be set up in association and coordination with PAs, cooperatives and in
close collaboration with municipalities. Women and youth’s involved in producers’ organizations
should benefit from complementary skill development training to feel in competence and knowledge
gaps (e.g. participatory planning, leadership skills, etc.). In municipalities with a significant number of
poor and vulnerable households wishing to become value chain participants, the “production starter
packages” may be adapted to better suit the needs of poor and vulnerable farmers.
In addition to the different mechanisms, tools and partners’ efforts to ensure project activities
79.
reach the very poor and poor farmers, women and youth, a grant of US$ 500,000 has been allocated
87
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
to finance specific activities to ensure inclusiveness, monitoring the inclusion of the project target
groups and to finance the initial project information campaign.
Induction training by BFPs and APCU/PCU on inclusive VC development and targeting.
80.
Similar to the workshop organized to the benefit of the BFP (on targeting and inclusive VC
development), BFPs (with the eventual support of APCU/PCU) will organize workshops for all
stakeholders involved in local value chains and clusters (private sector, PAs and cooperatives,
Municipalities, youth and women’s organisations) to ensure inclusive targeting and monitoring,
pro-poor and inclusive approaches, the implementation of enabling measures for women and youth to
actively participate in BPs and project activities, make a proper use of top-up funds and starter
packages to ensure inclusiveness, and set a monitoring system able to portray this dimension.
Workshops could be carried out by an organization/NGO with experience in poverty targeting and
gender able to portray.
81. Organizational strengthening of PAs and cooperatives (capacity development in a broad
perspective). RCDP’s vision is to enhance market power of small farmers in the value chain through
strengthening of PA and cooperatives. Based on needs assessment, systematic efforts should be
undertaken to strengthen PAs and cooperatives organizational capabilities and skills so that they can
– among others, represent small farmers and in general act as exponents of the social economy. The
Project will actively support cooperatives willing to, broaden their membership (to 15 members and
more), engage at cluster platform level and ultimately prepare business proposals. Cooperatives and
PAs would be assisted to become more business-oriented and more active engaging more members,
particularly the small famers.
Specifically, RCDP will: (a) support the transition from Producers Associations to commercial
82.
entities, namely farmers' cooperatives and farmer owned companies to become more business
oriented and ensure sustainability over time; (b) support the gradual consolidation of producers'
organizations into apex organizations; and (c) strengthen the capacities of producers' organizations
(farmers’ cooperatives and agribusinesses) to submit and implement BPs with the support of the
BFPs. The bulk of the organizational strengthening will be supplied by service providers contracted
through competitive process and will be broad in scope, going beyond the specific activities
implemented by the project to develop capacity and institutions that will be available at local level.
83.
Training requirements will be identified by the producers' organizations, facilitated by BFPs.
This training and capacity development will include capacity building of PAs and cooperatives and
advisory services in production related advisory services, business development services and
organisational development services. It will include membership increase and participation,
leadership, good governance, business development, branding development and marketing
strategies, design an effective out-grower supply, quality certification of products, supply chain
management, logistics, inventory management, strengthening of management structures and
systems, financial management and communication skills, inclusiveness, sustainability and others.
The ultimate objective is to have stronger, more commercially-oriented and more inclusive,
sustainable, local grassroots organizations which set their own goals collectively, take informed
decisions and have increased negotiation skills to participate in decision-making instances at value
chain and cluster levels.
84.
As planned, the training will be organized in modules arranged according to the needs and
strength of each participating organization. Modules will be spread along 18 months for PAs and
organisations. Training and technical assistance support for the organisations will be supplied by
service providers, which will be selected from the roster of services established by APCU/PCU, while
the services will be paid with vouchers administered by APCU/PCU. Funds have been allocated to
cover a significant number of organizations with different level of strength.
Participatory impact result monitoring as regards to the inclusiveness and pro-poor
85.
approaches developed by the intervention, knowledge management and promotion.
Monitoring of inclusiveness and gender issues. Monitoring of inclusiveness will be undertaken to
88
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
look at impact of the interventions on the core target group. A civil society organization or NGO with
experience in poverty targeting and gender will be contracted by APCU/PCU: (a) to develop tools and
methodologies that enable BFPs to reach out to rural poor people, women and youth; (b) to support
define and implement, mechanisms and activities to enable them to participate in the RCDP, (c) to
support the build-up of capacity at APCU, PCU, municipalities, other cluster development
stakeholders and implementing agents in the field of poverty targeting and gender; (d) to provide
necessary backstopping on targeting and inclusiveness during implementation; and (e) to monitor
inclusiveness and to support reporting on achievements and progress; and (e) ensure that
disaggregated information can feed the RCDP M&E system. The service provider will operate under
the direct supervision of the gender officer and close cooperation with cluster development facilitators.
The service provider will build on the knowledge developed by Oxfam Italy pilot activity in 2014.
86. Monitoring of inclusiveness will include: (a) definition of baseline for each selected cluster and
at subsector level in terms of each category of beneficiaries (very poor, poor, borderline poor), gender
focused analysis, (b) facilitators’ training and mentoring to define monitoring tools in each Cluster
development plan, (c) survey on inclusiveness at the end of each programme cycle and definition of
recommendations. As part of the induction training (workshop), the project will ensure the
training/awareness to key actors about the targeting criteria.
Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation
87.
The Lead Project Agencies shall be the Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management and
Forestry and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management of the Republika Srpska. In
each Entity, project coordination as well as fiduciary management will be entrusted to the existing
APCU and PCU.
88. With the view to promoting structural change and sustainable sub-sector development, a
rigorous and outcome and impact-monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be developed, for
which project stakeholders will bear shared/ joint responsibility; the APCU and PCU will however,
besides overall coordination maintain their ultimate responsibility for M&E.
Critically, RCDP will thus have to shift its attention towards project coordination, monitoring and
89.
evaluation of all project supported activities. The demand-driven nature of the project as well as its
participatory approach that will ensure beneficiaries take the lead in selecting, following-up and
assessing performance of service providers will require that PAs and cooperatives members become
part of the M&E process of RCDP. Participatory result monitoring as regards to inclusiveness and pro-
poor approaches, or to take informed decisions at policy level will require to setting up of a consistent
M&E system that will ensure actors and partner are part of the system, generate, collect, and review
information on their own activities and that the information fluxes from the field and is channelled to
the decision makers.
Inputs to M&E will be provided at decentralized level by the clusters, whose M&E capacity will
90.
be supported by BFPs and service providers, ensuring that disaggregated information on targeting
effectiveness on different target groups are provided, as well as capturing project outcomes/impacts
on different beneficiaries’ groups.
91. Monitoring of activities will be a participatory endeavour, directly involving rural organizations,
so as to foster project ownership and shared learning processes. Specifically, ACPU/CPU will be
responsible for M&E, coordinating the facilitation work and project monitoring and evaluation. Funds
have been allocated to finance: (a) equipment; (b) management support; (c) a MIS and monitoring
and evaluation system. Detailed cost for project management and coordination are presented in
COSTAB tables as well as in Appendix 5. Details on M&E are presented in Appendix 6.
89
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Annex I: Business Proposal Estimates (according to the different Originators) - (US$)
ASSUMPTIONS
ENTRY POINT
Production inputs
and extension
(starter package)
PRODUCTION
EQUIPMENT
COLLECTION
FACILITIES
PROCESSING
FACILITIES
BDS AND
ORGANISATION
STRENGTHENING
BP
PREPARATION
BP
MONITORING
TOTAL
COOPERATIVES
                    1,800,000                    630,000              900,000            180,000                 300,000             135,000                 67,500              4,012,500
no BPs
average total members
average eligible members
50%starter package
70% equipment
Average no collection points
Average no processing facility
No beneficiaries
No BPs
Average total members
Average eligible members
50%starter package
70% equipment
Average no collection points
No beneficiaries
No BPs
Average total members
Average eligible members
50%starter package
70% equipment
No beneficiaries
Total
30
150
120
500
3,000
7
3,600
INTERMEDIARIES
30                         900,000                    630,000
                300,000                90,000                 45,000              1,965,000
80
60
500
3,000
7
1,800
BUYERS
40                     5,000,000                    840,000
                800,000             240,000               120,000              7,000,000
400
250
500
3,000
10,000
                    7,700,000                 2,100,000              900,000            180,000              1,400,000             465,000               232,500            12,977,500
90
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Annex II: Job description
Inclusive Business Officer (IBO)
Duties and responsibilities
The IBOs will be a member of the PCU/APCU and will be the focal point for all RCDP project activities
related to component 2 aiming at a sustainable inclusion of smallholders and poor rural people,
women and youth in thriving value chains. To this end s/he will:
 Organise and play and active role in the start-up workshop, promotion/awareness campaign of
the RCDP project as focal point for its Component 2;
 Prepare the TOR and the documentation to hire a service provider to update the information
about sectors and confirm the selection of clusters;
 Prepare the TOR and the documentation to hire through a competitive process the Business
Facilitation Partners (BFPs);
 Organise and play and active role in the BFP induction training on inclusive VC development
and targeting;


Liaise with the PCU/APCU M&E officer and BFPs to set up an appropriate M&E system for
systematic data collection and reporting related to all key activities supported by component 2;
Follow-up on BFPs facilitation of the process of identification and preparation of Business
Proposals through periodic reporting and field visits;
 Monitor the activities of Cluster Stakeholders Platforms and Sub-sector Stakeholders Platforms
and carry out follow-up activities on behalf of PCU and APCU, if and when required;

Together with the Coordinator of the PCU/APCU participate in the BP approval session;
 Prepare the TOR and the documentation to re-hire the Business Facilitation Partners (BFPs) to
support the implementation of BPs;
 Monitor the functioning of the voucher scheme (in coordination with APCU/PCU M&E officer);
 Monitor the performance of approved BPs and progress made against baseline indicators
(business and social) through periodic reporting and field visits;
 Monitor the effective application of measures to mainstream inclusion of poor farmers, women
and youth men and women in supported BPs;
 Coordinate with BFPs the preparation of Knowledge-sharing products (guidelines, manuals,
case studies, lessons learnt) to document and share the results of the component 2 and feed
the agenda of cluster and sector platforms supported by component 1;
 Undertake any other assignment relevant to the RCDP project as requested by the PCU/APCU
Coordinator.
Required Skills and Experience
 Education. Master degree in Business Administration, economics, agriculture, economic
sciences or related areas;
 Experience. Minimum 5 years working experience in coordination and monitoring of value
chain development projects;
 Knowledge of gender and targeting issues;
 Proven communication and organization skills.

Language. Fluent spoken and written English
91
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Annex III: Project phasing and sequencing
PROJECT START-
UP WORKSHOP
(ENTITIES AND
MUNICIPALITY
LEVELS)
PROJECT PROMOTION AND
AWARENESS BUILDING
CAMPAIGN
Preparatory Phase at APCU/PCU level
 REVIEW AND UPDATE TERMS OF REFERENCE OF CURRENT APCU/PCU STAFF
 PREPARE TERMS OF REFERENCE, SELECT AND CONTRACT NEW STAFF (BUSINESS FACILITATORS AND
SPECIALISTS)
 REVIEW AND UPDATE PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL
 REVIEW PROJECT TARGETING METHODOLOGY
 DEFINE BP’S CONTENT AND QUALITY STANDARDS (DEVELOP GUIDELINES WITH SUPPORT FROM SPECIALISTS)
 DEVELOP BP FUNDING STRATEGIES
 DESIGN BP’S PARTICIPATORY MONITORING AND FOLLOW UP METHODOLOGY AND INDICATORS
 SET UP ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR SELECTING FARMERS’ ORGANIZATIONS (FOS) AND PRIVATE AGRIBUSINESS
 PREPARE TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR BUSINESS FACILITATION PARTNERS (BFPS), BP
ORIGINATORS/FORMULATORS AND GENERAL TORS FOR SERVICE PROVIDERS
 SELECT CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT AND PRE-QUALIFICATION OF SERVICE PROVIDERS
 DEFINE HOW AND WHO WILL ADMINISTER THE ROSTER OF SERVICE PROVIDERS AND THE
MECHANISMS TO BE IMPLEMENTED TO ENSURE FULLY AVAILABILITY TO BUSINESS PARTNERS
(WEBSITE)
 DEFINE MECHANISM FOR IMPLEMENTING THE VOUCHER SCHEME
 DEFINE CRITERIA FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND FUNCTIONING OF THE BP ASSESSMENT
COMMITTEE (BAC), BP ASSESSMENT AND APPROVAL MECHANISMS
RESULT 1
INCLUSIVE
BUSINESS
PROPOSALS
DEVELOPED AND
IMPLEMENTED
Component 2: Sequencing of Activities
APCU/PCU

 Update information on value
chains and subsectors, identify
opportunities and challenges
Procurement of a qualified
service provider (APCU/PCU)

APCU/PCU

 Competitive Process:
Procurement of qualified Service
Providers firms and individuals
(explore possibilities for
consortia). Establishment of a
Roster
 One for each subsector, 3 for
each Entity

ACPU/PCU
UPDATE VALUE CHAIN
INFORMATION IN
PRESELECTED SUB-
SECTORS
SELECTION AND
ASSESSMENT OF BUSINESS
FACILITATION PARTNERS
CONTRACTING AND
INDUCTION OF BUSINESS
FACILITATION PARTNERS
(BFP)
92
CLUSTER
DEVELOPMENT
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
FACILITATE
PARTICIPATORY
DEVELOPMENT OF
WIN-WIN BPS
IDENTIFYING BUSINESSES
AND PARTNERS IN ONE OR
MORE SUB-SECTORS
ENTRY POINT:
COOPERATIVES
INTERMEDIARIES
LEAD FARMERS’
BUYERS
VOUCHER
SCHEME
VOUCHER
SCHEME
SELECTION OF PRODUCERS’
ASSOCIATIONS AND
COOPERATIVES
FACILITATE IDENTIFICATION
OF BUSINESS PROPOSALS
SELECTION OF BP
ORIGINATORS
(FORMULATORS)
BUSINESS PROPOSALS’
PREPARATION
(PARTICIPATORY
DEVELOPMENT OF WIN-WIN
BUSINESS PROPOSALS)
RESULT 2
VERY POOR AND
POOR FARMERS,
WOMEN AND YOUTH
HAVE
SUCCESSFULLY
INTEGRATED INTO
COMPETITIVE AND
REWARDING VALUE
CHAINS









BUSINESS
FACILITATION PARTNERS (BFP)
Scouting opportunities and partners
and partners in the clusters
Three possible initiators
BFPs help BP partners to define key
features of BPs
BFPs help identify financial
alternatives/opportunities and financial
gaps
BFPs review market opportunities
BFPs help to ensure pro-poor and
inclusive dimensions
APCU/PCU
Selection from the Roster established
by APCU/PCU (same or new BFPs)
PRO-POOR AND
INCLUSIVENESS
APPROACH
BFP’s support

 Help to create enabling


conditions
Participatory, demand driven based
and tailored to the specific demands of
partners involved
 Review and assess BPs’ technical and
financial viability, quality standards and
focus required by the project. Written
opinion to APCU/PCU
COST SHARING OF
INVESTMENT SUPPORT
(TABLE)
93
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
ESTABLISH THE
BP ASSESSMENT
COMMITTEE
(BAC)
BUSINESS PROPOSALS’
ASSESSMENT
BUSINESS PROPOSALS’
APPROVAL
VOUCHER
SCHEME
IMPLEMENTATION OF
BUSINESS PROPOSALS




Favorable opinion/or further
adjustments
BPs’ presentation to the BAC by
representatives of submitting
organizations
APCU/PCU chair BAC’s approval
sessions
Same or new BFPs or Service
Providers
 New Service Providers from Project
Roster of pre-qualified consultants
and service firms, NGOs, etc.
SERVICES
PAS AND COOPERATIVES’ INSTITUTIONAL
STRENGTHENING, EXTENSION, TRAINING, TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE, ADVISORY SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY
DEMONSTRATION AND DISSEMINATION,
DISSEMINATION OF GOOD PRACTICES, TRAINING OF
TRAINERS, LEAD FARMERS, FARMERS’ GROUPS,
PIONEERS, INNOVATORS
SUPPORT
SERVICES /
BUSINESS
DEVELOPMENT
SERVICES (BDS)
SERVICE PROVIDERS (ONLY PRIVATE)
INDIVIDUALS
PRIVATE EXTENSION FIRMS WHO CAN PROVIDE
SERVICES ON SPECIFIC TASKS, SPECIALIZED
PRIVATE EXTENSION CONSULTANTS: CONSULTING
FIRMS, NGOS, AGRIBUSINESSES (PRIVATE
ADVISORY SERVICES WITH COMMERCIAL INTEREST)
CONSORTIA OF SERVICE PROVIDERS
‘EXTENSION AGENTS’ AND ‘COMMUNITY
ORGANIZERS’ (INFORMAL FARMERS’ LEADERS,
PIONEERS, INNOVATORS
BUSINESS PROPOSALS
PARTICIPATORY FOLLOW-UP AND
MONITORING, PARTICIPATORY
CASE STUDIES, SYSTEMATIZATION
OF EXPERIENCES



BPs participants/partners
ACPU/CPU staff
Support from Project M&E team and
specialized BFPs or specialized
service providers (financed by the
project)
94
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT SEQUENCING
PROJECT START-
UP WORKSHOP
(ENTITIES AND
MUNICIPALITY
LEVELS)
PROJECT PROMOTION AND AWARENESS
BUILDING
CAMPAIGN, PROJECT APPROACH,
CLUSTERS AND VALUE CHAIN APPROACH

APCU/PCU
UPDATE THE MUNICIPALITY SCORING
AND BASELINE INFORMATION ON
POVERTY

APCU/PCU
APCU/CPU PROMOTES
INTER-MUNICIPAL
COORDINATION
APCU/PCU SEES POTENTIALS AND
SUGGEST AND PROMOTE CLUSTERS
BETWEEN MUNICIPALITIES

APCU/PCU
 Municipalities

Support from
APCU/PCU
PRIORITY
 Municipalities

APCU/PCU
 Negotiations
when
necessary
MUNICIPALITIES
ESTABLISH A CLUSTER
MUNICIPALITIES JOINT TOGETHER TO
ESTABLISH A CLUSTER
PRIORITY
FORMAL CLUSTER APPLICATION
SUBMITTED TO APCU/PCU
REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF CLUSTER
APPLICATION
ESTABLISH CLUSTER PLATFORMS
(WHEN MUNICIPAL PARTNERS ARE ON
BOARD)
95
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
SERVICE PROVIDERS
PREPARATORY PHASE AT APCU/PCU LEVEL


Preparation of the bidding documents for the call for interest for the pre-selection of qualified
private service providers (individuals, individual firms, consortia, NGOs and others)
Select criteria for assessment and pre-qualification of service providers and invite ad hoc
independent specialists
 Define how the roster will operate, will be administered and evaluated and how it will be made
fully available and accessible to PAs, cooperatives and agribusinesses, how it will be updated
and debugged from time to time


Bidding process (call for interest)
Set up the methodology for following-up, monitoring and verifying quality, effectiveness and
efficiency of services providers, and voucher scheme’s follows-up.
Implementation Phase
CALL FOR INTEREST FROM OF
SERVICE PROVIDERS

APCU/PCU
ASSESSMENT AND PRE-
QUALIFICATION OF CANDIDATES
SELECTION OF SUITABLE
CANDIDATES ACCORDING TO
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA



APCU/PCU and ad hoc
independent specialists
APCU/PCU
Independent specialists
BUSINESS PROPOSALS
ESTABLISHED A ROSTER OF PRE-
QUALIFIED SERVICE PROVIDERS

APCU/PCU
BFPS
BPS’ ORIGINATORS
(FORMULATORS)
BUSINESS
PROPOSALS
PREPARATION
BP IMPLEMENTATION
BUSINESS PARTNERS SELECT THE
SERVICE PROVIDERS OF THEIR
PREFERENCE AUTONOMOUSLY
FROM AN ACCESSIBLE ROSTER OF
PRE-QUALIFIED BDS PROVIDERS
AND RECEIVE VOUCHER(S) TO PAY
FOR THE SERVICES UPON
COMPLETION. NEGOTIATIONS ON
SERVICES ARE CONDUCTED
PRIVATELY BETWEEN BUSINESS
PARTNERS AND SERVICE
PROVIDERS
96
VOUCHER
SCHEME
ROSTER AVAILABLE
ON THE WEBSITE OF
ENTITY MINISTRY OF
AGRICULTURE AND
APCU/PCU
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Annex IV: Overall BiH Subsector Analysis
The strategic vision of RCDP is to use a subsector approach in order to support core areas108
From the Subsector approach to Value Chain selection
1.
necessary for sustainable structural changes and leading to the expected economic and social
benefits. A subsector approach thus allows for a broader scope approach than a restrictive VC
approach, in the sense that RCDP interventions will not be limited to the direct actors of the VC but
will also take consideration of the meso and macro levels of the VC environment. RCDP will focus
initially on the subsectors of fruits, vegetables and non-timber forest products (NTFP), which offer
good opportunities to contribute to rural poverty reduction, domestic economic growth and exports in
the medium and long term.
2.
The post-war context has given an increasing importance to berries and gherkins production as
well as to the “traditional” gathering of berries, MAPS and mushrooms, shifting for many rural families
(see below) from a secondary monetary resource to the main way of putting bread and butter on their
tables. Farmers starting berries or gherkins production, mainly on former pastures, have to adopt a
brand new production system, to which they must be prepared. On the other hand, the local post-
harvest/collection stages, to prepare and bring the products to the importer groups have been taken in
charge by “newcomers”, at first mainly local people with business acumen and enterprising mind, and
more recently by bigger Bosnian firms established in related sectors and seeking a way to realize a
profitable investment in a growing sector.
Common characteristics of selected VCs
“New” Value Chains and new actors
“Big buyers” and Export market. The selected VCs are characterized by the importance of
3.
the international demand on the said produces. The consumer trends and the structural changes
(e.g.; EU accession) for some of the former main Eastern-Europe countries producers have opened a
space for new producing countries, and big agro-food groups109 are presently boosting the local
production by offering stimulating prices for these products.
The post-war context has given an increasing importance to berries and gherkins production as
4.
well as to the “traditional” gathering of berries, MAPS and mushrooms, shifting for many rural families
(see below) from a secondary monetary resource to the main way of putting bread and butter on their
tables. Farmers starting berries or gherkins production, mainly on former pastures, have to adopt a
brand new production system, to which they must be prepared.
On the other hand, the local post-harvest/collection stages, to prepare and bring the products to
5.
the importer groups have been taken in charge by “newcomers”, at first mainly local people with
business acumen and enterprising mind, and more recently by bigger Bosnian firms established in
related sectors and seeking a way to realize a profitable investment in a growing sector.
Transformation/processing is limited: apart from deep freezing or drying, the buyers from the
6.
export market limit the local processing of the produces to the minimum for their good preservation
during transport. All grades of the exported products are not to be sold as they are to the final
consumers, and some will go through a further processing, towards the B to B market, for other
agro-food actors, and some of these products might be processed locally.
108 (a) an enabling policy framework from State to Municipality level, (b) mobilisation of the required financial support,
(c) strengthening relevant institutions and capacities of service providers in the subsector in order to ensure an adequate supply
of specialized services for sustainable development, (d) Subsector governance by private stakeholders and their professional
organizations, and involved ministries and municipalities through consultations and joint strategic planning of interventions and
(e) Subsector performance monitoring and accountability.
109 such as the Austrian Agrana, or the Swedish Nordic Food Group, through their branches
97
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Relations between actors and global strategies
7.
Apart from climate hazards that may deeply affect the whole VCs, the main risk for processors
is supply shortage, which induces the common response of contract-farming systems and vertical
integration models to tackle it. The contract can be concluded either directly between the processor
and the individual farmer, or between the processor and a “collector”110 who may in turn contract with
individual farmers. The “integrator” provides to farmers (i) technical assistance, through an extension
team “driving” the farmers to produce as required and (ii) an in-kind credit system111 for input supply,
that can include repayment arrangements for new plantations or in case of climatic disorders.
8.
Poor farmers, prone to feel redeemable to those offering to buy their products and to manage
their production, seem to have developed a “tradition” of over-reliance on “downstream” actors: they
appear to be generally loyal to their contractual commitment. On the contrary, mutual trust between
farmers has to be rebuilt, maybe as a consequence of the war and the maiming of the social fabric,
and broad membership based organisations (FA or Cooperatives) hardly emerge.
Contract and contractors versus 'cooperants'. So called Cooperants (cooperators) are not
9.
always cooperative members and some cooperatives act as a “protective level” for processors in
which they are embedded: they take the collection risks, and have to manage the relations with
farmers. But this type of “imperfect” cooperatives might contain the seeds for a co-management of the
VC, as a debating space for private company and farmers on quality, quantity and prices issues.
10. Working capital requirement is another key asset in a context where operating loan is not
easily available: availability of capital (to pay the suppliers) and ability to lend some in cash or kind is
an efficient way to create strong links between actors and to mark one’s dominance.
11.
Despite the unsatisfied demand of market, relations between processors do not seem to be an
intense competition for products. When bargaining with farmers, processors and collectors refer to a
reference price settled by foreign buyers at the start of the harvest campaign. This cannot be treated
as a cartel-like organisation and in the meantime, there does not seem to be a “collection-zone fixing”,
as it has been noted that several buyers’ supply zones can overlap.
Public authorities tend to see processors as private social “peace-keepers”, because they
12.
generate a flow of money and jobs on their territories. This situation allows processors to get good
investments conditions (land, co-financing or subsidies) from Municipalities, which seem not always to
be met for cooperatives wishing to develop their activities112. Nevertheless, the absence of
intermediary bodies -such as Farmers Organisations- jeopardize the long term social stability in local
communities and in the country, and Municipality awareness should be raised on these issues, to
foster their contribution in supporting Cooperatives and FAs growth.
110 Which can be a private agent or an Agricultural Cooperative
111 As regular operating loan from financial institutions (working capital for crop year inputs funding and/or investments for
seedlings installation in new plantations) are scarcely available to farmers, due to their lack of collaterals, this financing system
112 Oral communication, VIP Krajina Vegetable Cooperative, RS, November 2014.
98
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Main actors of VC
Figure 1: Main technical functions and actors of the selected VC
y
l
p
p
u
s
t
u
p
n
I
s
r
e
z
i
l
i
t
r
e
F
-
s
t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t
y
r
a
t
i
n
a
s
o
t
y
h
P
-
y
l
p
p
u
s
t
u
p
n
I
s
g
n
i
l
d
e
e
S
-
Extension
services
Exporter
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
o
r
p
f
o
g
n
i
k
l
u
B
s
t
n
o
p
i
n
o
i
t
c
e
l
l
o
C
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
T
n
o
i
t
c
e
l
l
o
C
)
C
°
4
+
(
e
g
a
r
o
t
s
l
o
o
C
)
C
°
0
4
-
(
g
n
i
z
e
e
r
f
p
e
e
D
)
C
°
8
1
-
(
e
g
a
r
o
t
s
l
o
o
C
i
g
n
g
a
k
c
a
P
s
r
e
c
u
d
o
r
P
r
e
d
o
H
l
l
l
a
m
S
t
s
e
v
r
a
H
&
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
o
r
P
Cooperatives
Fresh produce
« Middle men »
n
e
e
r
g
’
s
r
e
m
r
a
F
r
o
s
t
e
k
r
a
m
n
o
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i
l
i
a
t
e
r
d
a
o
r
e
h
t
t
e
l
t
u
o
.
g
.
e
(
g
n
i
s
s
e
c
o
r
P
,
m
a
j
’
s
e
i
r
r
e
b
r
o
s
g
n
i
l
l
i
f
,
p
u
r
y
s
)
s
e
l
k
c
i
p
’
s
n
i
k
r
e
h
g
i
g
n
p
p
h
S
i
t
e
k
r
a
M
t
r
o
p
x
E
l
a
c
o
L
t
e
k
r
a
M
This Figure fits particularly the berries VC, which are mainly oriented towards exportation of
13.
deep-frozen products, whereas gherkins VC export exclusively fresh products. In mushrooms VC,
drying processes stages often replace deep-freezing stages, but are not the majority for these
produces, which can also be exported as fresh produces.
Production
Farmers: Today, BiH agricultural production is assured by 515,000 privately owned smallholder
14.
farms, mostly small and fragmented113. Consequence of the war and also of a “rural exodus” of
younger people not finding enough perspectives in rural sector, the working-age population in rural
areas114 is ageing. Thus a lot of the present farmers have been permeated with the pre-war,
interventionist organisation of former Yugoslavia, either as agricultural cooperants under socialist
cooperative strong guidance, or as part-time farmers working in local factories which were destroyed
during the war or closed by post-war restructuring plans. These farmers have “inherited” a vision of
their activity mainly reduced to producing, with low control on input and output markets, as long as the
price from their products cover their family needs.
Consequently, with this low level of organisation and limited expectancy in terms of professional
15.
control of their activity, an important part of BiH farmers seems to view as a suitable opportunity the
vertical integration model proposed in the considered VCs. Although satisfactory for both sides in a
113 In Dimitrievski, D. Agriculture in the process of adjustment to the common agricultural policy, Monograph, Skopie, 2010. The
study also states an average of 0.59 ha of agricultural land per capita, of which 0.36 ha are fields and gardens
114 Source World BankGroup–Bosnia and Herzegovina Partnership: Country Program Snapshot, October 2014, pp7-9,
http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/eca/BH-Snapshot.pdf
99
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
short-term perspective, this contract-farming system is replacing the pre-war dependence on State
cooperatives and subsidies system by a dependence on “integrators”. Progress towards farmer's
empowerment is slight, which jeopardize the subsector’s ability to respond to changes in trends and
opportunities.
16.
Land availability: a paradoxical situation. Beside the abundance of available agricultural
land in BiH (around 50 % of agriculture land is said to be uncultivated), its land status is insecure for a
small farmer willing to set up or extend their land and youth’s land access is even more complicated
by social organisation115. Nevertheless, the land market transparency may not be optimal, at all levels
of the country, as some big actors manage to “grab” big plantations.
Access to conventional bank credit (see below) is limited for smallholders, and this situation
17.
reinforce the attractiveness of the integration model, when proposing in-kind credit system.
Apart from funding problems, producers face two opposite categories of climate risks: draught
18.
and flooding. Water supply is problematic in many parts of the hilly landscape of BiH, mainly
constituted by a dry limestone plateau, and establishing plantations along the narrow banks of the
rivers is a risky solution to make irrigation cheaper, as rivers are prone to overflow116.
Input supply
Input supply, cost and availability of fertilizers and plant-protection products, is an important
19.
concern for farmers, leading farmers to enter vertical integration systems. There are very few
examples of organized farmers taking in charge bulking of commands for input supply, It should be
stressed that (a) development of organic production and notably the use of locally produced organic
fertilizers could reduce these costs and enhance input local availability, (b) resort to local varieties,
particularly for berries production117, more adapted to local soil and climate conditions, and presenting
a greater hardiness towards diseases, could also allow for a less intensive use of inputs, and thus
reduce farmer’s need of external funding.
Input suppliers are of three main types: (1) berries nurseries and seedlings providers are
20.
essential, to meet the buyer's demand of specific varieties. H&H Fruit, a private actor from Bugojno,
has risen to a quasi-monopole in primary production of imported varieties’ seedlings and is supplying
the whole country. Seedling multiplication can be undertaken by private companies or in some case
by (buyer-driven) cooperatives, within the in-kind credit system described above, (2) chemicals -
fertilizers and soil conditioners, and phytosanitary treatments - are provided by private companies,
(3) development of organic fertilizers production could be a source of both local value-added and
employment. This latter issue should be seriously considered as the alternative of organic production
could be durably lost if a widespread use of chemicals is made in the selected VC.
Post-harvest/gathering operations
21.
Collectors buy the produces from the farmers or gatherers and bulk them for delivery to
processors. Generally tied to a specific area, they may organize collection points and even transport
to the processing unit. They can be (i) registered private buyers or (ii) cooperatives with whom the
processor may conclude a supply contract, and who will also contract with its suppliers, or (iii) they
may be “illegal”118, thus not paying taxes and being able to offer higher prices to their suppliers with a
disrupting effect on the VC. Private buyers take a fixed margin per kg, which is a problem for
processors when the product’s market price falls.
115 “Tradition” prevents the younger generations to possess their own land if their parents are still alive.
116 Nevertheless,  irrigation  facilities  solutions  have  been  tested,  notably  with  IFAD’s Renewable  Energy  Technologies  grant
funding that could be affordable for organised farmers.
117 BiH  host  many  endogenous  endemic  varieties  of  berries,  particularly  raspberries,  which  are  kept  in  the  University  of
Sarajevo’s collections, by the Balkans expert for berries, Dr Adnan Malicevic. Currently he lacks funding to develop systematic
testing of these varieties for their compliance with processors requirements and DNA sequencing to make them available as
“open source”.
118 Notably in the “traditional” -not selected- fruits & vegetables VC.
100
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Processors are the “local” link between producers/gatherers and the export market. These key
22.
players take in charge all the stages in the VC from the collection point to the shipping to export
markets. They manage deep-freezing and cool storage processes or the drying processes in case of
mushrooms and MAPs. They are local job creators on a permanent basis but also provide seasonal
jobs at the peak period of collection, to take delivery of supplies and to process them. Through
contract farming and sometimes a vertical integration system, they secure the farmers’ revenues and
are regarded as “social peace”-keepers in the unemployment context of BiH. Most of the time, they
are not specialized in a given VC.
Two types of processors: Historically, the local SMEs processing these VC produces have often
23.
started and gained their first business experience with mushrooms and MAPs (fresh or dried
products) before “catching” the berries train (and sometimes the donors’ funding), and shifting to deep
freezing technology. These historic players now have to face the rise of new processors, related to
biggest national or international actors119, and this trend seems to be promoted, as investments
opportunities are open in BiH for “big” integrators120.
Downgraded and lost products seems to be quite substantial, particularly during the processing
24.
of berries, as 20-30% of the total stock being lost/downgraded seems to be a common figure among
processors met during the mission. Reducing these losses could allow for higher prices for farmers,
and could be an issue for VC actor's win-win collaboration.
The level of investment is quite high for the different facilities that processors have to use, and
25.
their operating costs often have to include also the cost of the services121 they make available to
farmers. Nevertheless, most of the processors met were able to reinvest just through their benefits,
notably to increase capacity of their processing/storage facilities. Complement funding from bank
loans or donor and NGOs projects is generally available for these actors.
26.
The limiting factors vary according to the situation: (i) there is generally a competition for
produces, which keeps the market price for producers at a relatively high level, but (ii) it can also be
the storage capacity in more landlocked and less competitive areas, and (iii) availability of working
capital122 for payment of suppliers is also a concern for all these actors. Processors’ strategies secure
their supplies through a pool of contractors or through processors’ directly-owned and managed large
plantations, which also reduce the overall operating costs.
Export market buyers are the fuel of the demand and of all the VCs dynamics. According to
27.
the processors, they are the ones who make the campaign price for all products123, looking for the
best prices on several European supply markets. They have presently invested little in the country,
with the exception of Nordic Food Group124. It seems that in some case they can bring some limited
working capital loan to their suppliers.
VC Environment: a quick view on VC meso and macro levels
Meso level
28.
Farmers’ Organisations (FOs) as a whole are very little developed with regard to their
geographical availability to farmers (no more than 50 active FOs in the sectors of intervention of the
RCDP project). They are often supported by donors’ projects, some of them inclining towards
119 Three such big groups have been met /identified during the November 2014 mission: (i) Poljo-sementi Group, originally
dealing with input supply and transport, which started integration through these two entry points (ii) KLAS JSC, initially dealing
with the bakery VC at national level, with pre-war connection to berries production and (iii) Nordic Food Group, an international
that opened a Bosnian branch, Bos Agro Food in Sarajevo, and is presently extending its reach with new deep-freezing and
cool-storage facilities in the Zepce area.
120 From Bosnia and Herzegovina Investment Opportunities Document, FIPA, Sarajevo 2013, page 35.
121 In-kind loan of input, extension advisors, transport and post-harvest packaging
122 For which there does not seem to be any credit product available (such as stored product warranting) from banks or MFIs.
123 Although it is unclear whether this is a “Balkans’ price” or the price from the commodity market in Chicago
124 Through its Bos Agro Food subsidiary, which is present in Srebrenica, and has directly invested in a deep-freezing/cool
storage unit in the Gorazde region
101
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
promotion of vertical integration models for the F&Vs and NTFPs sectors. Remarkably, our
interlocutors from FOs were in almost all cases “recruited” officers (Director, etc.) but scarcely
“elected” officers (Board members) and meeting of “simple” farmer-members has been almost
impossible during the mission. An important issue is the farmers’ “project management” capacity of
their own organisation, and the RCDP should look for all means to develop this capacity from base to
summit, for fear of simply extending downwards a “top-down” approach, through technician-driven
FOs and taking the risk to go without the ideas of the producers, for evolving into an unsettled national
and international environment.
Cooperatives are a legacy of the agricultural system of the socialist era, part of the country’s
29.
tradition, but a new legal framework for cooperatives has been established by The General (state)
Law on Cooperatives, approved in 2003, which strives to instil the principles of voluntarism,
democracy, freedom and transparency, and regulates all aspects of cooperative operations.
Nevertheless, this law is not specific to agricultural cooperatives and presently, only 550 agricultural
cooperatives stand among the 800 cooperatives present on the whole BiH territory125. Only 150
cooperatives are estimated to be active in the whole BiH.
30.
“New cooperatives” operate notably in the selected value chains, and are mostly involved in
input supply and marketing, behaving as aggregators of smallholders’ production. To a large extent
these “new cooperatives” are, in reality, limited liability share companies formed as cooperatives for a
variety of reasons, with a minimal membership base. These cooperatives serve members as well as
non-members, who are only suppliers of produce to the cooperative. The members benefit from the
profit the cooperative makes by serving as an aggregator of produce while cooperants benefit only
from the access to market provided by the cooperative, quite far from the operating rules of EU
cooperatives. In a number of cases126, the cooperatives are closely linked to a processor, which may
even be founder of the “Farmers” Organization.
Producers’ Associations operate under the general State Law on Associations and
31.
Foundations adopted in 2001. Statutorily undistinguishable amongst the estimated more than
8,000 Civil Society Organizations (CSO) operating in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Producers’
Associations127, most often operating at Municipality level, are hardly identified even by Municipality
authorities, except when they are put in the light through the support of a donor. Some fruits and/or
vegetables producers’ association have been recently established, with the support of important
donors/projects such as IFAD, FARMA, UNDP, Caritas or Oxfam, which also operate mainly at
Municipality level. In those cases, the Farmers’ Association appears to be a first step of organization
and may lead to the establishment of a Cooperative128.
32.
PAs are at some liberty for entering many activities to bring VC support functions to their
members and a few farmers’ associations are, in particular, developing extension services or advices,
thus getting experience in providing training and marketing services, while their members develop
individually a “membership spirit”, a technic-economical vision of their productive activities and mutual
trust. The RCDP’s 10-years implementation period should be an advantage to support this maturing
process, and help the emergence of sustainable FOs.
33.
Support services: for farmers: mainly extension services provided through a variety of
channels, with different levels of proficiencies but a similar approach, they were present in all visited
areas (if not available to all). The level of proficiency in regard of service provided is variable129 but the
125 In 2008 Republic of Srpska issued a specific Law on Agriculture Cooperatives, largely in harmony with the BiH Cooperative
Law of 2003.
126 For example, Udruzenje Vocara “Drina” created with Herbos Nature d.o.o. in the Goradze zone, or AgroDAR in Cazin which
is more or less part of the Poljo-sementi Group.
127 They could be around 200 in FBiH and around 70 in RS, mainly dedicated to the dairy sector or bee-keeping, as a result of
post-war donors’ and administration’s efforts on these sectors.
128 In the area of Konjic, several FA covering various sectors have founded the Cooperative of Agricultural Associations. The
Cooperative serves as the umbrella for 700 members, 80 of which are women. Near Gorazde, a Cooperative has been
established by three FAs (and the local processor, Herbos Nature).
129 See also WP on VCs (WP N°- Appendix )
102
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
mainstream approach is a (i) technical, (ii) top-down and (iii) individual approach of support services,
which proved suitable for a quick increase of production to set up a core production capacity, on which
processors have been able to base their development. However, this approach has two main
drawbacks: efficiency and sustainability, as it allows only a reduced number of effectively trained and
monitored farmers per extension advisor, which implies fairly high individual training costs,
unaffordable for the poorest. This reduces the reach of the knowledge diffusion and only marginally
foster farmers’ management capacities needed for a sustainable development of the VCs, and for a
start, for an appropriate choice of introduction of new activities related to these VCs in poor farmers’
livelihood systems.
The present situation may then allow now for an evolving approach, building on trained and
34.
experimented farmers to expand the reach of extension services, in order to foster a horizontal
diffusion training approach. Key role would be devoted to support services providers willing to shift
towards a “development group” approach. In turn, this “development group” approach could be
widened from technical extension issues to more technic-economical “farm management and
consulting services” supporting the farmers’ promotion as valid decision-takers.
35.
Support services: for processors, are available for example to start in the business as well
as legal and technical advisors. Projects, Municipalities and banks can also be providers of support
services, through training and conferences. Private advisors, sometimes also operating as extension
officers, can provide training for export certifications and expand the training to farmers when
required. The growth of family managed companies should be accompanied by appropriate
management and accounting capacities building, to avoid growing pains.
Financial institutions: Banks’ loan policies are not directed towards farmers’ financing needs
36.
issues and apart from MFIs, loans seems to be mostly available to processors. The main limitations
for farmers' access to credit relate to collaterals availability, value and farmer’s willingness to risk
them, followed by the high cost of credit. Some MFIs value the backing of a “recognized” FO (e.g.
Cooperative) in assessing the creditworthiness of farmers. Credit lines opened through projects have
sometimes proved to be effective and to have allowed some testing of methods, but remain highly
questioned. PAs or Cooperatives willing to engage in commercial operations will need “collection
credit” and the warranting of stored products should contribute to tackle the working capital concern.
The promotion of such a new product would require intervention of high-level professional in this
banking sector.
Farmers’ commercial operations can be conducted in three ways: (i) farmers’ green markets
37.
or individual on-the-road retail outlet for local short value chains (ii) collection points in a contractual
organization130 in longer export value chains, but (iii) many farmers use the services of registered
(including Cooperatives) or un-registered (black market) collectors that take the produce at the gate of
the farm. No local commodity exchanges131 are organized, and the local fairs, which are presently
interestingly developing with the help of donors, are mainly exposition meetings, aiming at
establishing links between actors for subsequent commercial contracts.
38. Municipalities and “clusters” institutional dynamics are presently not yet clearly at work:
only some individual Municipalities have adopted a pro-active approach towards rural development
and a cluster approach is being tested in a few places132. Operating steering body and effective
pooling of projects and human resources seem to be key issues for its success. Local Economic
Development Agency (LEDAs) at Municipality and Regional levels133, can offer information and
training facilities for the various VC actors in the region. Law enforcement is also a concern, as VC
are disrupted by “black market” players, who nevertheless manage to deliver their produces to
supermarkets and greenmarkets or processors.
130 Or even the food processor’s gate, if the commodities are close to the farm.
131 Organized trading points for farmers, in particular for NTFPs and mushrooms, some kind of “open outcry markets”.
132 For example in various IFAD’s RLDP zones, notably with Oxfam support, but also in UNPD’s Srebrenica’s projects
133 During the mission, the Zepce Municipality, as well as Regional REDAH (Mostar) and SERDA (Sarajevo) Development
Agency were met.
103
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Macro level: entity and state level
The institutional complexity is a challenge in B&H due to the variety of key administration
39.
bodies involved in the agricultural administration. The respect of the subsidiarity principle and a good
coordination between the two entities are required to make this system effective.
40.
Research Institute and Certification services: quality and sustainability at stake along with a
sense of sovereignty. Qualified professors and their team can be found in the Agriculture Universities
but their operating funds rely heavily on donors, inducing some biases in research themas134. On
another hand, it has not been possible to identify a clear chain of certification to guarantee to farmers
to buy virus-free seedlings, nor the procedures to get such a certification.
Unions of FO: umbrella organisations for FOs are not yet developed, as FOs themselves are
41.
only emerging. In some cases, with the help of projects or LEDAs, seedlings of an umbrella
organisation might be fostered around the project of an agricultural fair.
Apex Cooperative Organizations exist at the three levels of BiH. Cooperative Union of Bosnia
42.
Herzegovina (BHCU) is the state level apex cooperative organization: they have a limited
representativeness as they regroup around 20% (less than 100 coops) of the 550 BiH Agricultural
Cooperatives135, this figure is however more significant compared to the estimated 150 active
Cooperatives. They have the delegated responsibility of auditing cooperatives, and the two entity
cooperative unions claim the same objectives and functions of advocacy and lobbying for their
members at their respective entity level, together with education, information and capacity building
trainings, although the extent to which they fulfil them is not evident. As an apex organization, BHCU
has the authority to work with the national government to pass laws that regulate cooperative
practices and to set standards for auditing cooperatives. It also represents cooperatives abroad and
collaborates with international organizations.
43.
Chambers of Commerce: organised in two distinct bodies, respectively for local and
international commerce, their role encompass facilitating economic information circulation, and they
should be information network headends, but their capacities have to be clearly assessed.
The legal framework should be adapted to fit the evolution of the rural sector in several, non-
44.
limitative, issues: (i) cooperatives working in accordance with the international (and notably EU)
standards of cooperation should be supported by a specific legal status, but the other agricultural
trade association-like structures should keep a specific status when managed by farmers, (ii) contract
farming136 should be paid a specific attention, as mutual commitments, in terms of duration, price,
grading and quality payment, may not always be clear, or fair, and (iii) land status to promote the
access of the young and the poorest to land property (the establishment of “Rural Land-Use Planning
Corporations”137 could be one of the solution).
134 For example, in the berries VCs, the Butmir Centre near Sarajevo has implemented its research programs mainly through
USAID and SIDA-funded FARMA program, which mainly focused its work on new imported varieties, and has not exploited the
collection of well adapted endemic varieties that they possess, and which might be of interest for economical and sustainability
issues.
135 The Republic of Srpska Cooperative Union (RSCU), which regroups 64 agricultural cooperatives, or the Federation of BiH
Cooperative Union (FBiHCU), which regroups no more than 30 agricultural cooperatives, amongst 78 members.
136 See WP N°, Appendix, for examples of the diversity of contract proposed to farmers.
137 For example, Rural Land-Use Planning Corporations (or Safer- “Sociétés d’aménagement foncier et d’établissement rural”)
have been created in France by the 1960’s agricultural guidance laws. They are organized in several ruling bodies facilitating
dialogues  between  regional  stakeholders  (farmers’ organisations, local  and  regional  authorities  and  State),  with  a  State  final
validation. Their initial objectives -“the reorganization of farms, as part of the establishment of more productive agriculture, and
the setting-up of young farmers”- have developed to fully take into account present concerns of territorial development and of
nature  protection. In  2012,  the  26-region  based  Safer  were  still  buying  about  one  third  of  accessible  surfaces  on the  French
land  market,  and  redistributed  the  same  amount  of  agricultural  land.  (http://www.safer.fr/avec-safer-dans-but-interet-
general.asp)
104
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Annex V: Analysis of the Vegetable Subsector in RS and BiH
1.
especially RS specificities, a more detailed analysis of the vegetable subsector in the RS was
undertaken.
On the basis of the request to further assess the viability of the vegetable subsector, and
The potential of the vegetable sector for pro-poor inclusion
Production of vegetables in RS and BiH
Vegetable production in BiH is a quite modest. Vegetable crops in BiH covers 75 000 ha what is
2.
around 14 % of total sown area. Annual production of vegetables in BiH from 2011-2014 is between
676 109 t in 2011 up to 507 365 tons in 2014. Republika Srpska contributes to BiH overall production
of vegetables with around 45 %. The most important crop in BiH is potato with share of 59.2 % of total
vegetable production.
Table 20: Comparison of Vegetable Production in BiH and RS (in Tn.)
BiH
2011
RS
BiH
RS
BiH
RS
BiH
RS
% of RS
in BiH
2011
2012
2012
2013
2013
2014
2014
2014
412696
175033
299935
124133
371141
146735
300408
134797
44.87
20693
4065
13698
2854
23141
3515
19985
39909
11749
32890
10262
39739
9652
33346
5649
11873
3305
2488
4819
2254
4849
9395
3035
2311
4335
2182
6649
2439
12643
6053
4369
3400
5115
9435
3352
4557
7906
1936
4549
2392
22.80
23.71
37.85
48.21
71.36
Potato
Carrot
Onion
Garlic
Bean
Peas
Cabbage
72391
26924
62079
29379
69622
37580
59972
27915
46.54
Tomatoes
45942
18734
44021
23709
56.03
24533
29307
12580
42.92
Green paper
37071
24118
35384
23543
38524
25801
28638
17908
62.53
Cucumber and
gherkins
26580
12233
23201
12856
27876
15201
17807
8940
50.20
Total
676109
282417
528487
235564
593760
274909
507365
223480
44.05
Figure 2: Production of vegetables in BiH and contribution of RS 2011-2014
Production of vagetables in BiH and RS in t 2011-2014
s
n
o
t
700000
600000
500000
400000
300000
200000
100000
0
BiH
RS
2011
676109
282417
2012
528487
235564
2013
593760
274909
2014
507365
223480
105
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Figure 3: Share of RS in overall production of vegetable in BiH 2011-2013
% of RS in
BiH for 2013
is 46.3 %
% of RS in
BiH for 2011
is 41.9 %
% of RS in
BiH for 2012
is 44.6%
In RS vegetable crops covers around 31 000 ha what is around 10 % of total sown area138.
3.
Most important vegetable production in BiH and RS is situated in the valley of river Vrbas (region
Lijevce field) and Sava River, Semberija region. These two regions have excellent soil conditions and
plenty of unpolluted water for intensive vegetable production, both on open field as well as in
greenhouses. In these regions production of vegetables in the open field is traditional activity.
In other regions of RS and BiH open field vegetable production is not so well developed due to
4.
lack of: (i) high quality soil; (ii) water for irrigation; and (iii) knowledge and marketing channels.
However, in these regions development of vegetable production in greenhouses is pretty obvious;
many small scale farmers or part time growers started vegetable production in greenhouses to
generate additional income.
5.
Lijevce area, with its municipalities Gradiska, Laktasi, Srbac and Semberija region, together
with Bijeljina, are the most important vegetable production region in RS and BiH. Beside these two
regions, Capljina and Stolac municipalities, in Hercegovina are the most important vegetable growing
areas in FBiH. In Herzegovina region majority of vegetable production is concentrated in
greenhouses.
Gradiska, Laktasi and Bijeljina municipalities contribute with 41% of total vegetable production
6.
in RS.
138 There is no updated statistical data available on vegetable production in greenhouses.
106
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Figure 4: Map of vegetable regions in Republika Srpska
Figure 5: Share of vegetable production per municipality in RS
Share of vegetable production per municipalites in RS
Gradiška
16%
Bijeljina
16%
Laktaši
9%
Banjaluka
5%
Other
52%
Zvornik
2%
The most common vegetable crops in in the Lijevce field are: potatoes, onion, cabbage, tomato,
7.
watermelons, melons and cucumbers. In the Semberija region the most common crops in the open
107
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
field vegetable production are: cabbage, watermelons and melons, paprika, potatoes, cucumber and
tomato.
Export–Import of Vegetables
Balance supply calculation shows that BiH import only 10% of total consumption of vegetables
8.
but in the reality we import much more. This is due to fact that 59 % of vegetable production is
potatoes. According to Ministry139 of Foreign Trade of BiH only self-sufficient production is production
of potatoes and cabbage. BiH is net importer of vegetables both for processing and fresh
consumption.
Table 21: Supply of vegetables, 2011-2014
BiH
Production in t
Import in t
Export in t
Supply
Export/Import
Export/Production
Production/Supply
Import/Supply
2011
2012
2013
2014
676.109
69.539
53.125
692.523
76.41
7.86
97.63
10.04
528.487
593.760
507.365
69.926
13.258
67.695
13.861
81.914
10.432
585.155
647.594
578.847
18.96
2.51
90.35
11.95
20.47
2.34
91.69
10.45
12.74
2.06
87.65
14.15
Figure 6: Total export of vegetables from BiH and RS in KM 201-2014
30000000
20000000
M
K
10000000
0
2012
BiH 25518168
2013
27207487
2014
28684318
RS 13245946.91 13197895.9 14179298.97
139 Annual Agricultural Report
108
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Figure 7: Total import of vegetables from BiH and RS, 2012-2014 (in KM)
80000000
70000000
60000000
50000000
M
K
40000000
30000000
20000000
10000000
0
BiH
RS
2012
59699866
2013
72319936
2014
73915625
8913459.72
14822781.62
12665619.44
Export-import data of peppers/paprika, onion, cucumber, tomato and salad show that all these
9.
crops are mainly imported, with the exception of salad, representing 33,5 % of total vegetables
imported in 2013/2014. These are crops that can be grown in open field during season and
greenhouses year round.
Figure 8: Export-import of certain vegetable crops in BiH, 2013 (in KM)
10 000 000
8 000 000
6 000 000
M
K
4 000 000
2 000 000
0
Export
Peppers
872 867
Onion
122 059
Cucumber
583 757
Tomato
280 265
Salad
1 786 627
Import
8 752 501
2 139 638
1 458 465
9 387 341
391 642
109
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Figure 9: Export-import of certain vegetable crops in KM, BiH 2014
14 000 000
12 000 000
10 000 000
8 000 000
6 000 000
4 000 000
2 000 000
M
K
0
Export
Peppers
1 173 639
Onion
102 852
Cucumber
407 354
Tomato
152 406
Salad
1 683 194
Import
8 710 243
2 300 803
1 470 416
12 564 427
319 861
Figure 10: Export – import of certain vegetables in in KM, RS 2014
3 000 000.00
2 500 000.00
2 000 000.00
M
K
1 500 000.00
1 000 000.00
500 000.00
0.00
Peppers
Export 109 727.51
Onion
101 784.94
Cucumber
473.31
Tomato
0.00
Salad
0.00
Import 2 682 441.9
357 297.94
133 828.10
477 301.02
1 941.14
Table 22: Vegetables export–import, BiH 2012-2014 and share of RS in total export-import 2012-2014 (KM)
Year
BiH export
RS export
2012
2013
2014
25.518.168
27.207.487
13.245.947
13.197.896
28.684.318
14.179.299
% of RS export/
BIH export
51.91
48.51
49.43
BiH import
RS import
59.699.866
8.913.460
72.319.936
14.822.782
73.915.625
12.665.619
% of RS import
in BiH import
14.93
20.50
17.14
According to the official statistics, the RS’s share in exports is about 50% of the total vegetables
10.
exported by the BiH, while RS’s share in import is about 20 % of BiH’s total imports.
Typical farming systems among small-scale farmers.
In RS only registered farmers can receive subsidies and incentives from the Ministry and
11.
municipalities. According to official data from the Ministry of Agriculture of RS, there are 5 769
110
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
registered vegetable growers in Republic Srpska. Among them, there are 4 022 non-commercial
farmers and 1 747 commercial farmers. In total 501 registered vegetable farms has more than 1 ha of
land, which is less than 10 % of all farms in RS. Only 191 commercial farmers has farm size >1 ha.
Therefore, 90 % of registered farms belong to the small-scale farmers.
Due to climate change, the weather has become increasingly unpredictable and more extreme.
12.
Because of extreme140 weather conditions in the last decade, many professional vegetable growers
have shifted production from open fields to greenhouses. It has become too risky to produce some
crops like tomato, paprika and cucumber on open fields. Furthermore, production in greenhouse
requires less land and it can generate higher income than traditional open field production.
13.
In principle, there are two main farming systems in vegetable subsector of RS:
i) A more traditional farming system that is common in traditional agricultural areas, mainly in
Lijevce polje and Semberija. In these areas most farmers produce vegetable on the open field
at the farms size from 2-15 ha. Farmers mainly produce crops such as potatoes, cabbage and
onion, which they can store on the farm, in basic storage facilities. These crops are main
crops in more traditional farming systems, but the farmers also produce in lesser extent
cucumber, tomato, paprika, watermelons, melons, eggplants and other crops, produced in
smaller plots (up to 1 ha), except watermelons. These are the farmers that have more
recently incorporated vegetable production in greenhouse between 500 m² up to 10 000 m² in
size. In most cases, farmers market their products directly in local green markets or to
wholesalers and exporters. In few special cases, farmers also supply supermarkets or final
consumers. This farming system requires important investments in agriculture machinery,
irrigation system and land;
ii) Farmers grow vegetables on small mix farms (0.5-2 ha) for their own needs. This farming
system can be found in other rural areas of RS and BiH. This is common to almost every rural
household. Recently some of these mixed-production farmers incorporated greenhouse for
vegetable production in order to generate additional income. Greenhouses are usually 300 m²
up to 1 000 m² in size. There are two patterns of vegetable production in greenhouses:
(i) growing a single crop, mainly tomato or paprika from February/March until October/
November; and (ii) growing three crops during a single season: early cucumber for salad,
then continues with late tomato or paprika, and then with onion, spinach and lettuce over the
winter.
14. Which one of these two farming systems predominate depends on different factors like market,
possibilities for greenhouse heating, climate conditions, farmer’s skill, and so on.
Most competitive vegetable crops and varieties
It is apparent that extreme weather conditions, lack of large surface of high quality land and big
15.
investments in agriculture machinery, irrigation system, storage capacities etc. play a role in the
farming system used by farmers. It is clear that production of certain vegetable crops at greenhouse is
a viable alternative for a small-scale farmer. This system has advantages; it doesn’t require large
investments and working capital; it can be established in a small plot of land within small-scale farms;
it doesn’t requires expensive and complex machinery; it generates significant additional income for
small-farmers; it is labor intensive production therefore it is an opportunity for using family labour more
efficiently and increase employment in the rural areas; it minimize the risk; is more environmentally
friendly as it makes a more efficient use of water, pesticides and fertilisers.
In line with RCDP’s approach, the challenge is to integrate these smallholder farmers in the
16.
value chains and link them to the market. Greenhouses and the crops planted by smallholder famers
increase competitiveness, which needs to be accompanied by better and more efficient production
techniques. A proved alternative is integrate farmers to cooperatives organisations and agribusiness,
increasing access to market and allowing them access to wholesale and retail markets and to inputs
140 Floods in 2014, extreme high air temperature and dry season in 2003, 2007, 2012 and 2013, hail 2014, early frost 2012.
111
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
pre-financed by those actors. There are some cooperatives the likes of PZ ViP Krajina, ZZ Srbac, ZZ
Agrojapra, and private companies like Ital voce, Mamex, Agrofucturs) that connect farmers with
market of fresh vegetables. There is also the alternative to link poor farmers to processing companies
like Sava-Bijeljina or Vitamnika – Banjaluka through cooperatives and PAs.
17.
As shown by export-import figures, import of certain crops, such as paprika, tomato, cucumber
for salad is very high, therefore production of these crops in greenhouses can be organized for local
market to substitute imported vegetables.
18.
There some trends that can be projected according to available data and expert’s opinions. It is
clear that production of vegetables in greenhouse has a certain advantage in relation to the open field
production, but the selection of the most competitive vegetable crops for production in greenhouses is
key question to answer by farmers, who had to make their own decisions. Technicians usually
recommend in these cases to prioritise hybrids instead of varieties. Although hybrids seed are more
expensive than varieties, yields is 50 to 70 % higher that production from varieties. Therefore, high
quality production of hybrids and varieties of tomato, paprika and cucumbers for salad is also an
option. The general rule “early is always better” is always true, though late production is becoming an
interesting option. If farmers have heating systems in greenhouse then production of three crops
during the year can be organized. Beside paprika and tomato, a second and third crop could be
lettuce, onions, spinach and mangold.
Market actors, including cooperatives, PAs and the private sector
Farmers’ commercial operations can be conducted in three ways: (i) farmers’ green markets
19.
or individual on-the-road retail outlet for local short value chains (ii) collection points in a contractual
organization141 in longer export value chains, but (iii) many farmers use the services of registered
(including Cooperatives) or un-registered (black market) collectors that take the produce at the gate of
the farm. No local commodity exchanges142 are organized, and the local fairs, which are presently
interestingly developing with the help of donors, are mainly exposition meetings, aiming at
establishing
Farmers. According to available data there are around 5 769 vegetable growers. Around 90%
20.
of all farmers have less than 1 ha of arable land. In general, vegetable growers in RS belong to the
group of small-scale farmers. Farmers mainly produce vegetables for fresh market, but some of them
are producing for processing industry especially in areas of Semberija and Lijevce polje. The lack of
knowledge in modern production technics, lack of investment and working capital and weak
integration into markets are seen as a major obstacles in further development of vegetable production
in RS.
21.
Input suppliers. This group is very well organized and market oriented. While farmers in RS
have many different agricultural inputs available from the suppliers (pesticides, fertilizer, machinery,
irrigation systems, etc.), one of the major obstacles is the very restrictive regulation in place for the
import of seeds. Authorities at BiH level have setup a list of varieties that importers can import. Only
certain hybrids or varieties that are in the list can be imported.
Input supply, cost and availability of fertilizers and plant-protection products, is an important
22.
concern for farmers, leading farmers to enter vertical integration systems. There are very few
examples of organized farmers taking in charge bulking of commands for input supply, It should be
stressed that (a) development of organic production and notably the use of locally produced organic
fertilizers could reduce these costs and enhance input local availability, (b) resort to local varieties,
particularly for berries production143, more adapted to local soil and climate conditions, and presenting
141 Or even the food processor’s gate, if the commodities are close to the farm.
142 Organized trading points for farmers, in particular for NTFPs and mushrooms, some kind of “open outcry markets”.
143 BiH  host  many  endogenous  endemic  varieties  of  berries,  particularly  raspberries,  which  are  kept  in  the  University  of
Sarajevo’s collections, by the Balkans expert for berries, Dr Adnan Malicevic. Currently he lacks funding to develop systematic
testing of these varieties for their compliance with processors requirements and DNA sequencing to make them available as
“open source”.
112
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
a greater hardiness towards diseases, could also allow for a less intensive use of inputs, and thus
reduce farmer’s need of external funding. Input suppliers are of three main types: (1) berries
nurseries and seedlings providers are essential, to meet the buyer's demand of specific varieties.
H&H Fruit, a private actor from Bugojno, has risen to a quasi-monopole in primary production of
imported varieties’ seedlings and is supplying the whole country. Seedling multiplication can be
undertaken by private companies or in some case by (buyer-driven) cooperatives, within the in-kind
credit system described above, (2) chemicals - fertilizers and soil conditioners, and phytosanitary
treatments - are provided by private companies, (3) development of organic fertilizers production
could be a source of both local value-added and employment. This latter issue should be seriously
considered as the alternative of organic production could be durably lost if a widespread use of
chemicals is made in the selected VC.
23.
Service providers. Service providers in RS are public (the Agricultural Advisory Service and
the Agriculture Institute), private (Freelance consultants or agronomist who are working for pesticide
and fertilizer distributors companies) and semi-private (the Chamber of Commerce and Associations
of Cooperatives), which are partly financed by membership fee and somehow by government. In
general, overall support of service providers is not very well organized and structured and so farmers
do not receive regular trainings and technical assistance. It has also been questioned how often
advisers and agronomists update their own knowledge. Two curricula should be developed if quality
services are expected from service providers: (i) training of trainers organized and improved; and
(ii) specific training of farmers. Knowledge and expertise do exist in the country to implement these
activities.
Farmers Associations. In RS there exists an umbrella organization of vegetable growers,
24.
located in Laktasi with the main function of lobbying for the interest of its growers. Besides, Entity
association and few local and regional associations exist in Bijeljina. Lack of management capacities
and reduced interest of farmers to associate are seen as the bigger obstacles for further development
of this kind of associations.
25.
Cooperatives. According to data from the association of cooperatives, in RS are around
320 cooperatives, though only 120 of them are currently active and only some of them are active in
the vegetable sector. The most important of them are: Agrojapara, Novi Grad, ZZ Srbac, Srbac, PZ
ViP Krajina, Gradiska, OPZ, Agro-Una, Novi Grad, ZZ Vocar, Zvornik, ZZ Brka-Brcko, OPZ Tarevci,
Modrica, PZ Povrtlar - Bijeljina. Main function of these cooperatives is to link farmers with markets,
supply agricultural inputs and provide advice to their members. Cooperatives like PZ ViP Krajina
exports potato, cabbage and other vegetables to neighboring countries, ZZ Srbac supplies local
market with fresh vegetables, ZZ Vocar organizes production and export of gherkins and ZZ Brka and
PZ Povrtlar organises purchase of vegetables from growers and supply processors. Lack of
management and marketing skills, weak market orientation, reduced interest of farmers to join
cooperatives, are seen as biggest obstacles in further development of cooperatives.
26. Wholesale market and wholesalers. Main wholesale market players are located in Arizona,
Brcko, Sarajevo, Banjaluka and Capljina. Arizona wholesale market is the main wholesale market in
BiH, where the most important importers and wholesalers can be found. Importers and wholesalers
have booths on these markets and supply local retail market. Farmers also sell their vegetable
produce on these markets but they not always have the booths in good locations within the markets.
These wholesale markets are very important outlets for farmers and they are at the moment the most
important marketing channel for them. In general, all these wholesale markets have very deficient
infrastructure (in cooling house facilities, water supply, roads etc.). Sometimes, it is very expensive for
farmers to enter the markets as high fees or lack of time to spend in the market.
27.
Processors. Processors are very important actors in the universe of vegetable sector actors as
they are the ones purchasing huge volumes of produce and are not so demanding in terms of quality.
Most important processors in RS are: Vitaminka in Banjaluka, Sava in Bijeljina, Tanasic in Bijeljina,
Spektar drink in Bijeljina, Mladeks pak in Prnjavor, Fructa trejd in Derventa, Eko-bel in Banjaluka, and
Balatunka in Bijeljina. Each of them process between 1 000 -5 000 tons of vegetables annually.
113
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Processors are always complaining they cannot get enough vegetables on local market. But
28.
they are not willing to work with large number of small farmers so they are trying to deal with reliable
cooperatives and private companies that can supply them volume and quality of vegetables. Lack of
enough quantities of vegetables and appropriate business partners (suppliers) on local market are
seen by local processors as the biggest obstacles for expansion.
Retail markets. The importance of traditional small shops/outlets and fresh green markets in
29.
the food retail sector is decreasing. Supermarket chains are slowly taking over the place of main
suppliers in food retail markets. It is estimated that market share of supermarkets chains is around
45 to 60 %, with the rest going to small shops and fresh green market. Supermarkets are constantly
looking for reliable suppliers and this is an option for small farmers but they have to adapt their
operations to the requests of main market actors. The most important retailers in RS are: Konzum,
with around 25 % of market share, Tropic & Moj Market, with 10-15 % of market share, Bingo, with
around 10 % of market share, Robot, with 5 % of market share. Cort, AS market and Duric are
regional supermarkets. A lack of local reliable suppliers is seen as the biggest constraint for the
continuous supply of local vegetables to supermarkets.
Consumers. Most of the vegetables in RS can be found on market shelves all year round, but
30.
consumers are strongly season-oriented when it comes to consumption of fresh and processed
vegetables. Furthermore during winter time, consumers prefer processed vegetables. Many families
are still doing home processing of certain quantities of vegetables for home consumption during winter
time. For the consumers in RS, the most important feature is price, locking usually for the cheapest
product in the market. There are also certain preferences for locally produced vegetables like
“Hercegovacki tomato”, “Glamocki krompir “, “Vitaminka ajvar” etc. BiH consumers also prefer large
size vegetables. A weak sense of local consumers to buy locally produced vegetables and the poor
visibility local vegetables have in store shelves are to important constraints for improving consumption
of local products.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management RS. Besides policy, regulatory
31.
and law making role, the Ministry directly provides public advisory service, subsidies to farmers and
incentives etc. In any further development of vegetable production the Ministry should play key role.
Financial institutions: Banks’ loan policies are not directed towards farmers’ financing needs
32.
issues and apart from MFIs, loans seems to be mostly available to processors. The main limitations
for farmers' access to credit relate to collaterals availability, value and farmer’s willingness to risk
them, followed by the high cost of credit. Some MFIs value the backing of a “recognized” FO (e.g.
Cooperative) in assessing the creditworthiness of farmers. Credit lines opened through projects have
sometimes proved to be effective and to have allowed some testing of methods, but remain highly
questioned. PAs or Cooperatives willing to engage in commercial operations will need “collection
credit” and the warranting of stored products should contribute to tackle the working capital concern.
The promotion of such a new product would require intervention of high-level professional in this
banking sector.
Access to conventional bank credit (see below) is limited for smallholders, and this situation
33.
reinforce the attractiveness of the integration model, when proposing in-kind credit system.
34.
Education.  There  are  two  agriculture  faculties  in  RS,  one  located  in  Banja  Luka  and  the
second  one  in  East  Sarajevo.  Both  faculties  have  curricula  for  vegetable  growing  but  the  education
programs in both Faculties should be more practical and market oriented.
Natural resources. Apart from funding problems, producers face two opposite categories of
35.
climate risks: draught and flooding. Water supply is problematic in many parts of the hilly landscape of
BiH, mainly constituted by a dry limestone plateau, and establishing plantations along the narrow
banks of the rivers is a risky solution to make irrigation cheaper, as rivers are prone to overflow144.
144 Nevertheless,  irrigation  facilities  solutions  have  been  tested,  notably  with  IFAD’s Renewable  Energy  Technologies  grant
funding that could be affordable for organised farmers.
114
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Relations between actors and global strategies
36. Working capital requirement is another key asset in a context where operating loan is not
easily available: availability of capital (to pay the suppliers) and ability to lend some in cash or kind is
an efficient way to create strong links between actors and to mark one’s dominance. Despite the
unsatisfied demand of market, relations between processors do not seem to be an intense
competition for products. When bargaining with farmers, processors and collectors refer to a
reference price settled by foreign buyers at the start of the harvest campaign. This cannot be treated
as a cartel-like organisation and in the meantime, there does not seem to be a “collection-zone fixing”,
as it has been noted that several buyers’ supply zones can overlap.
Public authorities tend to see processors as private social “peace-keepers”, because they
37.
generate a flow of money and jobs on their territories. This situation allows processors to get good
investments conditions (land, co-financing or subsidies) from Municipalities, which seem not always to
be met for cooperatives wishing to develop their activities145. Nevertheless, the absence of
intermediary bodies -such as Farmers Organisations- jeopardize the long term social stability in local
communities and in the country, and Municipality awareness should be raised on these issues, to
foster their contribution in supporting Cooperatives and FAs growth.
Macro level: Entity and State level
A thorough study of the macro level of the subsectors VC will not be made here, but some
38.
interest points for the RCDP will be raised when necessary. The institutional complexity is a
challenge in BiH due to the variety of key administration bodies involved in the agricultural
administration. The respect of the subsidiarity principle and a good coordination between the two
entities are required to make this system effective.
39.
Research Institute and Certification services: quality and sustainability at stake along with a
sense of sovereignty. Qualified professors and their team can be found in the Agriculture Universities
but their operating funds rely heavily on donors, inducing some biases in research themes146. On
another hand, it has not been possible to identify a clear chain of certification to guarantee to farmers
to buy virus-free seedlings, nor the procedures to get such a certification.
Unions of FO: umbrella organisations for FOs are not yet developed, as FOs themselves are
40.
only emerging. In some cases, with the help of projects or LEDAs, seedlings of an umbrella
organisation might be fostered around the project of an agricultural fair. Apex Cooperative
Organizations exist at the three levels of BiH. Cooperative Union of Bosnia Herzegovina (BHCU) is
the state level apex cooperative organization: they have a limited representativeness as they regroup
around 20% (less than 100 coops) of the 550 BiH Agricultural Cooperatives147, this figure is however
more significant compared to the estimated 150 active Cooperatives. They have the delegated
responsibility of auditing cooperatives, and the two entity cooperative unions claim the same
objectives and functions of advocacy and lobbying for their members at their respective entity level,
together with education, information and capacity building trainings, although the extent to which they
fulfil them is not evident. As an apex organization, BHCU has the authority to work with the national
government to pass laws that regulate cooperative practices and to set standards for auditing
cooperatives. It also represents cooperatives abroad and collaborates with international organizations.
Infrastructure
Farmers have more opportunities to successfully access to the market are bigger when their
41.
products are supplied out-of-season, supplying early production and late production, when prices are
145 Oral communication, VIP Krajina Vegetable Cooperative, RS, November 2014.
146 For example, in the berries VCs, the Butmir Centre near Sarajevo has implemented its research programs mainly through
USAID and SIDA-funded FARMA program, which mainly focused its work on new imported varieties, and has not exploited the
collection of well adapted endemic varieties that they possess, and which might be of interest for economical and sustainability
issues.
147 The Republic of Srpska Cooperative Union (RSCU), which regroups 64 agricultural cooperatives, or the Federation of BiH
Cooperative Union (FBiHCU), which regroups no more than 30 agricultural cooperatives, amongst 78 members.
115
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
higher. So any actions supported to help farmers to access to out-of-season markets should be
promoted. Farmers of vegetables that produce in greenhouses without heating can also supply out-of-
season markets, but heating facilities could help them to supply the markets even earlier, about 10 to
15 days earlier. With heating they can also extend production for 15 to 20 days so they can supply the
market later than usual. Greenhouses with heating do not abound in the area as they demand large
investments but access to heating facilities allows farmers to move to more specialised productions,
like seedlings. Usually, common investments in heating system cost around 1 000 to 2 000 USD for a
500 m² greenhouse. To gets early harvest in greenhouses without heating facilities, farmers are using
different technics like double folia, covering crops with folia etc. all of which are available in the
market.
Drip irrigation systems in greenhouses are a must. Water pump on electricity, efficient water
42.
supply from wellspring is necessary for farmers to have successful vegetable productions. Cost of
irrigation system are around 1 000 USD for 500 m² size greenhouse.
During early harvest, farmers go directly to the market; there is no need to keep tomato, paprika
43.
or cucumber in storages. Farmers deliver products to clients or on wholesale market already ideally
packed: tomato is packed in wooden boxes (10-15 kg), paprika to carton boxes (10 kg) and cucumber
in nets (10 kg).
In the peak of the season, during hottest summer days, it is necessary to keep vegetables in
44.
cold storages, but unfortunately farmers and cooperatives do not have appropriate cold storage
facilities. Wholesale markets do not offer cold storage facilities either. This is one of the reasons post-
harvest losses are quite high (up to 20 % in several cases). It would be an ideal situation if farmers
could store vegetables in cold storages for a few days, during season peak until a buyer is found.
Investments in cold storage capacities for around 25 tons production is up to 15 000 USD. It is for that
these investments are more appropriate for cooperatives.
Some clients, especially at the export markets, request uniform quality in size, color, variety,
45.
shape etc. therefore grading and sorting equipment is necessary. Most of the vegetable farmers and
cooperatives do not have equipment for grading and sorting equipment. Very simple equipment costs
around 1 500 - 2 500 USD. Usually, processing companies like Vitaminka, in Banjaluka, Sava, in
Bijeljina, Tanasic, in Bijeljina, Spektar drink- Bijeljina, Mladeks pak in Prnjavor, Fructa trejd in
Derventa, Eko-bel in Banjaluka, Balatunka, in Bijeljina have all the necessary equipment. However
these companies have reported that in some cases they do not have enough working capital for a
timely payment of vegetables to farmers. Furthermore processing companies do not have enough
working capital to pre-finance vegetable production to farmers either. There are group of farmers
interested to produce vegetables for processing companies but they do not have enough money to
invest in production. Investments in 1 ha of open field production of paprika or tomato for processing
industry is around 5 000 USD.
Harvesting cost of tomato is a major constraint of tomato for the processing industry. The price
46.
of 1 kg of tomato for the industry is 0.18 KM, while harvesting cost is almost the same.
47. Most of supermarket chains have small cooling facilities to keep vegetables for a few days,
although vegetable manipulation is still a bottleneck to ensure quality, with workers not handling
vegetables properly and causes damages. Supermarkets try to write-off damage products to suppliers
which leading to different conflicts among them.
48. Marketing standards for fresh fruit and vegetable do not exist in BiH, like in the EU countries.
Farmers, wholesalers, retailers very often do not have common understanding of high quality
vegetables. Farmers pack vegetables by themselves following common practices that do not take into
account market standards, creating lots of misunderstandings and conflicts among sellers and buyers.
In B2B, market reliability is at the core of the business. Delivering products on time, with appropriate
quality and in quantity is a must for professional buyers. Many farmers are not able to fulfill these
requirements due to their lack of marketing skills.
116
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Entity/municipal subsidies and eligibility criteria for the vegetable sector.
In RS farmers can get incentives and subsidies from the Ministry of Agriculture and
49.
municipalities but only if they are officially registered. Every registered farmers get certificate and an
identification number. The database of registered farmers is administered and updated by the Agency
API. Each registered farmer has the status of commercial or non-commercial farmer. The Ministry of
Agriculture has issued official guideline and criteria which define commercial and non-commercial
farmers. Basically, commercial farmers have to pay health and social insurance; non-commercial
farmers have to pay health and social insurance as well, but the rate is lower.
Commercial farmers collect higher incentives and subside from the Ministry, up to 30 % in
50.
average, while non-commercial percentage is up to 10-20 % in average. Specifically, the Ministry of
Agriculture RS provides incentives for the purchase of agriculture machinery, construction of
greenhouses and cooling facilities, sorting and grading equipment, irrigation systems, etc. To
purchase this equipment, vegetable growers can get subsidies up to 30 % of their price. The Ministry
also provides subsides to produce potatoes, cucumbers, peppers, tomatoes, onions, carrots and
beets.
51. Municipalities also provide certain subsidies and incentives for vegetable production, but this
varies between municipalities. In most cases, poor municipalities like Bratunac or Milici do not provide
any subsidies. Municipalities like Kotor Varos or Celinac provide limited subsidies, while municipalities
like Banjaluka, Prijedor, Gradiska, Bijeljina, Laktasi, provide different subsidies to support vegetable
growers. In general, most of municipalities subsidies construction of green houses with 0,5-1 KM per
m², agriculture machinery and irrigation systems (Municipalities subsidies to purchase this equipment
amount to 30 %-40 % of their costs). Finally, the municipality Bijeljina also provides subsidies for
tomato with 0.03 KM per kg sold to processing industry.
117
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Annex VI: Analysis of the Berries Subsector in BiH
Overview of the berry sector in BiH
1.
Various plant species are classified as part of the berries sector, including strawberry,
blackberry, raspberry, blueberry, forest strawberry, cranberry, aronia (black chokeberry), currants,
gooseberry, and other wild varieties.
While this document in general speaks about the berries, the situation in the field is such that
2.
the raspberry production is strongly leading the sector. Strawberries are the second largest product in
terms of production, and blackberries are the second major exporting product. However, quantity
wise, raspberries are by far the most significant crop in the field and will be given focus throughout
this document.
Production and demand at international level
A constant and ever increasing demand for berries (especially raspberries) exists amongst the
3.
more developed countries in the world, and particularly within Europe. This is because berries (esp.
raspberries) are among the most deficient fruits in the world market. The current untapped demand
exists simultaneously for high-quality fresh and processed berries. In brief, an overall high demand is
met only partially by a limited supply.
52. Only within the EU, among the lead world importers, it has been estimated that around
250,000 tons of raspberries are imported on an annual basis. When considering that the EU is
presently importing large quantities from Chile and China, the implicit transaction costs currently paid
by EU consumers are high when accounting for cost of transportation, or even the carbon footprints.
The rationale for long-term investments in the subsector is thus potentially justified to – among others
– enable smallholders to meet the untapped market demand.
In terms of annual production, in 2013 Poland was the biggest producer and BiH was ranked as
4.
the 10th world raspberry producer.
Production in BiH
BiH offers generally favorable agro-ecological conditions for the production and expansion of
5.
berries, including the quality of land, climatic conditions, and water resources. Production statistics for
the raspberries are provided below (Table 1), and graphically displayed in Figure 11. As can be seen
by the table and graph below, while the harvested area has gradually increased over the last three
years, yields have fluctuated with a steep decrease in 2012 (-35% from 2011 levels), and an increase
back in 2013 (+29% compared to the 2012 levels). This fluctuation is mainly attributable to weather
and climatic variations occurred.
Table 23: Raspberry production in BiH (2011-2013)
2011
2012
2013
Fruit
Harvested
area (ha)
Production
(t)
Harvested
area (ha)
Production
(t)
Harvested
area (ha)
Production
(t)
Index of
production
(t)
2013/2012
Raspberry
Source: Agency for statistics of BiH
1,220
9,459
1,242
7,016
1,261
9,075
129.4
118
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Figure 11: 2011-2013 Raspberry production in BiH
Based on primary data collected from the field (and specifically from the locality of Željezno
6.
Polje), the average yield of raspberries per dunum amounts to 1,200 kg. Varieties usually comprise
Willamette, Meeker and minor quantities of Polka. The average farm-gate price is at KM 3 to 3.20/kg
(though it can be higher if the Polka variety is sold to through the fresh market channel). The
opportunity identified through this analysis is for diversified variety production, which offers both a
means to diversify the market channels (thus minimizing the risks of e.g. unsold produce) as well as to
prolong the growing/harvest window. In the latter case, in fact, it should be noted that if the three
different varieties are grown (even on a very small plot of land) the harvesting season is extended
from mid-June to late September/early October. The profit computation conducted demonstrates that
growing the three different varieties on 0.3 ha of land guarantees the equivalent of an average annual
salary to any given farmer.
Demand at domestic level
Similarly to the untapped market demand dominating the international markets (the case has
7.
been made above for the EU), a growth in demand has recently been registered also within the
domestic market. Local markets and urban retailers indicate the recent increase in demand; yet, a
rapid survey was undertaken among Sarajevo supermarkets and the results showed that most
processed berry products are currently being imported from neighboring countries. This, further
aggravating the food import/export deficit in the country, and despite the richness in natural resources
(and berries) characterizing the country. As a result of the participatory value chain analysis
undertaken, one of the current players in the target municipalities has expressed the need for
additional 60 tons of berries (Polka raspberry variety); this is just a small example of the currently
unfulfilled demand that represents an untapped market opportunity for cooperatives as well as for new
raspberry producers.
Trade-related data
An analysis of the berries trade trends is here given, based on data by the BiH Foreign Trade
8.
Chamber (see Table 24 and Figure 12 below). A gradual increase in exports of berries has been
experienced over the last six years, with only a slight decrease between 2011 and 2012. The increase
between 2013 and 2014 was still experienced, though the percentage increase was inferior to that
between 2012 and 2013, as a consequence of the severe floods and prolonged rains during the year.
Imports, on the other hand, have steadily been decreasing over the past four years.
Table 24: Berries trade in BiH (2009-2014)
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014 (as of
Sep)
Export (BAM)
16,553,086
19,946,142
22,268,666
20,730,449
29,054,093
29,974,426
Import (BAM)
Source: BiH Foreign Trade Chamber, USAID/Sida FARMA
3,652,354
5,099,757
2,341,527
2,538,150
2,049,063
1,915,674
119
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Figure 12: Berries trade in BiH (2009-2014)
An ulterior analysis is made to assess which berry fruits are mostly exported, and how fresh
9.
and frozen compare with regards to total share in exports. Based on Table 25 below, it is evident that
in 2013, most berries exported were frozen raspberries (69% of total value of exports), followed by
frozen blackberries (13%), fresh raspberries and frozen blueberries (5% respectively), frozen
strawberries (3%) and others.
10. When analyzing the fresh product channels, and also in this case based on export amounts in
2013, the highest ranking commodities are fresh raspberries (60% of total fresh export value),
followed by fresh blueberries (25%), and fresh strawberries (15%).
Table 25: Export of berries (sorted by export value as of 2013, in BAM)
Products
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
I-IX 2014
Frozen raspberries
12,182,421
13,086,530
13,237,140
14,117,098
20,051,422
23,961,282
Frozen blackberries
965,866
1,580,635
2,452,472
4,083,684
3,672,340
1,184,734
Fresh raspberries
43,183
112,207
177,611
745,265
1,358,142
535,055
Frozen blueberries
1,085,990
4,240,141
4,408,961
487,156
1,334,049
1,689,825
Frozen strawberries
1,049,812
535,362
1,088,279
Fresh blueberries
202,938
270,986
573,492
Frozen red currants
Fresh strawberries
Frozen berries,
other
Fresh blackberries
192,129
28,238
122,631
733,281
31,486
39,863
2,932
307,335
288,012
382,058
205,460
6,516
2,637
Other berries
97,466
60,557
165,285
105,228
911,676
1,738,236
572,470
457,448
333,957
157,610
401,289
62,250
261,905
208,756
3,721
96,963
11,383
24,006
Total
16,553,086
19,946,142
22,268,666
20,730,449
29,054,093
29,974,426
11. When it comes to analyzing the prices, fresh raspberries receive a much higher (export) price
than frozen ones. Analysis from the field also reveals that with regards to cultivated berry varieties,
the forest strawberries (fragaria vesca) are among the most profitable to farmers, an indication of the
fact that expanding cultivation of these plants could help generate profits for smallholders currently
engaged in other productions.
12. With regards to main trade (export) partners, Serbia was the largest exporter in 2013 (30% of
total berries), followed by Sweden (22%), Austria (11%), Croatia (7%) and others. The figures are
given in Figure 13 below.
120
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Figure 13: BiH Berries - trade partners (2013)
Slovenia
4% Italy
3%
Other
countries
3%
Serbia
30%
Austria
11%
Sweden
22%
Hungary
4%
Switzerland
5%
Germany
5%
Belgium
6%
Croatia
7%
Individual Quick Freezing (IQF)
Today’s available processing technologies, especially grading, sorting and packaging facilities,
13.
have been set up by export companies as part of Foreign Direct Investments (FDI). Generally, with
small and medium freezing facilities decentralized to be logistically closer to production areas, fresh
berry chains remain to-date still uncoordinated compared to the IQF products.
Organic market
14. With a growing demand for organic products, supply of organic production remains to-date
unstable and unreliable. In the words of exporters met, the frequency of non-organic chemical
residues still remains high due to smallholders’ limited agro-chemical management practices. Similarly
to other market segments, the organic one offers high opportunities for further growth in the near
future given the untapped market demand. Currently, companies have to rely on their own limited
productions, clearly only marginally satisfying the demand available at domestic and international
level.
FDI and longer-term contractual arrangements with berry producers
The analysis here undertaken, and evidence for the FDI in the berries sectors that has taken
15.
place in the recent years in BiH, attests for the fact that support to this sector, and to local producers,
is likely to result in long-lasting solutions for the development of smallholders’ producers. This given
foreign companies’ estimated investment cycles of 12 years. Potential scope for encouraging
contractual arrangements between private companies and smallholder farmers needs to be
explored, as well as an investigation for areas at policy level to facilitate the ease of doing business
(and enabling environment) for private companies.
Price volatility
Price volatility is related to both production shocks and supply chain inefficiencies. However, in
16.
general, appropriate production and commercial strategies can help reduce prices variability and
capture value for smallholders during different stages of the harvest.
Risk perception: an area requiring intervention
Supply chain inefficiencies derive from a less-than-optimal warehousing capacity, and low value
17.
addition capacity to capture value out of the berries with grades that are not sufficient for IQF industry.
Many of the producers are first generation, and while this might increase the likelihood of adopting
innovations, it is an indicator of uneven and often low agronomical capacities. One of the main
bottlenecks is the perceived high risk of the primary production. The mindset shift from industrial
employees to 45 years old smallholders is evidently not an easy one. Many farmers refer to their
crops saying: “Agriculture is a lottery”. The reduction of their risk perception will necessarily need
121
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
to go through an increased technical education and training and the support to make informed
choices on their future position in the chain.
Zooming into FBiH
18.
The information provided above depicts the situation at country level (vis-à-vis BiH’s export
partners), whereas this section takes a closer look at the situation specific to the entity of FBiH, to
further complement the main findings from the analysis of the sector undertaken. With an ever
increasing growth in processed berries exports, FBiH is succeeding particularly with regards to
raspberries and strawberries148. The main competitors at international level remain Serbia and
Romania. Three main determinants for competitiveness are deemed to be the following: (i) rapid
innovation adoption from first generation farmer, compared with lower adoption rates from competitors
in the region, (ii) relatively small supply where opportunities for value addition and diversification can
still harvest important economies of scale and scope, (iii) the relatively low presence of health hazards
in exported berries compared to the issues recently experienced from Serbia, Poland and Romania
(norovirus and Hep-A).
SWOT Analysis
This section derives some of the main conclusions reached from the analysis undertaken in
19.
FBiH on the raspberries sector (based on the “Strategy for increasing competitiveness and attracting
investments in dairy and fruit and vegetables value chains in FBiH”, July 2014).
148 At country level, recent statistics place BiH 10th and 35th world producer for raspberries and strawberries respectively.
122
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 4: Detailed project description
Table 26: SWOT Analysis – Raspberries sector in FBiH
STRENGTHS
 Good agricultural and ecological conditions
 Stability of yields and increased demand for
WEAKNESSES
 Small farmers are not eagerly forming/joining
cooperatives and clusters
locally grown fresh food
 Production for unknown buyers and low level
 Prevalence and increased demand for locally
of mechanization
grown fresh food
 Fragmented farms(small volume of farm
 Availability of good quality seedlings
 Expenses are not too high (small farms do
not use lots of chemical treatments)
 Possibility of moving to organic production
production)
 Range of products is not adjusted to
industrial processing (deep freezing)
 Lack of certification and standards of good
(plant extracts with insecticide effects can be
used)
practice in agriculture which would guarantee
safety to human heath
 Nonexistence of a stable market and too
much relying on seasonal sales on markets
 Lack of capacities for deep freezing
 Failure to comply with the long term strategy
for agricultural development
THREATS
 Decline of prices in the area
 Seasonal fruit has short “life” unless it is
processed
 Climatic conditions( issues with fallouts in the
picking season-rotten fruit)
 Insufficient usage of modern technologies in
production process (irrigation system, anti-
hail nets)
 Cheap labor force
 Authorities are resolved to support the
production and introduction of new
technologies (irrigation systems, anti - hail
nets) – Competent ministry supports
strengthening of the production
OPPORTUNITIES
 Opportunity to use fruit in the production of
sweets, juices and jam
 Production of traditional products
 Production with geographic origin
 Combining traditional raspberry products
with opportunities in tourism
 Introducing modern technologies
 Possibility to engage young people during
the picking season
 Availability of traditional varieties and genetic
pool
 Current methods of production with limited
inputs quite simply provide satisfying
standards for having ecologically acceptable
and organic production.
123
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
Appendix 5:
arrangements
Institutional aspects and implementation
A.
Project implementation
The implementation of RCDP foresees a re-orientation in the modus operandi of both PCU and
1.
APCU. Effectively, entrusted with the coordination of the intervention; A/PCU will have to demonstrate
its preparedness to work, in line with the objectives and strategic approach defined in the IFAD
RB-COSOP (2013-2018), towards achieving effective inclusion of non-commercial farmers in
rewarding value chains which in turn implies changes in A/PCU staffing and implementation
approaches. This represents a shift from previous projects financed by IFAD in BiH and it will
therefore be critical, that this new generation of Project will be matched with responsive coordination
and strengthened management capacity.Most notably, the intensive planning, facilitation and
coordination activities envisaged by the Project will not only require substantial field presence but also
strong capabilities in facilitation, follow-up and impact monitoring. This will require, among others, a
detailed description of roles and responsibilities of implementing partners and service providers,
reflected in agreements and terms of reference, and related contractual arrangements.
The number of stakeholders and required partnerships facilitated and/ or supported by the
2.
project calls for a considerable increase in the number and types of implementation arrangements
(with service providers, implementation partners, etc.).
Implementation of the targeting approach. RCDP will select smallholders, organized in PAs
3.
and cooperatives, within the targeted value chain clusters, following clear criteria to ensure
transparency in selection and mitigate the risk of elite capture. Key actors in the targeting process are
local authorities at municipal level (extension workers, social service centres, employment bureau,
heads of the local communities, and others), as they manage the list of people that benefit from social
security, and are hence able to determine who belongs to the three target groups (very poor, poor and
borderline poor). The local authorities are also responsible for managing the entity-level Farm
registers, which are a source of information that can provide a valuable starting point for the project
intervention. For the implementation of the targeting approach, questionnaires will be used.
The targeting process will include extensive communication with PAs and cooperatives, which
4.
will be, jointly with agribusinesses, the main partners for the inclusion of smallholders. In that process,
PAs and cooperatives will promote the inclusion of new smallholders from selected local communities,
knowledgeable of the criteria under which these are eligible for inclusion in the value chain. Once the
interest from the (eligible) farmers has been expressed, PAs and cooperatives will be responsible for
preparing lists of interested farmers, collecting the field questionnaires and organizing these into the
database for further analysis149. Eventually, PAs and cooperatives should be the ones to make the
final selection of the farmers that fulfil the targeting criteria, based on their knowledge of individual
farmers involved in production of relevant agricultural commodities. This list will be verified by the
Business Facilitation Partners (BFPs) and/or the local facilitators (such as the local development
agency).
Local authorities will be partnering with LED/RED150/consultancy firm/NGO that will be hired to
5.
work on cluster development as BFPs. Facilitators from the BFPs will support local authorities in:
(i) conducting training and awareness raising on the targeting approach and principles; (ii) capacity
support to municipalities /cluster stakeholders’ platforms to identify criteria and set up and implement
a transparent and fair targeting approach; (iii) support the selection of beneficiaries, so as to avoid
149 Sample questionnaires have been prepared by Oxfam Italia during the implementation of the Pilot project. They include
questions on household (HH) assets and revenues, which are the basis for classifying the HHs into poverty categories.
150 LED Local Economic Development Agency, RED Regional Economic Development agency
125
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
exclusionary practices and elite capture; and (iv) follow up and monitoring of targeting implementation
and activities delivery.
Selection of PAs and Cooperatives. RCDP will work with PAs and Cooperatives that are
6.
active in the selected clusters. The vision of the Project is to facilitate emergence and growth of
cooperatives through technical and organizational support and co-financing of BPs. Minimal eligibility
criteria for PAs and cooperatives as project partners will be the following: (i) compliance with current
legislation of cooperative and governance principles; these conditions are different for PAs and
Cooperatives; (ii) at least one formal market channel established; (iii) number of members and their
categorization in poverty groups based on the landholding size; (iv) type of membership so as to give
preference to organizations with a favourable proportion of women and youth among their members;
(v) proven experience in developing concrete measures to include women among their members,
favouring their participation; (vi) track record of their willingness to expand membership, in particular
reach out to smallholder farmers and rural poor; (vii) capacity to improve provision of services and
guaranteeing access to production factors by all members; and (viii) work towards social and
sustainable use of natural resources.
Representatives of target groups and PAs and cooperatives, women and youth will participate
7.
as active members in cluster stakeholder platforms to be established at cluster level. It will ensure
they can monitor progress in terms of local VC development, voice their concerns on VC issues,
participate in decisions taken in CSPs, interact with other partners in the cluster and VCs, etc.
Specific activities will be undertaken to ensure the organizational strengthening of PAs and
8.
cooperatives as well as to ensure inclusiveness and empowerment of rural poor, women and youth
through their organisations. Activities will include: (i) organizational strengthening of PAs and
cooperatives; (ii) information and mobilisation campaigns; (iii) business counselling for members of
PAs; (iii) matching grants to leverage investments; (iv) support to ensure active participation of women
and youth in PAs and cooperatives’ decision-making process; and (v) information campaign on rural
labour conditions, food safety, enforcement of regulations in agriculture and agribusinesses.
9.
Agribusinesses. The involvement of exporters, wholesalers and enterprises is crucial to
ensure effective access of smallholders to productive assets, finance, services and markets. Eligible
agribusiness companies will have to comply with the following criteria: (i) proven know-how and
technical expertise in the subsector; (ii) company’s willingness to use environmental friendly
production practices and compliance with social, labour and gender standards; (iii) company’s
strategy is focused on long-term presence and viable business relationships with producers; and
(iv) proven experience in or formal commitment to establishing business with small producers. With
regards to the inclusion of women and youth, the Project will ensure that these target groups
effectively take on an active role in the value chain coordination mechanisms, and directly benefit from
the BPs and from tailored support extended by the Project. RCDP will prepare guidelines on proper
governance and management, checks and balances and monitor the process to ensure that PAs and
cooperatives will be able to engage with agribusiness companies on the basis of fair deals.
10.
It is expected that the bulk of the institutional strengthening activities will be provided by
specialized service providers. Currently, public extension services are available only in RS and need
to be strengthened. It is important to respect the fact that when it comes to organizational
strengthening no blueprint approach is effective. Each organizational strengthening should be
considered as a process, requiring an initial diagnostic and needs assessment.
11. With respect to the Business Proposals (BPs), these will be approved by the APCU/PCU upon
assessment by a technical committee of three independent experts based on a set of criteria: e.g. the
formal buy-in and commitment of the business parties involved in the BP, the financial viability and
sustainability of the proposed business; the number of new small producers/collectors reached,
especially the number of women and rural poor, win-win (pro-poor) features of the proposed business
model (including no transfer of land rights from the farmers to the private company), percentage of the
126
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
total cost of the BP covered by the agribusiness company or farmers organizations with their own
funds or through a complementary loan from a financial institution.
The project will ensure a close monitoring of the actual implementation of BPs to ensure that
12.
each 'BP-party' is actually delivering as planned and poor small-scale producers and collectors are
effectively benefitting. In addition, the project will produce a number of knowledge products
(guidelines, manuals, case studies and lessons learnt) to identify good practices and document the
experience in order to provide guidance to the Government and other stakeholders to replicate and
scale-up the approach.
13. Overall, the APCU/PCU will have the main responsibility to contract service providers through a
competitive process. Three modalities of service providers can be selected, according to the specific
services required: (i) individual; (ii) single private or public service provider (consulting companies,
regional development agencies, NGOs, Universities); or (iii) a consortia of service providers, the latter
being needed because the broad range of training needs (organizational development, technical and
business-related aspects), or a wide geographical coverage may require different service providers.
In addition, implementation arrangements put in place under RCDP will facilitate the process of
14.
identification of farmers' leaders, pioneers, and innovators within the selected value chains, who –
may also, among others – play roles of extension agents and community organizers, as may be
required to deliver quality services to the target group.
Approach
The Project will work in 12 VC clusters starting their establishment from PY1, after the baseline
15.
poverty information will be updated and the municipality scoring exercise will be repeated, in order to
reflect the changes in the clusters pre-identified since project design. The exercise should confirm the
clusters pre-identified. After their establishment a municipal level, the clusters will be developed with
the support of the BFPs.
16.
The vision of the Project is to take advantage of existing value chain dynamics in BiH. The
agribusiness sector is already engaging with smallholders in establishing contractual relationships and
for example using in-kind credit for product pre-financing and provision of extension and technical
assistant to farmers (‘cooperants’). Benefiting from these processes, RCDP main contribution would
be to consolidate the perspectives for sustainable subsector development by: (i) expanding the
number of small farmers benefitting from the opportunities offered in the selected subsector
(ii) maximising the inclusion and participation of poor smallholders in profitable value chains, including
women and youth; (iii) enhancing the capacity of small farmers to develop their business activities and
to take decisions regarding the needed organisational structure (e.g. PAs and cooperatives) and
marketing strategies (including value adding). The ultimate objective is to help improve the livelihood
of small scale farmers through sustainable and profitable farming and consolidate their organisations
and their capabilities to identify and seize forthcoming business opportunities (markets, marketing
channels, products etc.), develop their business, play an active role in the cluster coordination
platforms while benefitting in the long run from the sustainable development of the subsector.
Organizational framework
Overall responsibility and orientation
17.
The State Ministry of Finance and Treasury (MOFT) will have overall responsibility of RCDP
and will coordinate with the Entity Ministries of Finance which are responsible for externally-funded
projects. An Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the entity Ministry of Agriculture or its
designated representative would be set up in each Entity to provide overall guidance to the Project at
Entity level. The PSC would meet once or twice per annum. Each PSC will ensure that (i) project
activities are in compliance with the Government and IFAD strategies and policies and goals and
objectives defined at project design; (ii) endorse strategic orientations taken up by the project
(iii) review project Entity level Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB); (iv) oversee the transparent
127
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
selection of service providers and partner institutions; (v) ensure that Project interventions are
coordinated with other development programmes and projects and (vi) ensure adherence to the
highest standards of financial management and audit. As expected, the PSC should invite
representatives from the private, PAs and cooperative sectors the joint the Committee. A yearly inter-
entity meeting (workshop) will assess the 'state of play' of the programme in particular as regards
sustainable subsector development, performance and governance. The meeting will be co-chaired by
the state-level Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations and state-level Ministry of Finance
and Treasury.
Project coordination
In each Entity, project coordination as well as fiduciary management will be entrusted to the
18.
existing APCU and PCU. These units will demonstrate a clear orientation towards and renewed
emphasis on targeting and social inclusiveness in line with the IFAD RB-COSOP (2013-2018).
19. Given the scope of RCDP, both Units will be required to develop new partnerships with state
and non-state service providers and facilitators while building up their management capacity in
several areas. Among others, the intensive planning, facilitation and coordination activities envisaged
by the Project will not only require substantial field presence but also strong capabilities in facilitation,
follow-up and impact monitoring. The number of stakeholders and potential partnerships that will be
facilitated and/or supported by the Project anticipates a considerable increase in the number and
types of implementation arrangements and agreements with service providers, implementation
partners, etc., that may have to be adopted by the Project. Effectively, the operating modalities of the
proposed RCDP will likely represent a shift from previous projects; it will be critical therefore, that this
new generation of Project will be matched with responsive coordination and strengthened
management capacity.
The APCU and PCU are already established and are implementing other IFAD funded projects
20.
in the country. Both APCU and PCU are headed by Directors appointed by the respective entity
Minister of Agriculture and their appointment has been acceptable to IFAD. Salaries of the staff of both
Units are already financed by other IFAD funded project and will be for the next four years; only
supplementary staff specifically hired to carry out specialized functions for RCDP will be funded by
this project. The APCU and PCU Director report to the respective entity Minister of Agriculture. The
additional staff to be hired by the APCU and PCU will include: Business Development Officers, and
M&E/Targeting Gender Officer.
APCU and PCU will be responsible for coordination and liaison with municipalities, clusters and
21.
implementing partners, overall project management and monitoring, organizing start-up and annual
workshops, preparation of AWPBs, fiduciary management. The APCU and PCU will recruit through a
competitive process BFPs, technical advisory services, business development services and
organizational development services and will establish a roster of service providers which will be
made available to all BPs partners through a public Website or equivalent platform. BPs’ partners will
selected and enter into agreements with services providers of their choice. Complementary, the APCU
and PCU will establish the voucher scheme, which will be an instrument to pay for the services
rendered by the service providers to the BPs’ partners. While the voucher scheme will be
administered by APCU and PCU, it will be basically an empowerment instrument for business
partners to ensure they select and negotiate service contents and price with the service providers of
their choice, evaluate their performance and deliver the voucher for the providers to cash according to
the administrative arrangements made by APCU and PCU to cash the vouchers.
They will also be responsible for providing logistical and administrative support to IFAD and
22.
Entity joint supervision missions, mid-term review and project completion missions. Detailed
responsibilities are described in Appendixes 5, 6 and 7. The APCU and PCU will be responsible for
ensuring the systematic collection of baseline data, monitoring and evaluation, policy facilitation,
progress reporting and liaison with the Government.
128
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
Implementation partners
Actors in the implementation of the project will comprise the following: Government (Entity-
23.
level); Ministry of Agriculture (Lead Implementation Agency), Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in the
Federation and Agricultural Project Coordination Unit (APCU) in RS, are mandated by the government
for day-to-day coordination of the project; primary target group project beneficiaries (including
smallholder farmers, PAs, Cooperatives); identified service providers (specialized individuals,
companies and consortia) and implementing partners (including local development agencies, NGOs,
other development partners); agribusinesses; local government (Municipalities, Cantons); Project
Steering Committee (PSC) and others. APCU and PCU
24. Moreover, the project will support the establishment of Cluster Stakeholder Platforms (CSP)
and Subsector Stakeholders Platform (SSP). The cluster serves as a stakeholder platform for
participatory planning and monitoring progress of value chains, clusters and subsector development,
targeting and inclusiveness. CSP will eventually feed into the country level (SSP) planning and
monitoring process.
Responsibilities of Municipalities. The Municipalities will: (i) facilitate inclusive targeting of
25.
vulnerable groups and youth; (ii) provide funding and logistics to their relevant departments and
development associations to implement their core mandate as far as facilitating VC cluster
development processes and agribusiness development are concerned; (iii) give access to their
facilities for meetings; (iv) provide incentives and enabling measures for agribusinesses development
and investments of smallholders; (v) for commercial infrastructure and facilities, provide the land and
contribute to investments, organize procurement and implementation; and (vi) facilitate programming
and implementation.
26.
Partnerships. RCDP will build on the positive experiences of USAID’s FARMA and LAMP
projects and the work of the SIDA, SDC, GIZ, CARITAS, OXFAM, etc. and RED/LED agencies, Czech
Development Agency, Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA) and the Swiss
Development Cooperation (SDC). In addition, EU, World Bank and IFC’s investments in technical
capacity building regarding Food Safety Standards in the country will be utilized for the benefit of
smallholders by IFAD projects. RCDP will also build on its lessons from the grant provided to Oxfam
Italy to pilot territorial marketing and explore the potential for branding products. The modalities and
partnerships proposed by the project, are based on existing modalities and dynamics, though with
some adaptation where appropriate to enhance feasibility.
Implementation of Component 1
Establishment of local Cluster Stakeholder Platforms. At the initial steps, it is expected that
27.
the Business Facilitation Partner (BFP), hired by the ACPU/CPU through a competitive process, will
scout for relevant and eligible stakeholders from producers’ organizations (PAs and cooperatives) and
agribusinesses in quality of local 'VC champions'. Subsequently, the BFP will sound out the interests
of all stakeholders and the Municipalities in particular, LEDs where they exist, local service providers,
NGOs and donor-supported projects active in the cluster, local branches of banks and MFIs and the
initial meeting will be convened. It is expected that the BFP will serve as the secretariat of the CSP
but always with a role as a facilitator, supporting stakeholders take the necessary steps to promote
cluster development.
28.
Establishment of country-wide Subsector Stakeholder Platforms. In the initial steps,
APCU/PCU will be responsible for identifying relevant stakeholders starting from those involved in the
approved BPs in each cluster. Subsequently, the APCU/PCU will solicit the Lead Implementation
Agency (Ministry of Agriculture) to invite relevant stakeholders and convene the initial meeting to
establish the SSPs. After the establishment of the platform, APCU/PCU will continue supporting the
SSP, acting as secretariat, with responsibilities for convene platform’s members, organize and
coordinate meeting, agenda, minutes and their dissemination among members. Ideally, the APCU and
PCU will work together in this endeavour although initially, each SSP has been considered specific for
each Entity. Alternately, each Project Coordination Unit could carry out the secretariat function on
129
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
rotation basis. Meetings could be held on quarterly basis or more frequently according to the
emerging issues and the agreement reached among its members.
Policy dialogue/engagement. At national or subnational level subsector stakeholder
29.
platforms, involving all key stakeholders, will oversee and coordinate activities in the respective
subsectors, as well as work on all relevant policy issues, including regional trade issues and
opportunities, regulatory frameworks, and core project risks. The APCU and PCU will contact
professional organizations in the subsectors in order to provide logistic and financial support to
facilitate meetings and the functioning of the platforms, in close collaboration with other development
partners, as several initiatives are ongoing. At local level, cluster stakeholders’ platforms will be
established with the support of RCDP and BFPs in collaboration with public and private stakeholders.
Municipalities, LED agencies will provide logistical support to this process and will be members of
them. The CSP will function at local-level and be involved in participatory evaluation of project
activities and progress.
Effective monitoring of VC and (sub) sectors’ performance .Sector and subsector
30.
monitoring will be coordinated by the PCU/APCU, but should be assisted primarily by external BDS
providers. Data collection will be actively assisted by local authorities (municipality level), local NGOs,
rural organizations and others. This support from existing local stakeholders will foster greater
ownership and learning as a desired side-effect. Substantial insider knowledge about the VC and
subsector performance will be made available and will be an input for RCDP’s own monitoring and
reporting. The emphasis on subsector development in conjunction with the long-term project
perspective provides the necessary space for initiating change and effectively monitoring project
outcomes and impact.
Implementation of Component 2
31.
Business Proposals (BPs), allowing business partners (producers and agribusiness) to plan
coordinate and carry out mutually benefiting investments, will be the main project instrument under
Component 2 of BP partners151 for the sustainable development of their joint businesses in the
selected sub-sectors and value chains.
32.
Project promotion and awareness campaign, confirmation of preselected VCs and
clusters. After the start-up workshop, the ACPU/CPU will contract a specialized consultancy services
to update the baseline poverty information and repeat the exercise conducted during the design to
pre-identify and pre-select promising clusters, which included a scoring of municipalities with potential
to integrate clusters. This exercise will help confirming the proposed clusters or otherwise inform the
selection of new clusters. Based on the information obtained from the exercise, ACPU/CPU will
promote inter-municipal coordination in regions where opportunities exist to establish a cluster. This is
considered a key step in the cluster identification and development process to ensure municipalities
have a better understanding of the potential for cluster formulation in their regions. Municipalities will
submit their application to ACPU/CPU for the approval of their clusters. As a final step of this process,
the APCU/PCU will review the applications, negotiate with cluster applicants to make sure all project
criteria are met and makes the final selection of clusters. In this process, APCU/PCU may initiate the
revision of the cluster participants, if necessary.
Cluster Development Facilitation. The facilitation role will be played by BFPs from a LED,
33.
RED, NGO or a consortium of development actors to be contracted by RCDP, through a competitive
process. BFPs will work closely with municipalities at cluster level and will reporting to Municipalities
and the project. The consultancy firm or NGO will put an individual or a team of facilitators who would
carry out its services on full-time or part-time bases according to the size of the cluster and
requirement for services. Probably, the BFPs or consortium will cover more than one municipality and
cluster what would increase coverage and make more efficient and effective the delivery of services.
151. Small-scale producers and collectors and their organisations, agribusiness companies).
130
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
34.
Identification and planning of activities. Activities of component 2 will be implemented on the
basis of Business Proposals (BPs), with the facilitation of BFPs. Each BP will determine the volume of
activities, the contributions of municipalities, cooperatives and agribusiness, as well as the volume of
subsidies to be accorded by the Project.
35. Marketing facilities will be identified and prioritized at cluster level. Procurement will be
organized at local level or by the APCU/PCU. Given the small scale of the interventions, no significant
negative environmental impacts are expected from the investments in rural infrastructure. However, all
approved designs should meet requirements of the environmental legislation of the FBiH and the RS.
Submission of required documents and expenses for Environmental Assessment as per the existing
legislation will be the responsibility of participating municipalities or local private stakeholders.
36.
BFPs will be chosen according to a proven track record in facilitating contract farming
arrangements for pro-poor value chain development. Although the design mission is attaching some
suggested TORs for BFPs, they will be updated and finalised at a very early stage of project
implementation. BFPs will be one of the first categories of services to be hired, through a competitive
process, by APCU/PCU. As in every TOR and BFPs’ TOR are not the exception, a special place on
them will be reserved for the specific support required from the BFPs to ensure the implementation of
inclusive targeting and following up on its implementation. A BFP could continue working with the
same cluster and BP based on its performance, but it can also happen that a new service provider
could provide the support and facilitation to the implementation of the BP.
The planning process
AWPB. The AWPB represents the key planning document for the Project and its
37.
implementation. The AWPB is driven by a participatory process particularly from the second year on,
with feedback provided by the clusters, and thus encouraging the demand-driven nature of the project
and bottom-up prioritisation.
Based on inputs from the stakeholder, the APCU/PCU will prepare spate Annual Work Plan and
38.
Budget (AWPB) in a format acceptable to IFAD and submit it to the Project steering committee (PSC)
for approval and to IFAD for its non-objection at least two months before the beginning of the relevant
fiscal year. The AWPB will represent the key planning document for the Project. The AWPB process
will be based on proposals from stakeholder platforms at cluster level and will be initiated in
September each year and will be prepared in participation with all stakeholders and finalized with the
approval of the PSC. If required, the PCUs may propose adjustments in the AWPB during the relevant
Project Year, which shall become effective upon approval by the respective PSC and IFAD. The PIM
provides the overall format of the AWPB.
39.
Considering that the AWPB has to be review and approved by the Entity-level PSC (review and
validation) and IFAD (review and approval) before the beginning of the fiscal year (30 to 60 days prior
the commencement of the fiscal year), the elaboration of the AWPB should formally initiate few
months earlier. As expected, the work of the Business Facilitation Partners (BFPs) and the CSPs at
cluster levels will facilitate the identification, prioritisation and planning of BPs and complementary
activities that will be part of the AWPB. During the implementation year, flexibility to proactively
respond to realities of implementation will be considered, and proposed adjustments to the AWPB can
be made and informed to IFAD and Entity-level PSCs. The final Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
will outline further guidelines and details for the overall format of the AWPB, and more importantly, on
the process for its elaboration.
Cluster level. A concentration of activities implicating the key cluster stakeholders will be
40.
initiated with the purpose of establishing the planning and implementation process at cluster level,
namely undertaking diagnostic mapping of the subsector and value chains, identifying M&E
responsibilities and setting-up the M&E system, etc. contributing to establishing the baseline situation.
The process will ensure that the project is carried out to respond to bottom-up and demand driven
needs. This strategic planning phase is a critical stage, in which the Cluster Development Plan (CDP)
131
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
will be elaborated, and first BPs will be identified, initiated, formulated and submitted to the BAC for
approval.
During PY1, most of the preparatory actions will be implemented and several of the key
41.
mechanisms and systems for project implementation will be set up, so ACPU/PCU will have a central
role in the planning process at the initial steps of RCDP. From the second year on, CSPs’ partners at
cluster level should take the lead in the planning process as most of the activities to be implemented
will be identified and prioritised at that level and counterpart funds for co-financing BPs will be agreed
at cluster level. As expected, the Cluster Development Plans should serve as inputs to integrate
demands from clusters and for APCU/PCU to aggregate all demands under a single Entity-level
AWPB. At national level planning consolidation of local-level needs, progress and realities of project
implementation (including challenges and constraints faced) are expected to take place, resulting in
the process of elaboration of the AWPB. It is at this stage that the PCU, APCU and Government will
have the overall oversight and leadership responsibilities to ensure the relevancy and articulation of
the AWPB. In the subsequent project implementation years, operationalization of CDPs will be closely
monitored at the cluster level; the project's performance, and output level and results monitoring will
be discussed twice-yearly, or quarterly as the need arises, and will inform the following year's planning
for the cluster.
132
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
Annex I: Eligibility criteria, roles and responsibilities of key project partners
and platforms
Selection of PAs and Cooperatives
1.
RCDP will work with PAs and Cooperatives that are active in the selected clusters. The vision of
the Project is to facilitate emergence and growth of cooperatives through technical and organizational
support and funds to cofinance BPs. Essentially, RCDP will:



Support the transition from Producers Associations to commercial entities, namely farmers'
cooperatives and farmer owned companies to become more business oriented and ensure
sustainability over time;
Support the gradual consolidation of producers' organizations into apex organizations; and
Strengthen the capacities of producers' organizations (farmers’ cooperatives and
agribusinesses) to submit and implement BPs with the support of the BFPs.
2.
Minimal eligibility criteria for PAs and cooperatives as project partners will be the following:
 Compliance with current legislation of cooperative and governance principles; these
conditions are different for PAs and Cooperatives;

At least one formal market channel established;
 Number of members and their categorization in poverty groups based on the landholding size;



Type of membership so as to give preference to organizations with a favourable proportion of
women and youth among their members;
Proven experience in developing concrete measures to include women among their
members, favouring their participation;
Be open and willing to expand membership and to reach out to new smallholder farmers and
rural poor, in particular women and young men and women;
 Capacity to improve provision of services and guaranteeing access to production factors by
all members;
 Work towards social and sustainable use of natural resources;



Be in line with the legislation and internationally agreed cooperative principles;
Be able to provide evidence of past consistent sales to a national or export market and/or
market opportunity identified; profile of their membership; and
Be open and willing to improve their services and access to production factors.
Agribusinesses
The involvement of exporters, wholesalers and enterprises is crucial to ensure effective access
3.
of smallholders to productive assets, finance, services and markets. Eligible agribusiness companies
should comply with the following criteria:

Proven know-how and technical expertise in the subsector;
 Company’s willingness to use environmental friendly production practices and compliance
with social, labour and gender standards;
 Company’s strategy is focused on long-term presence and viable business relationships with
producers;


Proven experience in or formal commitment to establishing business with small producers.
Business practices that are environmentally friendly;
 Comply with social standards (labour, gender); and

Business strategies based on long-term investments and viable business relationship with
suppliers (producers, collectors, PAs and cooperatives).
133
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
While it is expected that each CSP at local level will focus on issues related to the
Establishment of Stakeholders Platforms
4.
enhancement of the competitiveness of each cluster, the SSPs will involve institutional actors grouped
by the common interest to promote the subsector as a whole, and bring relevant policy issues to the
attention of policy makers.
Establishment of Cluster Stakeholders Platforms (CSPs)
5.
For each of the clusters envisaged under RCDP during Cycle 1 a Cluster Stakeholders’
Platforms (CSP) will be established with the aim at supporting the development of clusters and
selected value chains in their territories and enhance cluster competitiveness. At local level, issues
related to cluster development would be discussed and analysed with the objective of identifying key
priorities to be brought to the attention of municipal and canton authorities. The CSPs will:




Validate and agree on key priority action for cluster development;
Identify and aggregate buyers’ demands for agricultural produce, producers’ demands for
inputs, extension and BDS services;
Identify financial gaps and sources of funds;
Promote horizontal and vertical integration among value chain actors;
 Coordinate service delivery;

Ensure inclusiveness of poor farmers, women and youth and enhance the pro-poor content in
business proposals (BPs); and
 Monitor progress achieved in each cluster and its impact on poverty reduction; and (viii)
identify constraints to the development of clusters and local issues for policy
dialogue/engagement.
Representatives of target groups and PAs and cooperatives, women and youth will participate
6.
as full members in cluster stakeholder platforms to be established at cluster level. It will ensure they
can monitor progress in terms of local VC development, voice their concerns on VC issues, participate
in decisions taken in CSPs, interact with other partners in the cluster and VCs, etc.
Establishment of country-wide Subsector Stakeholder Platforms
For each of the three selected subsectors a SSP will be established with the aim to improve
7.
sub-sector governance and enhance sub-sector competitiveness. Overall the SSPs will:



Identify key priority actions required to improve the competitiveness of each subsector,
including investments required in public goods (marketing infrastructure) and public
services (e.g. research and development of new varieties, policy development);
Identifying policy and regulatory issues regarding the legal framework, public resources
and fiscal incentives;
Formulating medium- and long-term strategies for sub-sector development;
 Contracting sector specific studies and market research for domestic and international
markets, when appropriate


Advocating sustainable subsector development and providing advice to policy makers;
and
Enhancing pro-poor sub-sectors’ linkages and impact.
The establishment of the SSPs may follow the establishment of the CSPs when new platforms
8.
need to be established (not the case of berries).
134
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
PAs and Cooperatives’ Organisational Strengthening
9.
cooperatives as well as to ensure inclusiveness and empowerment of rural poor, women and youth
through their organisations will include:
Specific activities to be undertaken to ensure the organizational strengthening of PAs and
 Organizational strengthening of PAs and cooperatives;


Information and mobilisation campaigns;
Business counselling for members of PAs;
 Matching grants to leverage investments;


Support to ensure active participation of women and youth in PAs and cooperatives’ decision-
making process; and
Information campaign on rural labour conditions, food safety, enforcement of regulations in
agriculture and agribusinesses.
The bulk of the organizational strengthening will be supplied by service providers contracted
10.
through competitive process and will be broad in scope, going beyond the specific activities
implemented by the project to develop capacity and institutions that will be available at local level.
Business Facilitation Partner (BFP)
11.
In the selection of BFPs, through a competitive process, APCU/PCU will take into account:
 How candidates are planning to operate;

Their experience in facilitating win-win public-private partnerships and pro-poor and inclusive
approaches, particularly inclusive business relationships between poor small-scale farmers
and buyers;
 Commitment to gender equality and engagement with youth;


Knowledge of sub-sectors and value chains; and.
Expertise in providing business development support services to small scale producers’
organizations and facilitating participatory business development processes.
12.
Additional selection criteria will take into account the geographic presence, particular
knowledge of a specific territory, technical expertise offered by the candidate organization or
consortia, experience working with one or more of the pre-selected sub-sectors, implementation
capacity to cover one or more value chain, clusters and sub-sector.
13.
The Business Facilitation Partner (BFP) will:




Scout for relevant and eligible stakeholders from producers’ organizations (PAs and
cooperatives) and agribusinesses in quality of local 'VC champions'.
Sound out the interests of all stakeholders and the Municipalities in particular; LEDs where
they exist, local service providers, NGOs and donor-supported projects active in the cluster,
local branches of banks and MFIs;
Serve as the secretariat of the CSP but always with a role as a facilitator, supporting
stakeholders take the necessary steps to promote cluster development;
Support local authorities in conducting training and awareness raising on targeting principles;
capacity support to municipalities /stakeholders’ platform in setting up transparent and fair
targeting criteria; and
 Carry out beneficiaries’ selection process, so as to avoid exclusionary practices and elite
capture.
Individuals, firms or consortia of BFPs will be selected based on their expertise, knowledge and
14.
familiarity with value chains in the area to provide training, technical assistance and support to CSPs
135
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
on VC coordination and organization of the production, mobilization of private and public sector
investments, inclusion of poor smallholders, etc.
BP implementation with the support of selected BFPs
Depending on the quality of the services provided by BFPs during the identification, preparation
15.
and approval of BPs, the same BFP could be hired to facilitate its implementation. If that is not the
case, another BFP will be selected from a roster of service providers established by ACPU/PCU
through a competitive process, which will be available in the Website of the Ministry of Agriculture.
The project will hire BFPs to support the implementation of BPs. Main functions of the BFP during this
phase will be to:
 Monitor compliance with project targeting methodology and criteria to ensure project target
group are effectively included, participate and benefit from the implementation of BPs;
 Monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of activities implemented (training, technical
assistance and business development services provided, development support, quality of
assets purchased etc.);


Facilitate dialogue and conflict resolution between parties if necessary; and
Facilitate clustering and bundling of BP activities in order to achieve economies of scale and
reduce administrative costs.
BFPs induction workshop (induction training)
Soon after the BFPs selection process has been completed, an induction workshop will be held
16.
in each Entity to provide BFPs with background information on:


The overall project proposal;
Approach and strategies;
 Guidance on the facilitation role each BFP is expected to play at cluster level;

The role of partners in clusters, value chains and BPs;
 How the process of identification, preparation and submission of BPs is expected to be
implemented, and

BPs’ scope and minimal content. Particular attention will be given to:
-
The project targeting methodology and eligibility criteria for producers organisations and
private companies;
- How to maximise inclusiveness and pro-poor nature of BPs in order to gain the support by
the project; and
-
BPs’ funding strategies, which will necessarily require the combination of private and
public financing, in addition to project funds.
17.
A proper induction workshop of BFPs combined with close monitoring by the APCU/PCU during
implementation should ensure consistent and coherent project implementation across the two entities
and for the three pre-selected sectors.
BP Assessment Committee (BAC)
18.
The project will establish a BP Assessment Committee (BAC) with the specific task of reviewing
and assessing BPs. The Committee will be composed of three to four members: a representative of a
development organisation with strong pro-poor orientation; a representative of a financial institution;
and an agribusiness specialist hired to provide technical advice to the project and a VC specialist
when necessary. The BAC will:


review the viability and the pro-poor nature of each BP; and
provide a written technical opinion to the APCU/PCU (positive, hence the BP is subsequently
submitted for final approval, or partially positive in which case it will be send to the BP
applicants with specific recommendations for improvement).
136
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
19. Main criteria for assessment will include:


Formal buy-in and commitment of the parties involved in the BP supported by a formal
agreement (e.g. contract agreements);
Financial viability and sustainability of the proposed business;
 Number of new small producers/collectors reached and incorporated in the BP, with particular
emphasis on number of women and youth;

Expected increase in the volume of production purchased from small producers;
 Win-win (pro-poor) features of the proposed business (i.e. duration, existence of a transparent
price setting mechanism, suitable payment terms, risk mitigation measures, amount of value-
added shifter closer to the farm-gate);
 Grievance mechanism foreseen to settle potential disputes among parties;

Share of total cost of (investments, working capital and technical assistance requirements
covered by the agribusiness company or farmers organizations from their own funds; and
 When necessary, review any specific evidence of the availability of funds to finance working
capital and/or investments.
BFPs, BP originators and the BCP will ensure that there will not be any transfer of land rights
20.
from farmers to private companies envisaged in the BP.
BP approval
Following the assessment of BPs, BP originators and their business partners will be formally
21.
invited to present their BPs to the BAC committee. The BAC approval process will be chaired by
APCU/PCU.
137
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
Annex II: APCU/PCU main roles and responsibilities
The APCU and PCU are already established in both Entities and are implementing other IFAD
1.
funded projects in the country. In addition to regular roles and responsibilities carried out by the
APCU/PCU to manage, administer and implement the project (see this Appendix 5 for more details),
the Units will carry out specific activities that are at the core of the project approach, strategies and
implementation modality:
 Contract, after the project start-up workshop, a specialized consultancy services to update the
baseline poverty information and repeat the exercise conducted during the design to pre-
identify and pre-select promising clusters to confirm the proposed clusters or otherwise inform
the selection of new clusters;.
 Hire through a competitive process a civil society organization or NGO with experience in
poverty targeting and gender to develop tools and methodologies that enable BFPs to reach
out to rural poor people, women and youth; support define and implement, mechanisms and
activities to enable them to participate in the RCDP, support the build-up of capacity at APCU,
PCU, municipalities, other cluster development stakeholders and implementing agents in the
field of poverty targeting and gender; provide necessary backstopping on targeting and
inclusiveness during implementation; and monitor inclusiveness and to support reporting on
achievements and progress.

Supervise through the gender officer and close collaboration with cluster and cluster
development facilitators the service provider;
 Hold, during the initial stage of implementation, several workshops across the country, at least
5 in each Entity, to promote the project and explain its approach; guiding principles; target
groups; pro-poor and inclusive approaches; strategies and implementation modality; value
chains, clusters and subsector approaches; pre-identified municipalities and clusters of
municipalities; public-private linkages, leverage points etc. (the events will follow the pre-
identified clusters within each Entity and focus on value-chains that are specific to these
clusters);


Promote inter-municipal coordination in regions where opportunities exist to establish a
cluster as a key step in the cluster identification and development process to ensure
municipalities have a better understanding of the potential for cluster formulation in their
regions.
Promote the cluster approach, reviewing the proposals and open negotiations with
municipalities prior to clusters selection and approval, after clusters have been established by
municipalities and local stakeholders;
 Review the applications, negotiate with cluster applicants to make sure all project criteria are
met, and make the final selection of clusters. APCU/PCU may initiate the revision of the
cluster participants, if necessary.




In each Entity select through a competitive process a qualified organisation or a consortium of
organizations to perform the role of Business Facilitation Partner (BFP) at cluster level for
each of the three pre-identified sub-sectors (fruits, vegetables and NTFPs) (a combination of
subsectors should be explored and highly encouraged by APCU/PCU when a consortium has
the experience and capability to serve more than a subsector);
Establish a Business Proposal Assessment Committee (BAC) with the specific task of
reviewing and assessing BPs and ensuring viability and pro-poor nature of each BP;
Approve BPs upon a thorough assessment by a technical committee of three independent
experts based on criteria set;
Support BFPs, if and when necessary, to organize workshops for all stakeholders involved in
local value chains and clusters to ensure inclusive targeting and monitoring, pro-poor and
138
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements
inclusive approaches, the implementation of enabling measures for women and youth to
actively participate in BPs and project activities;

Setup the voucher scheme, define procedures and prepare guidelines on how the voucher
scheme will be implemented, on how it will be administered (including control mechanism)
and how its performance will be evaluated;
 Call for application targeted at interested service providers, individuals, firms and consortia
interested in providing service to PAs, cooperatives and BP stakeholders;



Pre-qualify suitable candidates with ad hoc independent specialized support. Support the
short accreditation process handled by an ad hoc small commission of specialists;
Setup a roster of pre-qualified candidates (eligible consultants under the voucher scheme),
which will be made accessible to all BP stakeholders in the Website of the Ministry of
Agriculture and also in the project Website;
After it had received a copy of the contract/agreement signed between PAs or cooperatives
and the service provider(s), deliver a voucher to the PAs and cooperatives in the agreed value
and pay the vouchers to the consultants/firms/consortia once the services have been
completed;
 Maintain the roster of pre-qualified consultants and firms based on performance evaluation of
services and update the roster from time to time with a new call for interest to expand the
supply of qualified service providers;



Support BP partners, through M&E officer and/or consultants hired for that purpose, to follow-
up and monitoring of services (a primary responsibility of BP partners);
Solicit the Lead Implementation Agency (Ministry of Agriculture) to invite relevant stakeholders
and convene the initial meeting to establish the Subsector Stakeholder Platform (SSP);
After the establishment of the platform, APCU/PCU will continue supporting the SSP, acting
as secretariat, with responsibilities for convene platform’s members, organize and coordinate
meeting, agenda, minutes and their dissemination among members;
 Coordinate sector and subsector monitoring, assisted primarily by external BDS providers;
 Contract through a competitive process the preparation of related studies on specific issues of
VCs and subsectors which limit their development and which need to be addressed by policy-
makers. These studies can be proposed by CSP, SSP, the APCU/PCU and even by Entity
authorities, when relevant for decision-making;
 Contract through competitive process competent service providers to conduct project impact
surveys;


Prepare and submit overall semi-annual and annual financial and physical performance
reports with information gathered through the process of progress monitoring;
Prepare spate Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) in a format acceptable to IFAD and
submit it to the Project steering committee (PSC) for review and to IFAD for its non-objection
at least two months before the beginning of the relevant fiscal year;
 Maintain its accounting records in accordance with IPSAS-cash basis of accounting;

Ensure that adequate Internal Controls are maintained through the project implementation by
all implementing entities and project partners;


Provide IFAD with consolidated financial reports within agreed timeframes as follows: (a)
semi-annual consolidated Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) as agreed with IFAD;
Prepare the respective annual financial statements in a timely manner which will be audited
by the selected auditor in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISA) (the
terms of reference for the audit will be agreed with IFAD on annual basis)
139
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 5:
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements

Submit to IFAD within six months of the end of fiscal year the consolidated audit report
covering the whole project, together with the separate audit reports for APCU and PCU,
including the management letters covering the audit observations on internal controls;
 Carry out the procurement under the project in accordance with IFAD procurement guidelines,
IFAD procurement handbook and the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. For
each major contract to be financed by the IFAD financing, the different procurement methods,
the need for prequalification, estimated costs, prior review requirements, and time frame will
be agreed between the Borrower and IFAD project team in the Procurement Plan.

Prepare an AWPB and a Procurement Plan in a format acceptable to IFAD for the first
18 months of project implementation (draft-procurement plan is included in Appendix 8 of this
Design Report);
 Generated and submit to IFAD procurement progress reports, as part of the semi-annually
and annual progress reports, and list all contracts in the Register of Contracts in a format
agreed with IFAD and maintained by the APCU/PCU.
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system
2.
The Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be a key management tool for the Project and
will serve the primary purpose of providing data and feedback to improve the effectiveness, efficiency,
sustainability, relevance and impact of Project activities. The overall responsibility for the M&E
activities will lie with APCU/PCU, which will be responsible for:
 Coordinate and follow up on the design and development of the project Information System
and the centralized computerised database containing all relevant data (project inputs,
outputs and outcomes) collected by project stakeholders and consolidated by the PCU and
APCU. M&E Officer should ensure the system is customized for the project;
 Monitor service provider for inclusiveness and impact monitoring;
 Collecting and analysing the data gathered from all implementing partners and service
providers;
 Organize impact evaluations;

Ensuring consistency, accuracy and timeliness of all reporting undertaken under the Project;
 Hire specialised services to conduct evaluation studies, case studies, systematize good
practices and experiences;
 Disseminate information of project activities and results;
 Update in a participatory manner the Logical Framework of RCDP;
 Coordinate knowledge management activities carried out by RCDP, project partners and
beneficiaries.
 Coordinate the preparation of the Project Completion Report (PCR);
All M&E activities will be in line with the IFAD Guidelines for Project M&E and IFAD RIMS first
3.
and second level Indicators Handbook.
140
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 6: Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management
Appendix 6: Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge
management
A. Overview
Results-based and performance management under the RCDP are cornerstones for effectively
1.
contributing to the strategic objectives outlined in the RB-COSOP for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and for
the project development objective itself. Subsequently, the adoption of a disciplined structure for
planning, M&E and knowledge management under the project is fundamental during the project life
cycle, and which will also serve as a management tool for informed decision making and to guide the
overall progress of the project. The M&E system proposed is compliant with IFAD guidelines and the
Results and Impact Monitoring System (RIMS) handbook. An underlying principle behind the M&E
system will be its participatory nature, with shared responsibility amongst project stakeholders for
effective M&E across the project interventions, and with emphasis on outcome and impact-level
monitoring for results.
The project is designed to encourage sustainable development of the identified subsector; on
2.
an operational level, the project adopts a cluster approach, which implies the interaction between
multiple project stakeholders and value chain (VC) actors within a more production-concentrated
geographical scope. The cluster approach therefore provides a basis for bringing stakeholders/VC
actors together and creating a culture for regular dialogue and communication at the local level, and
through which, key priorities and activities to be pursued under the project will be identified and
validated.
3.
Partners in development. Actors in the implementation of the project will comprise the
following: Government (Entity-levels); Ministry of Agriculture (Lead Implementation Agency), Project
Coordination Unit (PCU) in the Federation and Agricultural Project Coordination Unit (APCU) in RS,
are mandated by the government for day-to-day coordination of the project; primary target group
project beneficiaries (including smallholder farmers, PAs, Cooperatives); identified service providers
(specialized individuals, companies and consortia) and implementing partners (including local
development agencies, NGOs, other development partners); agribusinesses; local government
(Municipalities, Cantons); Project Steering Committee (PSC) and others. APCU and PCU
Moreover, the project will support the establishment of Cluster Stakeholder Platforms (CSP)
4.
and Subsector Stakeholders Platform (SSP). The cluster serves as a stakeholder platform for
participatory planning and monitoring progress of value chains, clusters and subsector development,
targeting and inclusiveness. CSP will eventually feed into the country level (SSP) planning and
monitoring process.
The emphasis on subsector development with the longer-term life cycle of the project provides
5.
the space for effectively initiating change and for monitoring project outcome and impact.
B.
Planning
The planning process.
AWPB. The AWPB represents the key planning document for the Project and its
6.
implementation, and is driven by a participatory process particularly from the second year on, with
feedback provided by the clusters, and thus encouraging the demand-driven nature of the project and
bottom-up prioritisation. Considering that the AWPB has to be review and approved by the Entity-level
PSCs (review and validation) and IFAD (review and approval) before the beginning of the fiscal year
(30 to 60 days prior the commencement of the fiscal year), the elaboration of the AWPB should
formally initiate few months earlier. As expected, the work of the Business Facilitation Partners (BFPs)
and the CSPs at cluster levels will facilitate the identification, prioritisation and planning of BPs and
complementary activities that will be part of the AWPB. During the implementation year, flexibility to
141
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 6: Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management
proactively respond to realities of implementation will be considered, and proposed adjustments to the
AWPB can be made and informed to IFAD and Entity-level PSCs. The final Project Implementation
Manual (PIM) will outline further guidelines and details for the overall format of the AWPB, and more
importantly, on the process for its elaboration.
Cluster level. A concentration of activities implicating the key cluster stakeholders will be
7.
initiated with the purpose of establishing the planning and implementation process at cluster level,
namely undertaking diagnostic mapping of the subsector and value chains, identifying M&E
responsibilities and setting-up the M&E system, etc. contributing to establishing the baseline situation.
The process will ensure that the project is carried out to respond to bottom-up and demand driven
needs. This strategic planning phase is a critical stage, in which the Cluster Development Plan (CDP)
will be elaborated, and first BPs will be identified, initiated, formulated and submitted to the BAC for
approval.
8.
During PY1, most of the preparatory actions will be implemented and several of the key
mechanisms and systems for project implementation will be set up, so ACPU/PCU will have a central
role in the planning process at the initial steps of RCDP. From the second year on, CSPs’ partners at
cluster level should take the lead in the planning process as most of the activities to be implemented
will be identified and prioritised at that level and counterpart funds for co-financing BPs will be agreed
at cluster level. As expected, the Cluster Development Plans should serve as inputs to integrate
demands from clusters and for APCU/PCU to aggregate all demands under a single Entity-level
AWPB. At subsector level, planning consolidation of local-level needs, progress and realities of
project implementation (including challenges and constraints faced) are expected to take place,
resulting in the process of elaboration of the AWPB. It is at this stage that the PCU, APCU and
Government will have the overall oversight and leadership responsibilities to ensure the relevancy and
articulation of the AWPB.
In the subsequent project implementation years, operationalization of CDPs will be closely
9.
monitored at the cluster level; the project's performance, and output level and results monitoring will
be discussed twice-yearly, or quarterly as the need arises, and will inform the following year's planning
for the cluster.
C. Monitoring and evaluation
10.
The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system will be a key management tool for the project and
will serve the primary purpose of providing data and feedback to improve the effectiveness, efficiency,
sustainability, relevance and impact of project activities. The overall responsibility for M&E activities
will lie with the PCU and APCU, who will be responsible for collecting and analysing the data gathered
from all stakeholders on the basis of an agreed reporting format and timing, and consolidating this
information and reporting.
11. Objectives and principles of the M&E system. The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system
aims at providing accurate and reliable data to ensure the effectiveness of project management, the
achievement of the project objectives and targets and the sustainability of benefits provided through
project interventions and activities. The key functions of the M&E system are to ensure that the project
activities: (i) are being implemented according to plan; (ii) have the intended impact on the
beneficiaries; (iii) are being effective in delivering benefits and that the benefits are being sustainably
managed and owned by communities; (iv) are relevant to the needs of, and prioritized by, the
beneficiaries; and (v) are being monitored so as to identify problems and risks early and ensure the
progress of the project is on track.
The M&E system will be customized to the needs of the project and aligned with its objectives
12.
and expected results. To ensure that the objectives, outcomes and results are achieved, project
management will track results at the output level, and place repeated emphasis on the outcome level
analysis and tracking. This would enable results-based management that makes use of this
information and implements timely and adequate improvements or adjustments to project
142
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 6: Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management
components. In addition, the effectiveness and sustainability of the benefits of the project should be
closely monitored, both at the local/ cluster level, and at the national subsector level, to measure
subsector development and performance. The SPSC will have responsibility for M&E oversight on
both the technical and policy-related progress and results which are critical for the development of the
subsector.
13.
The emphasis on bottom-up and joint/ shared responsibility for M&E will contribute to building a
culture of real ownership, responsibility and accountability for delivering on results that are sustainable
and will encourage continuity beyond project completion. Thus the identification of meaningful
indicators, including performance indicators, to be validated through a participatory process, is a
means to ensure relevancy of the project interventions (meeting the priority needs) and effective
overall M&E. Finally, the M&E system needs to be cognizant of targeting-related issues. Large
sections of the population are currently vulnerable including women and the youth, and need
enhanced support to ensure their participation in agricultural and marketing activities.
14.
Types and levels of monitoring. The M&E system will be built on three levels of monitoring:
 Output monitoring (RIMS first level). This refers to reporting on the transformation from inputs
and activities into outputs of the project (typically products, goods and services resulting from
interventions and that are tangible immediate results); it is expected that this will be measure
at least quarterly;
 Outcome monitoring (RIMS second level). This is related to how outputs are utilized and the
direct benefits accruing from the project; the accessibility of products, goods and services to
the target group (including for example, the application and uptake of technologies and
practices) and results of these in terms of yields, productivity, gross margins, etc. should be
considered; outcomes reflect the likely or achieved short-term and medium-term effects of
project outputs, and should be measured at least on a half-yearly basis; and

Impact monitoring (RIMS third level). This relates to the project evaluation process, to
measure achievement of the project goal and development objective; it may reflect on the
strengths, weaknesses, direct and indirect long-term effect of the project's interventions.
15. On the above basis, the project will systematically adopt two types of monitoring: (i) progress
monitoring (RIMS first and second level); and (ii) impact monitoring and evaluation (RIMS third level),
which are elaborated below. The necessary tools, such as a results tracking sheet for reporting on
identified indicators, and other complementary M&E tools adapted for use by different levels of
actors/stakeholders, will also be developed. These M&E tools should be used at the field and cluster
levels, to be aggregated and consolidated at the PCU and APCU level, led by the M&E Officers who
will ensure consistency, accuracy and timeliness of all reporting undertaken under the project.
Progress Monitoring will concentrate on the financial and physical performance of the project.
16.
Implementing partners, service providers and the partnerships/ relationships formed by the project
stakeholders in general will operate and be governed on a contractual basis, with performance
reviews. The information gathered through the process of progress monitoring will feed into the overall
annual and semi-annual progress reports. For contracted service providers and/ or implementing
partners, M&E responsibilities and reporting deliverables will be clearly stated with agreed schedules
for reporting.
17.
Impact Monitoring will focus on the outcome and impact level indicators specified in the
Project Logical Framework. Surveys will be undertaken in PY 1, 5 and 10. The impact surveys will be
outsourced to competent service providers, though the contribution of the project stakeholders in
feeding data and information is critical to these exercises.
18.
Furthermore, the project makes a particular distinction for participatory impact result
monitoring as regards to the inclusiveness and pro-poor approaches developed by the
intervention, knowledge management and promotion. Monitoring of inclusiveness will be
undertaken to look at impact of the interventions on the core target group. A civil society organization
143
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 6: Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management
or NGO with experience in poverty targeting and gender will be contracted by APCU/PCU: (a) to
develop tools and methodologies that enable BFPs to reach out to rural poor people, women and
youth; (b) to support define and implement, mechanisms and activities to enable them to participate in
the RCDP, (c) to support the build-up of capacity at APCU, PCU, municipalities, other cluster
development stakeholders and implementing agents in the field of poverty targeting and gender; (d) to
provide necessary backstopping on targeting and inclusiveness during implementation; and (e) to
monitor inclusiveness and to support reporting on achievements and progress; and (e) ensure that
disaggregated information can feed the RCDP M&E system. The service provider will operate under
the direct supervision of the gender officer and close cooperation with cluster development facilitators.
The service provider will build on the knowledge developed by Oxfam Italy pilot activity in 2014.
19. Monitoring of inclusiveness will include: (a) definition of baseline for each selected cluster and
at subsector level in terms of each category of beneficiaries (very poor, poor, borderline poor), gender
focused analysis, (b) facilitators’ training and mentoring to define monitoring tools in each Cluster
development plan, (c) survey on inclusiveness at the end of each programme cycle and definition of
recommendations. As part of the induction training (workshop), the project will ensure the
training/awareness to key actors about the targeting criteria.
In sum, with respect to impact monitoring and evaluation, there is need for the PCU and APCU
20.
to establish the baseline situation as early as possible; given the longevity of the project, impact
monitoring should be attempted at mid-term (PY 5) and at the end of the project (PY 10).
21.
An Inter-cycle Review Mission (IRM) will be conducted during project year five, to assess the
progress, achievements, constraints and emerging impact and likely sustainability of project activities
and to provide detailed planning for the next cycle of five years. The IRM will be carried out jointly by
the PCU, APCU and IFAD.
At the end of the project, a completion evaluation will be conducted, as an input into the Project
22.
Completion Report (PCR) through a formal survey preferably undertaken by a neutral agency with
no previous involvement in project implementation; the PCR will have to be submitted to IFAD within
6 months of the completion date. IFAD itself may also undertake a formal Evaluation of the project
through its Independent Office of Evaluation (OE).
Performance indicators. A defining feature of the project M&E system will be the ability to
23.
monitor and report on the indicators identified and linked to the outcome and expected results of the
project (also articulated in the project logical framework); these are a combined mixture of both
quantitative and qualitative indicators and include, though are not limited to: the RIMS indicators;
indicators defined in the project logical framework; and other priority indicators that have been
identified through the participatory discussions at cluster and subsector stakeholder platform levels.
Not least, the emphasis on 'inclusiveness' will be mainstreamed accordingly.
Particularities of the cluster and VC development approach. As envisaged by the project,
24.
the support for, and strong linkages between producers and agribusinesses (encouraging improved
and favourable marketing and commercialization) is a fundamental principle. Whilst seeking win-win
partnerships and opportunities, ensuring the pro-poor dimension of the project interventions suggests
that monitoring indicators to measure both quantitative and qualitative aspects such as outreach (from
a targeting perspective) and willingness of VC actors to form working and favourable relationships, is
needed.
Targets against the indicators will be set on an annual basis, and will be included in the AWPB;
25.
the AWPB will also include the annual M&E plan.
26.
Finally, it should be noted that all indicators will be disaggregated according to gender, age and
socio-economic status to the extent possible, so as to enable a proper assessment as to whether the
Project is reaching its intended target groups.
27. Management information system (MIS). In order to promote the M&E system as a decision-
making tool, M&E information must be easily accessible to government, PCU and APCU and other
144
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 6: Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management
project stakeholders, including beneficiaries. A centralized computerized database or MIS that
contains all relevant data (project inputs, outputs and outcomes) collected by project stakeholders and
consolidated by the PCU and APCU should be designed and developed, customized for the project.
This MIS will be maintained by the respective M&E Officers in the PCU and APCU with assistance of
all project team members and project implementation partners.
Capacity building for M&E. The capacities of project stakeholders responsible for M&E will be
28.
further assessed, and where needed, provision will be made to provide training and develop simple
tools and mechanisms to facilitate more efficient and effective M&E.
D.
IFAD supervision
The Project will also be monitored and evaluated externally by IFAD through supervision and
29.
other regular monitoring and evaluation measures, such as: (i) annual or bi-annual supervision
missions; (ii) RIMS impact surveys (at baseline and completion; (iii) Mid Term Review (by IFAD in
cooperation with the Government in year 5); (iv) Project Completion Report (IFAD would provide
support to the preparation process); and (v) yearly audits conducting by independent consulting firms.
E.
Learning and knowledge management
30. Given the innovative features of the RCDP, primarily in approach, the effectiveness of
consolidating, analysing and disseminating project experiences and achievements will be important.
Provision has also been made for specialised studies, preparation of case studies of successes and
failures, and for communication. Effectively, a knowledge-sharing and learning culture will be
promoted within the subsector and across stakeholders. Knowledge gained will be translated into
messages, manuals, concepts and strategies, and disseminated to the various target groups and
stakeholders, using appropriate means of communication.
Another important element of learning and knowledge management relates to the project's
31.
effort to harmonize the various support and interventions of other donors and development partners
working in the subsector; best practices and lessons learned across partners will be important to
capture and will result in improved performance monitoring of the subsector.
The SSP, as a higher-level platform with wide representation of stakeholders, is a means to
32.
leverage good results, information and knowledge for sustainability and continued development of the
subsector. This will also be part and parcel to generate effective policy dialogue.
145
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 7: Financial management and disbursement arrangements
Appendix 7: Financial management and disbursement
arrangements
A.
Financial Management Assessment (FMA) of the Project
Methodology. In accordance with IFAD guidelines, a Financial Management Assessment
1.
(FMA) has been undertaken as part of project design. The objective of FMA is to provide assurances
that the Project will be implemented in an environment with sufficiently strong financial management
systems and controls in place to properly manage, control and report on programme finances. The
FMA involves assessing: (1) the inherent risk at country level; and (2) the project specific risk.
Country context and inherent risk. The inherent risk of BiH is assessed as medium. The
2.
fiscal structure is highly decentralized as defined in the country’s constitution. The government
structure consists of four fairly autonomous units: BiH Institutions, Brčko District (DB), and the two
Entities, Federation Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and Republika Srpska (RS). BiH Institutions are
at the central government level (governed by the BiH Council of Ministers); and each Entity has its
own government, extra-budgetary funds (EBFs), and local self-governance units. According to the
Corruption Perception Index published by Transparency International, BiH has improved 3.2 (2011) to
4.2 in 2012 and 2013. But at the same time, World Banks’ doing business ranking has slightly
decreased from 104 in 2014 to 107 in 2015 with sub-indicators related to Starting a Business, Dealing
with Construction Permits, Getting Electricity and Paying taxes have worsened. The first Public
Expenditures and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment published in 2014 rate the Public
Financial Management systems separately at the state and entity level. The report identified several
areas that require improvement including: (i) Legislative scrutiny of external audit reports, (ii) Scope,
nature and follow-up on external audit reports, (iii) effectives of internal audit, iv) Competition, value
for money and controls in procurement and (v) performance audits performed by the Supreme Audit
Institutions.
Financing conditions for the IFAD loan. The IFAD loan will be given on ordinary terms, and
3.
denominated in Euro. The currency of the designated account and repayment will be in euros. The
IFAD reference rate applicable to loans on ordinary terms is based on an SDR weighted, EURIBOR
(for euro loans) 6-month composite rate of the four currencies which constitute the SDR basket
(United States Dollar, Japanese Yen, Euro and Great Britain Pound), available on first business day of
January and first business day of July, plus a variable spread. The IFAD reference rate is published
on the IFAD website.
Implementation arrangements and project risk. The State Ministry of Finance and Treasury
4.
will be the signatory to the loan agreement with the International Fund for Agriculture Development.
The State Ministry will, in turn, sign Subsidiary Loan Agreements with the Entity Government of the
Federation of Bosnia Herzegovina and Republika Srpska. The Federation’s Ministry of Agriculture,
Water Management and Forestry (MAWMF) will be responsible for the Project in the FBiH. The
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) in the Republika Srpska (RS) will
be responsible for the Project in the RS. These Ministries will be through their respective Project
Coordination Units (PCU and APCU respectively) will be responsible for the overall financial
management of the Project including coordinating all financial reports from implementing partners.
Project Coordination Units. The proposed project will take advantage of the established
5.
Project coordination mechanisms in the FBiH and RS which are called the Project Coordination Unit
(PCU) in the FBiH and the Agriculture Project Coordination Unit (APCU) in the RS IFAD. Both units
have an established track record in accounting, managing, and reporting on IFAD financed Projects
and the APCU is also managing projects financed by the World Bank, and other donors. In 2014 and
again in the first months of 2015, the IFAD APCU/PCU showed satisfactory performance with regards
to financial management and according to the risk assessment the APCU/PCU have been rated as
147
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 7: Financial management and disbursement arrangements
medium - low risk. The most recent project Audit reports (2013 fiscal year) have been received in a
timely manner and have been unqualified.
Anticorruption and Good Governance Framework. The primary responsibility of detecting
6.
fraud and corruption lies with the borrower. However, it should be noted that IFAD’s applies a
zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in projects financed
through its loans and grants. 'Zero tolerance' means that IFAD will pursue all allegations falling under
the scope of this policy and that appropriate sanctions will be applied where the allegations are
substantiated. This policy applies to IFAD-funded activities whether supervised directly by IFAD or by
a cooperating institution. IFAD shall take all possible actions to protect from reprisals individuals who
help reveal corrupt practices in its project or grant activities and individuals or entities subject to unfair
or malicious allegations.
Given IFAD’s zero tolerance described in the above paragraph, it is important that the all project
7.
staff, project parties and stakeholders of the project are familiar with IFAD’s as well as the national
anticorruption policies and whistle blowing procedures. The IFAD anticorruption policy is available on
the IFAD website at www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/index.htm). The website also provides
instructions on how to report any alleged wrongdoing to the Office of Audit and Oversight
(http://www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm). The national anticorruption policies and
whistle blowing procedures are under the responsibility of the Agency for the Prevention of Corruption
and Coordination of the Fight against Corruption.
Taxation. As per IFAD policy, none of the IFAD proceeds of its financing can be utilized for the
8.
payment of taxes during the course of project implementation
Project specific Financial Management Assessment. As required by IFAD Financial
9.
Management assessment guidelines, the summarised scoring at design is as shown in the table below.
Table 27: Risk assessment at design stage
Type of risk
Inherent Risk
TI Index
RSP score
Control Risks
Organisation and staffing
 Qualified FM staff in both APCU and
PCU. However, the technical staffing
arrangements may not be adequate for
the proposed project.
 APCU in RS overextended between
different projects.
 Role of the steering committee
unclear.
 Limited FM staff in the PCU/FBiH.
Initial Risk
Assessment
Proposed mitigation
4.2
M
Final Risk
Assessment
Medium
L
 The overall staffing arrangements
(staff, TORs and reporting lines of the
APCU/PCU need to be reviewed and
agreed on to ensure adequate
technical skill set appropriate time
allocation to meet the project needs.
 Role and composition of the steering
committee to be clarified and agreed
on with IFAD.
 A qualified accountant to be trained in
the FM unit of the PCU to ensure
continuity.
148
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 7: Financial management and disbursement arrangements
Proposed mitigation
Initial Risk
Assessment
M
Type of risk
Budgeting
 Budget prepared separately by
APCU/RS and PCU/FBiH.
 Budget preparation and monitoring in
APCU require more attention and
responsiveness.
 Budget controls not in place in the
accounting software (PCU/FBiH).
 IFAD to be consulted already in early
stage of the AWPB preparation.
 The consolidated AWPBs to be
submitted for IFAD non-objection 2
months before the beginning of the
fiscal year in a format acceptable to
IFAD.
 Proper budget controls to be ensured
in the accounting software
PCU/FBiH.
 Schedule 2 to include separate
expenditure categories for APCU/RS
and PCU/FBiH.
 Separate designated and programme
accounts to be opened for each
financing source in a commercial
bank acceptable to IFAD
 WAs duly authorized by double
signature (APCU/PCU/& and
authorized Representative of the
borrower).
 Audit trail for each expenditure item
to be properly disclosed in
Withdrawal applications by modified
forms.
 The Financial procedures manual to
be adopted by APCU and PCU.
 The accounting software to be
customized to fit the project needs
(financial reporting fully automated).
 Schedule 2 to include separate
expenditure categories for APCU/RS
and PCU/FBIH.
 Reporting templates to be
established and the Accounting
system to be customized to produce
these reports automatically by the
APCU/PCU
 APCU/PCU to produce
quarterly/semi-annual Interim
Financial Statements.
 The APCU (RS) audited by the state
auditor.
Final Risk
Assessment
L
L
L
L
L
M/Not
applicable
Funds flow and disbursement
arrangements
 Several financiers
 Complex financing structure due to the
M
2 separate entities.
 Project account not operational in RS.
Internal controls
 No Formal Financial Procedures, or
credit manual in place.
Accounting systems, policies and
procedures
 Financial reporting not fully automated
in the APCU.
Reporting and monitoring
 APCU and PCU will provide separate
Financial Reports.
M
L
L
Internal Audit
 The APCU(RS)/PCU(FBIH) not
M/Not
applicable
included in the IA exercise of the LPA.
149
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 7: Financial management and disbursement arrangements
Type of risk
External audit
 Past Audit reports have been
unqualified and submitted on timely
manner.
Initial Risk
Assessment
Proposed mitigation
Final Risk
Assessment
L
 MoF to provide separate and
L
consolidated audit reports as per
current practice.
 IFAD non objection required for the
Audit TORs. This link to be
strengthened between IFAD and the
MOF contracting the auditors.
 The possibility to have the SAIs at
entity level conduct a
technical/operational audit sometimes
during the project lifecycle will be
explored.
Fiduciary risk at design stage
M-L
 Mitigation action summary: The
L
financial management arrangements
of the Existing APCU/PCU are assed
as Medium-Low. The mitigation
actions will need to be timely
implemented to further reduce the
Financial Management risk.
NB: H/M/L = High, medium and low risk as per the Guideline Note on undertaking Financial Management Assessment at
design
Conclusion. The financial management arrangements, and capacity of the existing APCU/PCU
10.
are adequate to meet IFAD’s requirements and the initial risk rating is considered as medium-low. Given
the proper implementation of the mitigation actions, the residual risk will be further decreased to low.
B.
Proposed financial management arrangements
Proposed financial management arrangements. The proposed FM-arrangements including
11.
budgeting, accounting, internal controls, flow of funds, financial reporting, and audit arrangements will
follow the FM arrangements already in place in the APCU/PCU with some adjustments. The
proposed FM arrangement are described below and will be outlined in detail in the Project's Financial
Procedures Manual which will be prepared before project start up and reviewed during first year of
implementation.
Staffing. Experienced financial managers and accountants are already in place in the
12.
APCU/PCU. In order to ensure proper back-up and segregation of duties in the case of absences, an
additional accountant should be hired or trained to support the financial manager in the PCU and
ensure continuity in the future. As the APCU in RS is implementing several projects it is important to
ensure that the staff allocate sufficient time for the proposed project to ensure timely and efficient
implementation and fulfilment of the financing covenants as specified in the Financing Agreement.
Budgeting and Budget control. Based on inputs from the stakeholder the APCU/PCU will
13.
prepare spate Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) in a format acceptable to IFAD and submit it to
the project steering committee for approval and to IFAD for its comments and non-objection at least
two months before the beginning of the relevant fiscal year. The format of the AWPB will indicate at
least the following: expenditure items by activity, by component, by expenditure category, and by
implementing entity, physical indicators by activity as well as funding requirements by financier on a
quarterly basis. The AWPB must be in line with the project description and any incurred expenditures
as part of the project will have to be part of the approved AWPB to be considered eligible for IFAD
financing
150
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 7: Financial management and disbursement arrangements
Accounting. The APCU/PCU will maintain its accounting records in accordance with
14.
IPSAS-cash basis of accounting. The project transactions will be recorded in their respective
accounting systems which are already in place and which have been assessed as adequate for IFAD
needs including a budget module with proper budget controls, accounting module, financial reporting
module, fixed asset register etc... The accounting systems will be further fine-tuned during the project
start-up as necessary to fully automate the generation of reports required under the project.
Internal Controls. In order to ensure: (a) efficiency; (b) reliability of financial reports; and
15.
(c) compliance with applicable laws and regulations including the conditions set forth in the financing
agreement, the APCU/PCU will ensure that adequate Internal Controls are established including:








Adequate policies and procedures,
Sufficient segregation of duties,
Fixed asset maintenance including tagging of all assets,
Periodic monitoring and review including comparison of physical and financial progress.
Proper authorization and access levels are maintained through the project parties.
All project sites for works clearly identified and mapped including addresses/GPS-coordinates
(as appropriate) to facilitate supervision.
All trainings duly documented including a list of participators.
All delivered goods reconciled against procured goods.
16.
Payment authorization. All payments are prepared by the Finance Manager, and approved by
the Project Director (PD) and Deputy Minister of Agriculture APCU/RS and Finance manager and PD
in PCU/FBiH.
Flow of funds. It is expected that separate bank accounts will be opened and maintained for
17.
each financing source and for each entity, FBiH and RS. Accordingly, there will be a two (one for each
Entity) designated accounts for the IFAD loan (in EUR) and two (one for each Entity) designated
account for the grant (in USD) and four (two for each Entity) operating accounts in BAM to receive
financing from the respective designated accounts in a commercial bank acceptable to IFAD. In
addition, there will be a separate counterpart account for the government contribution. The project
bank accounts will be operated under the joint signature of the Project Director and the Financial
Controller of the APCU/PCU.
18.
Counterpart and government contribution. The Government contribution up to the amount
detailed in project costs and financing (see Appendix 9 for details) will cover taxes and will be paid in
cash to a separate account based on the approved AWPBs. The funds will be transferred by the state
treasury to the project through withdrawal applications prepared by the APCU/PCU and approved by
the MoF. The municipalities and other stakeholder partners in the BPs will agree on and make
arrangements to determine how their contributions will be handled based on agreed financing
percentages. The Counterpart and government contribution will be captured in project accounting and
financial reports and included in the audit; municipalities and BP partners’ contributions will be
captured by M&E systems in both Entities and included in performance reported.
19.
Financial Reporting. The APCU/PCU will further fine-tune its accounting software as
necessary to automatically produce all financial reports on a quarterly/semi-annual basis in a format
agreed with IFAD152. The financial reports will link each transaction to a financier and compare
incurred expenditures with the planned amounts: actual vs. budget for a reporting period and
cumulative vs. appraisal. The APCU/PCU will provide IFAD with financial reports within agreed
timeframes as follows:

Semi-annual interim financial reports (IFRs) as agreed with IFAD;
152 The financial reports will in include at least the following reports: i)Balance sheet, ii) sources and uses of funds by financier
ii) expenditures by component and financier (actual vs budgeted), iii) designated account reconciliation statement, iv) Statement
of Expenditures - Withdrawal Application Statement, and v) a fixed asset register.
151
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 7: Financial management and disbursement arrangements


Annual Financial Statements within four months after the end of the fiscal year prepared in
compliance with International Accounting Standards (IPSAS cash) and IFAD requirements;
and
Annual consolidated audit report and a management letter within six months after the end of
the borrower’s fiscal year together with separate audit reports for the APCU and PCU.
Internal auditor. The respective lead project agency (MAWMF) in RS and FBiH respectively
20.
have an internal audit function in place however the APCU/PCU are not included in their audit
exercise as these are externally audited.
21.
External audit. All audits of externally financed projects implemented by the government in
Bosnia and Herzegovina are covered by an umbrella agreement with one audit firm procured and
contracted by the state Ministry of Finance. The audits for FY 2013 to 2016 had been/will be
conducted by the audit firm Deloitte doo Sarajevo in accordance with International Standards on
auditing (ISA) and the audit report have been submitted to IFAD in a timely manner. In addition, the
project (RLDP) currently implemented by the PCU and APCU have received unmodified audit
opinions and no material issues were noted in the Auditor's reports or management recommendations
letters. RCDP will also be covered by the same audit arrangements. Accordingly, the APCU and PCU
will prepare their respective annual financial statements in a timely manner which will be audited by
the selected auditor in accordance with the procedures and criteria set forth in IFAD's Guidelines on
Project Audits (for Borrower's Use). The auditors will be required to audit the consolidated financial
statements of the entire Project for each fiscal year in accordance with International Standards on
Auditing (ISA). The terms of reference for the audit will be agreed with IFAD on annual basis. The
consolidated audit report covering the whole project, together with the separate audit reports for
APCU/RS and PCU/FBiH including the management letters covering the audit observations on
internal controls will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of the fiscal year.
22.
In addition to the annual financial audits, the project will explore the possibility for the Entity
level Supreme Audit Institutions (SAIs) to conduct a technical/operational audit at least once in the
project life cycle focusing on the field level activities.
Records management. The APCU/PCU under the respective Ministries will maintain adequate
23.
filing and ensure proper back up of all project records. In accordance with IFAD General Conditions,
the borrower has to maintain the original records for a minimum of 10 years after the project
completion.
C.
Proposed Sub-level FM arrangements
The project is foreseen to collaborate together with Municipalities, PAs and cooperatives, while
24.
PAs and cooperatives will hire service providers through a voucher scheme to provide technical
organisational and business support. The tentative Financial Management and flow of funds
arrangements for the different scenarios foreseen by the project are outlined below and will be further
detailed in the project implementation manual and in the financial procedures manual. When selecting
the partners, it is important to emphasize the importance of the IFAD and National anticorruption and
whistle blowing procedures.
Technical Service Providers
The Technical service providers will be used to for conducting studies, baseline surveys and
25.
coordination activities requiring specialized expertise. The FM arrangements will be as follows:



The APCU/PCU will send out a call of interest.
All interested Service providers will submit a proposal to the APCU/PCU.
Subject to IFAD non objection, the APCU/PCU will enter into a performance based contract
with the selected Technical Service Provider.
152
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 7: Financial management and disbursement arrangements


The performance milestones and criteria will be clearly specified in the contract these will
function as disbursement triggers.
All payments to the service providers will be made against an invoice and supporting
documentation (technical and financial when necessary) as required in accordance with the
disbursement schedule of the agreement. The Payment request will be reviewed by the
technical officer in the APCU and PCU ensuring that the performance milestones have been
reached. Subject to the technical officers clearance the payment is approved by the Project
director and Finance Manager.
 Once the payment is approved the funds are transferred in to the technical service providers
and duly recorded in the APCU/PCU accounting software.

All contracts for the services financed by the IFAD financing will include a provision requiring
bidders, suppliers, contractors, sub-contractors and consultants to permit IFAD to inspect their
accounts (limited to the reach of the service rendered to the project only), records or other
documents relating to the bid submission and contract performance and to have them audited
by IFAD-appointed auditors and investigators, as appropriate.
Voucher scheme. Technical Assistance to Farmers, Technical Service Providers,
Implementation of Business Proposals
26.
The APCU/PCU will setup a voucher scheme to strengthen the capacity and outreach of both
the required technical advisory and the BDS services at (sub) sector level. The voucher scheme is a
mechanism in which BP partners will get an entitlement (a voucher) to hire services from a broad
range of pre-qualified service providers (instead of money), with the voucher then to be redeemed for
cash from the APCU/PCU.
The ultimate purpose of the voucher scheme is to empower PAs, cooperatives and BP partners
27.
to decide on how they wish to fulfil their business requirements (in terms of extension, of specialised
technical advisory, of BDS); to negotiate services and to enter into agreement with service providers;
to follow-up on and to assess the quality and efficiency of the rendered services. The scheme will also
empower PAs and cooperatives in doing business procurement and thus stimulate entrepreneurship
by giving them the equivalent of cash (the voucher).The voucher scheme will make services more
affordable (but not free of charge) for smallholders.
The system will enable smallholders’ organisations and stakeholders to choose the services
28.
they require from a repertory of service providers. The scheme will allow beneficiaries to choose the
training, technical assistance and advisory services required to implement their BPs among the
various private service providers across the country and hiring these BDS providers at a privately
negotiated price. BP partners will select the service providers from a list (roster) of pre-qualified
consultants, consultancy firms and consortia.
29. Operationally, the APCU/PCU will set up the scheme, define procedures and prepare guidelines
on how the scheme will be implemented, on how it will be administered (including control mechanism)
and how its performance will be evaluated. A contract or an agreement between BPs’ partners and
services providers will regulate the relationship between the parties.
30.
The management arrangements will be the following:


call for application targeted at interested service providers, individuals, firms and consortia
interested in providing service to PAs, cooperatives and BP stakeholders (by APCU/PCU);
pre-qualification of suitable candidates (by APCU/PCU with ad hoc independent specialized
support). Applicants will undergo a short accreditation process handled by an ad hoc small
commission of specialists. Eligibility criteria and the process of pre-selecting candidates
should ensure that the roster includes a wide range of services so as to broaden the choice
for the stakeholders;
153
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 7: Financial management and disbursement arrangements





setup a roster of pre-qualified candidates (eligible consultants under the voucher scheme),
which will be made accessible to all BP stakeholders in the Website of the Ministry of
Agriculture and also in the project Website (by APCU/PCU)153;
PAs, cooperatives and other stakeholders that had submitted a successful application to
APCU/PCU choose one or several consultants or consultancies from the official roster. Prices
may or may not be indicated in the BP;
PAs or cooperatives and the service provider(s) sign a contract/agreement describing the
required services and expected results. A copy will be send to APCU/PCU. In return the PAs
or cooperatives will receive a voucher in the agreed value from APCU/PCU;
after the services are completed the consulting services, the PAs or cooperatives will hand
over the voucher instead of cash to the consultants or consultancies; and
the consultants or consultancies will go to the APCU/PCU and cash it in while submitting a
short report about the services done.
The APCU/PCU will be in charge of maintaining and updating the roster of pre-qualified
31.
consultants and firms based on performance evaluation of services. The roster will be updated from
time to time with a new call for interest to expand the supply of qualified service providers. Follow-up
and monitoring of services will be a primary responsibility of BP partners, although a role for
monitoring will be reserved for the ACPU/PCU (M&E officer and/or consultants hired for that purpose),
which should also involve in follow-up on the implementation of the services.
D.
IFAD disbursement procedures
32.
IFAD disbursement procedures. In accordance with the IFAD disbursement procedures
between the date of entry into force of the Financing Agreement and the Financing Closing Date, the
APCU/PCU may request withdrawals from the Loan Account and/or Grant Accounts of amounts paid
or to be paid for eligible expenditures. Accordingly four standard disbursement procedures may be
used for withdrawal of financing:

Advance withdrawal;
 Direct payment;

Special commitment;
 Reimbursement (Statement of Expenditures).
However, it is expected that the advance withdrawal/replenishment of the designated account
33.
and direct payment will be main methods used.
Authorized allocation of the Designated Account. The Designated Accounts for the IFAD
34.
financing will be in EURO and will be operated and replenished following the Imprest Account
arrangements in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures. After the IFAD financing has
entered into force and the conditions for first disbursement have been duly complied with and upon
request by the borrower, IFAD will make an initial deposit to the Designated Accounts equal to the
requirements of six months implementation (Authorized Allocation).
Conditions for first withdrawal. As per standard IFAD practices, the following conditions
35.
related to financial management are to be met before the first withdrawal can be realized:

IFAD has received from the Minister of Finance, a letter designating the name(s) of official(s)
authorized to sign withdrawal applications, which includes their authenticated specimen
signature(s);
153 Based on previous experience with setting up a voucher system REDAH could support the project in setting up a small
commission of experts who will examine the qualifications of the consultants. As 'selection' service provider REDAH could
benefit from a fee for each tested candidate.
154
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 7: Financial management and disbursement arrangements



IFAD has received documentation evidencing the opening of: (i) the bank account designated
to receive IFAD Loan and in advance; and (ii) the project account (if applicable) in local
currency with advice of the persons/titles authorized to operate these accounts;
An updated Project Implementation Manual including the Financial procedures manual,
procurement manual and credit manual have been approved by IFAD; and
The IFAD no-objection on the first AWPB and procurement plan for the first 18 months of the
project has been obtained.
Start-up funds. To ensure smooth implementation the programme will received start-up funds
36.
to cover expenditures related to start up activities after the date of entry into force and before the
fulfilment of the conditions precedent to withdrawal. The start-up funds will be deposited in the
Designated Account after IFAD has received from the Minister of Finance: (a) a letter designating the
name(s) of official(s) authorized to sign withdrawal applications, which includes their authenticated
specimen signature; (b) documentation evidencing the opening of the bank account designated to
receive IFAD Loan in advance; and (c) a duly signed withdrawal application. The required amount for
start-up activities will be calculated and determined during the final design mission.
37. Withdrawal applications. The APCU/PCU will compile and consolidate, on a timely basis,
eligible project expenditures for activities. From these expenditures the APCU/PCU will prepare
withdrawal applications (WAs) for eligible project expenditures for submission to IFAD for
reimbursement or replenishment. All WAs will be signed by the authorized signatories as determined
by the Borrower.
38. Minimum withdrawal amounts. In order to minimize transaction costs, the minimum
withdrawal amounts are set as follows:
 Withdrawal Applications requesting replenishments of the Designated Account should at least
cover a minimum amount of thirty per cent (30%) of the initial advance.
 Direct Payment method should only be used for payments of USD 100 000 and above while
expenditures below USD 100 000 should be financed from the Designated Account if possible
and claimed through the replenishment of the Designated Account.
Statement of Expenditure (SOE). The SOE thresholds shall be determined in the light of the
39.
associated risk for each expenditure category and will be duly documented in the Letter to the
Borrower. The initial estimate is that the SOE threshold will be USD 200 000 for all contracts under all
categories. The project will retain the relevant support documents and make them readily available for
inspection and review by supervision missions and the auditors.
E.
Supervision, Implementation Support and Implementation Readiness
Programme supervision. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD in accordance with
40.
IFAD guidelines and should be seen as an opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly,
and to reflect on ways to improve implementation and impact. From a financial management
perspective, a financial management specialist will participate in missions annually to supervise and
provide implementation support to the project and follow up the fiduciary risk at various levels
including the use of the SOE.
Supervision and implementation support plan. In light of the risk assessment residual (Low
41.
FM risk), in the first two years of implementation, the supervision plan of project will include annual
visits to the APCU/PCU focusing on the following actions:

At least two on-site visits that will involve visits to the, implementing partners (if any) and
municipalities, co-operatives etc. conducting/updating the FM assessment;
 Detailed review of adequacy of the staffing arrangements at the FM unit of the, including the
TOR’s and performance of the financial staff and identification of training needs.
155
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 7: Financial management and disbursement arrangements
 Review of the flow of funds structure with special emphasis on the counterpart funds and
project funds reaching the lower levels.
 Detailed review of the Project Financial Management and accounting systems and
procedures in use.
 Detailed review of the accounting software and financial reports produced by the accounting
software and the use of budget controls.
 Review of overall flow of funds (and resolving any bottlenecks) and a detailed review of the
operation of the designated and project accounts (including monthly reconciliations).
 Detailed review of the fixed asset register and verification of a) inventory reports and
b) assets through spot checks.
 Detailed review of records management, back up and the use of the Statement of
Expenditure (SOE) procedure and the applicable SOE-thresholds (adequacy of supporting
documentation).


Follow-up on contracting the project (independent) external auditors;
Follow-up on the identified mitigation actions identified in the project design.
42.
The supervision process will be complemented by desk review of progress and financial
reports, the programme’s annual financial statements, internal audit reports, and annual audits.
A list of key tasks is summarized below:
Action
Agree on the Start-up funds (if any)
Financial procedures manual, procurement
manual and credit manual have been duly
updated.
Opening of Designated Account, and
Project account
Format of the Quarterly/semi-annual
Financial Reports and Annual Financial
Statements to be agreed.
Finalise project draft LTB
Prepare first AWPB & procurement plan.
Appointment of auditor under ToR and
conditions acceptable to IFAD using QCBS
Accounting software to be fine-tuned to
fully automate financial reporting
Conduct a technical/ performance audit at
the ground level.
By Whom
IFAD and MOF
APCU/PCU
When
As part of design
Start up
Conditionality
Negotiations
Start Up and
disbursement condition.
MoF
Start up
Disbursement condition
IFAD and APCU/PCU
Start up
N/A
IFAD
APCU/PCU
MoF
APCU/PCU
As part of design
By start-up
Not later than 3
months after entry into
force
Start up
Negotiations
Disbursement condition
Financing agreement
schedule 3
N/A
SAI FBiH and RS,
APCU/PCU and /IFAD
Once in a project cycle N/A
156
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 8: Procurement
Appendix 8: Procurement
A. Country context and IFAD procurement guidelines
Country Assessment. Bosnia and Herzegovina has established modern public financial management
1.
systems and a country-wide Law on Public Procurement (LPP) became operative in January 2005. This law
is in line with EU requirements and, if implemented, has the potential to provide the basis for donors
including IFAD and the World Bank to use the country’s own procurement systems. However, it is not yet
being consistently implemented at the State or Entity levels. The Supreme Audit Institution of the State has
reported several instances of violation of the LPP in its audit reports154. Furthermore, the first Public
Expenditures and Financial Accountability (PEFA) identified Competition, value for money and controls in
procurement as an area that requires improvement. Of the PEFA sub-indicators: (i) Transparency,
comprehensiveness, and competition in the legal and regulatory framework and (ii) Existence of an
independent administrative procurement complaints system were assessed as moderate (B) but
iii) Justification for use of less competitive procurement methods and iv) Public access to complete, reliable,
and timely procurement information were assessed to be weaker (D and C respectively). For these reasons,
the LPP is not yet acceptable for use under IFAD financed projects and IFAD procurement guidelines will be
adopted for the proposed project. However, improvements in implementation of the law are being supported
by various donors. When properly implemented these will be adopted.
IFAD Procurement Guidelines: IFAD procurement guidelines take into consideration the following:
2.
(i) general procurement principles, standards and policies (ii) procurements shall be carried out in
accordance with the provisions of the Borrower’s procurement regulations, to the extent that these are
consistent with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines, (iii) procurement methods will be identified in the approved
procurement plans and prior review thresholds provided in the Letter to the Borrower (LTB) and any duly
agreed amendments thereto; (iii) procurement will be conducted within the project implementation period,
with the exception of winding up expenditures); (iv) cost of the procurement is not to exceed the availability of
duly allocated funds as per Financing Agreement unless otherwise agreed in accordance with amendments
to the Financing Agreement; (v) procurement will be consistent with the duly approved Annual Work Plan and
Budget (AWPB) including an initial procurement plan for 18 months followed by successive 12-month plans
synchronised with the annual AWPB cycle; and (vi) procurement should result in the best value for money.
3.
General Guidelines: The following considerations generally guide IFAD’s requirements for
procurement: (i) the need for economy and efficiency in the implementation of the project, including the
procurement of the goods and works involved and the recruitment of consultants; (ii) IFAD’s interest in giving
all qualified bidders from developed and developing countries the opportunity to compete in providing goods,
works and consulting services financed by IFAD; (iii) IFAD’s interest, as a development financing institution,
in encouraging the development of domestic capacity to provide goods, works and consulting services; and
giving appropriate preference to experts, technicians and suppliers from developing countries; (iv) the
importance of fairness, integrity, transparency and good governance in the procurement process; and (v) the
recognition that competition is the basis for efficient public procurement.
Anticorruption and Good Governance Framework. IFAD’s applies a zero-tolerance policy towards
4.
fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in projects financed through its loans and grants. 'Zero
tolerance' means that IFAD will pursue all allegations falling under the scope of this policy and that
appropriate sanctions will be applied where the allegations are substantiated. IFAD shall take all possible
actions to protect from reprisals individuals who help reveal corrupt practices in its project or grant activities
and individuals or entities subject to unfair or malicious allegations. The IFAD anticorruption policy is
available on the IFAD website at www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/index.htm). The website also
provides instructions on how to report any alleged wrongdoing to the Office of Audit and Oversight
(http://www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm).
154 Country Partnership for Bosnia and Herzegovina 2008-2011. November 2007. World Bank.
157
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 8: Procurement
B.
Proposed Procurement Arrangements under the Project
5.
Implementation arrangement. The APCU/PCU will be responsible for the procurement under the
project in accordance with IFAD procurement guidelines, IFAD procurement handbook and the provisions
stipulated in the Financing Agreement. For each contract to be financed by the IFAD financing, the different
procurement methods, the need for prequalification, estimated costs, prior review requirements, and time
frame will be agreed between the Borrower and IFAD project team in the Procurement Plan. The end-users
will be included in developing the TORs to the extent possible. The project will also allow for procurement
with community participation as outlined in IFAD guidelines. Accordingly procurement, supervision may also
be undertaken by the end users e.g. producers associations, or co-operatives etc.
6.
Staffing. The APCU/PCUs procurement officers, i.e. the procurement manager in the APCU and the
Project director in the PCU have extensive experience with IFAD financed projects and IFAD procurement
procedures. As a result no strengthening of procurement capacity is needed to meet project requirements.
Bidding Documents. All bidding documents for the procurement of goods, works and services would
7.
be prepared by the APCU/PCU. The technical specification will be prepared in consultation with the end-
users. The bidding documents shall be based on the WB procurement sample documentation appropriated
for IFAD’s purposes.
8.
Performance based contracts. The project envisages performance based contracts for both
technical service providers and financial service providers. Thus during the procurement of these providers
and renewal of contracts, the performance criteria will be clearly specified on the basis of which
disbursements will be made. All bidding documents and contracts for the procurement of services financed
by the IFAD loan and grant will include a provision requiring bidders, suppliers, contractors, sub-contractors
and consultants to permit IFAD to inspect their accounts, records or other documents relating to the bid
submission and contract performance and to have them audited by IFAD-appointed auditors and
investigators, as appropriate.
Procurement Plan: The APCU/PCU, will prepare an AWPB and a Procurement Plan in a format
9.
acceptable to IFAD for the first 18 months of project implementation. The procurement plan will provide the
basis for the procurement methods and prior/post review threshold. The Procurement Plan would be updated
at least annually or as required to reflect the actual project implementation needs.
Procurement progress report. Procurement information would be recorded by the APCU/PCU and
10.
submitted to IFAD, as part of the semi-annually and annual progress reports.
Register of contracts. In addition, all contracts will be listed in the Register of Contracts in a format
11.
agreed with IFAD and maintained by the APCU/PCU. The register of contract will include information on
contractor/supplier/service provider, contract amount, procurement method, contract signing, contract
duration, date of IFAD non objection, prior/post review etc.
Record keeping: The APCU/PCU under the respective ministries will maintain complete procurement
12.
files which will be reviewed by IFAD supervision missions and backed up electronically. In accordance with
IFAD General Conditions, the borrower has to maintain the original records for a minimum of 10 years after
the project completion.
C.
Procurement with community participation
Procurement by communities. In selected activities, the project will allow for procurement with
13.
community participation as outlined in the IFAD procurement guidelines. Accordingly, the selected
communities or informalgroupsmaybebroughttogethertoactasimplementingagenciestoundertake project
procurement. Where this is the case, their role will include:
 Competitive contracting using any of the agreed procurement methods; and

Supervision of a contracted provider of works, goods or services.
The exact criteria and procedures to be followed under procurement with community participation will
14.
outlined in the implementation manual, and clearly defined in the approved procurement plan. In cases
where the project’s beneficiary community does not have adequate institutional capacity to receive and
158
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 8: Procurement
account for funds or administer procurement reliably, it will be necessary to introduce intermediaries with
adequate capacity to perform such duties to act on behalf of the community.
Classification of Procurement Items
15.
The procurement items under the project will include the following:



Procurement of Works. Works include (to be updated once we have the final cost tables).
Procurement of Goods. Goods include (to be updated once we have the final cost tables).
Procurement for Consulting Services. Training activities include (To be updated once we have the
final cost tables). The Project will finance training programs, including training workshops, study tours
and local training. Expenditures related to such training activities include:, and other training activities
not included under goods and service providers' contracts, to be carried out under the Project,
including fees, travel costs and per-diem allowances for the trainers and travel costs and per-diem
allowances for the trainees, cost of training materials, space and equipment rental, and other related
expenditures; all such expenditures shall be based on plans adopted by the APCU/PCU and
satisfactory to IFAD, which shall include proposed budgets and terms of reference.
16.
Training plan. As part of the AWPB, the APCU/PCU will prepare a training plan that will identify the
agreed procedures to be used for procurement of various training services and share it with IFAD annually.
17. Operating cost. Operating cost mean reasonable expenditures incurred as part of the project
implementation, management and monitoring, including vehicles and equipment and office operation,
maintenance and repair, office supplies, publication of procurement notices, communication, translation and
interpretation, travel and supervision costs (only project staff and cost involved with support to joint
supervision missions), health and life insurance for staff, miscellaneous costs directly associated with the
project, but excluding salaries of APCU/PCU staff.
Procurement of project auditors. All project audits in BiH are covered by an umbrella agreement
18.
with one audit firm. Therefore, the Procurement of the project auditor will be conducted by at state level by
the Ministry of Finance for a period of 3 years based on TORs approved by IFAD annually.
Procurement Thresholds
19. While specific thresholds for procurement financed under the programme will be stipulated in the
Letter to the Borrower, the general recommendation is the following:
 Goods estimated to cost more than USD 100,000 equivalent per contract may be procured through
the International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the World Bank’s applicable Standard
Bidding Documents (SBDs). Goods estimated to cost less than US$100,000 equivalent per contract
may be procured through the National Competitive Bidding (NCB). Goods estimated to cost less
than US$20,000 equivalent per contract may be procured through National Shopping method.
 Works estimated to cost more than USD 500 000 equivalent may be procured through International
Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the World Bank’s applicable SBDs. Works estimated
between USD 25 000 and USD 500 000 may be procured through the NCB. While works estimated
below USD 25 000 may be procured through National Shopping method. Direct contracting will have
to be identified and approved by IFAD in advance for those cases which justify use of such method.
 Consultancy services generally estimated to cost more than USD 50 000 for firms and USD 20 000
for individuals will be on the basis of Quality and Cost based selection method. However, the specific
nature of the assignment will finally determine the method of procurement to be followed.
Prior Review Thresholds
The prior review threshold will be initially communicate in the LtB and subsequently specified in the
20.
procurement plan. It is foreseen that the following will be subject to prior review by the Fund:


Award of any contract for goods to cost USD 50 000 equivalent or more.
Award of any contract for works estimated to cost USD 50 000 or more.
159
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 8: Procurement



Award to an enterprise of any contract for consulting services estimated to cost USD 50 000 or
more.
Award to an individual of any contract for consulting services estimated to cost USD 20 000
equivalent or more.
Award of any contract through direct contracting.
21.
Such thresholds could be modified by during the course of the Programme implementation.
160
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 8: Procurement
Table 28: 18 months Procurement Plan
UNIT
2016 (USD
000)
2017 (USD
000)
18 MONTHS
(USD 000)
Financier
Proc Acc
Proc Method
Responsible
Agency
In country Study Tours
Training of Trainers TOT
Training of Trainers TOT
Contracting of Lead Farmers
Contracting of Lead Farmers
Cluster Stakeholders' Platform Allocation
Case Studies & Learning and Policy Notes
Sub-Sector Stakeholder's Platform allocation
Gender & youth diagnostic study and action plan
Gender & youth capacity building for implementing partners
Capacity Building and Monitoring Inclusiveness of  Component 2
COMPONENT 1: Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development_FBiH
COMP.1.1.1
COMP.1.1.2
COMP.1.1.3
COMP.1.1.4
COMP.1.1.5
COMP.1.1.6
COMP.1.1.7
COMP.1.1.8
COMP.1.1.9
COMPONENT 1: Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development_RS
COMP.1.2.1
COMP.1.2.2
COMP.1.2.3
COMP.1.2.4
COMP.1.2.5
COMP.1.2.6
COMP.1.2.7
COMP.1.2.8
COMP.1.2.9
COMPONENT 2: Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains_FBiH
COMP 2.1.1
COMP 2.1.2
COMP 2.1.3
COMP 2.1.4
COMP 2.1.5
COMP 2.1.6
Capacity Building and Monitoring Inclusiveness of  Component 2
Gender & youth capacity building for implementing partners
Gender & youth diagnostic study and action plan
Sub-Sector Stakeholder's Platform allocation
Case Studies & Learning and Policy Notes
Cluster Stakeholders' Platform Allocation
Public Technical Advisory Services
Induction Training for BFPs
Update Market Information
In country Study Tours
BPs Technical Review
BPs Preparation
BPs Monitoring
BPs Investment Funds
Update Market Information
COMP 2.1.7
COMPONENT 2: Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains_RS
COMP 2.2.1
COMP 2.2.2
COMP 2.2.3
COMP 2.2.4
COMP 2.2.5
COMP 2.2.6
Public Technical Advisory Services
Induction Training for BFPs
BPs Technical Review
BPs Preparation
BPs Monitoring
Unit
pers/month
pers/day
Amount
pers/day
Number
Lumpsum
number
Lumpsum
Unit
pers/month
pers/day
Amount
pers/day
Number
Lumpsum
number
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Number
BP
Number
Number
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Number
BP
Number
1.22
7.31
24.38
59.21
1.22
4.88
16.25
20.43
6.81
14.51
33.81
14.30
-
2,180
13.62
4.54
14.51
22.54
9.54
-
5.89
4.71
0.00
7.07
-
-
14.73
57.20
24.20
17.16
2.95
2.36
16.25
3.53
59.50
20.43
6.81
21.88
62.41
26.40
8.58
3,655
4008
-
-
14.73
40.04
16.94
11.44
13.62
4.54
21.88
42.56
18.00
5.72
COMP 2.1.7
BPs Investment Funds
Number
2,523
4,440
4,743
161
2.47
7.07
7.42
35.35
8.84
7.07
3.53
60.09
1.24
4.71
4.95
2.46
3.53
11.03
17.67
4.42
3.54
24.38
1.77
89.25
1.84
2.36
7.35
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
TRAIN_PA
NCB_PM (100%)
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
NTA_PM
QCBS_PM (100%)
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
TRAIN_PA
NCB_PM (100%)
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_G(100%)
IFAD_G(100%)
IFAD_G(100%)
NTA_PM
NTA_PM
STU_PA
NTA_PM
NTA_PM
NTA_PM
QCBS_PM (100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
NCB_PM(100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
TRAIN_PA
NCB_PM (100%)
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
NTA_PM
QCBS_PM (100%)
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
TRAIN_PA
NCB_PM (100%)
35.35
17.67
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_G(100%)
IFAD_G(100%)
IFAD_G(100%)
NTA_PM
NTA_PM
STU_PA
NTA_PM
NTA_PM
NTA_PM
QCBS_PM (100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
NCB_PM(100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
39.47
40.06
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
NTA_PM
QCBS_PM (100%)
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
TRAIN_PA
NCB_PM (100%)
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% ); PS
(95%); Municipalities (5%)
NTA_PM
NTA_PM
NTA_PM
NTA_PM
QCBS_PM (100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
BPS_PA
QCBS_PM (100%)
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
NTA_PM
QCBS_PM (100%)
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
TRAIN_PA
NCB_PM (100%)
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% ); PS
(95%); Municipalities (5%)
NTA_PM
NTA_PM
NTA_PM
NTA_PM
QCBS_PM (100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
QCBS_PM (100%)
BPS_PA
QCBS_PM (100%)
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 8: Procurement
Table 29: 18 months Procurement Plan (cont.)
External audit
Local Courses
Baseline study
Training Manuals
International Courses
Inter-Entity Workshop
Annual review  w orkshop
Participatory Case Studies
Business Development Officer
Business Development Officer
Information and Communication Materials
Project Management, Monitoring and EvaluationM Unit_FBiH
COMP 3.1.1
COMP 3.1.2
COMP 3.1.3
COMP 3.1.4
COMP 3.1.5
COMP 3.1.6
COMP 3.1.7
COMP 3.1.8
COMP 3.1.9
COMP 3.1.10
COMP 3.1.11
COMP 3.1.12
Project Management, Monitoring and EvaluationM Unit_RS
COMP 3.2.1
COMP 3.2.2
COMP 3.2.3
COMP 3.2.4
COMP 3.2.5
COMP 3.2.6
COMP 3.2.7
COMP 3.2.8
COMP 3.2.9
COMP 3.2.10
COMP 3.2.11
COMP 3.2.12
Information and Communication Materials
Business Development Officer
Business Development Officer
M&E/Targeting Gender Officer
Participatory Case Studies
Annual review  w orkshop
Inter-Entity Workshop
International Courses
Procurement Officer
Training Manuals
Baseline study
Local Courses
External audit
1.16
-
5.80
1.51
-
2.90
17.41
-
-
30.56
30.56
30.56
1.16
-
5.80
1.01
-
2.90
11.61
-
-
29.42
29.42
29.42
Course
Course
audit
number
number
number
study
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
pers/year
pers/year
pers/year
Course
Course
audit
number
number
number
study
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
pers/year
pers/year
pers/year
162
1.18
2.95
5.89
1.53
2.95
2.95
1.75
1.47
8.75
2.28
1.47
4.38
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
-
17.41
IFAD_1_FB ( 100% )
IFAD_1_FB (100% )
IFAD_1_FB (100% )
TRAIN_PA
TRAIN_PA
STU_PA
STU_PA
TRAIN_PA
TRAIN_PA
STU_PA
EQUIP_PA
EQUIP_PA
NCB_PM (100%)
NCB_PM (100%)
NCB_PM(100%)
NCB_PM(100%)
NCB_PM (100%)
NCB_PM (100%)
NCB_PM(100%)
NCB_PM ( 100% )
NCB_PM ( 100% )
2.95
5.89
30.56
30.56
30.56
1.18
2.95
5.89
1.02
2.95
2.95
1.47
2.95
45.84
45.84
45.84
1.75
1.47
8.75
1.52
1.47
4.38
2.95
5.89
29.42
29.42
29.42
1.47
2.95
44.14
44.14
44.14
IFAD_1_FB (100% )
SAL_PA
DIR_CONTRACT_PM(100%)
IFAD_1_FB (100% )
SAL_PA
DIR_CONTRACT_PM(100%)
IFAD_1_FB (100% )
SAL_PA
DIR_CONTRACT_PM(100%)
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
TRAIN_PA
TRAIN_PA
STU_PA
STU_PA
TRAIN_PA
TRAIN_PA
STU_PA
EQUIP_PA
EQUIP_PA
NCB_PM (100%)
NCB_PM (100%)
NCB_PM(100%)
NCB_PM(100%)
NCB_PM (100%)
NCB_PM (100%)
NCB_PM(100%)
NCB_PM ( 100% )
NCB_PM ( 100% )
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
SAL_PA
DIR_CONTRACT_PM(100%)
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
SAL_PA
DIR_CONTRACT_PM(100%)
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
SAL_PA
DIR_CONTRACT_PM(100%)
-
11.61
IFAD_1_RS ( 100% )
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
PCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
APCU
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 9: Project cost and financing
Appendix 9: Project cost and financing
A. Assumptions
1.
(RCDP) is estimated at 10 years.
Project Duration. The implementation period of the Rural Competiveness Development Project
2.
Price contingencies. Price contingencies aim to cover expected price increase between
project preparation and project start up as well as throughout the project implementation period.
Local price inflation has been assumed at 1.5%.
Physical contingencies aim to cover uncertainties related to quantities and units costs. They
3.
are assumed at 5%, and they are applied only in specific case where variation in quantities may
happen (e.g. trainings and study tours).
Taxes: The levels of taxes in the unit costs were estimated to include Governmental duties and
4.
taxes. Most costs items include VAT, which account for 17%. As per IFAD rules and regulations, local
VAT and import taxes are considered as a contribution to project costs by the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina (see financing tables). The Value Added Tax (VAT) applies to virtually all expenditure
categories except international technical assistance, and staff allowances. An average amount of
17% VAT is included for all vehicles and equipment, training and workshops, studies (realised by a
service provider) funded with IFAD funds. Salaries include 5.6% of income taxes in the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and 10% in the Republika Srpska. The Government of BiH is expected to
finance taxes for a total amount of up to US$ 4.7 million.
5.
Exchange Rate. The exchange rate used in the analysis is fixed at 1 USD=1.7357 BAM
computed as an average of the exchange rate prevailing between January and end of March 2015,
when the design mission took place.
B.
Total Costs
6.
The total project costs including physical and price contingencies are estimated at
USD 61.45 million155 (BAM 106 million) over a ten-year period. Project costs by components are
summarized in the table below. Component 2, which is the main investment component, represents
86% of total project costs. A complete set of summary and detailed costs tables are attached in
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
Rural Competitiveness Development Project (RCDP)
Appendix 9.
Components Project Cost Summary
Table 30: Project costs by components
A. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development
1. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development_FBiH
2. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development_RS
Subtotal Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development
B. Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains
1. Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains_FBiH
2. Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains_RS
Subtotal Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains
C. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
1. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation_FBiH
2. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation_RS
Subtotal Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
(BAM '000)
Foreign
Local
Total
Local
(USD '000)
Foreign
Total
2,210.00
1,503.00
3,713.00
55,346.80
35,835.94
91,182.74
4,322.28
3,730.31
8,052.58
102,948.32
8.05
3,375.06
106,331.44
-
-
-
-
-
-
157.29
149.77
307.06
307.06
-
27.31
334.37
2,210.00
1,503.00
3,713.00
55,346.80
35,835.94
91,182.74
4,479.56
3,880.08
8,359.64
103,255.38
8.05
3,402.38
106,665.81
1,273.26
865.93
2,139.19
31,887.31
20,646.39
52,533.70
2,490.22
2,149.16
4,639.39
59,312.28
4.64
1,944.50
61,261.41
-
-
-
-
-
-
90.62
86.29
176.91
176.91
-
15.74
192.64
1,273.26
865.93
2,139.19
31,887.31
20,646.39
52,533.70
2,580.84
2,235.45
4,816.29
59,489.19
4.64
1,960.23
61,454.06
155 Project total costs may increase during implementation depending on the accessibility of credit funds provided by other IFAD
funded projects.
163
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 9: Project cost and financing
C.
Project Financing
A total of US$ 25.5 million of IFAD-financing is expected to be mobilized over the ten-year
7.
period. RCDP will absorb the entire PBAS allocation of 2013-2015, including a loan of
US$ 12.25 million and a grant of US$ 500,000 specifically for inclusiveness-related activities to be
implemented under Result 2 of Component 2. Subject to performance and availability, additional
financing of US$ 12.75 million could be earmarked from the 2016-2018 PBAS cycle, which will be
allocated for the co-financing of Cycle 2 of the project.
8.
IFAD loans will be used to fully finance: (a) Component 1; (b) Project Coordination Unit in both
Entities, and (c) to co-finance Business Proposals (BPs) implemented under Component 2. BPs are
expected to be financed according to the following allocation: (a) 38% from IFAD loans; (b) 5% from
Municipalities; (c) 17% from PAs; and (d) 39% from agribusiness and/or financial sector.
Table 31: Total Costs by Financiers
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
Rural Competitiveness Development Project (RCDP)
Components by Financiers
(USD Million)
A. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development
1. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development_FBiH
2. Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development_RS
Subtotal Enabling Environment for Inclusive Sub-sector Development
B. Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains
1. Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains_FBiH
2. Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains_RS
Subtotal Sustainable Inclusion of Smallholders in the Thriving/Successful Value Chains
C. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
1. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation_FBiH
2. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation_RS
Subtotal Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Total PROJECT COSTS
IFAD LOAN CYCLE IFAD LOAN CYCLE IFAD LOAN CYCLE IFAD LOAN CYCLE
1_FBiH
1_RS
2_FBiH
2_RS
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
IFAD Grant
%
Amount
Government
%
Amount
Municipalities
%
Amount
Private Sector
%
Amount
Total
Amount
%
0.38
-
0.38
5.88
-
5.88
0.84
-
0.84
7.09
27.6
-
16.4
17.9
-
10.9
29.9
-
16.5
11.5
-
0.27
0.27
-
4.17
4.17
-
0.72
0.72
5.16
-
29.2
11.8
-
19.6
7.7
-
32.0
14.3
8.4
0.47
-
0.47
5.63
-
5.63
1.75
-
1.75
7.85
34.1
-
20.3
17.1
-
10.4
62.7
-
34.7
12.8
-
0.29
0.29
-
3.26
3.26
-
1.35
1.35
4.91
-
31.6
12.8
-
15.4
6.0
-
59.6
26.7
8.0
0.29
0.21
0.50
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.50
21.3
22.2
21.6
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.8
0.23
0.16
0.39
2.36
1.52
3.88
0.21
0.19
0.40
4.67
17.0
17.0
17.0
7.2
7.2
7.2
7.4
8.4
7.8
7.6
-
-
-
0.95
0.61
1.56
-
-
-
1.56
-
-
-
2.9
2.9
2.9
-
-
-
2.5
-
-
-
18.04
11.68
29.72
-
-
-
29.72
-
-
-
54.9
55.0
54.9
-
-
-
48.4
1.37
0.93
2.30
32.86
21.24
54.10
2.79
2.26
5.05
61.45
2.2
1.5
3.7
53.5
34.6
88.0
4.5
3.7
8.2
100.0
9.
As mentioned, IFAD will also provide a grant of US$ 500,000 which will be used to finance
inclusiveness impact monitoring. The loan will be disbursed during the first 5 years of the project.
The Government of BiH will finance taxes and duties on imported goods, and Value Added Tax
10.
(VAT) for a total amount of up to US$ 4.7 million. This is an estimate as the bulk of project funds will
be channeled to co-finance BPs, which will be formulated during the implementation so it is not
possible at this stage establish which kind of investments will be included in the BPs and in
consequence calculate taxes.
164
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 9: Project cost and financing
Table 32: Project components by year – total costs including contingencies
165
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 9: Project cost and financing
Table 33: Expenditures of accounts by financiers
166
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 9: Project cost and financing
Table 34: Project components by year – totals including contingencies
167
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 9: Project cost and financing
Table 35: Expenditure accounts by components – totals including contingencies
168
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
169
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
A.
Fruits, vegetables and MAPs subsectors in BiH
Bosnia and Herzegovina has favorable agro-ecological and soil conditions for production of a
1.
broad range of vegetables and fruits. Climate variations between northern continental part of Bosnia
and southern Mediterranean part of Herzegovina enable provision and delivery of fruit and vegetables
for the market throughout most of the year. Nevertheless, the country is a net importer for most fruits
and vegetables.
Fruits production includes in particular apples, pears, plums, cherries, berries, peaches, grapes
2.
and apricots. The country is producing a broad range of berries, in particular raspberry and
strawberry, but also blueberry, blackberry, redcurrant, blackcurrant and others, mainly for export.
Currently, export of cherries and berries is expanding rapidly and interesting for smallholders, as their
production is mainly based on family labour and small farm holdings. In the past few years BiH has
emerged as a major exporter in this field, especially raspberries, mostly in frozen form. Production of
other berries is much smaller, but also expanding from year to year. Berries, also categorized as
“forest fruits” by the food industry have interesting demand prospects in the EU and non-EU markets,
for example in the fresh market but also in fruits drinks and yoghurts. Consequently, the food industry
is looking for new supplies and developing networks of wholesale buyers in BiH. A quick survey
learned that at least 10 wholesale buyers and processors are currently buying berries in BiH. The
market is transparent: purchase prices and conditions are known. The companies are using more or
less the same price. Most of them are investing in networks of smallholder producers.
3.
Vegetable production in BiH covers 75,000 hectares (gherkins, paprika, tomato, cucumber,
lettuce, etc.), both for fresh consumption mainly in the domestic market and for processing in the
domestic and EU-market. Vegetable crops in BiH covers 75 000 ha of sown land what is around 14 %
of total sown area. Annual production of vegetables in BiH from 2011-2014 is between 676 109 t in
2011 up to 507 365 tons in 2014. In Herzegovina, production of Mediterranean fruits and vegetables is
expanding. Production in greenhouses is in full expansion, but less developed than in most
neighbouring European countries. Marketing chains for fresh produce are generally very poorly
developed. . Most vegetables are produced for the domestic consumer market, but also for
processing. The challenge of vegetable production is: (a) to develop market linkages with export
markets; only few efficient linkages are being developed; one of these is the gherkins value chain for
processing; (b) to enhance linkages in the domestic market; few vegetable producers have stable
relations with wholesale buyers; (c) to mainstream modern production technologies, in particular
irrigation and production in greenhouses; (d) to develop supply chains for the food processing
industry, that is problems to procure raw material locally.
4.
BiH, with its abundant forest resources, is very suitable for the collection of wild fruits,
mushrooms, medicinal and aromatic plants (MAPs), which are premium products. Also in the MAPs
and mushroom subsector, at least 10 wholesale buyers are active. Most of them are also buying
berries. When talking about mushrooms then the following varieties are considered: Boletus edulis -
King Boletus, Cantharelluscibarius – Chanterelle; Cartarelluscornucopioides - Black trumpet and
Morchellaesculenta – Morel. Collecting MAPs is an income generating activity for rural people, in
particular those with small revenues. The related market linkages for exports are developing, often
based on collection points (cold rooms) at the level of municipalities.
Table 36 presents a swot analysis of the fruits, vegetables and MAPs subsectors in BiH. RCDP
5.
is based on strengths and opportunities in the targeted subsectors, while taking into account
weaknesses (building linkages, promoting technologies, investment support).
170
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
Table 36: Swot analysis of the fruits, vegetables and MAPS subsectors in BiH
STRENGTHS
 Competitive labour cost
 Various agro-ecological conditions
 Traditionally good estimate in production of some
soft fruits, plums, vegetables.
 Existing conditions for organic production;
presence of agencies for organic certification.
 Farmers and local authorities’ great interest in
production of fruits and vegetables.
 Strong demand from processing industry and
exporters.
 Increasing consumers’ requirements for local
produce at the domicile markets.
WEAKNESSES
 Weak market orientation; inadequate farmers’
awareness
 Few well-organized value chains and market
linkages.
 Low productivity and technology level; weak
input supply lines (in many cases)
 Land ownership issues; small individual
pieces of land; many lands in the country are
abandoned and unutilized
 Difficult access to financial resources,
especially for farmers
 Weak cooperation among producers
 Weak or poorly organized technical aid by the
expert agricultural services.
OPPORTUNITIES
 Easy access to EU and non-EU markets.
 Wholesale buyers organize outgrower schemes.
 Strong export demand: berries, sour cherry and
cherry, plum, soft fruit…
 Potential for organic production
THREATS
 Unregulated import of foreign produce
 Strong regional competition
 Insufficient coordination of quality standards
 Pollution and lack of environment protection
 Fluctuating regional demand (Russia...)
Source: Based on own observations and on Boris Tadic (2008) “Fruit value chain in BiH“
B.
Financial Analysis
Methodology
The primary objective of the financial analysis is to determine the financial viability and
6.
incentives for the Project target group as a result of their engagement in Project activities. Seven
illustrative crop models were prepared to demonstrate the financial viability of the expected
investments: a) raspberries model; b) strawberries model; c) blackberries model; d) blueberries
model; e) gherkins open field model; f) potatoes open field model; g) paprika for industry open field
model. Considering that farmers investing in greenhouse will have the possibility to grow more than
one crop during the year; also two representative green house models were developed: a) cucumbers
and tomatoes greenhouse model; b) cucumbers and paprika for the fresh market green house model.
Furthermore; in order to show the impact that the project will have not only on the target group but
also on other actors of the value chain; two cooperative models were designed: a) berries cooperative
model, b) vegetables cooperative model. All financial models were used as building blocks for the
economic analysis.
7.
Project Target Beneficiaries. The broad target group for the Project will be non-commercial
farmers of the three sub-sectors a) berries; b) vegetables; c) NTFP. The Project will have a
poverty focus and it is estimated that the number of direct beneficiaries will be 16,000.
Key Assumptions. The following source of information gathered during the pre-design and the
8.
final design missions have been used to set up the analysis: a) interviews with farmers and
cooperatives and wholesale buyers involved in out-grower schemes; b) other donors involved in the
sector, in particular projects financed by USAID, UNDP, CARITAS International, Oxfam Italia; these
development partners all prepared value chain studies and crop budgets to plan their interventions.
Information on labour and input requirements for various operations, capital costs, prevailing wages,
yields, farm gate and market prices of commodities, input and farm-to-market transport costs were
171
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
collected in the field. Conservative assumptions were made both for inputs and outputs in order to
take account of possible risks. Statistics from FAOSTAT or from the National Agency for Statistics of
Bosnia and Herzegovina did not provide information on most of the selected crops. When data where
provided, they were found to be outdated if compared with more recent data collected in the field or
provided by other sources as per the above list. Therefore, when different information on the same
crop was available from different sources, an average was adopted.
Assumptions on Greenhouse Model: in the without project situation, it was assumed that
9.
farmers do not have greenhouses due to the high investment required. For this reason, it has been
assumed that the source of income for farmers, in the without project situation, is “foregone income”
that farmers would have earned by working at 30 KM per day for the same amount of days they are
employed in the with project situation.
Assumptions on Cooperatives Model: Cooperative models in BiH may be very different from
10.
each other in terms of size, investments, number of members, and mix of products collected and
distributed. Due to the lack of extensive information, the cooperative models designed for this analysis
are based on some assumptions which are sourced from interviews with cooperatives and from other
donors’ projects: a) type and quantity of products collected and distributed; b) number of farmers,
130 for the berries cooperative, and 160 for the vegetables cooperative; c) increase in 15% of number
of farmers after the 4th and 8th year from the start of the project; d) 15% of marginal revenue
compared to farmer gate prices; e) cooperatives are considered as intermediaries between farmers
and final buyers; f) out of 100 cooperatives, 70% are berries cooperatives and 30% are vegetables
cooperatives; f) blueberries crops are not included in the berries cooperative model because usually
treated separately due to the large investments they require. The main aim of these two models is to
represent to what extent increase in farmers’ productivity will also positively affect other value chain
actors’ return, such as the cooperatives’ ones.
Exchange Rate. The exchange rate used in the analysis is fixed at 1 USD = 1.7357 BAM
11.
computed as an average of the exchange rate prevailing between January and end of March 2015,
when the design mission took place.
12.
Labour. Family labour has been valued both in financial and economic analysis. It has been
assumed that farm labour is provided by the households. Farm labour is priced at 30 BAM per day,
which is the prevailing market rate.
13. Opportunity Cost of Capital. A discount rate of 10% has been used in this analysis to assess
the viability and robustness of the investments In order to consider the profitability of the foreseen
investments with market alternatives. The selected value is calculated as an average of the actual
market interest rate on loans, which is around 7-8% and microfinance institutions interest rates, which
is between 10% and 15%.
Summary of Results
14.
A summary of the Results is presented in Tables 37 and 38, below. All financial models
indicate that profitability of the targeted interventions is good, in case market access is ensured and
farmers adopt good technologies. It can be concluded that investments and diversification in the
berries and vegetables subsectors provide the required leverage to reduce rural poverty and to
improve financial viability of small farm holdings in BiH. These results are only valid in areas where
a) linkages to wholesale buyers are ensured; b) farmers adopt good technologies; c) the VC approach
functions properly; d) farmers have access to the project grant – which is expected to finance up to
50% of the initial investments farmers have to face to start/improve their agricultural activities – and to
the in-kind loans from buyers, such as PAs, cooperatives or agribusinesses. Market prices of berries
and vegetables can fluctuate; however, when the necessary conditions are met, organized
smallholders will be competitive in the targeted subsectors, even in a liberalized EU and non-EU
market context.
172
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
For all financial models of berries and vegetables cultivated in the open field, the total costs of
15.
production (investment and inputs) in year 1 vary between 1,200 and 4,050 BAM per dunum. For
financial models of vegetables cultivated in the greenhouse, total costs of production are about
9,400 BAM per 300 m2. These high investment costs are due to the considerable investment that
farmers have to face in order to purchase a greenhouse and to plant more than one crop over the
year (in our models they produce tomato and cucumbers or paprika and cucumbers). Although part of
this is the opportunity cost of family labour, these start-up costs are beyond the financial capacity of
most rural poor, which generally leads to the adoption of second best technologies (e.g. without
irrigation) and the resulting low yields and incomes. Matching grants and/or in kind loans are required
to lower barrier of entry to poor people, in particular if they have to get access to good technology.
Net income of all models varies between 940 BAM and 5,168 BAM per dunum. In particular
16.
raspberry, blueberry, blackberry and gherkin are very profitable. Greenhouse production of tomato
and cucumber gives a net income of 4,583 BAM while production of paprika and cucumber gives a
net income of 4,374 BAM per year.
As shown in Table 38, all financial models present a positive NPV and high internal rates of
17.
return. By looking at the NPV’s figures, the most promising crops are again blueberries, raspberries
and blackberries, among the berries crops. Among the vegetables cultivated in the open field,
gherkins have the highest NPV – 4,509 BAM. Cultivation in the greenhouse looks very much viable
especially when production of tomato and cucumbers is combined.
18.
The cost of seasonal labour in rural BiH is 30 BAM/day, which is significantly lower than the
return to family labour of the financial models that varies between 84 BAM and 156 BAM/day. This
shows that investments in the targeted subsectors contribute to poverty reduction.
19.
Cooperative models show that, after an initial investment on machineries and other inputs – like
a small cool house or trimmers and digital scales - that can be used to support farmers, cooperatives’
financial indicators become particularly attractive already from the second year.
Models
Berries Crop Models: The most promising berry variety in BiH is currently raspberry.
20.
Raspberries are usually grown on small plots near the farmhouse, often on steep slopes with alkaline
soils. With quality seedlings, drip irrigation and appropriate technology and crop husbandry, yields of
1.2 to 1.5 tonnes per dunum can be achieved already from the second year. Prices of raspberry were
quite good since 2007, between 1.60 BAM and 3.20 BAM per kg. The financial model shows that
raspberry production in BiH is profitable in case prices are higher than 1.6 BAM/kg. Smallholders are
eager to invest in raspberry production because: (i) a net income of 3,887 BAM/dunum is attractive in
rural BiH; (ii) the market is guaranteed in case a wholesale buyer is active in the area; (iii) almost
optimal yields are obtained from year 2 onwards for almost 10 years; (iv) operational costs, except for
family labour, are low after the initial investment; (v) production is based on family labour; (vi) all
financial profitability indicators are attractive: NPV 11,935 BAM/dunum; Internal rate of return (IRR):
85%.
21.
Although blueberry gives higher returns and higher NPV if compared to raspberries, it also
needs to be considered that blueberry faces specific constraints, which make it less accessible in
most situations, while the risk profile remains higher: (a) blueberry requires an acid soil, which is only
available in specific areas of BiH, as most good soils are alkaline; (b) the initial investment cost is high
compared to other berries; (c) full production is only achieved in year 4, compared to year 2 for other
berries; a much stronger financial capacity is required; (d) wholesale buying is less developed;
(e) international competition with producers in Poland is sharper, certainly in periods with low access
to the Russian market. Nonetheless, currently very good prices, up to 10 BAM per kg, are paid for wild
blueberry, but these volumes remain small and prices and market demand volatile. Potential exists to
further develop marketing channels of this premium product. Net income for blueberry amounts to
5,168 BAM per dunum, Net present value (NPV) is 14,454 BAM per dunum and IRR is 68%.
173
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
Both blackberry and strawberry are considered as crops with good future prospects in BiH.
22.
Market demand for blackberry is growing, but it still remains more “niche product” than raspberry and
mainly purchased by the food industry. Strawberry production is also developing with requests both
from the fresh and industrial market. While other berries have an investment cycle of approximately
10 years, the production cycle of strawberry is 2 years with highest yields obtained in year 1. Financial
indicators for both blackberry and strawberry are attractive although lower than for raspberry and
blueberry.
Vegetables Open Field Crop Models: production of gherkins crop for processing as pickles is
23.
developing rapidly in BiH and it is the most promising crop, among the vegetables open field
production, according to our financial indicators. Gherkins are annual crops, which are quite labour
intensive. The production cost consists mainly of family labour while initial investments (excluding
operating inputs and labour costs) are around 1,700 BAM per dunum. Wholesale buyers are
developing out-grower schemes and are currently guaranteeing buying the entire production, which
results in interesting farm gate prices (on average 0.90 BAM per kg, with 1.1 BAM for grade I,
0.50 BAM for grade II and 0.10 BAM for grade III). Strong demand results in a net income of
3,052 BAM/dunum. All financial profitability indicators are attractive if compared to other vegetables:
NPV: 4,509 BAM/dunum, B/C: 1.9; return to family labour: 95 BAM/day..
Production of early potato and paprika for industry in the open field are attractive crops,
24.
especially as import substitution. Their cultivation is mainly valuable in some regions like Semberjia;
Krajina and Herzegovina. Financial indicators of paprika show a good NPV of 2,654 BAM, IRR of 90%
and B/C of 1.54. Return to family labour is 84. In the potato financial model, beyond investing in
irrigation, the with project situation invests on better quality seeds that allow farmers to produce higher
yields than in the without project situation. Although the NPV of potato is less attractive than other
vegetables – 1,918 BAM - the total initial investments are low – 1,213 BAM – therefore more
accessible to many farmers. Furthermore, the net income – 942 BAM – and return to family labour –
113 – would be still attractive for a farmer cultivating a simple crop like potato.
Vegetables Greenhouse Models: these models show that, thanks to the use of a greenhouse,
25.
small plots of land – size of 300 m2- can become more productive than 1 dunum of land in the open
field and allow the farmer to produce more than one crop over the year. Our models show that
cucumbers and paprika or cucumbers and tomato can generate attractive financial indicators when
produced in the same greenhouse. When producing more than one crop, the yield of each crop would
be about 20% lower than producing the crop alone. However, economic results are still very attractive
and extra investments for producing more than one crop are relatively small. For instance, first year’s
production total costs for producing tomato alone in the green house is 8,300 BAM while producing
one extra crop – cucumber - during the same year would increase total production costs only up to
9,400 BAM. Consequently, net income for producing only tomato is 2,500 BAM (on the fourth year)
while net income for producing both tomato and cucumber would be 4583 BAM. In the tomato and
cucumber model, NPV is 6,204 BAM; net income is 4,583 BAM; and IRR is 44%. Although
combination of tomato and cucumbers gives more attractive financial indicators, also combination
between tomato and cucumbers is financially viable: NPV 3,355 BAM; net income is 4,374 and IRR is
29%.
26. Greenhouse can be attractive investments because a) they protect crops from bad weather;
b) can be organized on small surfaces; c) do not necessarily require big investments in terms of
machineries; c) are risk minimiser. However, considering that the initial investment for purchasing a
green house would be minimum 6,000 BAM – the cost of a greenhouse varies between 20 and
30 BAM/m2 - the target of this project will have access to such investment only with initial financial
support by the project.
Cooperative Models: As previously mentioned, cooperative models were designed in order to
27.
show the financial effect that the Project has also on other actors of the VC. During the first year of the
Project, cooperatives are expected to invest on new technologies than can be used by farmers.
Examples of initial investments may be trimmers or digital scales in the case of berries cooperatives,
174
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
or small cool houses in the case of vegetables cooperatives. Considering that farmers will benefit from
such investments, the Project will contribute to these purchases up to 70% of the total cost. The link
between farmers and cooperatives is stressed in the model also by linking quantity of yields in the
crop models to quantity of working capital (berries and vegetables) purchased and then sold in the
cooperatives models. Overall, financial indicators are positive: NPV for the berries cooperative is
134,396 BAM and IRR is 35%; NPV for the vegetable cooperative is 78,527 BAM and IRR is 57%.
During the first year, berries cooperative will have high costs of production - 158,600 BAM –
compared to total revenue – 72,260 BAM – due to the fact that raspberries and blackberries crops
give fruits starting from the second year. Berries cooperatives will therefore need to access to bank
loans on the first year. Nonetheless, the expected high returns from the second year onward will allow
them to repay the loan with an interest rate of 7% and also to have attractive incremental income after
financing.
Table 37: Financial Analysis of Crop Budget
 Yield
Kg/dunum
Production &
Investment Costs
Including Labour in
year 1 BAM/dunum
Revenue
BAM/Dunum
year 4
Net Income (year
4) BAM/dunum
Raspberries
Blueberries
BlackBerries
Strawberries
Potatoes_Open Field
Paprika_Open Field
Gherkins_Open Field
1,500
1,200
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,300
4,500
2,848
4,058
2,735
3,860
1,213
2,073
2,743
4,500
6,000
3,750
4,000
1,500
2,475
4,050
3,887
5,168
3,317
2,555
942
1,589
3,052
Yield
Kg/300
m2 GH
Production &
Investment Costs
Including Labour in
year 1 BAM/300 m2
GH
 Revenue
BAM/300 m2 GH
year 4
Net Income (year
4) BAM/300 m2
GH
Paprika+Cucumber GH
7,760
Tomato+Cucumber GH 12,880
aoptimal yield: raspberry year 2; blueberry year 4; blackberry year 3; strawberry year 3
9,479
9,422
6,324
6,644
4,374
4,583
Net
Increment
al Income
(year 4)
BAM/dun
um
2,947
3,947
2,433
1,840
502
692
1,265
Net
Increment
al Income
(year 4)
BAM/300
m2 GH
1,764
2,273
175
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
Table 38: Financial Profitability Indicators
Net Income (year 4)
BAM/dunum
Net Present
Value
BAM/dunum
Internal Rate of
Return (%)
Return to
Family Labour
BAM/Day
B/C Ratio
Raspberries
Blueberries
BlackBerries
Strawberries
Potatoes_Open Field
Paprika_Open Field
Gherkins_Open Field
3,887
5,168
3,317
2,555
942
1,589
3,052
11,935
14,454
7,991
5,265
1,918
2,654
4,509
85%
68%
56%
93%
89%
90%
107%
Net Income (year 4)
BAM/300m2 GH
Net Present
Value
BAM/300m2 GH
Internal Rate of
Return (%)
Paprika+Cucumber GH
Tomato+Cucumber GH
4,374
4,583
3,355
6,205
29%
44%
Net Income (year 4)
BAM
Net Present
Value BAM
Internal Rate of
Return (%)
Berries Cooperative
Vegetables Cooperative
72,360
31,502
134,396
78,527
35%
57%
138
157
109
116
113
85
95
2.26
2.22
1.86
1.38
1.65
1.54
1.9
Return to
Family Labour
BAM/Day
99
118
Return to
Family Labour
BAM/Day
-
-
B/C Ratio
1.42
1.49
B/C Ratio
1.06
1.04
Mushrooms and Other Maps
28.
Today mushrooms could be seen in many cases as a by-product of the berry value chain, as
often the same wholesalers are still buying. Many companies started with mushrooms (which is still
visible in their names) and then expanded to berries which are commercially more important today.
The marketing infrastructure for mushrooms is very similar to the one for berries and many berry
wholesale buyers started as mushroom collectors. These cold storage facilities for mushrooms are the
same like for berries, either having 4° Celsius or minus 20° Celsius.
The collection of mushrooms (and blueberries) does not require any input beside workforce.
29.
Initial training, awareness creation to protect and maintain the natural resource base, and organization
of bulking are required. Small-scale farmers and landless people are collecting mushrooms (and
MAPs) during the season and bring them daily to collection points. These wild mushrooms are
collected; graded according to size, colour, and percentage of broken parts. Mushrooms are sold
fresh if possible as this allows the highest price, but volumes remain small. Therefore they need to be
sorted and eventually mechanically cleaned. Imperfect mushrooms are sorted out and used for
processing; processing traditionally was drying and pickling for conservation purposes. For drying the
mushrooms are cut, dried (12% moisture content) and packed for shipment to export markets. The
latest development was deep freezing (minus 40° Celsius) and then storing the mushrooms in cold
storage facilities (minus 20° Celsius) in card boxes of 15 kg. In these cold storage facilities
mushrooms are kept for further processing into smaller consumer packages or are shipped out to
other processing facilities.
C. Benefits and Beneficiaries
30.
The main benefits of the Project would be:


Expansion of acreage of fruits and vegetables, and NTFP both for domestic and export
markets; the promotion of agribusiness agreements and market linkages would enhance
competitiveness of the targeted subsectors and ensure sustainability; the value chain cluster
approach would enhance the position of about 12 national clusters of value chain actors;
Increased revenues for 16,000 direct beneficiaries, who would develop or upgrade their fruit
and vegetable production;
176
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis




Support to the berries subsector would lead to increased exports and export earnings; on an
average additional national production of berries would be 7,600 tonnes per annum (40%
increase of the current production, considering that 20% increase is expected from new
production and 20% increase is expected from improved yields);
The grassroots organizations of these farmers would be enhanced; over a period of 10 years,
approximately 120 PAs and 100 cooperatives would be supported;
Priority target groups of IFAD, including women, youth and rural poor would receive access;
At wholesale and cooperative level, significant investments in collection and processing
facilities would be supported;
 Creation of 3,150 fulltime and part-time jobs upstream and downstream in the value chains
(estimated at 1 job per 5 farmers);

Particular attention will be given to support climate change resilience, by for instance favoring
environmental friendly technological investments;
 Component  1  would  result  in  significant  benefits  in  terms  of  institutional  capacity  building  of
specialized institutions and service providers.
D.
Economic Analysis
The objectives of the economic analysis are: (i) to examine the overall Programme viability, and
31.
(ii) to assess the Project’s impact and the overall economic rate of return; and (iii) to perform
sensitivity analyses to assess the benefits from a broad welfare perspective.
Key Assumptions. The physical inputs and productions established in the financial analysis
32.
provided the basis to determine the viability of the programme investment in terms of opportunity
costs and quantifiable benefits to the economy as a whole. The estimate of the likely economic
returns from project interventions are based on the following assumptions: (i) Project life has been
assumed at 20 years; (ii) Project inputs and outputs traded are valued at their respective market
prices, and goods are expected to move freely within the Project area in response to market demand;
(iii) an economic discount rate of 10% has been used; (iv) The economic analysis is based on direct
costs and benefits, while social and indirect benefits have not been taken into account of the “average
farmer” compared to the best farmer.
33.
Project Economic Costs and Benefits. The economic analyses include the investment and
incremental recurrent costs of Project components. The Project financial costs have been converted
to economic values by removal of price contingencies, taxes and duties. In order to avoid double
counting, the final aggregation considered only those costs that were not included in the financial
models. Furthermore, it has been assumed that after the 10th year, the incremental net benefits of
each model will be the same as for the incremental net benefits obtained after the fifth year of the
Project, when the cost of replacing/maintaining of some specific equipment is considered for all
models.
Project Phasing. Tables 39 and 40 below summarize the number of participating farmers
34.
during the implementation period and the related phasing of the investment.
177
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
Table 39: Number of Farmers and Phasing In
Raspberry
Blueberry
Blackberry
Strawberry
Gherkin
Potato_OF
Paprika_OF
Cucumber & Tomato_GH
Cucumber & Paprika_GH
Total
PY1
PY2
Number of Farmers
PY5
PY4
PY3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
345
115
58
115
173
58
58
115
115
1150
585
195
98
195
293
98
98
195
195
1950
600
200
100
200
300
100
100
200
200
2000
600
200
100
200
300
100
100
200
200
2000
30%
10%
5%
10%
15%
5%
5%
10%
10%
100%
PY6
PY7
PY8
PY9
PY10
Total
240
80
40
80
120
40
40
80
80
800
240
80
40
80
120
40
40
80
80
800
705
235
118
235
353
118
118
235
235
2350
705
235
118
235
353
118
118
235
235
2350
705
235
118
235
353
118
118
235
235
2350
4725
1575
788
1575
2363
788
788
1575
1575
15750
Table 40: Number of Cooperatives and Phasing In
Number of Cooperatives
PY1
PY2
PY3
PY4
PY5
PY6
PY7
PY8
PY9
PY10
Total
Berries Cooperative
Vegetables Cooperative
Total
70%
30%
100%
0
0
0
22
10
32
11
5
16
11
5
16
13
5
18
0
0
0
0
0
0
13
5
18
0
0
0
0
0
0
70
30
100
Economic Pricing. Economic pricing was undertaken using the following assumptions: (a) the
35.
opportunity cost of labour is BAM 24/day, or 80% of financial cost of labour, which is justified given
high rural unemployment; (b) the shadow exchange rate (SER) has been calculated at 1 USD=1.5230
BAM and 1 EUR = 2.0230 BAM (c) the standard conversion factor for the exchange rate has been
calculated at 1.03; (d) the conversion factors for outputs and inputs have been calculated starting from
FOB and CIF prices when data were available; when data were not available CFs were calculated
starting from the financial price, deducting any duty or tax and multiplying it by the SCF; overall all CF
vary between 0.8 (for imported inputs) and 1.09 (for the specific case of raspberries).
Economic Rate of Return. On the basis of the above assumptions, the ERR of RCDP would
36.
be 36.6% and the Net Present Value (NPV) would amount to USD 53.1 millions. The high ERR
reflects the ambition and potential leverage of RCDP, with an approach focused on clear comparative
advantages and existing economic dynamics in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
37.
Sensitivity Analysis. In order to test the robustness of the above results, a sensitivity analysis
has been carried out, the outcomes of which are presented in Table 41 below. The sensitivity analysis
investigates the effect of fluctuations in Project costs, benefits and delays in implementation on the
NPV and ERR. The sensitivity analysis shows the economic impacts that a decrease in project
benefits - of up to -50% - will have on the project’s viability. Similarly, it shows how the economic
viability of the project will be affected with an increase – of up to +50% - in project costs and with one
and/or two years delay in project implementation. Finally, the analysis shows that the economic
viability of the project remains attractive by preserving positive NPV and ERR in each case.
178
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
Table 41: Sensitivity Analysis
Assumptions
Related Risk
ERR
NPV $ Million
Project Base Case
36.6%
53.1
Decrease in Project Benefits
Increase in Project Costs
Delays in Implementation
Beneficiaries do
not adopt new
and more
environmental
friendly
technologies.
Price and market
fluctuations. Low
crop yields
Weak quality of
extension
services. Weak
cooperation
within the VC.
Procurement
risks. Low
management
capacity.
Capacity of PCU
& APCU to
implement the
project and
cooperate on
common
activities.
-20%
-50%
20%
50%
1 year
2 years
32.9%
40
25.2%
20.1
33.6%
29.9%
50.5
46.6
31.9%
44.5
28.0%
36.7
179
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 11: Draft Project Implementation Manual
Appendix 11: Draft Project Implementation Manual
Table of contents
Abbreviations & Acronyms
I. Introduction (to be completed by APCU/PCU)
1. Presentation of the Project
2. Project Goals and Objectives
3. Project Approach, Focus, Subsector Approach
4. Description of the Project Components
5. Cost and financing
7. Project Implementation modality
6. Organisation and management
7. Institutional and implementation arrangements
9. Organisational chart
II. Administrative Procedures (to be completed by APCU/PCU)
1. Human Resources management
1.1. Job descriptions
1.2. Recruitment procedures
1.3. Contract Management
1.4. Internal Rules for Personnel
2. Communication Organisation
3. Logistics
4. Asset management
III. Financial and Disbursements Procedures (to be completed by APCU/PCU with
IFAD support)
1. Financial Arrangements and Flow of funds
2. IFAD disbursement procedures
3. Disbursement procedures
4. Accounting systems and procedures
5. Planning and budgeting
IV. Procurement Procedures (to be completed by APCU/PCU with IFAD support)
1. IFAD basic procurement principles
2. Procurement procedures, rules and regulations
3. Main methods of procurement for goods, works and contracting of services
4. Main methods of selection of consultants and services providers
5. Specific procurement arrangements
V. Monitoring & Evaluation and Knowledge Management (to be completed by
APCU/PCU)
1. Planning of M&E
2. AWPB Preparation, including annual targets (RIMS+)
3. Follow-up of outputs
4. Evaluation of results and outcomes
5. Impact evaluation
6. Progress Performance report
181
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 12: Compliance with IFAD policies
Appendix 12: Compliance with IFAD policies
A. Compliance with IFAD Policies
IFAD policies
Strategic Framework
(SF) 2011-2015
Private sector
development and
partnership strategy
Rural Enterprises
Policy
Rural Finance Policy
Targeting Policy
IFAD gender policy
Climate change
strategy
Compliance
RCDP is highly compliant with IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015. RCDP has a clear
focus on enabling poor rural women and men to overcome poverty. RCDP is aligned to
the 5 strategic objectives of the framework, especially: (i) a natural resource and
economic asset base for poor rural women and men that is more resilient to climate
change, environmental degradation and market transformation; (ii) access for poor rural
women and men to services to reduce poverty, improve nutrition, raise incomes and build
resilience in a changing environment; (iii) poor rural women and men and their
organizations able to manage profitable, sustainable and resilient farm and non-farm
enterprises or take advantage of decent work opportunities; (iv) poor rural women and
men and their organizations are able to influence policies and institutions that affect their
livelihoods.
Compliant. The key areas of action in RCDP are: (i) formalization of value chain linkages;
(ii) technical and management skills training; (iii) investment support; (iv) knowledge
management.
Compliant. IFAD’s longer term vision in BiH is to support development of formalized
agribusiness linkages for better income generation. In this respect, RCDP will facilitate
access to financial and non-financial services and skills training. The approach will be
demand-driven.
Compliant. All interventions are market-conform and implemented through commercial
and rural banks.
Compliant. RCDP uses (i) targeting of pro-poor value chain; (ii) self-targeting; (iii) direct
targeting; (iv) enabling factors to reach rural poor and empower them. RCDP will also
support institutional strengthening of those actors (PAs, coops, etc.) who provide
services to rural poor. A particular focus will be placed on investment support that
enables disadvantaged groups, including women and youth, to integrate commercial
value chains and improve their livelihoods.
Compliant and innovative. Due cognizance will be given to women in value chains (see
also: Appendix 2).
Focus on scaling up good practices – targeting the most vulnerable ecosystems and
groups to climate risks and shocks. Focus on smallholder farmers.
B.
Environmental and Social Review Note (ESRN)
38.
Based on the relatively minor negative impacts of the targeted economic activities on the
environment, the Programme has been classified for the purposes of environmental scrutiny as
Category B.
39.
To successfully achieve sustainable agricultural and rural livelihoods in the Project catchment
area, due attention must be given to environmental and social safeguards implementation. The main
E&S impacts are concentrated around Component 2.
40.
To ensure environmental and social safeguards compliance, Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMPs) will be developed and monitored for all major rural infrastructures. This
will be done through consultations and monitoring visits by the various stakeholders (PCU, APCU,
Municipalities). This will be aimed at addressing all the concerns from the stakeholders. Periodic
environmental and social compliance monitoring reports must be prepared and shared with all
stakeholders, in line with local policies. Training of farmers on basic best environmental practices in
agriculture will be provided.
183
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 12: Compliance with IFAD policies
41.
The Project will only have positive social impacts, in particular on rural poverty reduction. It will
not have negative effects on indigenous population groups. Special monitoring will be done of labour
conditions of smallholders, youth and female labour in the targeted value chains.
The main threats, caused by climate changes, affecting the three sub-sectors are given in table
42.
below.
Table 42: Main threats and mitigation measures
Threat
Drought
Heavy snow
Hail
Severe precipitation
Fire
Soil erosion
Affected
sectors
Berries
Vegetables
Vegetables in
greenhouse
Berries
Vegetables
Berries
Vegetables
NTFP
Berries
Vegetables
NTFP
Mitigation measure
Adoption of water efficient technologies, such as
drip irrigation systems; Use of resistant new
varieties; Use of anti-hail nets (for sun protection)
Adaptation of greenhouses frames and shape,
distance between the greenhouses and
development of crisis management plans
Development of the anti-hail protection systems
(nets, rockets)
Development of the drainage systems; Production
in greenhouses (controlled environment)
Improved wildfire management; Adoption on
forestry laws on state/entity levels (strategy for
forest protection)
Reforestation, proper drainage, contour farming
Degradation of NTFP
habitats / loss of biodiversity
NTFP
Increase production of NTFP on plantations
Improve regulatory framework (introduce red lists)
In addition to the mitigation measures proposed above, for threats 1-4 additional solution can
43.
be the development of insurance products against weather-related yield variations.
44. With a wide range of climatic threats foreseen in the near future, some are more important than
others with regards to relevance to the three sub-sectors for consideration under RCDP. With regards
to the berries sector, drought, hail, severe precipitation, and soil erosion are the most evident threats.
Vegetables are most at risk with regards to drought, heavy snow (greenhouse cultivations), hail,
severe precipitations, and soil erosion. Finally, NTFPs are expected to suffer the most through the
occurrence of fires, soil erosion, and loss of biodiversity. Mitigation measures exist, and cover a range
of technologies, but also improvement of regulatory frameworks and enforcement when it comes to
mitigation against threats of fires and biodiversity loss.
45.
The most recommended technologies in agriculture consist in use of drip irrigation system,
adoption of drought-resistant crop varieties, and anti-hail nets to mitigate against the threat of drought
and hail especially for berries and vegetables. Greenhouses can provide for better controlled
environments for vegetables as well as berries, against damages from severe precipitations.
Greenhouse vegetables production may benefit from stronger frames, rounded shapes, more robust
pipes structures (as well as a more appropriate distance between greenhouse structures) to prevent
damages from heavy snows. A combination of reforestation schemes, improved drainage systems
and contour farming can serve as mitigation measures against soil erosion for all three sub-sectors.
Finally, and of particular interest for NTFPs, threats of fire may be mitigated through improved wildfire
management, development of a forest protection strategy, and enforcement of state and entity laws,
whereas the threat of biodiversity loss may be mitigated through plantation production, and
introduction of ‘red lists’ as part of a wider effort to improve the regulatory framework.
46.
The comparative analysis is computed between climate smart and non-climate smart
technologies. In a nutshell, the drip irrigation system can – on a 0.1 ha land - yield a farmer with
184
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 12: Compliance with IFAD policies
KM 720 higher profits (against an additional yearly investment of 31 KM) compared to traditional
irrigation systems; this, through an estimate 30% increase in yields, water savings
(9,000 litres/year/dunum), and easier fertilization of crops through the system (resulting in additional
time and money savings). With regards to water pumping, the analysis demonstrates that the most
cost-efficient source of power is electrical (at an annual cost of 60 KM), followed by solar-powered
pumps (annual cost of 200 KM) that are most suitable where rural households are disconnected from
the electric grid.
47. When it comes to greenhouses –based on 100 m2– calculations clearly favor, in the medium
and longer term run, the more climate smart models (either PVC pipes filled with reinforced concrete,
or aluminum/zinc plated pipes structures) offering the most resilience to snow (60 to 70 kg/m2),
longest duration (20 to 30 years), and an estimate yearly price of 60 KM (for the reinforced structures)
and 108 KM (for the aluminum/zinc-plated pipes structures); this, compared to non-climate smart
greenhouses (traditional, of lighter structure, with no additional or standard reinforcements). The
resilience of greenhouses to heavy snows is of special interest in BiH, where the occurrence of heavy
snowfalls is frequent on a yearly basis (at least 3 to 5 times a year). Greenhouse production also
offers a considerable potential in an agricultural context such as BiH characterized by continental
climates and high land fragmentation, and small plots of land, thus providing the opportunity for
farmers to extend the growing season, and enhance production efficiency.
Anti-hail nets provide a highly profitable solution against damages from ice, rain, strong winds
48.
and sun, also contributing towards the creation of a favorable microclimate for crops. With an initial
installation investment required (400 KM/dunum/raspberries), the payback period can already occur
during the first year, when potential losses from crop damage resulting from extreme weather events
are minimized. Considering the potential seasonal profit of 4,500 KM/dunum of raspberry, as an
example, the initial investment of anti-hail nets is highly justified.
49.
The activities to reduce climate change vulnerabilities are shown in the table below.
Table 43: Reducing vulnerability to climate change
Threat
Measure
Cost benefit analysis
1.
Installation of
drip irrigation
system
2. Use of anti-hail
nets (for sun
protection)
Drought
3. Promotion of
greenhouse
production
The installation of this system can increase the yield of berries and up to
100% and taking into account that proper installation of the system can
ensure a double profit, it is easy to calculate that the installation of such
a system is extremely cost-effective.
The installation of anti-hail net is primarily for protection of hail and
heavy rains, but it also ensure exceptional protection from the heat,
which presents a serious threat to crops. Please see the columns below
for the cost benefit analysis
Greenhouses ensure high quality produce around the year with efficient
use of resources, such as water, fertilizers, pesticides and labour.
Greenhouses may also lead to put in value areas in marginal regions as
it makes economically-efficient use of many resources, such as land,
labour and water and allows out-of-season products.
All parameters show that this way of production is extremely cost-
effective. The fact that the production is possible throughout the year,
the much higher prices of products, 2-3 times higher yield than in open
area, easier access to market etc. prove that it’s very profitable investing
in greenhouse production. For some varieties (e.g. some sorts of
strawberries) it is possible to pay off the investment in some more than
one year.
It is expected this technology will increase water use efficiency (as a
result of reduced potential evaporation, indoor climate characterised by
higher humidity and less radiation and wind), increase yields and the
application of advanced irrigation technologies, such as drip irrigation
and hydroponics.
185
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 12: Compliance with IFAD policies
Reinforced frames
and semicircular
shape of the
greenhouses:
Aluminum/ zinc
plated pipes
structure
or PVC pipes filled
with reinforced
concrete (concrete
ribbed steel rod 10
mm, unlimited
lifetime).
Installation of anti-
hail protection
systems (rockets,
nets)
Anti- hail net
Heavy
snow
Hail
Severe
precipita
tion
Development of
drainage systems
Soil
erosion
Reforestation,
proper drainage
Degrada
tion of
NTFP
habitats
/ loss of
biodiver
sity
Increase production
of NTFP on
plantations –
introduction to
farmers with benefits
of such production
Considering potential damage that heavy snow may cause to the
greenhouses, the installation of climate smart, snow- resistant frames is
worth investing. The two proposed models, described in the left column,
are recommended to be installed in all project areas, regardless of
projected climate zones as occurrence of heavy snow is likely to happen
in all country. The price of reinforced, weight resistant frames is 30-50%
higher than the standard ones but the risk of damage is reduced to
minimum.
In case of hail (or extreme drought), the net can save 20 – 100% of total
corps, which for raspberries is about 15 tons per ha. Since the price of 3
KM/kg and the life-time of the net is about 5 years, it is easy to calculate
the benefit of its use. The usage of anti-hail net pays off for itself already
in the first year
Heavy rains cause floods and landslides, but also plant diseases and a
loss of berry seedlings in affected areas. The development of drainage
systems aimed to removing excess waters is a most effective measure,
requiring not big investment but some labor by the user. The cost of
installation of drainage pipes, most recommended Ǿ 110 –300 mm will
solve the problem and will not require significant investment ( should not
exceed 150 KM/0,1 Ha)
The only proven method on mitigation of soil erosion risk is proper
reforestation of critical areas. Depending on the degree of soil damage
or indicators of possible emergence of landslides, the measures should
be planned to prevent negative consequences. In case of necessity for
smaller/light intervention, very often is enough to properly treat
endangered areas and implement measures described in paragraph “f”
of this document.
In order to protect natural habitats, the plantation production of profitable
sorts of NTFPs is the best mitigation measure. Bearing in mind huge
potential in this sub-sector, demands of foreign market and increasing
export trend, the opportunities in production and processing of NTFPs
are very high.
186
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Rural Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP)
Final project design report
Appendix 13: Contents of the Project Life File
RCDP - Concept Note (BiH RB-COSOP)
RCDP - OSC Issue Paper
RCDP - OSC Minutes
RCDP - Detailed Design (main report and appendices)
RCDP - QE memo
RCDP - CPMT minutes
187
