Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project 
(READP) 
Final Project Design Report 
Main report and appendices 
Document Date:  19-Dec 2017 
Project No. 
Report No: 
2000001813 
4636-BA 
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Contents 
Currency equivalents 
Weights and measures 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Map of the Project area 
Executive Summary 
Logical Framework 
I. 
Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
B.  Rationale 
II.  Project description 
A.  Project area and target group 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
C.  Outcomes/Components 
D. 
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies 
III.  Project implementation 
A.  Approach 
B.  Organizational framework 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
D. 
E. 
Financial management, procurement and governance 
Supervision 
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.  Project costs 
B.  Project financing 
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
D.  Sustainability 
iii 
iii 
iv 
vi 
vii 
x 
1 
1 
3 
8 
8 
12 
14 
27 
31 
31 
31 
33 
35 
37 
38 
38 
38 
39 
40 
41 
i 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: 
Appendix 2: 
Appendix 3: 
Appendix 4: 
Appendix 5: 
Appendix 6: 
Appendix 7: 
Appendix 8: 
Appendix 9: 
Appendix 10: 
Appendix 11: 
Appendix 12: 
Appendix 13: 
Appendix 14: 
Country and rural context background 
Poverty, targeting and gender 
Country performance and lessons learned 
Detailed Project Description 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Procurement 
Project cost and financing 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Draft project implementation manual 
Compliance with IFAD policies 
Social, environmental and climate assessment procedures (SECAP) 
Contents of the Project Life File 
43 
57 
81 
87 
103 
121 
127 
139 
155 
161 
177 
287 
289 
297 
ii 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
US$1.0 
EURO 1.0 
= 
= 
= 
BAM Convertible Mark 
BAM 1.76 
BAM 1.956 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
1 dunum 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
0.1 hectare 
iii 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
APCU 
AWPB 
BAM 
BDS 
BiH 
BP 
CAP 
CDP 
COSOP 
CPMT 
EA 
ERR 
EU 
FARMA 
FBiH 
FMA 
FO 
GALS  
GDP 
GIZ 
GNI 
GlobalGAP 
HACCP 
HBS 
IPA 
IPARD 
IPSAS 
IRM 
IRR 
ISA 
KM 
LPP 
LRFDP 
M&E 
MAFWM 
MAWMF 
MCO 
MDG 
MFI 
MoFT 
MOFTER 
MTR 
NGO 
NPV 
NRP 
NTFP 
Agriculture Projects Coordination Unit  
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Bosnian Convertible Mark 
Business Development Services 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Business Plan 
Common Agricultural Policy 
Cluster Development Program 
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 
Country Programme Management Team 
Extension Services Agency in RS 
Economic Rate of Return 
European Union 
Fostering Agricultural Markets Activity 
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Financial Management Assessment 
Farmers’ Organization 
Gender Action Learning System 
Gross Domestic Product 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
Gross National Income 
Global Good Agricultural Practice 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points 
Household Budget Survey 
Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance (to the EU) 
Instrument for Pre-Accession Rural Development 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
Inter-cycle Review Mission 
Internal Rate of Return 
International Standards on Auditing 
Convertible Mark 
Law on Public Procurement 
Livestock and Rural Finance Development Project 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management  
Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry 
Microcredit Organization 
Millennium Development Goals 
Microfinance Institution 
Ministry of Finance and Treasury 
Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations 
Mid-tern Review 
Non-Governmental Organization 
Net Present Value 
Nominal Rate of Protection 
Non-Timber Forest Products 
iv 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
OPEC Fund for International Development  
Producers Association 
Performance-Based Allocation System 
Project Completion Report 
Project Coordination Unit 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
Participating Financial Institution 
Project Implementation Manual 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
Project Steering Committee 
Project Year 
OFID 
PA 
PBAS 
PCR 
PCU 
PEFA 
PFI 
PIM 
PRSP 
PSC 
PY 
RB-COSOP  Results-based country strategic opportunities programme 
RBDP 
RCDP 
READP 
RS 
REEP 
RIMS 
RLDP 
SDC 
SDG 
SIDA 
SME 
SP 
SPSC 
UNDAF 
UNDP 
UNFCCC 
USAID 
USD 
VAT 
VC 
Rural Business Development Project 
Rural Competitiveness Development Project 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project 
Republika Srpska 
Rural Enterprise Enhancement Project 
Results and Impact Management System 
Rural Livelihoods Development Project 
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation 
Sustainable Development Goals 
Swedish International Development Cooperation 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
Service Provider 
State Project Steering Committee 
United Nations Development Assistance Framework 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
United States Agency for International Development 
United States Dollar 
Value Added Tax 
Value Chain 
v 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Map of the Project area 
vi 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Executive Summary1 
Background: Following the Bosnian war from 1991-95 Bosnia and Herzegovina became a sovereign 
country with several tiers of Governance. The State level Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina 
(BiH) at the top is followed by two Entities, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and the 
Republika Srpska (RS), plus the self-governing Brčko District (BD). The third tier of governance 
consists of 10 cantons in FBiH. The fourth tier comprises 143 municipalities. The total population is 
3.52 million, with 58% living in rural areas. In 2015, one in six households lived in poverty and 15% of 
BiH population did not have public social security. The poverty headcount of BiH in 2015 stood at 
16.3% of the population with 19% poverty in rural areas and 9% in urban areas. Unemployment is 
extremely high amongst youth at 62.3%. Women unemployment is higher at 30.7% than for men at 
25.2%. In February 2016, BiH applied for EU membership and with the subsequent adoption of a 
Stabilization and Association Agreement, it has taken a critical step to accession to the EU. At the 
State level BiH is formulating its first Strategic Plan for Rural Development for 2018-2021 to serve the 
pre-requisite to access the pre accession funds.  
Rationale: The justification for the project is rooted in the presence of high levels of rural poverty with 
19% of the rural population living in chronic material poverty and up to another 27% at the risk of 
falling back into material poverty. Simultaneously, the lack of economic opportunities has led to very 
high levels of youth unemployment estimated at 62.3%, with large numbers of them leaving the rural 
areas in search of better livelihoods. Commercial agricultural production by the rural poor is limited 
due to their lack of competitiveness caused by small land holding sizes, lack of technical enterprise 
skills, information and technology gaps and limited access to resources such as quality inputs and 
rural finance. Weak and non-inclusive nature of farmers’ organisations (FO) has added to the 
problem. Furthermore, in the absence of such market linkages, the rural poor continue at subsistence 
level unable to develop into commercial farmers.  
Potential for agriculture to develop the rural economy: There is strong potential for agriculture to 
develop the rural economy. Vegetable production in BiH covers 75,000 hectares (gherkins, paprika, 
tomato, cucumber, lettuce, etc.), and exports from BiH have nearly quadrupled since 2008 to 125 
million BAM in 2015. At the end of 2015, the total milk production was around 666 million litres from 
around 243,000 cows. The number of beehives in BiH nearly doubled within ten years (2004-2014) 
from 240,723 to 392,348 beehives. It is assessed that BiH has over 700 species of medicinal and 
aromatic plants of which around 200 are exploited. Mushrooms are important within NTFPs and 
mainly collected in the forest. MAP and mushroom collection is a sector dominated by around 30,000 
rural families as collectors of which 60% are female.  
Project area: The programme area will consist of 90 municipalities grouped into 10 clusters with an 
average of 9 municipalities per cluster. 
Target group: The READP target group will comprise (i) rural households with 0.1-0.5 ha (1-5 
donums) land available for cultivation either through direct ownership or rented/leased (ii) households 
with monthly income less than 817 KM comprising mainly non-commercial farmers (iii) unemployed 
rural youth (below 30 years2) and (iv) poor women headed households in rural areas. The outreach of 
the project will be 8,650 direct beneficiaries and around 5,000 indirect beneficiaries from the enabling 
infrastructure investments. The project supported sub-sectors will comprises berries, fruits and 
vegetables, forest products, honey, MAPs and to a limited extent dairy.  
1 The mission consisted of Mr. Swandip Sinha (Team Leader), Mr. Roberto Longo (Lead advisor, IFAD), Ms Sigrid Giencke 
(Value chain specialist), Mr. Benjamin Toric (Production and marketing infrastructure specialist), Mr. Nedim Dzano (Targeting 
and institutional specialist), Mr Yonas Mekonen (M and E Specialist, IFAD); Mr Malek Sahli (Senior finance officer and team 
leader, IFAD), Ms Dajana Grandic (Economic and financial analysis specialist) and Mr Željko Vaško (Procurement specialist). 
Mohamed Abdelgadir (Country Programme Manager, IFAD) supervised the mission and provided overall guidance to the 
design team. 
2 READP is aligned with BiH's youth age classification and existing age categorisation. 
vii 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Targeting strategies: In order to reach the target group READP will adopt (i) geographical targeting 
measures to reach those areas with higher concentration of targeted households (ii) self-targeting 
means by selecting crops and enterprises suitable enough and of interest to the target groups (iii) 
direct targeting actions to include rural youth and women headed households and (iv) other enabling 
measures to promote greater chance of linking the target group to business leaders. Business leaders 
are regarded as SMEs or Farmers Organisations (FOs) primarily offering market linkages to the target 
households.  
Targeting of enterprises and farmers’ organisations: Enterprises will be selected based on 
appraisal of their business plans against criteria such as (i) market prospects (ii) outreach to the target 
households (iii) potential returns to the target households including youth. Farmers Organisations will 
be targeted based on criteria indicating their pro poor orientation and business plan merits. 
Goal: READP’s goal is to contribute to rural economic development and poverty reduction by 
improving livelihood, generating revenue and enhancing the living standards of target households. 
Objectives: READP’s objective is to increase the income of rural poor households and rural youth by 
engaging them in profitable agribusiness and employment opportunities. READP will unlock new rural 
business opportunities by better connecting and integrating farms, farmers’ organisation and business 
leaders to commercial markets. It will create new avenues for self, salaried and wage employments 
for beneficiary household members including youth. 
Outcomes/Components: The project has two components: (i) Enhancement of economic 
opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains and (ii) Project management and 
coordination. 
Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value 
chains: The expected outcomes of this component are (i) production, productivity, marketing of 
produce and profitability of target group households improved based on 4Ps models (ii) market 
access and value chain integration of target group households enhanced through strengthened 
farmers’ organisations and improved market infrastructure. The component is supported by three 
mutually reinforcing sub-components; (i) development and implementation of pro-poor BPs (ii) 
development of farmers’ organisations and (iii) enabling infrastructure development. 
Sub component 1.1: Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans: This 
subcomponent will increase the adoption and implementation of 4-Ps based business models by 
business leaders along the value chains. The Project will assist around 150 business leaders (SMEs 
and FOs) to develop and implement BPs leading to market linkage between 7,500 target households 
and business leaders. Additionally, it will provide special financial packages for 350 youth apprentice. 
The main BP development related activities will be (i) selection of service provider (ii) targeting survey 
(iii) stakeholder awareness and sensitisation workshops (iv) call for proposals and selection of eligible 
applicants (v) development of detailed BPs and implementation agreements. The main BP 
implementation related activities will be (i) market development assistance (ii) farmers’ training, 
advisory and capacity building services (ii) co-financing starter packages and youth apprentice 
support (iv) assisting other external linkages e.g. to financial institutions, certification bodies and (v) 
creating a supportive setting for BP implementation. 
Sub component 1.2: Farmers’ Organisations Development: This subcomponent will strengthen 
FOs to increase their outreach to target households and to develop into viable inclusive farmers’ 
institution. The main activities will be (i) seed capital financing to 40 FOs (FO seed capital support) 
resulting in direct benefits to 800 households and (ii) institutional development training and advisory 
support. 
Subcomponent 1.3: Enabling Infrastructure Support: This subcomponent will improve the 
profitability of the target households, connect business leaders to the target households and improve 
the market participation of the beneficiaries. The project will identify and support the infrastructure 
requirements for successful implementation of the BPs. Thus, READP will support (i) publically owned 
viii 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
and managed infrastructure such as public water supply, which benefits multiple farmers in a defined 
area, or the establishment and rehabilitation of feeder roads, culverts and small bridges which 
connect business leaders and target households (ii) publically owned infrastructure, such as irrigation 
structure, cooling and packing facilities, which is co-managed in partnership between the 
municipalities, FOs and private sector. 
Component 2: Project coordination 
Overall responsibility: The READP will be implemented by Government and non-government 
institutions and private sector partners. The The Ministry of Finance and Treasury of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina(MOFT) will have overall responsibility of READP and will coordinate with the Entity 
Ministries of Finance and Agriculture.  
Lead Agencies: At entity level, the Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry 
(MAWMF) in the FBiH and the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Resources (MAFWR) in the 
RS will have the overall responsibility for the implementation as the Lead Agencies.  
Project Steering Committee (PSC): A Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the entity 
Ministry of Agriculture or its designated representative would be set up in each Entity to provide 
overall guidance to the Project at Entity level.  
Project coordination units: FBiH will entrust the responsibility of coordination and management of 
project activities to the existing Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in Sarajevo. Likewise, the RS will 
entrust these functions to the existing Agricultural Project Coordination Unit (APCU) located in Banja 
Luka. The PCU and the APCU each will be headed by a project director who will also be the 
secretaries of the PSCs.  
Field coordination: In the FBiH, the PCU will contract 5 field officers as cluster coordinators, one for 
each cluster, to ensure field presence of the PCU and assist quality implementation process. In the 
RS the APCU will ensure field presence through extension officers deployed in the seven regional 
extension offices of the Agency of Extension Services in the 5 project clusters.  
Partnership with Service Providers (SP): In order to manage and coordinate the implementation of 
two projects READP and RCDP in parallel, both PCU and APCU will rely on considerable increase in 
support services from service providers and other implementation partners. In general, SPs will be 
responsible for supporting the A/PCUs in implementing the targeting surveys, conducting sensitisation 
and consultation workshops prior to launching the business planning initiative, supporting business 
proposal selection, assisting business plan development and implementation, ensuring the quality of 
the final business plans, facilitating negotiations the implementation agreements between different BP 
implementation partners, providing technical guidance to the business leaders, FOs and target 
households during BP implementation and assisting the M&E data collection for READP. The selected 
service provider should possess the required environmental expertise to backstop the project. The SP 
will closely liaise with the specific READP Project Manager, business development officer and the 
M&E Officer in the A/PCUs.  
Project costs: The total project cost is expected to be around EUR 27.68 million. Out of this the 
share of FBiH is 60% and RS is 40%. IFAD contribution will be EUR 11.78 million (43%) as loan in 
ordinary terms. The remaining amount will be co-financed by the Government (15% - totally for VAT), 
municipalities (9%) and private sector (33%). The private sector contribution of 33% is related only to 
its co-financing contribution in the project specific categories. In addition, it will invest is other 
business plan implementation areas such as financing of private assets and working capital 
requirements equivalent to at least additional 50% of the READP costs.  
Economic Rate of Return: The EIRR of READP will be 35%. The high EIRR reflects the ambition 
and potential leverage of READP, with an approach focused on clear comparative advantages and 
existing economic dynamics in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  
ix 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Logical Framework 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Name  
Baseline 
Mid-term  
End 
Target  
Source 
Frequency   Responsibility  
Goal  
To contribute to sustainable 
rural economic development in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH)  
Project Outreach 
Development Objective 
To Increase the income of rural 
youth and poor households by 
fostering their engagement in 
profitable agribusiness and 
employment options  
1. percentage % increase in assets 
ownership*  
2. Number of persons receiving 
services promoted or supported by 
the project * (RIMS 1)  
3. Number of supported households 
reporting increase in income of at 
least 25% over the baseline income 
at project start up  
4. Number of new jobs created* 
(RIMS 2.2.1) 
Outcome 1 : Production, 
productivity, marketing of 
produces and profitability of 
target group households 
improved based on 4Ps 
models 
5. Number of supported rural 
enterprises reporting an increase in 
sales over baseline level through 
4P agreements (RIMS 2.2.2) 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
15% 
25% 
15 000 
25 0003 
4,700 
6,900 
3 000 
4 5004 
75 
110 
National 
statistics,  
Human 
development 
reports 
Progress 
report 
Progress 
Report, 
Service 
providers 
Outcome 
survey, 
Progress 
report 
Outcome 
survey, 
Progress 
report,  
Service 
Providers  
Years 1, 3 et 
5 
PCU/APCU 
Annually  
PCU/APCU 
Annually  
PCU/APCU 
Annually 
PCU/APCU  
Annually 
PCU/APCU  
-  Conducive macro-
economic and 
deterioration of the 
political 
environment 
-  The demand for 
specialised Bosnian 
products on the 
export market 
increase  
- Timely and quality 
access to specialised 
service providers  
-Continued interest of 
rural producers and 
3 Given that the support will be reaching 8,650 household and given an average household size of 2.9 members in BiH, READP will reach around 25 000 people at project completion.  
* RIMS Core Indicators; disaggregated by the sex of beneficiary (S: male or female) and the age status of the beneficiary (Y: “young” or “not young” as per the national definition for youth). 
4 Includes 350 young apprentices and 50% of the 8,300 beneficiaries of starter packages and FO seed capital financing. Their cash returns from the adoption of the project supported activities is 
expected to equal at least the minimum net salary earned (BAM 425) from a full time job  
x 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Name  
Baseline 
Mid-term  
End 
Target  
Source 
Frequency   Responsibility  
6. Number of beneficiaries reporting 
at least 30% increase in sales over 
the baseline level  
0% 
2 200 
4 4005 
Output 1.1: Development and 
implementation of Business 
Plans  
8. Number of pro-poor BPs 
approved and implemented by 
Business Leaders  
Output 1.2 : Provision of start-
up packages  
Output 1.3 : Youth Apprentice 
Programme  
Outcome 2 : Enhanced FOs 
for increased integration of 
farmers in markets  
9. Number of targeted farming 
households engaged in 4Ps *  
10. Number of rural producers 
accessing production inputs and/or 
technological packages (RIMS 
1.1.3)*  
10. Number of youth supported by 
the Youth Apprentice Programme *  
11. Percentage of FOs engaged in 
formal partnerships/agreements or 
contracts with public or private 
entities (RIMS 2.2.3) 
12. Percentage of FOs’ members 
reporting new or improved services 
provided by their organization 
(RIMS 2.2.4) 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
100 
150 
5 000 
8 0006 
5 000 (25% 
women) 
250  
(50% 
women) 
8 300 
(25% 
women)  
350  
(50% 
women) 
60% 
80% 
60% 
80% 
Annually 
PCU/APCU  
farmers organisations 
to establish stronger 
linkages with lead 
enterprises 
Semi-annual  
PCU/APCU  
Semi-annual  
PCU/APCU 
Semi-annual 
PCU/APCU 
Semi-annual 
PCU/APCU 
Annually  
PCU/APCU  
Annually  
PCU/APCU  
Timely, quality and 
continuous access to 
business 
development services 
FOs governance and 
management 
capacities increased 
Outcome 
survey, 
Progress 
report,  
Service 
Providers 
M&E system of 
READP, 
Service 
providers  
M&E system of 
READP, 
Service 
providers  
M&E system of 
READP  
M&E system of 
READP  
Outcome 
survey, 
Progress 
report,  
Service 
Providers 
Outcome 
survey, 
Progress 
report,  
Service 
Providers  
5 The number of farmers at mid-term and end term represents 40% and 80% of the 5,500 beneficiaries of starter packages who will be directly engaged in production activities. 
6 Includes 7 500 direct beneficiaries of starter packages plus 50% of the 800 beneficiaries of FO seed capital financing  
xi 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Name  
Baseline 
Mid-term  
End 
Target  
Source 
Frequency   Responsibility  
Output 1.4: FOs seed capital 
financing  
Output 1.5 FOs capacity 
development  
13. Number of FOs provided with 
seed capital financing  
0 
30 
40 
14. Number of persons trained in 
FOs capacity development *  
0 
1 500 
3 000 
Outcome 3: Market access of 
target group households 
enhanced through improved 
market infrastructure 
15. Number of persons/households 
reporting improved physical access 
to markets, processing and storage 
facilities (RIMS 2.2.6) 
Output 1.6: Production and 
marketing support  
16. Number of market and storage 
facilities constructed or rehabilitated 
(RIMS 2.1.5) 
17. Km of roads (linked to the 
selected value chains) constructed, 
rehabilitated or upgraded (RIMS 
2.1.5) 
0 
0 
0 
3 000 
5 000 
18 
287  
10 
16 
M&E system of 
READP, 
Service 
Providers  
M&E system of 
READP, 
Service 
Providers  
Outcome 
survey, 
Progress 
report,  
Service 
Providers 
READP 
Progress 
report,  
Service 
providers  
READP 
Progress 
report,  
Service 
providers 
Semi-annual 
PCU/APCU 
Semi-annual  
PCU/APCU  
Annually  
PCU/APCU 
Semi-annual 
PCU/APCU  
Semi-annual 
PCU/APCU 
- Willingness of 
municipalities, 
farmers organisations 
and local 
communities to 
manage marketing 
infrastructure 
- Effective 
coordination from the 
municipalities 
- Target households’ 
access to timely 
irrigation facilities and 
crop 
- Recruitment of 
locally experienced 
contractors 
7 Includes both cold storage facilities and packing/mini warehouses and rural markets 
xii 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
I.  Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
Governance and administration: Prior to 1991, Bosnia and Herzegovina was a republic in the 
1.
Yugoslav Federation. Following the Bosnian war from 1991-95 it became a sovereign country under the terms 
of the Dayton Peace Agreement in 1995. However, a complex multi-tiered governance structure was adopted 
starting with the State level Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) at the top followed by a second tier 
of governance with two Entities, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and the Republika Srpska 
(RS), plus the self-governing Brčko District (BD). The third tier of governance is unique to the FBiH and 
consists of 10 cantons. The fourth tier comprises 143 municipalities, 79 in FBiH and 64 in RS. The 
municipalities are extremely variable in terms of socio-economic development, size and population. BiH is 
highly decentralised and many public services are delivered at the municipality level. BiH has an ethnically 
diverse population of 3.52 million, with 58% of it living in rural areas. The share of the rural population living in 
rural area has remained constant in recent decade; from 60.5% in 1991 to 58% in 2015.  
Economy: In 2016, the GDP growth was 2.8%, valued at USD 16.19 billion and ranked 109 out of 194 
2.
countries. The Gross National Income (GNI) per capita was US$ 4,880 qualifying BiH as an upper middle 
income country. Yet, it is the third poorest country in south-eastern Europe. Agriculture comprised 7.5% of the 
GDP. A key economic challenge is the imbalance of the country’s economic model: public policies and 
incentives are skewed towards the public sector rather than the private sector; consumption rather than 
investment; and imports rather than exports. BiH ranked 81 out of 190 countries in the World Bank ease of 
doing business rankings 2017, the lowest amongst former Yugoslav republics. Inter-entity fragmentation has 
led to an absence of common vision and objectives, lack of coordination mechanisms, gaps in cooperation 
between agencies and an inefficient public service. A highly decentralized government has provided scope for 
frequent political obstruction and gridlocks and hampered economic policy coordination and reform. Excessive 
bureaucracy and a segmented market has discouraged foreign investment (Appendix 1).  
Poverty profile: According to the Household Budget Survey in FBiH, one in six households live in 
3.
poverty and 15% of BiH population does not have a public social security. The poverty headcount of BiH in 
2015 stood at 16.3% of the population. Poverty incidence is much higher in rural area at 19%, compared to 
9% in urban areas. High rate of unemployment and inactivity, stagnating at 25.4% and 45.5%, are the main 
reasons for poverty. Unemployment is extremely high among youth at 62.3%. Women unemployment is higher 
at 30.7% than for men at 25.2%. Between 1990 and 2015, BiH progressed well with the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs) increasing life expectancy at birth (+5.7 years), mean years of schooling (+1.6 
years) and expected years of schooling (+2.6 years). However, it performed poorly in employment, gender 
and youth, long and healthy life, access to knowledge and decent standard of living thus ranking 81 out of 188 
countries and territories, below most of its neighbours. A Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) roadmap for 
the country needs to get adopted (Appendix 1).  
Agriculture: Agricultural land covers 2.1 million hectares, of which 46.5% is arable and as much as half 
4.
of arable land remains unused. Cultivable land amounts to 1 million ha. However, less than 20% of agricultural 
land is suited to intensive agriculture, for the most part located in lowlands and river valleys. The main 
agricultural crops are corn, wheat and barley. Agricultural exports by value mainly consists of fruits and nuts, 
animal or vegetable fat and oils and fish. These are mostly exported to Turkey (27%), Serbia (15%) and 
Croatia (11%). Although the share of agriculture in GDP is steadily decreasing, from 11% in 2003 and 7% in 
2016, agricultural production is a backbone of the rural economy and generates significant economic value, 
provides for 10% of the country’s exports, generates 8% of GDP and creates jobs for about 18% of the 
national labour force, representing 147,000, of which 65% men and 35% women. In 2015, this number of 
employees rose by 8,000 or 6% compared to the previous year.  
Climatic and environmental challenges: BiH has experienced frequent weather extremes and natural 
5.
disasters over the past decade, causing severe economic losses. Individual households working in the 
agricultural sector are more vulnerable to weather shocks and lack the resilience to recover from natural 
disasters and the increasing impacts of climate change, including floods, droughts and harsh winters. Building 
resilience and ensuring the climate proofing of agricultural value chains is essential for both sustainable 
1 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
economic growth and rural livelihood. The consecutive climatic shocks of 2013 and 2014 revealed an under 
insured agricultural sector. 
6.
EU accession: On February 15, 2016, BiH applied for EU membership and with the subsequent 
adoption of a Stabilization and Association Agreement, BiH has taken a critical step to accession to the EU. At 
the moment, it is in the process of preparing responses of BiH to the questionnaire received from the EU 
based on which its candidate status will be approved. Progress is required in several areas of the economy to 
reach compliance with the EU’s Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), which sets standards for participation in 
the common agricultural market. Meanwhile, BiH is working to meet the required preconditions for using the 
Pre-Accession Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD) funds of up to US$ 21 million earmarked by the 
commission to support competitiveness of agriculture in the pre-accession phase (Appendix 1). 
7.
Rural Development Strategy: At the State level BiH is formulating its first Strategic Plan for Rural 
Development for 2018-2021 to serve as a road map to adopt EU food security and phytosanitary measures. It 
is a pre-requisite to access the pre accession funds. At FBiH level, the Mid-term Strategy for the Agricultural 
Development Sector (2015-2019) was adopted in mid-2015 but the corresponding program of work still needs 
to be approved. It builds on areas such as improvement of profitability and competitiveness of agriculture and 
food industries, strengthening FOs and linking them to food industry, increasing quantity and quality of food to 
meet domestic and export demands, and promotion of exports of agricultural and food products. At the RS 
level the 2016-2020 Strategic Plan for the Development of Agriculture and Rural Areas has been adopted. Its 
priorities are on-farm investments, investments in processing and marketing of agricultural products, support 
to FOs and rural finance sector, construction and maintenance of rural infrastructure. Brčko district also 
drafted the Strategy of development agriculture, food and rural development for period 2008-2013 which was 
never officially adopted (Appendix 1).  
Farmers Organisations: Producers’ Associations (PAs) and Cooperatives and commonly referred to 
8.
as Farmers Organisations (FOs) by the Government and development partners. Producers Associations (PAs) 
are considered as not for profit Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) under the BiH State Law on Associations 
and Foundations 2001. They benefit from tax exemptions on donations, grants, membership fees and profits 
from economic activities. PAs are treated like any other profit-making enterprises but with condition that profits 
cannot be distributed to members. There are around 200 PAs in FBiH and 70 in RS. Cooperatives are 
registered under the 2003 State Law on Cooperatives. They are commercial entities owned and controlled by 
members (minimum 5 required) for carrying out economic activity for mutual benefit. Economic benefits are 
distributed to members as dividend on sales or purchases. The cooperative sector in BiH is a non-
governmental sector. Around 400 cooperatives operate in the agricultural sector and more than half are 
considered active. Active cooperatives in the two entities have established umbrella federations at the entity 
levels namely Federation of BiH Cooperative Union (FBiHCU), Republika Srpska Cooperative Union (RSCU) 
and the Brcko District Coop Union (BDCU). All three entity associations have established a BiH level apex, the 
BiH Cooperative Union to influence policy making (Appendix 1). 
Rural Advisory Services: In the RS, public advisory services are managed by a central unit in Banja 
9.
Luka, the Agency for Extension services in the Ministry of Agriculture. It coordinates its services through seven 
regional branches. In FBiH, the system was originally established at canton level with no centralised 
coordination unit. Currently, and given the cantons' lack of capabilities, municipalities are tasked with 
mobilising external resources and recruiting and financing their own extension officers. This has not proven to 
be efficient or effective. In general extension services in both entities are deficient, being underfunded, 
suffering from lack of equipment and understaffed. In response six regional semi-public entities have emerged 
in the FBiH as business development service providers to private actors, businesses, NGOs and 
governments. RS created the Agency for Development of Small and Medium Enterprises in 2004 which 
coordinates is activities through 13 local development agencies across the entity. Advisory services for value 
chain development are also available through private service providers, chamber of commerce in both 
entities, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Export Promotion Agency (BHEPA) and other donor supported advisory 
centres e.g. incubation centres in Mostar, Zenica and Banja Luka, funded by the EU. (Appendix 1). 
2 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
B.  Rationale 
  The justification for the project is rooted in the presence of high levels of rural poverty with 19% of the 
10.
rural population living in chronic material poverty and upto another 27% at the risk of falling back into material 
poverty. Simultaneously, the lack of economic opportunities has led to very high levels of youth unemployment 
estimated more than 60%, with large numbers of them leaving the rural areas in search of better livelihoods. 
The firm potential for agriculture to develop the rural economy is not harnessed and BiH remains a net food 
importer with agricultural products representing 10% of exports but accounting for 18% of total imports in 
2015. Commercial agricultural production by the rural poor is limited due to their lack of competitiveness 
caused by small land holding sizes, lack of technical enterprise skills, information and technology gaps and 
limited access to resources such as quality inputs and rural finance. Weak and non-inclusive nature of 
farmers’ organisations (FO) has added to the problem. Furthermore, poorly developed transport networks and 
marketing channels and weak wholesale linkages for processing and bulking have limited the outreach of 
business leaders to the rural poor. In the absence of such market linkages, the rural poor continue at 
subsistence level unable to develop into commercial farmers.  
11.
  High levels of rural poverty: The main rationale for READP is the presence of a large number of 
economically deprived poor people in the rural areas along with a large section of unemployed youth. Out of 
the 2.1 million (58% of population) people living in the rural areas around 19% (394,000 people) suffer from 
chronic material poverty and 22-27% are at the risk of falling into material poverty, and thus living in a 
precarious situation, a rate higher than all European countries except Bulgaria. The magnitude of this 
problems are even more amplified considering that BiH is classified as an upper middle income country with 
per capita gross national income of USD 4,880 (present the poverty statistics). The presence of the large 
number of rural poor in this context indicates that the benefits of overall economic development in the country 
are unable to reach the rural poor households.  
  High levels of youth unemployment: This is one of BiH's biggest challenges. The youth 
12.
unemployment rate at 62.3% is more than double the overall unemployment rate, 25.5%. Around 31% of 
young people have no qualifications or inadequate knowledge and 90% lack skills for the labour market. For 
years, young people are unable to enter into in the labour market which is affected by rigid labour market 
regulations, high tax burden, unfair competition and insufficient control of unregistered labour. Consequently, 
there is a high rate of youth migration. The Government has created Employment Bureaus at the municipality 
level with job seekers database and efforts to link employers and job seekers. Donors such as the World 
Bank, USAID and SIDA have initiated employment development projects. However, there is limited focus on 
job creation in the agricultural sector. READP will supplement the efforts of the other stakeholders with special 
focus on job creation in the rural sector (Appendix 1).  
  The development hypothesis on which the project is based is that business leaders8 (SMEs and FOs) 
13.
can be motivated and driven by their commercial interests to anchor and lead the process of including youth 
and poor households in their raw material supply chains resulting in job creation, income generation and 
poverty reduction of these households. This requires producers’ access to information, skills, finance, and 
services from FOs that can support them to become commercial producers by producing and selling the 
quality and quantity of products required by the business leaders. This approach is in line with the State and 
Entity level rural and agricultural development strategies, the IFAD COSOP, the IFAD supported Rural 
Competitiveness Development Programme (RCDP) which will be implemented simultaneously, expected EU 
accession and other donor initiatives in the rural and agricultural sector. READP will co-finance and support 
the implementation of viable business plans based on 4-Ps models with the objective of expanding the supply 
chain of business leaders, enterprises and FOs, and creating additional demand for raw materials sourced 
from poor rural farming households and assisting to transform them from non-commercial to commercial 
farmers.  
  Smallholders’ access to finance is critical for developing their linkages to business leaders and thus for 
14.
ensuring the sustainability of smallholders’ business ventures. However, the high cost of borrowing (15-24%) 
from MFIs and the lack of rural outreach of banks (agricultural portfolio 2% only) are currently the major 
obstacles to producers’ access to finance. At the same time, the banking system currently has sufficient 
8 Business leaders are regarded as SMEs or Farmers Organisations (FOs) offering market linkages to the target households along with 
other services such as supply of crop production inputs, advisory inputs and pre financing support. 
3 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
liquidity which is available at an affordable cost of 3-5% but smallholder farmers are unable to access this as 
they are confronted by barriers at entry in terms of high collateral requirements and the need for reliable 
financial accounting records which are often lacking for first time commercial farmers. Also the relatively small 
individual financing needs of smallholders (US$ 500-1500) is often too low for generating the interest of 
commercial banks which seldom deliver loans lower than US$ 5,000-6,000. To overcome this problem READ 
will provide grants to co-finance starter packages that meet the production costs of first time commercial 
smallholders linked to business leaders. The starter packages will be partly in the form of subsidies from the 
project and will be triggering co-financing by the municipalities, cash contribution of the smallholders, credit 
from financial institutions and value-chain financing (advance) from the buyers.  
  The profitable linkage between the smallholders and the buyers through the adoption of the starter 
15.
packages will increase cash returns to the smallholders from assured sales and will increase the capacity for 
own investment in subsequent crop production cycles. This will eventually enable the graduation of newly 
developed commercial producers from grant financing to commercial financing in subsequent crop production 
cycles. Specifically, graduation will be achieved by meeting the future agricultural financing requirements from 
higher self-cash contributions of the smallholders and increased commercial financing from business leaders 
and financial institutions as described below; 
  The profitable linkage between the smallholders and the business leaders/buyers through the adoption 
16.
of the starter packages will develop win-win partnership between the business leader and the smallholder 
farmers with the latter integrated as partners in SMEs businesses (as suppliers of quality raw materials). The 
increase in smallholders’ income will increase their capacity to invest on their farm while the stable partnership 
between the buyers and the smallholders will promote value-chain financing – through the business leaders 
pre-financing (advancing) the production costs of smallholders. Pre-financing from business leaders will 
increase as a result of project facilitated working capital loans from commercial banks to business leaders at 
prevailing commercial interest rate of 3-5%. 
  There will also be an increase in the participation of banks and MFIs in directly financing the production 
17.
costs of these smallholder farmers as these farmers will become viable/bankable clients based on functional 
marketing linkages with buyers, documented evidence of the cash flows from these linkages and greater 
presence of bankable assets generated from increased revenue. In particular, the lending from MFIs to the 
smallholders will increase given the doorstep presence of several MFIs which will compete to finance the 
smallholders at market based interest rates or around 15%. However, due to the Increase in smallholders’ 
own capacity to invest and in the availability of pre-financing from buyers, the loan requirement by 
smallholders from MFIs will be relatively limited (around 25% of investment costs). This factor will assist to 
reduce the effective interest paid on the overall investment to 3-4% and make the MFI loans more affordable 
to the smallholders.  
  The higher self-cash contribution from the smallholders will be facilitated by project sponsored financial 
18.
planning and management training and adequate record keeping guidance to assist producers to reinvest 
their returns for expansion of commercial agricultural activities.  
Problem 
- Economic 
poverty of 
households 
living in rural 
areas 
- Youth 
unemployme
nt in the 
rural areas 
Causes 
- Lack of 
competitiven
ess 
- Lack of 
technical 
and 
enterprise 
skills 
- Lack of 
access to 
resources 
Effects 
- Agri. production limitations 
- Low outreach of business 
leaders 
- Low production and 
productivity 
Intervention 
- Linking non-
commercial 
households to 
business leaders 
- Support to youth 
- Non- commercial farming 
apprentice t 
practices 
- Not integrated in VCs 
- Limited participation in FOs 
- Lower asset ownership and 
living standards 
- Social concerns – rural 
desertification 
- Strengthen FOs 
with focus on 
including poor 
- Support market 
linkage and 
production 
infrastructure 
Impact 
- Scalable model for first 
Objective 
- Increase the 
time commercial 
farmers 
- Reduction in poverty – 
improved living 
standards 
- Increases in the 
volume and value of 
produce 
- Job growth; increase in 
self-employment  
- Reduction in migration 
from rural areas 
income and job 
creation of rural 
youth and poor 
households by 
linking them to 
profitable 
agribusiness and 
employment 
options on a 
sustainable basis  
4 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
  Potential for agriculture to develop the rural economy: There is strong potential for agriculture to 
19.
develop the rural economy. Yet, BiH is a net food importer. In 2015, agricultural products only represented 
10% of exports, but accounted for 18% of total imports. The lack of competitiveness of the agricultural sector 
is a major constraint to agricultural development and is caused by (i) fragmentation of land ownership (i) lack 
of technical enterprise skills (ii) suboptimal technology leading to low yield and low profits (iii) weak market 
demand information leading to poor choice of produce and (iv) inadequate capital to engage in commercial 
agricultural production. Small land parcels (4.7 ha/farm) often dislocated from each other, makes production 
more costly and less efficient. Out of the 600,000 smallholder farms, 50% own less than 2 ha, 89% own less 
than 5 ha and only 4% own beyond 10 hectares. Formal holdings registration gives access to direct support 
from the municipalities in the form of subsidies. But, due to the minimum threshold to qualify as a farm, less 
than 20% benefit from direct subsidies. READP will address these areas by providing target households with 
access to market information, knowledge, agronomy skills and access to quality inputs, services and financial 
resources and most importantly assured market linkages to support their commercialisation and contribution 
to the rural economy. The potential of the READPs focal sub sectors are presented below;  
  Fruit and vegetable: Fruits such as plums, raspberries, strawberries, cherries, forest fruits and 
20.
vegetables such as cucumbers and gherkins, tomatoes and peppers are attractive for fresh markets as well 
as processing. Vegetable production in BiH covers 75,000 hectares (gherkins, paprika, tomato, cucumber, 
lettuce, etc.), both for fresh consumption mainly in the domestic market and for processing in the domestic 
and EU-market. Annual production of the main fruit and vegetables in BiH from 2013-2015 was between 
815,736 and 955,821 tons. Due to favourable climatic and economic conditions the area with berries 
(raspberries, strawberries, blueberries, blackberries and chokeberry), has increased over the last few years 
and has reached production above 13,631 tons in 2015. Fruit and vegetable exports from BiH have nearly 
quadrupled since 2008 to some 125 million BAM in 2015. Worldwide BiH is in 15th place with plum production 
and 10th place in raspberry production. The raspberry sub-sector generates exports of BAM 50 million and 
employs 50,000-60,000 people in production, harvesting and processing. Some 15 companies in BiH are 
involved berries export. Industrial processing of fruit in BiH involves fruit drying and fruit juice production (or 
concentrates), syrups, jams and marmalades. There are approximately 20-25 fruit and vegetable processors 
in BiH. About one third of processed fruit and vegetables are imported, as a local production cannot meet the 
local demand (Appendix 1). 
  Dairy: In the last decades the dairy sector in Bosnia has developed towards increased productivity by 
21.
reduction of cows alongside increased milk production per animal. At the end of 2015, the total milk production 
was around 666 million litres from around 243,000 cows. Dairies collect approximately one third of milk 
produced by local farmers, which is still low in comparison to other countries such as Slovenia with 80% milk 
collection). BiH has 100 dairies with total production capacity of 2 million litres/day. Approximately 45 dairies 
exceed capacity of 1,000 litres/day and 10 dairies exceed capacity of 100,000 litres/day. Six large dairies are 
market leaders in the country with a market share of more than 70%. BiH currently processes less than one 
quarter of its total milk production and with demand for dairy products such as cheese, yoghurt and other milk 
probiotic products are expected to rise by 20% over the next 5 years in the region, the country offers an 
excellent opportunity for added processing. Therefore, conditions to further improve milk production meeting 
EU standards in terms of productivity as well as in terms of hygiene and standards are required. 
  Honey: Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has good potential for the production of honey due to its varied 
22.
climate and landscapes. Bosnia, with its continental climate and mountainous terrain, enables the production 
of several high-value types of mono-floral (chestnut blossom, acacia), forest and meadow honey; 
Herzegovina, on the other hand, with its Mediterranean climate, is ideal for the production of other types of 
honey such as poly-floral honey derived from the nectar of many types of Mediterranean herbs. According to 
FAOSTAT official data, the number of beehives in BiH nearly doubled within ten years (2004-2014) from 
240,723 to 392,348 beehives. Production has rapidly increased and imports have dropped from 270 tons in 
2012 to some 180 tons of honey in 2015. However, beekeeping accounts for 1% of the total agricultural 
production in BiH and cannot cover local market demand.  
  MAPs/NTFP: Bosnia and Herzegovina has long tradition in collecting and cultivating of medicinal and 
23.
aromatic herbs, wild berries  and mushrooms. A very rich biodiversity of medicinal and aromatic plants and 
mushrooms in Bosnia and Herzegovina has the potential to contribute substantially to the national economy. 
5 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
It is assessed that BiH has over 700 species of medicinal and aromatic plants of which around 200 are 
exploited (balm, immortelle, juniper, chamomile, lavender, mint, rosemary, sage, savory, etc.). The annual 
harvesting of medicinal and aromatic plants in BiH varies from 1,500 to 9,000 tons. Still, herbs continue to 
play an important role in the MAPs sector, accounting for about 20% of total exports. Also notable is the recent 
trend of cultivation, especially for plants such as chamomile, lemon balm, mint, marigold, lavender, basil and 
immortelle. Some 30-40 companies in BiH are active in MAP export.  
  Essential oils: Production of essential oils has dramatically increased over the last 10 years. Most 
24.
popular oils are immortelle, sage, lemon balm, chamomile, bay laurel, juniper, lavender, heather, chaste tree, 
mint, wild thyme, prickly juniper and rosemary. Certain number of companies also specialized in essential oils 
from conifer trees, such as Black pine, Scots pine, Silver fir and Spruce. The United States and France are the 
key markets for essential oil, with great interest for immortelle oil from Herzegovina. To meet the growing 
demand, over 1,000 ha are planted with immortelle in Herzegovina, with seeds taken from the wild plants and 
in areas where immortelle naturally grows. The immortelle oil contains high percentage of alfa-pinene, which 
is considered to be a broad-spectrum antibiotic. Therefore, this oil is more and more in demand by 
pharmaceutical industry.  
  Mushrooms: MAP and mushroom collection is a sector dominated by around 30,000 rural families as 
25.
collectors. According to recent studies 20% of the collectors are young people below 25 years, 60% middle-
aged (25-45 years) and 30% elderly collectors. Most collectors belong to rural and unemployed population; 
60% of them female. Collection of mushrooms and medicinal herbs are the major source of income of 44% of 
the collectors; for 38% of the collectors it is additional income and rest use NTFP for own consumption.  
Inadequate market linkage between poor producers and SMEs: Value chain actors such as agro 
26.
processors, traders, buyers, wholesalers and exporters have low outreach to the rural areas in spite of the 
high potential for agricultural development in these regions. They are discouraged from linking with 
smallholder farmers due to low production and productivity, non-commercial farming practices, lack of 
integration with value chains support service providers such as FOs, input suppliers and financial institutions. 
Additionally, they are discouraged by infrastructure constraints such as (i) poorly developed transport 
networks and marketing channels (ii) unreliable wholesale linkages for processing and bulking (iii) low rate of 
mechanisation and the very low share of land under irrigation, about 1%. Previous IFAD projects have 
developed models to address some of these issues and to facilitate linkages between target households and 
private lead buyers, notably by channelling inputs through the lead buyers and other forms of pre-financing 
arrangements. These arrangements are based on win-win producers-private-public partnerships also involving 
the municipality to provide public infrastructure support to leverage greater private sector commitment. 
READP will build on the success stories and will adopt a business plan methodology for sustainable 
integration of target households to value chain actors.  
Inadequate outreach of financial services to the poor: There are 24 commercial banks registered 
27.
with the Central Bank of BiH. The non-banking financial system is distributed among 25 insurance companies 
(5% of financial system assets), 8 leasing companies (2%), 34 investment funds, and 18 micro-credit 
organizations (MCOs) (3% each) and 1 factoring company as of end of 2013. The MCOs are treated as 
microfinance institutions (MFIs). The credit outreach of commercial banks to the agriculture sector is only 2% 
of the total portfolio as they have traditionally avoided rural markets due to limited understanding of 
agricultural business and higher risk perception associated with small producers. Thus potential borrowers are 
constrained by high collateral requirements, high interest rate, and a lack of reliable financial accounting 
records. Commercial banks have seldom engaged with IFAD's target group. In contrast the MFIs have 
increased their lending to agriculture, from 33% in 2011 to 38% in 2015. They cater to unemployed and 
vulnerable groups, women and youth which correspond to the IFAD target group. However, they charge high 
interest rate ranging from 15-24% which hinders access to finance by the rural poor.  
  Complementary to RCDP: IFAD projects in BiH are implemented by the Project Coordination Unit 
28.
(PCU) in FBiH and the Agricultural Programme Coordination Unit (APCU) in RS. The two coordination units 
are collectively referred to as A/PCU in the rest of this document. The A/PCUs have just started the 
implementation of a new IFAD supported project, the Rural Competitiveness Development Project (RCDP). 
RCDP is a national project that will be implemented up to 2027 by the A/PCUs and will overlap with READP 
6 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
that is likely to be implemented from 2019-2023. Both projects will be then implemented during the period 
2019-2023 period.  
29.
  RCDP was designed in 2014 focusing on the concept of the starter packages to finance the crop 
production needs of smallholder farmers. The starter packages replaced the credit line approach which was 
witnessing targeting and disbursement problems in previous and ongoing projects. RCDP is based on the 
business plan (BP) approach to develop linkages between poor producers and buyers. Over the last three 
years current IFAD projects implemented by the A/PCUs (RLDP and RBDP) have successfully tested the 
starter package concept and have developed partnerships between producers and business leaders that can 
be strengthened and replicated through RCDP’s business plan approach.  
  RCDP and the new READP project will be complementing each other at field level and at the same time 
30.
READP will be working on approaches and investments that are not covered by RCDP. For example, READP 
will be piloting specific initiatives for addressing youth out-migration. Specifically READP will be supporting 
RCDP activities by:  
 
 
 
 
Complementing BP support with investment in infrastructure. READ will be supporting the 
implementation of BPs holistically taking into account the on-the-farm needs of producers as well as 
addressing the infrastructure needs such as the ones related to storage facilities, secondary irrigation 
schemes , market outlets and roads. READP will address this gap by dedicating 37% of IFAD 
contribution to infrastructure development.  
READP approach of supporting BP will be demand driven, open to any pro-poor marketing 
opportunity as identified by Business Leaders, without being focusing on specific value chains as is 
the case of RCDP. Thus, READP will be selecting proposals for different value chain crops in the 
identified geographical clusters and these will be complemented by RCDP with a value chain 
approach focusing mainly on the berries sector. RCDP will be also investing in higher level policy 
changes with value chain platform development and setting up pro-poor and sustainable regulatory 
frameworks for selected value chains  
Although RCDP recognises the problem of youth unemployment it does not have clear solutions to 
this issue. READP will adopt direct targeting of the youth with around 30% of investments in starter 
packages and apprentice programmes directly supporting youth.  
RCDP will continue for several years after READP. This will provide the opportunity to consolidate 
READPs achievement in the common municipalities and replicate the success stories in other 
municipalities through RCDP.  
In addition to the above READP will assist to enhance the impact of RCDP in the READP target 
31.
municipalities. Out of the estimated 57,000 rural households living below poverty line in the READP targeted 
municipalities RCDP will reach around 10,500 households (18% of poor rural people). READP will provide 
benefits to an additional 8,650 households thus increasing the overall impact of the IFAD investments in the 
targeted municipalities. 
  Weak and non-inclusive farmers’ organisations: IFAD interventions have established or supported 
32.
more than 200 Producer Associations (PAs) and Cooperatives, with a total membership of 18,750 out of which 
14,250 were men and 4,500 of women representing 24% of the total membership. Yet, the persistent 
challenges have been their lack of cohesion, non-commercial mind set still at its early stage, limited outreach 
to poorest farmers and constraints in achieving financial sustainably. With regards to cooperatives the main 
challenges are low barriers to entry in the cooperative sector which have led many would-be companies to 
register as agricultural cooperatives and operate as private businesses. Cooperatives are relatively easy to 
establish; five founding members and limited capital are required. As a result, a vast majority of cooperatives 
are family centred and operate as commercial enterprises, taking advantage of certain cost effective 
requirements, including reduced registration time, lower operating costs than companies, lower capital and 
workers requirement and access to government subsidies and donor support, generally unavailable to 
companies. The RCDP which will be implemented in parallel will READP will have strong focus on 
strengthening the enabling environment for the FOs by addressing their policy and regulatory challenges 
which will assist their institutional sustainability. READP will capitalise on these initiatives and support the 
commercial aspects of these FOs and help their progress towards financial sustainability. IFAD experience 
with supporting FOs in past project is presented in Appendix 1. 
7 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
  Harmonized with donor initiatives: READP is harmonised with other donor programmes. For 
33.
example, it is aligned to agricultural and agribusiness development focus of FARMA II – an ongoing 5 year 
project supported by the USAID and Sweden. Similarly, it is also in tune GIZ’s ProLocal initiative promoting 
local economic development and agricultural value chain development. READ will develop effective linkages 
with such donor initiatives both for harmonised implementation as well as for knowledge sharing and 
dissemination of good practices, replication and scaling up of success stories. The project will also be aligned 
with IFAD’s Strategy for Engagement in Countries with Fragile Situations. BiH is part of the countries identified 
by the strategy, given its complex and conflict-ridden history and its effect on the institutional framework. In 
line with the strategy, the project will adopt flexible and differentiated approaches as compared to other IFAD 
projects (e.g. the PCUs across the entities). Further, the targeting focus of the project on unemployed youth is 
as per the guiding principle of the strategy.  
  Harmonized with government strategies and EU accession: The government strategies are being 
34.
aligned to the scope of future EU accession and READP is oriented in this direction with initiatives to 
strengthen private sector enterprise linkages to the agricultural sector, improving the competitiveness of 
agricultural production, strengthening farmers’ organizations, supporting exports and rural employment 
generation. In relation to harmony with future EU accession The IFAD RB-COSOP is already tuned in this 
direction by focusing on farmers’ transition from non-commercial to commercial agriculture. The RCDP will 
augment the enabling environment for commercial rural agriculture. READP will complement and capitalize on 
RCDP’s achievement to foster more efficient and sustainable local commercial agricultural models. 
II.  Project description 
A.  Project area and target group 
  Project area: The programme areas is selected based on geographical targeting approach. It will 
35.
consist of 10 clusters (five each in FBiH and RS) with an average of 9 municipalities per cluster grouped 
together on the basis of two main criteria;  
  majority of the municipalities represented in the clusters classified as extremely underdeveloped 
and underdeveloped by each entity according to their economic ranking and 
  presence of suitable conditions within the cluster for developing and strengthening the value chains 
of the project supported produce/crops 
  Thus, some relatively better-off municipalities are also included in each cluster where they offer 
36.
advantages such as the presence of marketing infrastructure and strong farmers’ organisations linked or with 
potential for linkage to target group members in the underdeveloped municipalities. In these relatively better-
off municipalities READP’s implementation will be directed to those pockets with relatively higher 
concentration of target households. As a result of this approach the READP clusters will include 90% of all 
extremely underdeveloped and underdeveloped municipalities and 40% of semi-developed and developed 
municipalities in BiH (appendix 2). 
  Target group: The total direct outreach of the READP will be 8,650 households. An additional 5,000 
37.
households will be the indirect beneficiaries mainly from the READP infrastructure investments (refer 
appendix 2). The criteria for defining the target group follows from the experiences in RLDP and RCDP and is 
based on availability of average land plot size and the level of income per household. Thus, the READP target 
group will comprise (i) rural households with 0.1-0.5 ha (1-5 donums) land available for cultivation through 
direct ownership on indirect arrangements such as leasing or renting (ii) households with monthly income less 
than 817 KM comprising mainly non-commercial farmers (refer table below) (iii) unemployed rural youth 
(below 30 years9) and (iv) poor women headed households in rural areas. Only one member per household 
will be eligible for direct project support in the areas of standard starter package, youth and women starter 
package and youth apprentice support (refer SC 1 and 2 for details about starter packages). 
9 READP is aligned with BiH's youth age classification and existing age categorisation 
8 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Category 
Rural Poor 
Borderline poor 
Not poor 
Average monthly income per 
household member BAM 
Upto 389 
390 – 500 
501 and above 
Per household 4 
members* 
Less than 817 
817-1000 
1000+ 
Average land size per 
household (area in ha) 
0.1 – 0.5 ha 
0.51 – 1.5 ha 
and above 
*Based on BiH household survey 2015 stating that 4 member households with income less than 817 KM per month are poor. 
38.
  READP will also partner with a range of institutional actors and link them to the target group through 
profitable business models to ensure the sustainability of the livelihood opportunities created for the target 
group. These institutional actors will consist of (i) farmers’ organisations (PAs and cooperatives) (ii) 
enterprises in the selected value chains (iii) service providers and (iv) financial institutions. 
39.
  Targeting strategies: READP aims to promote the inclusion of very poor and poor non-commercial 
farmers, women and youth in selected value chains through the development and implementation of cluster 
based business plans for connecting producers to buyers. In order to ensure the inclusion of the target group 
in the business models supported by the business plans READP will adopt (i) geographical targeting 
measures to reach those areas with higher concentration of targeted households (referring to project area 
above) (ii) self-targeting by enterprises/FOs offering business opportunities in proposed VCs suitable enough 
and of interest to the target groups (iii) direct targeting of youth (youth apprentice) and (iv) other enabling 
measures to promote greater chance of linking the target group to business leaders and inclusive FOs. 
  Geographic targeting strategy: The first level of geographical targeting has already been embedded 
40.
in the clustering of the municipalities in a manner that 54 (61%) out of the 89 municipalities selected for the 
project are underdeveloped and extremely underdeveloped municipalities (Appendix 2). These municipalities 
are characterised by fewer economic opportunities leading to higher levels of unemployment and outmigration 
as well as other factors such as less number of pupils in school. These local governments have limited 
financial strength and are often unable to attract investments to generate employment and revenues which 
further limits their ability to pursue developmental activities. These factors have contributed to higher levels of 
poverty and higher proportion of farming households in these municipalities ranging from 33-56% compared to 
the average of 32%. However, around 90% of these farming households are currently non-commercial in 
nature indicating the high relevance of the project activities in these areas. It is estimated that the project 
beneficiaries in these municipalities will be drawn from a domain of 15,057 non-commercial, poor farming 
households (Appendix 2, table 9).  
  The second level of geographical targeting measures will be adopted to assure that the cluster level 
41.
business plans are adequately incentivised to include more target households from the underdeveloped 
municipalities. Thus, the business leaders that achieve more than 60% of their linkage outreach to target 
households in the underdeveloped municipalities will be eligible for project support in the areas of product 
certification, trade fair participation and other marketing assistance such as branding and product 
identification. At least 20 out of the 30 youth apprentice providing management support to FOs will be 
deployed to FOs in the underdeveloped municipalities. This is consistent with the fact that the majority of the 
identified FOs are located in underdeveloped municipalities and a number of them have been involved in 
previous IFAD funded projects. Similarly, the contribution from the underdeveloped municipalities required for 
business plan related infrastructure development such as road, bridges, cold storages, rural markets and 
irrigation facilities will be 5-15% only compared to 50-70% requirement from developed municipalities. 
Increased infrastructure investments in the underdeveloped municipalities in this manner will play a vital role 
in the sustainability of the target households’ linkages to the value chains. The third level of geographic 
targeting measures will include direct sensitisation, guidance, technical assistance and implementation 
support to the business leaders assisting them to design and implement profitable business models especially 
relevant for the underdeveloped municipalities. 
  Self-targeting: READP will promote self targeting of target households by focusing on mechanisms 
42.
and activities that has greater involvement and relevance for target households. Thus, it will follow a demand 
driven approach for the selection of the crops instead of restricting to specific VCs. This approach will allow 
the selection of produce such as vegetable and MAPs that can generate reasonable returns from limited initial 
investments and from limited land area, thereby being more suitable for the inclusion of the target households 
who have limited resources for investment. READP will co-finance starter packages to assist the beneficiaries 
9 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
to meet the production costs for selected crops (starter packages are described in SC1). In order to ensure 
the starter packages are attractive only for smallholder farmers/target households READP will impose a 
ceiling of EUR 500 and 800 on the standard, youth and women starter packages. Finally, READP’s FO seed 
capital financing is expected to stimulate a range of FO level businesses involving on-farm production and 
processing activities as well as off-farm activities such as tourism and other rural services which will mostly be 
labour intensive in nature and will promote higher engagement of the target households. 
  Direct targeting of youth: Building on the experiences of RBDP and RCDP, youth aged from 20 to 30 
43.
years and belonging to the target households will be eligible for direct targeting schemes as given below.  
  Youth starter packages: As described earlier, READP will co-finance starter packages to support 
44.
beneficiaries with the cost of first time commercial production of selected VC crops. Out of the 7,500 starter 
packages supported, READP will reserve 1,400 starter packages as specific quota for eligible youth. The unit 
size of these starter packages will be higher at EUR 800 and will finance upto 60% of production costs 
compared to the standard starter packages of EUR 500 financing upto 40% of such costs. Access to the 
starter package will assist the youth to develop entrepreneurial skills and self-employment. Where relevant 
specialised youth farmers’ organisations, comprising members supported by youth starter packages, will be 
promoted and strengthened. Youth involved in producers’ organizations should benefit from complementary 
skill development training to address competency and knowledge gaps (e.g. participatory planning, leadership 
skills, mentoring etc.).  
  Youth apprentice support: The project will assist 350 youth apprentice in the agricultural and rural 
45.
sector (details in SC1). An apprentice will be a person undergoing on the job training leading to a full time job. 
At the end of the apprenticeship period the individual will be absorbed as a regular employee resulting in job 
creation and increased income for the target household. The project will finance the cost of youth 
apprenticeship for 1 year or upto a maximum of EUR 2,100 with all remaining costs borne by the employer10 
(implementation details in SC1). 
  Targeting of women: The project will develop a gender strategy based on lessons from past and 
46.
current projects (RLDP, RBDP and RCDP) regarding interventions that can increase women's incomes, 
enhance their decision-making and empowerment. In particular, READ will refer to tools developed under 
RBDP in establishing a mentoring system to empower women and promote their inclusion in the project 
activities. Self-targeting and direct targeting measures will be adopted for inclusion of women.  
(a)
(b)
The self-targeting measures will promote the selection of produce such mushrooms, gherkins, 
pepper and tomato which have higher women's involvement. The starter packages will support 
labour intensive crops which have greater involvement of women and the FO seed capital 
financing will promote enterprises involving processing, packaging, handicraft production and 
tourism promotion (small hotels and other services) which have higher women's involvement.  
Direct targeting measures for women’s inclusion will involve a quota of 600 starter packages 
reserved for women headed households which will have the same preferential conditions as the 
youth starter packages, i.e. unit size of EUR 800 financing upto 60% of production costs. 
Additionally, 50% quota or 183 youth apprentice opportunities will be received for young women. 
As a result of these mechanisms women will comprise at least 25% of the READP outreach 
achieved over the life of the project. 
  Gender empowerment measures: Gender empowerment measures adopted by READP will be 
47.
divided into three categories. The first category will comprise training and capacity building inputs for 
enhancing crop production and processing skills, business management skills and household budgeting and 
savings skills. FOs will be sensitised on women’s inclusiveness and women’s participation in governance and 
management roles. In order to optimise results training and capacity building inputs will be provided through 
classroom sessions as well as on farm lessons and exchange visits. The second category of empowerment 
measures will promote the adoption of farm tools and equipment for increasing productivity and saving time 
and energy. For example, farm labourers, who are often women, will be trained on the use of tools for weeding 
and harvesting produce. Similarly, target group households’ access to production and marketing related 
10 In addition to the cost sharing mechanisms, the sustainability of the youth apprentice scheme will be ensured based on the strict 
selection of the enterprises that demonstrate their strategic labor force requirement for the medium term. Access to regular employment 
will be subject to performance assessment 
10 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
infrastructure will be enhanced by supporting works such as domestic/irrigation water supply and roads which 
will reduce drudgery. The third category of empowerment measures will promote increased participation and 
decision making by women and youth within the business plan implementation partners. For example, the 
youth starter packages with the fixed women’s quota will lead to increase in women and youth membership in 
FOs. The women’s quota in the youth apprenticeship will lead to increased employment of young women. 
READP will also promote greater inclusion of youth and women in the governing and management 
committees of the FOs for increasing their decision making roles in these institutions. 
Implementation of the targeting approach 
  The implementation of the targeting approach will commence with a targeting survey followed by 
48.
selection of business leaders, PAs and other implementation partners that are willing to adopt the objective of 
reaching the target households. This will be followed by stakeholder sensitisation and guidance on the steps 
towards target group inclusion based on information/findings from the targeting survey. Thereafter, the project 
will provide training, technical assistance and implementation support for strengthening the capacity of the 
project partners to include the target households and for assisting the actual identification and linkage of the 
target households to the business leaders. These steps are further described below 
  Targeting survey: READP will conduct a targeting survey (see SC 1) guiding the project team in the 
49.
identification of poverty pockets and to identify where to focus on outreach. The study will identify the potential 
poverty areas and the target groups including assessing gender and youth dynamics in designated clusters. 
The targeting survey will be incorporate experiences from previous projects, in particular started in the pilot 
projects of RCDP and further elaborated under RBDP and RCDP. Furthermore, the study will recommend 
suitable products from the project supported agricultural sub-sectors, taking into consideration their prevailing 
market demand.  
  The survey will involve (i) consultations with key actors, such as social service centers, employment 
50.
bureau, heads of the local communities, authorities managing entity level farm registers and financial 
institutions active in the project area (ii) identification of the broad geographical areas and potential farmers’ 
organisations (FO) with higher concentration of the target households (iii) validation visits to these 
geographical areas and FOs and (iv) preparation of a verified list of the geographical pockets and FOs with 
higher concentration of target households. These lists will be used during the stakeholder workshops to 
promote inclusive business plan preparation. The target households identified in the business plans will be 
drawn from the poverty areas identified in the targeting survey.  
  Selection of poverty focused business leaders, FOs and other implementation partners: The 
51.
selection of the business leaders will be based on criteria that specifically indicate their commitment to link 
with the target households in addition to other criteria indicating their commercial strengths. Thus in order to 
be eligible the business leaders should comply with criteria including (i) proven experience in or formal 
commitment to establishing business linkages with small producers/target households in economically 
underdeveloped geographical areas (through MoUs); (ii) selection or willingness to select crop/produce 
suitable for production by target households and involving engagement of mainly women and youth as wage 
labour in the production cycle. Similarly, the business proposals submitted by the business leaders must 
indicate (i) targeted outreach to the target households including youth and women and (ii) bulk of the targets 
households planned to be drawn from the underdeveloped municipalities (iii) potential returns to the target 
households including youth and women.  
  Similarly the criteria for selecting FOs will include indicators of their potential to reach target households 
52.
such as (i) at least 25 members, which includes at least 20 members from the READP target group 
households with income less than KM 817 per month, in majority from the underdeveloped municipalities (ii) 
intention to further increase membership particularly from the READP target group in the underdeveloped 
municipalities and (iii) outreach to a wide base of co-operant and rural poor. The selection of the business 
plans for the FO seed capital financing will focus on identification of both on farm and non-farm business 
ideas which promote the involvement of women and youth. Relevant criteria for further assessing farmer 
associations and cooperatives, as successfully applied in RBDP, are described in Appendix 2. 
  Sensitisation, training and technical assistance: Cluster level sensitisation workshops will be 
53.
organised to develop shared understanding about the poverty reduction context of the project. The targeting 
11 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
criteria and the targeting approach will be explained. The technical assistance during the BP formulation will 
incorporate strategic and operational guidelines for targeting poor households. FO organizational 
strengthening will focus on inclusiveness and empowerment of rural poor, women and youth through activities 
such as (i) information and mobilisation campaigns; (ii) business counselling for members of PAs; (iii) seed 
capital financing to leverage investments; (iv) support to ensure active participation of women and youth in 
FOs’ decision-making process through adoption GALS methodology for financial inclusion ; and (v) information 
campaign on rural labour conditions, food safety, enforcement of regulations in agriculture and business 
leaders. 
  Target household selection process: Target households will be selected trough (i) sensitisation and 
54.
orientation of the target households about project details and mobilising applications for participation (ii) 
participatory wealth/poverty ranking of the interested households (iii) Selection and verification of eligible 
households.  
(a)
(b)
Sensitisation and orientation of the target households will begin during targeting survey followed 
by participation of community representatives in the cluster level sensitisation workshops. This 
will be followed by community level campaigns during the BP development stage focusing on the 
pockets of poverty identified during the targeting survey and selected by the business leaders for 
BP implementation. These campaigns will be conducted by the service providers, cluster 
coordinators/extension and representatives of the municipality and business leaders. During 
these visits the criteria for target household selection already explained during the cluster level 
workshops will be further explained. Next, READP in coordination with the other partners will 
invite expressions of interest from the target households. 
Participatory poverty/wealth ranking: The applications by interested households will be collected 
by the project service providers and field coordinators in coordination with the municipalities. The 
poor households will be screened from these applicants based on the project criteria highlighted 
in the ‘target group’ section above. Participatory poverty/wealth ranking of these screened 
applicants will be conducted in focus group discussion with community representatives and FOs 
active in the areas. This exercise will lead to the further classification of the poor category 
applicants into extremely poor, very poor and poor categories based on participatory approach.  
  Selection and verification of applicants will be conducted by a joint team comprising representatives of 
55.
the business leader, municipality, FOs and READP for selecting starter package beneficiaries. The team will 
conduct detailed examination and shortlisting of the applications according to different poverty categories 
identified during the participatory poverty/wealth ranking exercise. Shortlisting will be done based on the target 
group selection criteria presented above. Applicants in the extremely poor category will be selected first 
followed by those in very poor and poor categories. In case there are more applicants than the available 
number of packages the candidates will be selected based on lower average annual income per family 
member. The project will conduct household visits for shortlisted candidates to verify and validate the 
household selection. The quota for youth starter packages and starter packages for women will be respected 
during the selection process. 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
  Goal: READP’s goal is to contribute to rural economic development and poverty reduction by improving 
56.
livelihood, generating revenue and enhancing the living standards of target households. 
  Objectives: READP’s objective is to increase the income of rural poor households and rural youth by 
57.
engaging them in profitable agribusiness and employment opportunities. READP will unlock new rural 
business opportunities by better connecting and integrating farms, farmers’ organisation and business leaders 
to commercial markets. It will create new avenues for self, salaried and wage employments for beneficiary 
household members including youth. 
58.
  Key impact indicators: The achievement of the project objectives at the end of the project will be 
measured by the following indicators, (i) At least 8,650 households or around 25,000 household members 
have benefited from the project services (ii) At least 80% of the beneficiary households have increased their 
income by at least 30% (iii) Assets of the beneficiary households have increased by at least 25% (iv) At least 
4,500 full time jobs (or equivalent) created leading to stable income for enhanced food security and 
12 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
sustainable livelihood of beneficiary households (v) At least 75% enterprises supported by the project 
reporting an increase in sales through 4P arrangements (vi) At least 80% of beneficiaries reporting increase in 
production (vii) At least 80% increase in contracts between public and private entities (viii) at least 80% 
members reporting new or improved services provided by their organisations and (ix) at least 5,000 
households reporting improved physical access to markets, processing and storage facilities. 
  Project overview: READP will support 4-Ps (Private, Public Producer, Partnerships) based business 
59.
models that increase the income of the target households by developing profitable marketing linkages 
between them and sustainable business leaders. Business leaders can be capable private enterprises or FOs 
with the interest and potential to develop partnerships with the target households. In general, the integration of 
poor farming households in commercial value chains often faces challenges: private enterprises are interested 
in working with the target households only if they are competitive in production to make their VC integration 
commercially viable, while municipalities, mandated to reduce poverty, offer subsidies that do not address 
competitiveness to support commercial linkages for the target households. 
  Against this background READP will broker linkages between the business leaders and the target 
60.
households by investing in activities to (i) mobilise and reconcile the commercial and social interest of private, 
public and producer stakeholders (ii) incentivise and catalyse collaboration between business leaders, 
inclusive FOS, municipalities and target households and (iii) monitor and ensure that the collaboration with 
these target households develops into sustainable business relationships. The entry point of READP 
investments will be inclusive pro-poor business plans developed collaboratively by the business leaders and 
other private, public and producer partners facilitated by the project. 
  The pro-poor BPs will describe the business model and partnership needs for profitably linking the 
61.
target households to business leaders based on marketing opportunities for the selected produce. The 
selection of the produce will be market led mainly from the fruit and vegetable, MAPS/NTFPs, dairy and 
associated sub-sector. The business plans (BP) will be implemented using 4Ps arrangement involving 
partnerships between business leaders i.e SMEs and FOs as private partners, municipalities as public 
partners, target households as producers, and the READP as further public partner to fulfil the following 
responsibilities: 
  Business leader (SME and FO) responsibilities (Private): Private business leaders will be responsible 
62.
for (i) all marketing aspects, private infrastructure, working capital investments and operational requirements 
(ii) supply of quality planting material, other production inputs including advance financing to the producers (iii) 
including the target households in the business models. FOs can be intermediaries between the target 
households and the private enterprises or as independent businesses directly marketing their produce. FOs 
will (i) negotiate better terms and conditions for their members and adopt measures to safeguard members 
interests (ii) improve their services to increase the membership from the target households (iii) assist 
members to meet the quality and quantity requirements of the buyer by providing access to advisory 
assistance, machinery and agronomic inputs and (iv) where relevant ensure the proper management and 
maintenance of enabling infrastructure investments.  
  Beneficiary household responsibilities (Producers): The target households will be the main project 
63.
beneficiaries. They will be responsible partners in the business planning and implementation process and will 
(i) co-finance the starter packages and produce the selected products (ii) supply the agreed quantities and 
qualities to the business leaders and (iii) participate in strengthening FOs by lobbying and advocating more 
inclusive approach. 
  Municipality responsibilities (Public): Municipalities will provide a supportive setting for BP 
64.
implementation by (i) assisting consultation and discussions between different BP partners (ii) co-financing 
starter packages, FO seed capital financing and enabling infrastructure needs and (iii) ensuring proper 
management and maintenance of the developed infrastructure. 
  Project responsibilities (Public): READP will facilitate the linkage between the business leaders and the 
65.
target households. It will (i) sensitise and mobilise the stakeholders (ii) assist market development, training 
and advisory services to support competitive production by target households (iii) co-finance starter packages 
for competitive production by first time commercial farmers (iv) co-finance enabling production and marketing 
13 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
infrastructure investments and (v) plan, monitor and provide oversight to ensure that the project resources are 
being used as agreed and planned. 
C.  Outcomes/Components 
  The project has two components: (i) A technical component titled enhancement of economic 
66.
opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains and (ii) Project management and coordination. 
Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains – 
EUR 26.2 million (95% of project cost) 
  The expected outcomes of this component are (i) production, productivity, marketing of produce and 
67.
profitability of target group households improved based on 4Ps models (ii) enhanced FOs for increased 
integration of farmers in markets (iii) market access of target group households enhanced through improved 
market infrastructure. The component is supported by three mutually reinforcing sub-components; (i) 
development and implementation of pro-poor BPs (ii) development of farmers’ organisations and (iii) enabling 
infrastructure development. 
Sub component 1.1: Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans 
  This subcomponent will increase the adoption and implementation of 4-Ps based business models by 
68.
business leaders along the value chains. Business leaders comprising SMEs and FOs will be the originators 
of the BPs. The Project will assist around 150 business leaders to develop BPs and will facilitate BP 
implementation agreements between different partners targeting poor households in the selected project 
areas. With transparent targeting measures the project will ensure the identification of locations/communities 
with higher concentrations of the potential target households and the selection of suitable pro-poor sub-
sectors and crops. It will co-finance the implementation of standard starter packages (5,500) and preferential 
starter packages for youth (1,400) and women headed households (600) which will transform 7,500 non-
commercial households to commercial households in agriculture by developing their profitable linkages to the 
business leaders. Additionally, it will provide apprentice support for the employment of 350 youth (50% 
women) by linking them to employers in the rural sector. 
  The main BP development related activities are (i) selection of service provider (ii) targeting survey (iii) 
69.
stakeholder awareness and sensitisation workshops (iv) call for proposals and selection of eligible applicants 
(v) development of detailed BPs and implementation agreements. The main BP implementation related 
activities are (i) market development assistance (ii) farmers’ training, advisory and capacity building services 
(ii) co-financing starter packages and youth apprentice support (iv) assisting other external linkages e.g. to 
financial institutions, certification bodies and (v) creating a supportive setting for BP implementation. 
Development of pro-poor business plans 
  Activity 1 - Selection of service provider: The A/PCUs will prepare terms of reference for service 
70.
providers to be selected. The terms of reference of the service provider (SP) will differ between the two 
entities. The PCU is already experienced in implementing current IFAD projects by partnering with service 
providers. Whereas in the RS, the APCU implements current IFAD projects by partnering with the Agency for 
Extension Services (extension agency - EA) which currently does not have experience in the BP methodology. 
Also, the RCDP, which will start prior to READP, will invest in business development services (BDS) and 
implement a voucher system for financing advisory services. READP will take the RCDP experiences into 
consideration both for SP selection and financing arrangements. 
  SP selection by PCU: The PCU will competitively hire a service provider company (SP) to support the 
71.
READP BP development and implementation process. Depending on performance, the SP will be retained for 
implementing other READP sub-components. The PCU will contract 5 field officers as cluster coordinators, 
one in each of the five clusters, for field presence and quality implementation of READP. The SP selection 
criteria will include significant in-house expertise and experience in the sub-sectors, participatory targeting of 
individual beneficiaries, BP development, rural area development, environmental protection and climate 
change mitigation capacities, youth employment, stakeholder coordination, procurement, technical and 
financial reporting and donor interaction. The SP will (i) implement the targeting survey (ii) conduct 
14 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
sensitisation workshops before call for business proposals (iii) provide technical assistance for developing 
detailed BPs (iv) facilitate implementation agreements and implementation by BP partners. 
  SP selection by APCU: The APCU will also contract a SP for implementation of this sub-component. 
72.
However, the ToR of the SP will be adjusted to include training and capacity building of the extension agency 
(EA) to support the implementation of the BPs. Once trained, the SP and the EA will collaborate for 
implementing subcomponent 1 and 2. The EA will provide field coordination though 7 regional extension 
officers located in the 5 project clusters. 
  After tendering the SP selection will be done by the A/PCUs in consultation with the IFAD CPM. The 
73.
PCUs will orient the selected SP/EA to the project objectives, target group, approach and implementation 
steps. The cluster coordinators and the extension officers will be mandatorily included in the orientation 
activities. The orientation process will comprise (i) workshops for discussions between the SP/EA, A/PCUs’ 
staff and RCDP BDS providers (ii) field visits to farmers’ organisations, business leaders and municipalities. 
  Activity 2 - Targeting survey: READP will conduct a targeting survey to identify the 
74.
locations/communities with higher concentrations of the potential target households and to recommend the 
suitable pro-poor products from the project supported agricultural sub-sectors, taking into consideration their 
prevailing market demand. In consultation with the A/PCUs, the SP/EA will develop the questionnaires, 
checklists and other tools for conducting the targeting survey. These tool will be reviewed and approved by the 
A/PCUs followed by field level implementation of the survey by the SP/EA in coordination with the cluster 
coordinators and extension officers.  
  The survey will involve consultations with key actors (social service centers, employment bureau, heads 
75.
of the local communities, authorities managing entity level farm registers, financial institutions, business 
leaders active in the project area) and identification of the areas/communities mainly in the underdeveloped 
and extremely underdeveloped municipalities that have higher concentration of potential target households. A 
verified list of these geographical pockets will be developed and profiles of these geographical pockets will be 
developed in terms of (i) crop production experiences of target households and recommendations of potential 
crops suitable to the conditions and capacities of the target households (ii) current marketing arrangements 
followed for agricultural produce from these pockets along availability and access to crop production inputs 
and services by the target households (iii) identification of opportunities and constraints against women and 
youth involvement in project supported activities (iv) identification of FOs with higher concentration of the 
target households (v) recommendations of the areas/pockets specially in the underdeveloped municipalities 
where the business plan implementation should commence (vi) listing of interested enterprises and potential 
rural sector jobs they can potentially offer that can engage the youth apprentice.  
  These findings will be discussed during the stakeholder workshops (Activity 3) to promote inclusive BP 
76.
preparation. The business leaders and other stakeholders will be encouraged to increase their outreach in 
these poverty pockets. Going forward, the target households identified in the BPs will be drawn mainly from 
the poverty areas identified in the targeting survey (details in activity 7). 
  Activity 3 - Stakeholder awareness and sensitisation: Cluster level stakeholder sensitisation 
77.
workshops will be organised prior to the business planning exercise. The SP/EA in coordination with the 
A/PCUs will be responsible for organising these. The cluster coordinators and extension officers will be co-
facilitators. These workshops will be attended by representatives from target municipalities, business leaders, 
financial institutions, input suppliers, farmers’ organisations and target households. 
  The process of generating eligible pro poor business ideas will be stimulated during these workshops. 
78.
The participants will be informed about the concept of linking business leaders to target households using the 
BP methodology. The steps involved in the BP development process will be explained. Sample proposals and 
the templates for submitting BP proposals will be shared. The multiple criteria against which the business 
proposals will be evaluated will be transparently communicated.  
79.
  The workshops will clarify that (i) viable BPs are expected to include an array of producers including 
larger farmers but with strong focus on the project target households (ii) the role of the project is to facilitate 
and ensure the sustainable integration of target households in the business models and that this is clearly 
reflected in the BP target and investment projections and to monitor that these target households are actually 
reached during BP implementation process (iii) the BPs should consider the inclusion of various project 
15 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
promoted social, environmental and business issues such as gender and youth inclusion, climate change 
adaptation and marketing opportunities (iv) the business plans should incorporate geographical targeting, self-
targeting and direct targeting measures in line with the READP design along with the incentives for doing so 
where relevant. Resource person discussions and audio-visual sessions will be held during the workshops to 
assist full understanding of these concepts, best practices and approaches. 
  Activity 4 - Call for proposals and selection of eligible proposals: Every year (for three years) the 
80.
A/PCUs will announce a call for business proposals (expression of interest), through newspapers and the 
internet, inviting business ideas from interested business leaders. After the announcement, the SP/EA, along 
with the cluster coordinators and extension officers will follow up with potential cluster level business leaders 
and assist them to submit proposals to the A/PCU. It is to be noted that previous IFAD projects have already 
established linkages to SMEs active in agribusiness who can be potential leaders. An overview of actors and 
their businesses in the envisaged sub-sectors is attached in the Annex of Appendix 2. These businesses will 
be encouraged to respond to the call for proposals. 
  Business leaders comprising both SMEs and FOs can respond to the call for proposals. The proposals 
81.
from SMEs must be related to the agricultural supply chain linkages to the target households directly or 
indirectly through FOs. The proposals from the FOs can be related to their intermediation role in supporting 
the linkages between SMEs and smallholders. They can also be related to independent businesses related to 
farming or non-farm ventures such as rural tourism that can contributes to diversification of the rural economy. 
The specific nature of the support from READP to selected business plans from FOs is described in 
component 1.2. 
  These proposals will present (i) background details and rationale (ii) description of the business 
82.
model/concept (iv) targeting strategy and measures to be adopted specifically for including women and youth 
(v) the selected produce (vi) raw material supply, production/processing and marketing approach (vii) 
mechanisms for benefitting and potential outreach to target households (including youth) (viiii) estimation of 
investments required and expected returns and (ix) measures to address environmental and climate change 
concerns. The produce selected will be demand driven based on consultations between the business leaders, 
target households and other stakeholders and would not necessarily be limited to one item or commodity. 
  Selection of eligible proposals: Screening and shortlisting of the business proposals will be done by 
83.
a selection committee appointed by the A/PCUs in consultation with IFAD CPM. The committee will include 
representatives from the A/PCUs, SP/EA and development partners to ensure harmonisation with similar 
initiatives. The selection process will involve (i) screening and shortlisting eligible proposals (ii) validation visits 
to the shortlisted business leaders (iii) final selection of proposals. 
  Screening proposals: The A/PCUs in consultation with the SP/EA will develop objective criteria and 
84.
scoring method for reviewing and ranking the proposals. They will organise selection committee meetings and 
will sensitise the members about the scoring indicators. More weightage will be placed on indicators related to 
the targeting aspects such as (i) past experience of linkages with target group households directly or through 
PAs and willingness invest in solving VC related problems of target households e.g. by extending pre-
financing support or providing training services (ii) willingness to select crop/produce suitable for production by 
target households and involving engagement of mainly women and youth as wage labour in the production 
cycle (iii) bulk of the targets households planned to be drawn from the underdeveloped and extremely 
underdeveloped municipalities and (iv) plans for new full time jobs in the future (to manage the organisation 
growth from BP implementation) that can absorb youth through the youth apprenticeship support.  
  The business proposals and subsequently the BPs submitted by the business leaders will be further 
85.
assessed against criteria including (i) proven know-how and technical expertise in the subsector (ii) 
willingness to use environmental friendly production practices and compliance with social, labour and gender 
standards (iii) strategy for on long-term presence and viable business relationships with smallholder producers 
(iv) market prospects (national/export) and overall profitability (v) targeted outreach to the target households 
including youth (vi) market prospects (national/export) and overall profitability of the business model (vii) 
potential returns to the target households including youth (viii) prospects for partnerships with municipalities, 
FOs and other donor initiatives and (ix) measures to address environmental and climate change concerns.  
16 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
  The selection committee will review, score and shortlist around 200 proposals for around 250 proposals 
86.
received. Out of these around 175 will proceed with detailed BP development and 150 of the these will 
actively implement the business plans (see table below). 
Details of phasing 
Business proposals 
No of business proposals received 
No of proposals selected  
Business plans 
No of business plans prepared 
No of new BPs implemented 
Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Total 
75 
60 
50 
40 
100 
80 
75 
65 
75 
60 
50 
45 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
250 
200 
175 
150 
  Validation and final selection: Final selection of the proposals will be based on field visits to confirm the 
87.
critical areas presented in the screened proposals. The A/PCUs in consultation with the selection committee 
will develop the validation checklist for each screened proposal. Validation visits will be carried out by the 
SP/EA in coordination with cluster coordinators and extension officers with oversight from the A/PCUs. They 
will visit the business leaders and the proposed business partners such as municipalities, FOs and the target 
households to confirm their interest and technical and financial ability to participate. Based on confirmations 
obtained through the validation process the A/PCUs will prepare the final list of eligible business leaders which 
will receive technical assistance from READP for their development into detailed BPs. 
  Activity 5 - Development of detailed business plans and implementation agreements: The SP/EA 
88.
will deliver technical assistance to the selected business leaders and FOs to develop detailed BPs. The 
lessons learned and good practices from the RCDP programme in implementing the BP approach will be 
considered and adopted. 
  Actions involved: The SP/EAs will hold detailed consultations, site visits and stakeholder workshops 
89.
with the business leaders, target households, FOs and municipalities. They will assist the business leaders 
with (i) data collection and analysis (ii) marketing and profitability assessment (iii) formulation of the targeting 
strategy, targeting steps and actual target selection (described in the targeting section) with specific focus on 
the inclusion of women and youth (iv) identification of other business partners (v) outreach and financial target 
setting (vi) financial planning, identification of financial sources (vii) implementation agreement with other 
stakeholders. They will also be responsible for writing the BP in coordination and consultation with the 
business originators. 
  Main elements of the BPs: The final BPs will describe how the business will progressively increase 
90.
the profitability and sustain the inclusion of the READP target households. They will present (i) the nature of 
business including forward and backward linkages to other value chain actors (ii) ownership and management 
structure proposed for implementation of the business model (iii) domestic and export market analysis (iv) 
strategic plan for achieving the business objectives (v) targeting strategy and implementation steps for 
ensuring target group, mainly women and youth inclusion in the promoted VCs (vi) specific measures to 
support target household inclusion including advisory, extension, operational measures, partnership 
agreements and monitoring needs (vii) operational needs including implementation arrangements and 
partnership requirements (viii) financial plan estimating the total investment and co-financing needs and (ix) 
enabling infrastructure requirements such as roads, water supply and bridges expected to be implemented 
through municipality involvement 
  Performance target setting: The BPs will present 5 years projected growth targets in key areas such 
91.
as market share increase; increase in profitability and return on investment; increase in the quantity of 
produce purchased from the target households; increase in the number of target households linked to the 
business; increase in the total returns to the target households and increase in direct and indirect employment 
of youth in the business.  
  BP co-financing plan: The detailed activities in the BPs will be divided into expenditure categories; (i) 
92.
fixed and working capital needs including producer starter packages and seed capital financing to FOs (ii) 
market development investments including study tours, trade fair participation, certification (iii) training and 
advisory needs and (iv) enabling infrastructure necessities. Co-financing plan will be prepared indicating 
17 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
contributions from different partners; business leaders, READP, municipalities, FOs and the producers, 
according to the guidelines presented below. Contribution of the business originators and the target 
households will be regarded as self-contribution from their own resources (self-financing), in-kind or from 
borrowings from financial institutions. 
Categories 
Training and advisory 
Market development 
- Study tours (abroad) 
- Trade fair participation 
- Certification 
- Other marketing support 
Starter package 
- Standard 
- Youth and women 
Enabling infrastructure  
Assets for FOs  
(details in subcomponent 1.2) 
READP [ceiling in EUR] 
Others* 
100% 
70% [8,000] 
40% [4,000] 
40% [4,000] 
50% [4,000] 
Upto 40% [500] 
Upto 60% [800] 
details in subcomponent 1.3 
Upto 70% [17,500] 
30% 
60% 
60% 
50% 
60% 
40% 
30% 
*Other cofinanciers include municipalities, business leaders, FOs and beneficiaries 
  Training and advisory services financing: The project will bear the costs for BP related training and 
93.
advisory services to the target households except costs for transport and accommodation. These services will 
be provided by the READP contracted service providers, field coordinators and extension officers. The cost of 
domestic study tours for target households will be covered by the project. 
  Market development costs financing: BP partners will be eligible for co-financing for READP initiated 
94.
market development activities such as (i) study tours abroad - 70% of costs to a maximum of EUR 8,000 (ii) 
trade fairs – 40% of costs to a maximum of EUR 4,000 (iii) international standards and certifications - 40% of 
costs to a maximum of EUR 4,000 and (iv) other marketing support such as branding, product identification, 
packaging, promotion material - 50% with maximum of EUR 4,000. The business leaders will be eligible for 
receiving project financing for these activities only as performance incentives for achieving at least 60% of 
linkages to target households in underdeveloped and extremely underdeveloped municipalities through BP 
implementation. 
95.
  Starter package financing: Starter package describes the initial size of the investment required by a 
target household to become a commercial farmers. It is the size of investment required by a target household 
to produce the quality and the quantity of product required for developing marketing linkage with the business 
leaders for the first time according to the details in the BP. The estimated starter package requirement for 
producing the project supported products in 1-2 dunums of land (and with 1-3/3-5 cows) is around EUR 2,500. 
The starter package will be co-financed by READP, municipalities, advances from the business leaders and 
self-contribution of the producer in harmony with experiences of the RLDP and RBDP (see lessons learnt). It 
will also be in harmony with the starter package approach adopted for RCDP and will smoothen its 
implementation by the A/PCUs.  
  The starter package will include the cost of planting materials; farm protection investment such as 
96.
wires, pillars and nets; onsite irrigation works comprising barrels for water storage, pumps for lifting water and 
drip irrigation kits and pipes; fertilizers and other chemicals; machinery services such as ploughing, harrowing, 
tilling; labour costs in different stages of crop production and minor farm tools and equipment.  
In circumstances where the contributions from the other partners are not sufficient to meet the full 
97.
financing needs of the starter package, the producer households will borrow from financial institutions (bank or 
MFI) to meet the gap. It is expected that 40-60% of the beneficiary households may have to borrow from 
financial institutions. Taking into account the co-financing contributions from other partners the borrowings 
from banks/MFIs are expected to finance between 15-25% (EUR 700) of the starter package (production 
costs). Beneficiary households can borrow from any financial institution of their choice based on terms and 
conditions offered. The project will facilitate the linkage of beneficiary households to financial institutions by 
actively promoting the financing opportunities offered by READP amongst the banks/MFIs active in the project 
clusters.  
18 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
  READP will promote market-based interest rates. The co-financing from the MFI/banks will utilise 
98.
existing liquidity in the banking system and will be based on market driven interest rates (currently around 
15%) thus avoiding market distortion. However, since other co-financiers will shoulder almost 75% of the size 
of the starter package the beneficiary household will pay market driven interest rate only on around 25% of 
the starter package, thus resulting in an affordable, competitive and effective interest rate of around 3% on the 
full cost of the starter package. These financial linkages will assist the future commercial growth of the target 
household.  
  The starter packages will potentially lead to the involvement of several MFIs and Banks resulting in 
99.
competitive services and interest rates. They will also help the A/PCUs to fulfil the demand for lower interest 
rates for the borrower and faster disbursement of project funds by directly financing input costs for first time 
commercial farmers. Most importantly, the implementation of the starter packages will involve the A/PCUs 
directly in target household selection leading to improved targeting performance. Two types of starter package 
co-financing will be offered by the project. 
  Standard starter package: The standard starter package co-financing from READP will be valued at a 
100.
maximum of EUR 500 and will benefit 5,500 households. It will co-finance up to 40% of production costs in-
kind by supplying items such as planting materials, agrochemicals, fertilizers and small equipment. The target 
households provided with starter packages (i) will be contractually linked to business leaders for selling the 
produce (ii) would have undergone training and skills development and (iii) will receive agronomic advice from 
the project during the production cycle in order to meet the quantity and quality standards required by the 
buyers. These conditions will make these producers bankable and attractive as potential clients of 
banks/MFIs.  
101.
  Youth and women starter package: Project contribution to this type of starter package is valued at 
maximum EUR 800 and will promote self-employment of 2,000 youth (30% women headed households). It will 
co-finance upto 60% of production costs in kind as described above. The starter packages for youth will offer 
financial institutions with the opportunity to get access to a large number of young farmers by contributing a 
small share of the starter package and thereby developing linkages to a new segment of the microfinance 
market. Their support towards the future growth of youth as commercial farmers will significantly increase their 
portfolio and long-term profitability.  
  Continuous appraisal of the business plans: The BPs will be developed over a period of 3-6 months 
102.
and the process of their development will be subjected to continuous appraisal. The A/PCUs will organise 
biweekly BP progress review meetings with the SP/EA. During these meetings the BPs under preparation will 
be continuously divided into three categories, strong, moderate and borderline, based on criteria including (i) 
commitment of the businesses leaders in terms of time and resources devoted to the BP development 
exercise (ii) commitment of the business leaders in terms of their willingness to discuss and develop the 
partnership ideas and implementation arrangements (iii) business leaders’ acceptance of activities to keep the 
BPs focused on inclusion of target households and (iv) ability of the business leaders and other BP partners to 
supply co-financing in a timely manner. During the review meetings the nature of the challenges facing the 
moderate and borderline BPs will be discussed along with mitigation measures. The SP/EAs will be 
responsible for follow-up and implementation of these measures to ensure that majority of BPs get strong 
rating. The strong BPs will be prioritised for implementation. 
  BP implementation agreements: In preparation for the implementation of the BPs the SP/EA, in 
103.
coordination with the A/PCUs, will develop templates for implementation agreements/MoUs between the 
various implementation partners identified in the BPs (municipalities, FOs, financial institutions and the 
project). These agreements will define (i) financing commitments of the partners in different categories for 
implementing the business plans guided by the allocations presented in the co-financing table (ii) ownership, 
management and revenue sharing (if any) roles (iii) targeting roles and responsibilities (iv) monitoring and 
review responsibilities. The SP/EA will be responsible for organising meetings, facilitating negotiations and 
ensuring the development of the written agreements between the partners. These agreements will be 
accompanied by draft action plans indicating implementation responsibilities and time schedules.  
Implementation of pro-poor business plans 
19 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
  Activity 6 - Market development support: The activities under market development support will be 
104.
planned in the BPs but project financing for their implementation will be based on performance incentive 
basis. Therefore, only for the business leaders who have achieved at least 60% of linkages to target 
households in underdeveloped and extremely underdeveloped municipalities through BP implementation will 
be eligible for this support.  
In consultation with the SP/AE the business leaders will identify the specific market linkage and business 
development areas where they require assistance in order to increase their national and export market share 
of the BP produce. These will be presented in the BPs. Responding to these needs the SP/EA in coordination 
with the A/PCUs will provide assistance in the selected areas described below. Strong emphasis will be 
placed on collaboration with other donor projects providing support in similar areas and well as on 
coordination with RCDP initiatives in these areas.  
  Quality assurance and certification support: The SP/EA will guide the business leaders on 
105.
importance, mechanisms and process for obtaining different kinds of certification and will also link them to 
relevant certification bodies where required. The A/PCUs will co-finance eligible business leaders for the 
introduction of international standards such as HACCP, ISO, Global GAP and HALAL. Eligibility will be based 
on (i) clear assessment that certification will be an advantage for production and marketing (ii) presence of 
signed contract between the business leaders and a certification company on standards’ implementation (iii) 
higher partnering outreach to target households.  
  Trade fair participation, study tours, other marketing support: READP will support representatives 
106.
from the business leaders to participate in trade fairs and study tours that assist them to understand the 
market demand for different products as well as develop linkages for the marketing of their existing produce. 
Participation in local, regional and international trade fairs (e.g. Biofach, Fruit Logistica, ANUGA), regional 
marketing platforms and business networking activities will be supported along with local and international 
study tours. Other market development activities such as product identity, certification and brand development 
initiatives will be supported in collaboration with the BiH Foreign Trade Chamber, RCDP initiatives and other 
donor programmes.  
  Activity 7 - Farmers’ training, advisory and capacity building services: The SP/EA will identify the 
107.
specific areas of farmers’ training and advisory services in the BP development stage in consultation with the 
business leaders and the FOs. These will be clearly reflected in the BPs.  
  Training for farmers: Based on inputs from the BPs the SP/EA will draft the annual farmers’ training 
108.
plan which will be reviewed and finalised by the A/PCUs. The SP/AE along with the cluster coordinators and 
extension officers will be responsible of delivering the trainings and advisory services. Where relevant 
additional technical specialists will be hired to support training and advice in specific areas. The objective of 
the training will be assist the target households to timely adopt the different applications for quality and 
quantity production as agreed with the buyers.  
109.
  Target households will be trained on (i) quality standards (GAP, hygiene, EU quality standards) (ii) 
production of fruit and vegetables, MAPS/ NTFP, dairy as identified in the BPs (iii) environment training e.g. 
climate change and pest management (iv) investment related trainings including household budgeting and 
savings plan for next season crop financing and (iv) training on organising into FOs (v) training on adoption of 
farm level tools and equipment. Training will involve on-farm inputs and exposure trips to demonstration farms 
in the country. Where relevant the training courses will be open to all farmers involved in the BP, including 
relatively larger farmers to get to larger quantities and economies of scale.  
  Advisory services: The SP/AE, in collaboration with the cluster coordinators and regional extension 
110.
officers in the FBiH and RS respectively will provide production related advisory services and practical 
guidance to the farmers according to the BP agreements. These will focus on support related to (i) standards 
implementation, e.g. assistance in application (ii) production, e.g. access to seeds, fertilizer, advice in the field 
in production (iii) product value addition, e.g. access to processing equipment, packaging and post-harvest 
handling, bulking including storage (iv) investment regarding equipment to meet BP targets, tender process, 
installation and implementation and (v) access to finance, e.g. linkage to formal financial sector and 
agricultural insurance (vi) organising farmers into FOs. These inputs will be delivered through regular on-site 
visits by service providers as well as cluster coordinators and extension officers to enable real-time solutions 
20 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
to farmers’ production related problems. Advisory services will be concentrated mainly on the target 
households.  
Activity 8 – Delivery of starter packages and youth apprentice support:  
  Starter package: Both the standard and the youth starter packages will be implemented in the same 
111.
way and will be strictly linked to the BPs. The SP/AE will ensure that each BP and implementation agreement 
clearly reflects the starter package requirements along with estimated outreach, potential co-financing 
partners, co-financing shares and draft action plan indicating implementation schedule and responsibilities. 
Eligible production related investments supply and cover by the grant include: planting materials, 
agrochemicals, fertilizers and small equipment. Prior to implementation the SP/AE will organise cluster level 
planning workshops. The A/PCUs will invite interested financial institutions to these workshops. In these 
workshops (i) the inputs/services financed by the starter packages will be finalised (ii) identification of the 
target households to be linked to the business leaders will commence and (iii) partners including the financial 
institutions (where relevant) will re-affirm their co-financing commitments and finalise implementation 
arrangements.  
  The SP/AE will ensure that the above steps are strongly directed towards the inclusion of the targeted 
112.
households. Identification of target households will start by focusing of the geographical locations with higher 
concentration of the target households particularly in the underdeveloped and extremely underdeveloped 
municipalities as identified during the targeting survey. The SP/EA will along with the representatives of the 
business leader, municipalities and the FOs will visit these communities and conduct awareness and 
orientation campaigns sensitising the local population about the project and seeking applications from 
interested households. During these visits the criteria for target household selection already explained during 
the cluster level workshops will be further explained. 
  The applications by interested households will be collected by the SP and field coordinators in 
113.
coordination with the municipalities. Participatory poverty/wealth ranking of these applicants will be conducted 
in focus group discussion with community representatives and FOs active in the areas. This exercise will lead 
to the participatory classification of the applicants (poor households) into three sub categories - extremely 
poor, very poor and poor. 
  The applications in the three categories will be screened and shortlisted by the SP/EA in consultation 
114.
with the business leaders, FOs and municipality representatives according to READP poverty targeting 
criteria. First priority will be selection of candidates from the extremely poor category followed by candidates 
from very poor and poor categories. In case there are more applicants than the available number of packages 
the candidates will be selected based on lower average annual income per family member. The project will 
conduct household visits for shortlisted candidates to verify and validate the household selection. Thereafter, 
the SP/EA in coordination with the cluster coordinators and the extension officers will facilitate municipality 
level discussion workshops between the shortlisted households and the business leaders leading business 
agreements and contractual arrangements between them. The quota for youth starter packages and starter 
packages for women will be respected during the selection process and the bureau of employment at the 
municipality will be involved in the identification of the target youth beneficiaries for the youth starter 
packages. The SP/EA will ensure that 30% of the youth starter packages are directed to women-headed 
households.  
  The SP/EA will assist with the (i) finalisation of the contractual agreements between the target 
115.
households and the business leaders and BP implementation partners (ii) additional sensitisation of the 
farmers where required (iii) involvement of FOs in identification and negotiation with input suppliers (iv) 
coordination between business leader, FOs and final target households leading to compilation of the list of 
starter package beneficiaries which will be submitted to the A/PCUs for financing.  
  The A/PCUs will assess and approve these proposals based on (i) compliance with the conditions for 
116.
starter packages contributions by the project (ii) co-financing commitment for the full package by other 
business partners (iii) presence of buyer contract (iv) completion of initial training and skills development. The 
A/PCUs, in coordination with the business leaders and the FOs will start the procurement process for the 
starter package inputs to be co-financed by them. The project will directly pay the selected vendors on 
evidence of delivery of the inputs to the approved target households.  
21 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
  Youth apprentice support: READP will assist 350 youth apprentice to find full time employment in the 
117.
agricultural and rural sector11. Thus, it will include jobs which are created as a result of the project supported 
BP implementation activities by the business leaders as well as jobs offered by any other public or private 
agency. The project will actively promote the inclusion of youth apprentice in the business proposals and BPs 
submitted by the business leaders and this will be an important criteria for the selection of these business 
proposals and plans for READP support. The inclusion of youth apprentice will be promoted in business 
proposals and plans as response to the need for new full time jobs by the business leaders to manage future 
organisational growth resulting from the successful implementation of the project supported BPs. 
  An apprentice is a rural youth up to the age of 30 undergoing in-house training in an enterprise. In order 
118.
to promote women employment 50% quota will be reserved for young women apprentice. At the end of the 
apprenticeship period the individual will be absorbed as a regular employee resulting in job creation and 
increased income for the target household. The apprentice support will be implemented in partnership 
between the project, the employment bureau at the canton/municipality level and an employer. The project will 
bear the costs of an apprentice for one year to a maximum of EUR 2,100 which can be used for paying both 
the net salary and the mandatory government contributions for taxes, health and pension funds. The 
administration of these payments will be done through the employment bureaus.  
In order to implement the scheme the project in partnership with the employment bureaus will invite 
119.
expressions of interest from individual youth interested in receiving apprentice support as well as from 
employers interested in employing such youth. The announcement of the scheme will be done by the project 
at the cluster level in coordination with the employment bureaus. In order to be eligible the youth must be from 
the cluster, belonging to a target group household and the job should pertain to delivery or procurement of 
goods and services in the rural areas.  
  The employer can be a project value chain partner including private sector and FOs as well as other 
120.
enterprises and institutions active in job creation in the rural sector. They can be headquartered anywhere in 
BiH but the job offered must be related to supporting the rural operations in the project area. The employer will 
engage the apprentice in response to its requirement for a regular full-time employee in the organisation. 
Where there are multiple applicants for a single position the apprentice will be selected competitively and 
transparently through competitive selection process conducted by panel including the employer, employment 
and the project. In order to be eligible for apprentice support, the offer of employment by the employer will be 
for at least three subject to transparent performance assessment at the end of the apprentice period. 
  On pilot basis READP will reserve the appointment of at least 25 young apprentices as 
121.
coordinators/managers in FOs as a part of management support to promising FOs primarily the PAs which 
benefit from READP seed capital financing. READP will partner with the agricultural universities for selecting 
fresh graduates who are ready to serve as young apprentices in the FOs. Where required such apprentices 
can be guided by the universities during the course of the apprenticeship. Based on transparent performance 
evaluation at the end of the apprentice period the apprentice can continue working for the FO if so required or 
receive an apprenticeship certificate from the project/university that can assist the person to secure other rural 
sector jobs.  
  Activity 9 – Support to business leaders to develop external linkages: The SP/AEs in coordination 
122.
with the A/PCUs will assist the business leaders to develop external linkages in areas such as financial 
support, certification and sources of business management and operational guidance where needed. For 
assisting financing needs the project will facilitate their introduction and negotiations with financial institutions 
by highlighting the role of the project as a co-financier of the BPs. Also, a substantial proportion of credit lines 
to PFIs from past IFAD supported projects will be repaid by the PFIs to the government in the course of 
READP implementation. In FBiH, the PCU has initiated the process of pooling these repayments into a special 
fund for financing agricultural sector projects. In RS, these repayments are already pooled in a central account 
of the Ministry of Finance referred to as the partner fund. READP will facilitate negotiations with relevant 
actors to facilitate the investment of these funds for assets and working capital financing of the partner 
business leaders.  
11 Access to regular employment will be subject to a transparent performance assessment at the end of the scheme. 
22 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
  Activity 10 – A supportive setting for BP implementation: The A/PCUs will develop a supportive 
123.
setting for BP implementation by (i) establishing BP implementation oversight committees (ii) developing BP 
implementation monitoring system and (iii) organising BP implementation review and planning workshops. 
These will support regular consultation, implementation planning and feedback between the BP partners for 
smoother, target oriented BP implementation.  
  BP implementation oversight committees: These will comprise representatives from the 
124.
municipalities, business partners (PAs, buyers, processors, farmers, municipalities and project), and project– 
including members from A/PCU teams, SPs, AE and cluster level field officers and extension officers. They will 
be responsible for planning and implementation review of the BPs. The committees will be headed by selected 
municipalities and will (i) track the BP implementation progress against the BP targets at the cluster level (ii) 
identify and address the reasons for gaps in target achievement (iii) support the development and 
implementation of joint action plans between the different partners and (iv) swiftly resolve partnership issues 
and conflicts in the collaborative arrangements.  
  BP implementation monitoring system: In coordination with A/PCUs, SP and AE the oversight 
125.
committee will define the reporting needs of the business partners and ensure their regular reporting to the 
project and the municipalities. The cluster coordinators and the extension officers in coordination with the SP, 
AE and the M and E specialists at A/PCUs will be responsible for collection and cluster wise consolidation of 
these reports. The project will organise information and orientation workshops for capacity development of the 
members of the oversight committee to analyse and interpret the cluster reports.  
  BP implementation review and planning workshops: The project will organise regular cluster level 
126.
BP implementation review and planning workshops attended by the implementation oversight committee and 
other relevant stakeholders. The oversight committees in coordination with the A/PCUs and the SP/AE will 
organise these workshops. The SP/AE will co-facilitate these workshops along with the committee members. 
These meetings will identify and address the reasons for gaps on target achievement by the business 
partners. They will strengthen the collaboration between the partners, assist conflict resolution and planning 
for future actions. 
Sub component 1.2: Farmers’ Organisations Development  
  This subcomponent will strengthen FOs to increase their outreach to target households and to develop 
127.
into viable inclusive farmers’ institution. The project will also support the transformation of PAs to cooperatives 
as well as the transformation of owner centric cooperatives into inclusive institutions. Strengthening the FOs 
will empower them to increase their membership from the target households, become effective partners under 
business schemes and increase their capacity to take informed decisions about their business. The main 
activities will be (i) seed capital financing to 40 FOs (FO seed capital financing) and (ii) institutional 
development training and advisory support. Given the parallel implementation of READP and RCDP, the 
approach for the two programmes will be harmonized on the basis of lessons learnt of the RBDP 
implementation. Specifically, the MTR of the ongoing RBDP identified a major challenge for the counterpart 
financing from FOs for the seed capital financing and modified accordingly the ratio for RBDP funds to FOs 
mobilized funds to 70:30 ratio. In addition, the support for both seed capital financing and capacity building 
support will be also aligned as detailed below.  
128.
  The identification of the FOs to be supported by READP will be driven by the BPs call for interest and 
subsequent selection. In order to avoid the risk of duplicating support, FOs already supported by RCDP (or 
RBDP) will not qualify for READP assistance unless there is good performance registered by these FOs from 
previous assistance from RCDP (or RBDP) and there is an increase in the FOs membership following RCDP 
(or RBDP) support. In such cases FOs that have already benefited from RCDP (or RBDP) support can also 
benefit from READP support but for activities limited to (i) start up packages for members that have not 
benefited from start-up packages under RCDP (or RBDP) (ii) additional capacity building support for business 
expansion and consolidation. As a result, the seed capital financing will be directed mainly to the FOs not yet 
supported by RCDP (or PBDP) to ensure a greater outreach of IFAD supported interventions.  
  Activity 1 - FO seed capital financing: The project will provide upto EUR 17,500 as seed capital 
129.
financing to 40 eligible FOs to finance business assets identified in a profitable BP linked to project target 
23 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
households directly benefitting an average of 20 members per FO12. The seed capital financing to FOs is 
expected to generate outreach to around 800 target households. The co-financing arrangement13 includes up 
to 70% READP contribution, while the remaining counterpart funding will be provided by FOs through 
contribution by members – cash or through loans, contribution from partnering business leaders, and support 
by Municipalities 
In order to be eligible for seed capital financing the FOs should be Producers’ Associations (PA) or 
130.
Cooperatives (coop) with (i) at least 25 members, which includes at least 20 members from the READP target 
households with income less than KM 817 per month (ii) intention to further increase membership particularly 
from the READP target households (iii) cooperative audit (for cooperatives only), indicating that the 
cooperative functions in accordance with the BiH Law on Cooperatives, particularly in relation to the 
organization and management of the cooperative, and maintenance of the cooperative members' ledger. The 
A/PCUs through the SP/EA will provide institutional development training and advice to interested FOs. 
Consequently, those FOs which are initially not eligible for seed capital financing can qualify in later years by 
fulfilling the above conditions through project training and advisory support. 
  During the targeting survey (SC1) the SP/AE will identify the potential FOs based on the above criteria 
131.
which may be suitable for the seed capital financing support. The SP/AE will follow-up to facilitate (i) their 
participation in the cluster level sensitisation workshops (ii) submission of business proposals (either as 
Business Leaders or as Business Partners of a business leader) in response to the call for proposals (iii) 
competitive selection (based on criteria described in SC 1) for detailed business plan development assistance 
from the project.  
  The seed capital financing of EUR 17,500 from the project will provide FOs with seed capital to 
132.
purchase small productive assets at the FO level such as machinery and equipment, means of transport, 
small storage facilities, value adding equipment such as driers and small processing equipment and materials 
such as pipes and pumps for supporting farm connectivity to irrigation facilities. These assets will allow the FO 
to render services to the members such as production, processing and bulking, that will enhance the 
profitability of these members while simultaneously strengthen their linkage to other business leaders. The 
BPs should present the management and operational procedures as well as the revenue model for the 
implementation of these activities. The financial plans for these investments must realistically show that the 
income earned by the partnering FOs from these services will be sufficient to meet the maintenance and 
replacement costs of this asset after its productive life as well as can generate surplus towards capital 
formation and increasing the returns to the members. The SP/EA will provide management advice to the FOs 
qualifying for seed capital financing so that the BP implementation by the FOs is assisted, full utilisation of the 
project financed assets are achieved and the BP outreach and financial targets are met.  
  Activity 2 - Institutional development training and advisory support: SP/EA in coordination with the 
133.
A/PCUs will develop training and advisory plans defining the required institutional development training and 
advisory services for FOs. The project will recruit professional trainers and advisors experienced in 
cooperative movement and the defined technical areas. Capacity building support packages will be flexible 
depending on the needs of the FOs and aiming at assisting FOs to (i) increase membership outreach to the 
target households (ii) strengthen their institutional foundation through better governance, management and 
operational procedures and (iii) support profitable implementation of their business and hence profitable 
implementation of their BPs (where relevant). These activities will be targeted at FOs applying for BP support, 
including the ones that do not immediately qualify for FO seed capital financing. By adopting the 
recommended institutional strengthening measures the initially non-qualifying FOs can achieve the eligibility 
criteria and subsequently receive FO seed capital financing.  
  Training areas: The training inputs will cover (i) organizational structure (ii) governance and 
134.
management (iii) tailored women and youth FOs leadership programmes (iv) market intelligence and 
marketing, standards e.g. GAP, GHP, HACCP, GlobalGAP, ISO, organic, SPS, EU standards and negotiation 
skills (v) accounting, finance and bookkeeping (vi) BP development, costing and financing (vii) contract 
development with other chain stakeholders (viii) collective/bulk marketing and procurement of inputs (ix) 
12 This pertains to the additional number of poor members in the FOs who will benefit from the FO seed capital financing in addition to the 
members who already benefit from individual starter packages.  
13 The share of co-financing will be a selection criteria; only a lower percentage will be considered for FOs co-financing. 
24 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
management of common storage facilities and equipment (x) technology development for agricultural 
intensification and productivity enhancement (xi) financial literacy and linkages with banks (xii) savings 
mobilization and approaches to implement internal savings schemes for addressing social needs, business 
expansion and collateral requirements of the banks (xiii) sustainable adoption of climate resilient crop 
development that will be accompanied with approaches for sustainable use of natural resources. Trainings 
programmes will be complemented by exchange and learning visits, within the country and in Europe. These 
visits will provide exposure and learning for further expansion of FOs business model, to develop 
environmental sustainable strategies, and to promote market compliance. Promising FOs with limited net 
margin to cover the recurrent costs during start-up and growth stages will receive management support from 
READP through the placement of youth apprentice to manage both the commercial and institutional 
development aspects of these FOs. 
Subcomponent 1.3: Enabling Infrastructure Support  
  This subcomponent will improve the profitability of the target households, connect business leaders to 
135.
the target households and improve the market participation of the beneficiaries. The BPs will identify the full 
range of infrastructure requirements for their successful implementation including privately owned and publicly 
owned or co-owned investments. Under this subcomponent the project will support publicly owned or co-
owned investments. Public ownership will be considered when a municipality has majority ownership of the 
infrastructure. READP will support two categories of infrastructure activities (i) publically owned and managed 
infrastructure such as public water supply, which benefits multiple farmers in a defined area, or the 
establishment and rehabilitation of feeder roads, culverts and small bridges which connect business leaders 
and target households; (ii) publically owned infrastructure, such as irrigation structure, cooling and packing 
facilities, which is co-managed in partnership between the municipalities, FOs and private sector. 
  The activities in this subcomponent will involve (i) stakeholder sensitisation about infrastructure 
136.
investments (ii) identification of eligible proposals (iii) selection and prioritisation of infrastructure 
investments(iv) design, procurement and implementation (v) monitoring, supervision and training. The PCU 
will implement the infrastructure related activities through the selected SP while APCU will implement these 
directly through the in-house infrastructure engineer. The A/PCU will orient the SP and infrastructure engineer 
on the above aspects who will then orient the other stakeholders. The main tasks of the SP and the 
infrastructure engineer will be technical and financial analysis of screened proposals, review and approval of 
engineering designs, procurement of civil works and submission of evaluation reports and supervision of civil 
works. The A/PCU and the SPs will also support stakeholders to identify important social, environmental and 
climate issues early in the BP process, with adaption and mitigation measures factored in the BP process from 
the outset.  
  Activity 1 - Stakeholder sensitisation about infrastructure investments: This will be done in full 
137.
coordination with municipalities during the orientation workshops organised before the call for business 
proposals. The SP and the infrastructure engineer will be responsible to ensure that the BPs clearly present (i) 
the enabling infrastructure requirements in the geographical locations with higher concentration of target 
households including potential increase in outreach to target households from these investments (ii) the 
impact of these infrastructure on the profitability of the business leaders. The A/PCU and the SPs will advise 
stakeholders to incorporate into the business plans the relevant environmental and climate proofing measures 
to safeguard the infrastructure from natural hazards as well as to promote measures that reduce the adverse 
environmental impact of these investments by supporting energy and water efficiencies.  
  Activity 2 - Selection and prioritisation of infrastructure investments: All relevant infrastructure 
138.
items will be identified in the business plans. They must support the achievement of (i) the outreach (market 
access) targets set in the business plans for rural poor smallholder farmers, women and youth (ii) profitability 
targets of the target group farmers as presented in the BPs and (iii) the sustainability of the linkages between 
the target group farmers and the business leaders. Identification of the infrastructure items in the business 
plans will be undertaken in a participatory and demand-driven manner in consultation with the key BP 
implementation partners which includes the business leaders, municipalities, target group farmers and FOs. 
The A/PCUs will be assisted by the SP and the infrastructure engineer to coordinate the selection and 
prioritisation of eligible infrastructure investments. Business leaders will, in coordination with the municipality, 
25 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
identify infrastructure development needs that will enable the implementation of their BPs that are aligned with 
READP development objectives.  
139.
  The infrastructure selection process will be anchored by the SP and the infrastructure engineer. It will 
involve (i) long-listing all potential infrastructure items as presented in the BPs (ii) participatory discussion at 
the municipal/cluster level to shortlist the more important infrastructure items and examine opportunities for 
harmonization with infrastructure proposals identified in other BPs as well as municipal infrastructure plans, 
priorities and budgets. Screening criteria will include (i) contribution to increasing the outreach of the BP to the 
target households (ii) contribution to the profitability of the target households (ii) performance of the business 
leader in the implementation of the BP (iv) link between infrastructure and value chain development for 
municipality identified proposals. 
140.
  Final selection will be based on feasibility studies of the shortlisted infrastructure items, which will 
include mainstreaming and assessments related to environment and climate change. Final infrastructure 
evaluation will be based on criteria including (i) number of individuals assisted per USD 1,000 of investment 
(ii) co-financing by other stakeholders (iii) expected Increase in the value and volume of products sold by 
target households using better infrastructure (iv) technical and financial viability of the project (refer PIM). The 
selected infrastructure will be ranked based on this assessment and finalised for design and implementation 
according to the priority. 
141.
  Activity 3 - Design, procurement and implementation: The municipalities in coordination and with 
inputs from the private sector where relevant will be responsible for developing the designs for the selected 
infrastructure. The SP and the infrastructure engineer will review the proposal and incorporate relevant 
environmental and climate proofing measures to safeguard the infrastructure from natural hazards (such as 
flooding and landslides) through designs that take into account the climate risks. The aim of the measures is 
to avoid damages to property and forgone economic activity as a result of damages (e.g. failed bridges, 
damaged buildings), effects on health and human life, and impacts on environmental services (e.g. erosion, 
loss of natural capacity to protect from future climate change). In addition READP will promote measures that 
reduce the adverse environmental impact of these investments by supporting energy and water efficiencies.  
  Following the above, the SP and the infrastructure engineer will tender for implementation of the works. 
142.
The municipality along with the SP and the infrastructure engineer will be responsible for monitoring the 
implementation process. Following the technical acceptance of the works the SP and the infrastructure 
engineer will train the actors engaged for the management of the infrastructure where relevant. They will also 
facilitate the development of management agreements between different actors for operating the infrastructure 
(refer to PIM). Such agreements will be based on best practices and experiences in Bosnia and elsewhere. In 
case of irrigation systems, for example, the municipality will establish a mechanism for the collection of fees 
for irrigation water use, which will be used to cover maintenance and repair costs of irrigation systems. The 
municipality, in consultation with the project and POs, will determine which entity will be responsible for the 
collection of water use fees. A Water User Association (WUA) may be formed for this purpose or an existing 
will be used in case of READP activities that build on the existing World Bank Irrigation Development Project, 
which has introduced participatory approach to water management and created WUAs. The fees collected will 
be paid into a municipality bank account established solely for the purpose of accruing funds collected from 
irrigation water users and will be paid to the municipal utility company, which will be responsible for the 
maintenance and repairs of irrigation systems.  
  Activity 4 - Monitoring, supervision and training: The SP and the infrastructure engineer will 
143.
conduct periodic monitoring and follow-up visits to the infrastructure sites to assess the quality of 
implementation and the generation of benefits according to the projections in the BPs and feasibility studies. 
They will also provide technical assistance to overcome any issues and bottlenecks observed during the 
follow up visits. READ will provide tailored training to WUAs on organizational aspects of managing WUAs as 
well as technical aspects of operating irrigation systems to ensure optimum water use, optimum yields and minimum 
adverse impact on the environment. 
  Activity 5 - Financing arrangements: The approved infrastructure investments will be co-financed by 
144.
READP in partnership with municipalities and, whenever applicable, other entities such as business leaders, 
FOs, individual farmers. The expected average investment by municipalities and others shall be 25%, 
however, the eligibility and co-financing proportions expected from municipalities and other entities will vary 
26 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
according to their economic development category. The developed and the semi developed municipalities will 
not be eligible for project financing for roads, bridges, village water supply and rural markets. Their cost 
contribution for other infrastructure projects will be higher (50-70%) compared to the less developed 
municipalities (5-15%) as presented in the table below. However, the actual co-financing commitment to an 
infrastructure project will be one of the key criteria for the selection of an infrastructure for financing. The 
expected average investment through IFAD financing is 75% (may vary between 95% and 30% depending on 
the development category of the municipality) but in all cases IFAD financing in different infrastructure 
categories will be subject to ceilings (in EUR) as defined in the table below. These ceilings are only applicable 
to IFAD financing. There is no ceiling on the total size of infrastructure investment as long as the infrastructure 
development meet READP objectives.  
Minimum contribution from municipality and other entities*  
Extremely 
Underdeveloped 
Underdeveloped 
Semi-developed 
Developed 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Publically managed 
infrastructure 
- Rural roads 
- Small bridges 
- Domestic water supply 
Infrastructure co-managed in 
partnership between the public 
and the private sector 
- Cold storage and packing 
facilities 
- Small storage and packing 
facilities 
- Rural market 
- Irrigation for agricultural 
production 
- Small marketing infrastructure 
5% 
*other entities include SMEs, FOs, individual farmers 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
X 
X 
X 
50% 
50% 
X 
50% 
IFAD 
[ceiling 
in EUR] 
[75,000] 
[75,000] 
[40,000] 
X 
X 
X 
70% 
[100,000] 
70% 
[50,000] 
X 
70% 
[75,000] 
 [85,000] 
[10,000] 
Component 2: Project coordination and Management – EUR 1.49 million (5% of project costs) 
  The expected outcome of this component is efficiently and effectively managed project with knowledge 
145.
management integrated in all aspects of operations. The The Ministry of Finance and Treasury of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina(MOFT) will have overall responsibility of READP and will coordinate with the Entity Ministries of 
Finance and Agriculture. At entity level, the Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry (MAWMF) 
in the FBiH and the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Resources (MAFWR) in the RS will have the 
overall responsibility for the implementation as the Lead Agencies. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
chaired by the entity Ministry of Agriculture or its designated representative would be set up in each Entity to 
provide overall guidance to the Project at Entity level. READP implementation in each of the two Entities will 
be carried out by the existing A/PCUs that are well-versed with the systems and procedures for IFAD projects 
implementing. Dedicated project managers, additional staff and technical service providers will be deployed 
for the core project activities. Service providers and field coordinators will be hired to strengthen the 
implementation process. Further details on project management and coordination is presented in the in the 
section “Organisational Framework”.  
D.  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies  
IFAD‘s financial assistance to BiH started in 1996, soon after peace was restored following the 
146.
signature of the Dayton Peace Agreement in December 1995. The overall portfolio comprises six projects 
valued at US$ 234.2 million with IFAD's funding amounting to US$ 83.3 million. IFAD projects have directly 
benefited over 145,000 households or some 480,000 people which is nearly 20% of the country’s rural 
population14 and resulted in an annual increase of income of over 30% (Appendix 3). 
  The country program has evolved from emergency relief and rehabilitation in the first two projects to 
147.
supporting private sector led growth and enterprise development. The first generation of projects focused on 
rehabilitating a decimated livestock sector devastated by the war through directly supply of high quality dairy 
14 The number of indirect beneficiaries is not included in this figure. 
27 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
cows and sheep of improved breeds to poor households. The second generation of projects aimed at 
integrating smallholders into pro-poor profitable value chains (VCs), through the provision of basic 
organizational and technical support to producers and FOs. The Livestock and Rural Finance Development 
Project (LRFDP closed 2008) supported through this approach improved the quality of milk products and 
developed market linkages along the dairy value chain. These third generation projects focused on livelihood 
diversification and increased competitiveness in the context of economic transformation and trade 
liberalisation concurrent to the EU accession process. The REEP (closed in 2013), RLDP (closed in 2016) and 
the RBDP (closing 2019) and RCDP (planned from 2017-2027) are based on this approach.  
  All these projects have contributed to increase the income and livelihood of the rural communities. For 
148.
example, REEP increased the average monthly agricultural income of beneficiary households to over 60% 
from KM 11,700 in 2008 to 18,720 in 2012, through increased sales of milk, meat and fruits. RLDP increased 
the monthly income of beneficiary by 48% from to KM 822 in 2012 to KM 1,214 in 2015. More than 90% of the 
participating farmers were from unemployed category and the projects created more than 1-2 ‘jobs’ per 
household for 1,500 households. PFIs disbursed 5,687 smallholder loans (valued at US$ 22 million) and 146 
on-farm and off-farm SMEs loans (valued US$ 6.6 million). The projects also funded the construction of 350 
small rural infrastructure schemes (237 feeder roads with a total length 285.5 km, 15 small bridges, 77 village 
water supply systems and 21 animal watering points), aimed at improving market linkages and rural living 
conditions. As a result, the overall food security situation has improved and rural livelihoods have become 
more diverse, strengthening their resilience in dealing with climate change induced variability. 
  Status of IFAD interventions: BiH has a diversity of agro-ecological conditions that supports labour 
149.
intensive production in limited area of land for decent family income; for example vegetables, fruits, berries, 
dairy and honey. IFAD funded interventions have demonstrated that with adequate technical and 
organizational support, smallholders can benefit from growing demand for agricultural products, especially in 
the fruits, vegetables and non-timber forest products (NTFP) subsectors. There is strong demand from 
domestic processing industry15 and potential to increase exports of such products providing smallholders the 
opportunity to fully integrate into the European and global market, through technological innovations, business 
model adaptation and compliance with the EU requirement and standards. Based on these considerations the 
COSOP 2013-2018 has two strategic objectives (SOs) focus on Farmer organizations (FOs) and their apex 
organizations (SO1) and fostering innovations and increased competitiveness through the expansion of 
technological innovation, business development and financial services to individual producers or institutional 
partners (SO2). The READP will be the second project designed against this COSOP after RCDP which is 
planned for implementation from 2017-2027. 
  READP builds on IFAD's past and on-going experience and accumulated knowledge over more than 
150.
two decades of in-country operations. Lessons learned can be categorised into the following: (i) FO 
institutional strengthening (ii) enterprises linkages (iii) targeting (iv) advisory services (v) Infrastructure 
development and (vi) implementation support and M and E. Details are presented in Appendix 3. 
  FOs institutional strengthening: the experiences of the IFAD projects clearly indicate that FOs can 
151.
assist smallholders to achieve economies of scale and to access markets on a competitive basis. Recent 
IFAD projects have successfully implemented the value chain approach connecting 18,750 individual 
beneficiaries to commercial buyers and more than 200 FOs have facilitated the linkages for input supply, 
advisory services and output marketing wherever relevant. FOs have been supported in negotiations with 
financial institutions to encourage them to increase their presence in rural areas and offer financial services 
for poor rural households. Nevertheless, FOs need further attention in order to become inclusive, increase the 
range and quality of their services to members and strengthen their linkages to different actors in the value 
chains for more outreach, sustainability and impact. 
  Enterprises linkages. RLDP and RBDP have both shown the key role played by private enterprises in 
152.
driving the inclusion of IFAD's target households to domestic and export markets. PCU's co-financing of 
producers’ production costs (starter packages), piloted under RLDP have proved useful in leveraging private 
sector investment. In the piloted areas RLDP reached out to some 1,500 target households leveraging a total 
investment of US$ 465,276 for mechanisation, irrigation and cold storage facilities with a 54% contribution of 
15 ''BiH imports two thirds of the food it consumes, mainly processed foods, while it exports lower value food commodities'' (WB 2015: 59). 
28 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
the project16. RBDP has further scaled up the starter package co-financing instruments to trigger and deepen 
private sectors' interest. Based on these experiences, READP will include any commercially driven entity 
committed to expand its supply chains of raw materials from smallholders.  
  Targeting: Insufficient and ad hoc selection of beneficiaries in previous IFAD interventions often led to 
153.
missing the target groups, particularly the very poor. Ad hoc selection resulted due to i) the distribution of the 
poor across a wide geographies of municipalities ii) absence of differentiated criteria across farming patterns 
and seasonality iii) municipalities selection of beneficiaries based on inaccurate lists iv) lack of capacity from 
overstretched service providers and within A/PCUs and vi) underperforming monitoring and lack of corrective 
action. IFAD's mission have consistently highlighted the weak participation of the poor in project-supported 
PAs and has pointed out that the guiding principle for supporting SMEs should be their commitment to 
establish backward linkages with poor small producers and collectors with a long-term business perspective. 
In this context, the design and implementation of Pro-Poor Value Chain Development pilot project, 
154.
financed by RLDP and implemented in collaboration with Oxfam italia witnessed promising results in 
implementing specialized targeting approaches to include the poor households. READP will mainstream the 
implementation of these methodologies by the enterprises, FOs and municipalities in the process of 
expanding their rural outreach. It will form clusters of municipalities based on level of socio-economic 
development. These clusters will include 95% of all extremely underdeveloped and underdeveloped 
municipalities; in order not to exclude the poor households falling outside these municipalities, READ will 
incorporate a maximum of 35% of semi-developed and developed municipalities in the country. Specific 
attention will be paid to include women-headed households and youth participation in rewarding VCs. 
  Access to finance. Responding the shortage of liquidity in the financial system past IFAD supported 
155.
projects supported rural finance through refinancing of PFIs through credit lines. IFAD’s credit lines were 
devised in the post global financial crisis context when there was shortage of liquidity in the financial system. 
They were used to support refinancing mechanisms to incentivise commercial banks to scale up agriculture 
lending to agribusiness and SMEs and MFIs to deal with individual farmers. The three IFAD supported 
projects, REEP, RLDP and RBDP implemented since mid-2000s used credit lines for lending above US$ 42 
million to 16,150 individuals at 3-8% interest rates. However, the relevance and requirements for credit lines 
has declined since this approach was adopted in the mid-2000s.  
  The Central Bank of BiH data reveals that liquidity in the banking sector is currently high with deposits 
156.
against loans ratio, at 96.9% in 2015. Secondly, interest rate on bank deposits has decreased to less than 1% 
at the end of 2016 making credit lines (1-1.5%) unattractive to commercial banks. Therefore, the credit line 
approach was no longer relevant to the liquidity conditions of the financial system.  
  MFIs too, are less interested in credit lines as the pressure on such partnering financial institutions 
157.
(PFI) from the projects and the government to reduce interest rates to borrowers have squeezed their 
margins. They also find the reporting obligations to the project on these funds quite cumbersome. 
Consequently, in the FBiH only 1-2 MFIs have partnered in recent projects. In RS the last two IFAD projects 
were unable to identify any MFI partner and US$ 4 million credit line funds from RLDP were returned back to 
IFAD due to non-utilisation. Moreover, financial institutions developed dependency on credit lines for reaching 
the target group households. Apart from the PFI few other financial institution developed linkages to the target 
households as their cost of capital at 10-12% (for MFIs) was higher than the interest rate of 3-8% they are 
expected charge from this target group. Also, credit lines have not been very effective in reaching the target 
households as the PFIs preferred to select bankable clients with pre-existing market linkages who did not 
necessarily belong to the project target group.  
  The RCDP design recognised this issue and has proposed alternative approach in the form of financing 
158.
starter packages. Although RCDP has not yet started, experience of RLDP and RBDP, since the design of 
RCDP indicates that starter packages are a viable step forward from the credit line approach.  
  Experience and lessons from production package financing by RLDP and RBDP: In 2015-16, RLDP 
159.
piloted co financing production package (starter package) by partnering with a raspberry buyer and three 
municipalities to co-finance raspberry production costs of 300 producers in 2 dunums of land in these 
municipalities. The project contributed 40-50% of costs; municipalities, 10-20% and the buyer, 40-50%. The 
16 RLDP PCR: 13. 
29 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
contribution of the buyer was treated as advance payment to the producers, recoverable from the value of 
raspberry sold by the producers to the buyer over three years. The same model was replicated with three 
more buyers in the following season. Thereafter, in order to increase the outreach of the model RLDP roped in 
its PFI, to co-finance the production costs of target households with low cost loans (6-8%) from the project 
credit line. This increased the outreach of the model to 1,500 producers with project contribution of around 30-
40%, municipality contribution of 10-20% and PFI loans co-financing 40-50% of the loans. The same model is 
being replicated by for the RBDP and by the end of 2017 an additional 1,000-1,500 farmers are expected to 
benefit from it.  
  The project will promote market-based interest rates to increase access to finance for the READP target 
160.
group. So far the projects have confined the co-financing by financial institutions only to 1-2 PFIs benefiting 
from RLDP/RBDP credit lines as they are obliged to lend at 6-8% interest to the producers. However, limited 
participation of the financial institutions lending at subsidised interest rates to the producers is the main 
challenge for the sustainability of this model. The READP will address this issue by opening the co-financing 
opportunity to any interested financial institution at market driven interest rates for agricultural loans. However, 
since the other co-financiers (project, municipalities, buyer) will shoulder almost 75-80% of the production 
costs, the producer will pay market driven interest rate (around 15%) only on 15-25% of the production costs, 
resulting in an effective and affordable interest rate of around 3%. Also, RLDP and RBDP did not have 
dedicated allocations for financing starter packages and they had to use small sums of matching grants for 
FOs to finance this model which limited the scope of this intervention.  
  Advisory and Business Development Services (BDS). Past assessment concluded that constraints 
161.
in business development services are occurring on both the supply and demand side, thus hindering the 
coordinated delivery of services and development of new markets. RCDP is also designed to make available 
appropriate technical and business development services at local level. READP will build on the BDS related 
provisions of RCDP using various instruments e.g. the voucher scheme proposed in the RCDP design.  
  Climate resilient public or private rural infrastructure. The agriculture sector has consistently 
162.
suffered from a lack of investment, resulting in outdated and deficient rural (market) infrastructure. The lack of 
storage, processing and transport facilities is considered one of the main obstacles to developing value-adding 
activities. The previous IFAD projects have funded the construction of 350 small rural infrastructure schemes. 
The investments in market infrastructure (e.g. rural roads, small bridges), benefitting an important number of 
rural households, has also spurred rural growth. The overemphasis, however, on investments in rural 
infrastructure particularly in roads has resulted in the implementation of an incomplete and unfocused value 
chain approach, insufficiently reaching out to the rural poor, hindering the project in its achievement of its 
poverty reduction objectives. Hence, it is important to select infrastructure investments that directly serve the 
commercial considerations of the value chain actors and are not guided by popular public concerns. READP 
will facilitate business leaders and FOs to play lead roles in identification and selection of the market 
infrastructure requirements in their BPs based on relevant physical assessment and potential increase in their 
business volumes from these investments. Adequate importance will be given to make the infrastructure 
choices environmentally friendly by assisting the target households to select the appropriate infrastructure and 
by choosing construction methodology that protects the infrastructure against climate risks. 
Implementation arrangement and M and E. A recurrent bottleneck of IFAD operations in BiH has 
163.
been the time lapse between project design and implementation and translating into changing conditions at 
municipalities, sub-sectors and individual households. In addition, the role of the A/PCUs are still evolving as 
market linkage enablers and heavy emphasis is needed on adaptive management and facilitation skills. To 
cater for the specific implementation requirement of READP, core A/PCUs staff structure will be 
complemented by specialized expertise reflecting this newly focused role on brokering partnerships between 
producers and end markets. The main lessons M&E lessons pertains to its functionality, or lack thereof, to 
provide effective feedbacks loops to: i) improve projects' steering and ii) support informed decision making. 
This in turn has affected the project's ability to take timely corrective measures and the overall quality of 
reporting. The main gaps highlighted in the various M&E related assessments are: fragmented approach 
relying on service providers with limited capacity and understanding of reporting requirement to prove impact 
and improve project implementation; inconsistent monitoring of the accrued benefits for each categories of 
stakeholders, incomparable performance across entities given the lack of harmonisation in the approach to 
baseline methodology preventing robust comparison and overall poorly defined and measurable indicators. 
30 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
While the A/PCUs will maintain ultimate responsibility for M&E and reporting READP will involve stakeholders 
attached to BPs in the monitoring system and will also draw on BPs monitoring and reporting based on the 
contractual provisions developed under RCDP.  
Adherence to IFAD policies 
  The READP is fully aligned with all relevant IFAD strategies and policies including the Strategic 
164.
Framework 2016-2025, especially by way of promoting investment in productive capacities and market 
participation of beneficiaries through the vehicle of 4Ps; Targeting Policy; Gender Strategy; Rural Finance 
Policy, Climate Change Strategy; Policy on Supervision & Implementation Support. The environmental and 
social category is considered to be B namely that it does not present any irreversible impacts on the short or 
long term or during construction and /or operations. The climate risk classification is deemed to be Moderate. 
III.  Project implementation 
A.  Approach  
  The entry point for Component 1 will be through the promotion of 4Ps based Business Plans between 
165.
business leaders, municipalities, project and target households. These BPs will build on institutional 
arrangements and the lessons learned from the ongoing RCDP. In particular, the READP will make use of the 
experiences and achievements of RCDP in Business Development Services (BDS) as well as in establishing 
and operating cluster stakeholder platforms. The project will engage service providers, cluster coordinators 
and extension officers to support the business plan development process. The responsibilities of the different 
actors in the BP implementation is described in Section B in “project overview” section. 
  Partnerships. READ will build on the positive experiences of USAID’s FARMA I and II projects and the 
166.
work of CARITAS, OXFAM and RED/LED agencies, GIZ, Czech Development Agency, Swedish International 
Development Agency (SIDA) and the Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC). In addition, EU, World Bank 
and IFC’s investments in technical capacity building regarding Food Safety Standards in the country will be 
utilized for the benefit of smallholders by IFAD projects. 
  APCU and PCU will be responsible for coordination and liaison with municipalities, business leaders, 
167.
FOs and target households in the clusters and implementing partners. Thus, PCU/APCUs will enter into MOU 
with the relevant business plan partners in implementation of project activities, including project area 
municipalities, private agribusiness enterprises, producer associations and cooperatives (key mechanism for 
the participation of the target households). These MOUs will detail the roles and responsibilities of each party 
in business plan implementation, the modality of allocation and control of project resources and the monitoring 
and reporting arrangements. 
B.  Organizational framework 
  Overall responsibility: The READP will be implemented by Government and non-government 
168.
institutions and private sector partners. The The Ministry of Finance and Treasury of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina(MOFT) will have overall responsibility of READP and will coordinate with the Entity Ministries of 
Finance and Agriculture.  
  Lead Agencies: At entity level, the Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry (MAWMF) 
169.
in the FBiH and the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Resources (MAFWR) in the RS will have the 
overall responsibility for the implementation as the Lead Agencies.  
170.
  Project Steering Committee (PSC): A Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the entity Ministry 
of Agriculture or its designated representative would be set up in each Entity to provide overall guidance to the 
Project at Entity level. It is advisable that the READP PSC has the same composition as the PSC for the on-
going IFAD supported RCDP. It will comprise 7-10 members draw from relevant ministries and Government 
departments, as well as representatives from the private, PAs and cooperative sectors. The PSC would meet 
once or twice per annum. Each PSC will ensure that (i) project activities are in compliance with the 
Government and IFAD goals, policies and strategies defined at project design (ii) endorse the strategic 
orientations taken up by the project (iii) review and approve project Entity level Annual Work Plans and 
Budgets (AWPB) (iv) oversee the transparent selection of service providers and partner institutions (v) ensure 
31 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
that READP interventions are coordinated with other development programmes and projects and (vi) ensure 
adherence to the highest standards of financial management and audit. 
171.
  Project coordination units: FBiH will entrust the responsibility of coordination and management of 
project activities to the existing Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in Sarajevo. Likewise, the RS will entrust 
these functions to the existing Agricultural Project Coordination Unit (APCU) located in Banja Luka. Both, the 
APCU and the PCU will incorporate responsibilities for the overall project management and monitoring, 
organizing start-up and annual workshops for participatory annual programming, preparation of AWPBs and 
bi-annual reporting against the AWPBs, fiduciary management as well as smooth integration of READ into 
their on-going operations. They will also be responsible for providing logistical and administrative support to 
IFAD and supervision missions, mid-term review and project completion missions. Detailed responsibilities are 
described in Appendixes 5, 6 and 7.  
  The PCU and the APCU each will be headed by a project director who will also be the secretaries of the 
172.
PSCs. The READP staffing plan for other positions takes into consideration the parallel implementation of 
RCDP for two cycles, from 2017-2021 and 2022-2026, and are detailed below.  
(a)
(b)
(c)
PCU: In PCU the staffing for the RCDP already includes the director, two business development 
officers, M and E/targeting officer, procurement officer, finance officer and translator and driver. 
For the first two years of READP the salaries of these staff will be financed under RCDP. For the 
remaining three years of READP these salaries will be financed in 1:2 ratio between READP and 
RCDP. READP will finance two additional staff positions specifically hired for READP 
implementation. These two positions will be of Project Manager and accountant to enable the 
PCU cope with the additional re 
Responsibilities of implementing two projects simultaneously.  
APCU: in APCU the staff for RCDP includes two business development officers, M and 
E/targeting officer, procurement officer, finance officer accountant, translator, secretary and 
driver. For the first two years of READP the salaries of these staff will be financed under RCDP. 
For the remaining three years of READP these salaries will be financed in 1:2 ratio between 
READP and RCDP. READP will finance two additional staff positions specifically hired for 
READP implementation. These two positions will be of project manager with substantial VCs and 
business development experience and an infrastructure engineer to enable the APCU cope with 
the additional responsibilities of implementing two projects simultaneously.  
  Field coordination: READP will require substantial field presence since the project area, selected 
173.
based on geographical targeting approach, will consist of 10 clusters (five each in FBiH and RS) with an 
average of 9 municipalities per cluster. In the FBiH, the PCU will contract 5 field officers as cluster 
coordinators, one for each cluster, to ensure field presence of the PCU and assist quality implementation 
process. In the RS the APCU will ensure field presence through extension officers deployed in the seven 
regional extension offices of the Agency of Extension Services in the 5 project clusters.  
174.
  Knowledge sharing: One activity to strengthen the knowledge-sharing and learning culture of the 
program will be the conduct of bi-annual inter-entity knowledge management workshops to provide a forum for 
PCU's field coordinators and A/PCU's extension officers to exchange experiences, identify implementation 
constraints and document lessons learned. This field level knowledge sharing platform will directly feed into 
the work of the two entities' M&E units, notably serving in the identification of common strategies to overcome 
barriers to accelerate the successful the implementation of inclusive BPs, good practices for dissemination 
and scaling-up, and the development of harmonised communication and knowledge sharing measures to 
enhance the outreach and visibility of READP's investment along the following priority areas: i) 4-Ps business 
plans; ii) FO's management of the starter packages; iii) direct targeting of the youth and women headed 
households; iv) the youth apprentice support; and v) positive results from the participatory monitoring of the 
business plan implementation. 
  Partnership with Service Providers (SP): In order to manage and coordinate the implementation of 
175.
two projects READP and RCDP in parallel, both PCU and APCU will rely on considerable increase in support 
services from service providers and other implementation partners. In general, SPs will be responsible for 
supporting the A/PCUs in implementing the targeting surveys, conducting sensitisation and consultation 
workshops prior to launching the business planning initiative, supporting business proposal selection, 
32 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
assisting business plan development and implementation, ensuring the quality of the final business plans, 
facilitating negotiations the implementation agreements between different BP implementation partners, 
providing technical guidance to the business leaders, FOs and target households during BP implementation 
and assisting the M&E data collection for READP. The selected service provider will possess the required 
environmental expertise to backstop the project The SP will closely liaise with the specific READP Project 
Manager, business development officer and the M&E Officer in the A/PCUs. The specific use of SP by PCU 
and APCU will be as follows; 
(a)
(b)
In FBiH, the PCU will initially hire a service provider (company) competitively for business plan 
development process. The SP will be issued performance-based contracts and PCU will oversee 
and supervise their work. Depending on performance the SP can be retained for implementing 
the other sub-components on FO seed capital financing and enabling infrastructure development.  
In the RS, the APCU currently implements its projects in partnership with the Agency for 
Extension Services but the agency currently does not have experience in the business plan 
methodology. For implementation of READP, the APCU will partner with the EA and additionally 
with a SP selected competitively with the key responsibility to conduct ToTs for the capacity 
building of the extension agency in the areas of BP development and implementation. Thereafter 
the SP and the extension agency will be responsible for coordinated support to the BP 
implementation process. The subcomponent on enabling infrastructure will be implemented 
directly by the APCU using the services of the in-house infrastructure engineer. 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
Planning 
  Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB) and corresponding Procurement Plans17 will be the 
176.
project’s key planning instruments. The AWPBs will be formulated by the A/PCUs taking into account the 
Project Design Report, supervision report recommendations and legal agreements, contract and management 
agreements of SPs and BP implementation partners, the overall project targets, procurement plans and 
development priorities of target households. The AWPBs will be set against the project log frame and planned 
activities will have clear financial allocations on the basis of which funds release and financial control will be 
exercised. The AWPBs will be an essential covenant in the legal Financing Agreement and failure to prepare it 
on a timely basis may lead to delay or suspension of fund disbursement by IFAD. The first AWPB together 
with the Procurement Plan for the first 18 months will be presented for discussion during the start-up 
workshop followed by submission to IFAD for no objection. The AWPBs will be reviewed, approved and 
validated by the Entity PSCs and IFAD 30 to 60 days before the beginning of the fiscal year.  
  The process for designing AWPB will be participatory, reflecting a bottom-up prioritisation process from 
177.
the business leaders, the BP implementation oversight committees at cluster level, target households, FOs, 
SPs, field coordinators, extension officers and municipalities. The AWPB will be a living document with the 
flexibility to respond to realities. Proposed adjustments to the AWPB should be informed to IFAD and Entity-
level PSCs. Failures to meet two consecutive quarterly targets by more than 25% will trigger collective 
corrective decisions at the level of the PSC, in collaboration with IFAD. The final Project Implementation 
Manual (PIM) will outline further guidelines and details for the overall format of the AWPB. 
  A Start-up Workshop will be conducted at the onset to present the steps underpinning the planning 
178.
and annual work plan process as well as the monitoring and evaluation system. Under the guidance of the 
A/PCUs staff a special session on M&E system will be organised to brief participants about the Project Logical 
Framework, progress reporting and evaluation arrangements. Additionally, IFAD’s new RIMS system, 
performance based contracting system and key performance indicators regarding targeting effectiveness, 
backward linkages and the impact pathways will be presented. 
  Special sessions will be organised during the start up workshop for orienting the PCU staff, SPs and 
179.
other stakeholders on the targeting objectives, strategies and methodologies to be adopted by the project. 
Special emphasis will be given on steps and methodologies for participatory identification of the starter 
17 See Appendix draft PIM section on procurement. 
33 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
package beneficiaries. During these sessions targeting issues related to the youth apprenticeship will also be 
clarified.  
Monitoring and evaluation 
  M&E system: The READP M&E system will be established and managed by the A/PCU teams with 
180.
support from IFAD in accordance with established IFAD procedures. It will be built around the set of selected 
indicators outlined in the logical framework which have been developed taking into a number of RIMS core 
indicators, and project-specific indicators (PSIs). The A/PCUs will have the overall responsibility for M&E. 
  READP will use the organisational structure and human resources already in place for implementing the 
181.
M&E system for RBDP and RCDP. It consists of one M&E officer in each entity. Data collection will be 
supported by the SPs and extension agency in coordination with the business leaders, BP implementation 
partners and the READP cluster coordinators and extension officers at the field level.  
  As a core pillar required to effectively support BP implementation, the existing M&E system, will be 
182.
improved during project start-up to fit the READP requirements. To this end, the M&E officer will be supported 
to undertake a review geared to accommodate READP M&E requirements in the existing M&E system. The 
review will follow a three steps approach: i) Program M&E Review; performance assessment and existing 
level of quality and compliance with IFAD standard; ii) primary data collection with M&E stakeholders to better 
understand the current needs and expectations of the BPs market actors; specifically, what they value about 
the information generated by the M&E system; i.e. if the system is helping them to make evidence based 
decisions; and iii) formulation of clear recommendations on the revisions to be made to improve the key M&E 
domains of: data collection; data interpretation and use; real time data application for evidence based decision 
making; and adaptive project management against the READP additional reporting requirement. 
  READP will align, with RCDP's M&E system to enable consistent use of a common set of key 
183.
performance and management indicators. The structure shall reflect output monitoring & outcomes/impacts 
result monitoring. Both will be based on participatory process and, like in RCDP, it is expected that 
stakeholders external to the PCUs will play a key role, including business leaders, SPs, FOs, municipalities, 
beneficiaries and other private stakeholders/investors. 
  Output Monitoring: The AWPB will provide a framework for the immediate physical and financial 
184.
progress. During the first six months of implementation, a set of performance indicators will be developed to 
measure components' progress at outputs level. Inclusiveness monitoring will start against the benchmark 
established at start-up with regard to each category of beneficiaries (very poor, poor, borderline poor).  
  Outcome indicators: Outcome indicators will be measured with the project M&E budgets and 
185.
capacities. Quantitative and qualitative methodologies will be used such as focus groups, in-depth interviews 
and participatory assessments to triangulate findings and enrich the assessments. The M&E system will 
ensure that during implementation project management continuously receives clear information on 
performance and progress towards achieving the development objectives, the most successful interventions 
and hindering factors.  
Impacts assessment: will focus on the higher level of result defined in the log-frame and include the 
186.
limited set of development objectives the project intends to achieve. The Impact of READP will be reported in 
the project completion reports (PCR). Since RIMS impact completion survey are no longer mandatory, READP 
will determine in consultation with IFAD the project's most appropriate impact assessment need, drawing on 
combined quantitative, qualitative or mixed methods that reliably measure the project performance including 
household survey and market assessment surveys. The final evaluation will identify follow-up activities and 
generate actionable lessons learnt for IFAD and government counterparts. 
  Baseline studies. A baseline study will be commissioned as a tool to establish final baseline data and 
187.
targets for log-frame indicators. It shall be aligned with the key priorities of the project and will refer to key 
dimension of systemic change READP aims to bring about e.g. productivity efficiencies of rural producers; 
inclusion of target households, youth and women in value chains; transformation of FOs and their institutional 
performance and impact associated with production and marketing infrastructure. 
  Management information system (MIS). Immediately after the start-up workshop, the A/PCUs should 
188.
procure a centralised and integrated computerised MIS, designed based on M&E system requirement, 
34 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
including the log-frame. Associated database will contain all relevant data (project inputs, outputs and 
outcomes) collected by project stakeholders and consolidated by the A/PCUs. The M&E officers in the 
A/PCUs will be responsible for maintaining and updating the MIS with assistance of all project team members 
and implementation partners.  
  A start-up workshop will be organized in the six months after entry into force, to establish planning, 
189.
financial management, governance, procurement, M&E, project organizational and operational modalities, 
technical specifications and processes.  
  A Mid-Term Review will be carried at mid-year of READP’s third year. It will cover, among other things: 
190.
(i) physical and financial progress as measured against AWPBs (ii) performance and financial management of 
contracted implementing partners (iii) an assessment of the efficacy of technical assistance and capacity 
building activities (iv) and strategic recommendations for achieving the development objectives. 
  A Project Completion Review will be done within the last six months prior to project completion date. 
191.
It will assess the overall relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, sustainability and impact achieved. A completion 
rural households survey shall be done prior to the PCR mission. The assessment of project achievements 
would be in line with IFAD's project completion guidelines and the IOE Evaluation Manual18. The PCR will 
emphasise the lessons learnt. It will be submitted to IFAD within 6 months of the completion date. IFAD itself 
may also undertake a formal evaluation of the project through its Independent Office of Evaluation (OE). 
Learning and knowledge management 
  Learning and knowledge management will be a key underlining theme in READP, focusing on the 
192.
dissemination of project experiences and results to stakeholders and development partners for scaling up and 
policy impact. In general, READP will focus on increasing competiveness, strengthening FOs and generating 
youth employment which are aligned with national development priorities. Success with any of these elements 
would have a significant potential for scaling up, as significant EU resources are expected to be available for 
rural sector development. More specifically, some of the priority areas on which KM will concentrate are (i) 
success in using the 4-Ps business plans as entry points for the project along with targeting survey (ii) 
development of savings culture in the FOs and their management of the starter packages as revolving funds 
for financing members to connect to the value chains for the first time (iii) the effect of direct targeting of the 
youth and women headed households with special youth starter packages (iv) contribution of the apprentice 
support to the youth jobs in the rural sector and (v) positive results from the participatory monitoring of the 
business plan implementation through the cluster level BP implementation oversight committees. 
  Learning and knowledge management will focus on the enabling factors for successful implementation 
193.
of joint business plan. The experiences and knowledge gained will be translated into messages, manuals, 
concepts and strategies, and disseminated to the various target groups and stakeholders, using appropriate 
means of communication for wider policy impact. These activities are harmonised with the knowledge 
management activities adopted by RCDP. A knowledge-sharing and learning culture will be promoted at all 
level, including the A/PCUs, business leaders and other stakeholders. All activities related to KM should also 
be aligned with IFAD's Knowledge Management Strategy19. KM and communication responsibilities will be 
shared among all project staff, with the overall responsibility with the Project Directors in the A/PCUs and the 
M&E Officers. SPs will prepare case studies and Learning Notes as relevant. More details on planning, M&E, 
knowledge management and learning is presented in Appendix 6. 
D.  Financial management, procurement and governance 
Financial Management 
In October 2017, IFAD undertook an FM assessment of the A/PCUs managing the ongoing RBDP 
194.
project and, in accordance with IFAD guidelines, a Financial Management Assessment at design has been 
undertaken. The inherent risk of the country is assessed as Medium: BiH is ranked at Medium risk by 
Transparency International with a Corruption Perception Index score of 39 in 2016, and IFC/WB’s Ease of 
Doing Business rank at 81 out of 190 countries and a CPIA rating at 3.3 stable since 2007. The first Public 
18 Available at https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/bfec198c-62fd-46ff-abae-285d0e0709d6 
19 Available at https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/ad197dcd-93f9-4e50-ab3d-d773619a89e5 
35 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Expenditures and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment report identified areas in the public 
management system that require further improvement. 
195.
  Project risk. READP will take advantage of the coordination mechanism already in place for the on-
going RBDP in both entities. RBDP has been ranked as medium risk during supervision and the suggested 
mitigating measures has to be implemented to lower the level of the project risk.  
  Anticorruption. IFAD’s applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or 
196.
coercive actions in projects financed through its loans and grants. 'Zero tolerance' means that IFAD will 
pursue all allegations falling under the scope of this policy and that appropriate sanctions will be applied 
where the allegations are substantiated. All project staff, project parties and all stakeholders must be made 
aware of IFAD’s as well as the national anticorruption policies and whistle blowing procedures. 
  Financial management arrangements. The A/PCUs are adequately equipped with staff who have 
197.
been managing IFAD funded projects for many years and are adequate to their role and position. The financial 
management roles in PCU is managed by a financial manager (FM), a procurement officer and a 
secretary/assistant. The APCU has a finance manager, procurement officer and an accountant. For internal 
control purposes and segregation of responsibilities, especially in the oncoming scenario where the same 
units will simultaneously manage three different IFAD projects, an additional accountant will be recruited at 
PCU in FBiH. The Financial Manager will be responsible for his/her training on IFAD procedures. All the other 
arrangements in budgeting, accounting, internal controls, disbursement, financial reporting, flow of funds, 
external and internal audit will follow the system already in place in the both the units, with the additional 
mitigating measures which have been suggested. A financial and administrative manual will be developed at 
the beginning of the project. 
Accounts.  
  Separate bank accounts will be opened and maintained by the borrower for each financing source, and 
198.
for each entity. Accordingly, there will be one designated account in Euro for each entity to receive IFAD loan. 
In addition, there will be two separate counterpart accounts for the government contribution (one for each 
Entity) and separate bank accounts for Beneficiaries contribution where relevant, at each entity’s level.  
  Accounting. The A/PCUs will maintain a full set of accounts in accordance with IFAD’s requirements 
199.
and internationally accepted accounting standards (IPSAS-cash basis).  
  Financial reporting. To ensure efficiency and reliability of reports, the financial reporting mechanism 
200.
will be improved. Financial monitoring will be done directly through the features of the accounting system in 
place. Monthly financial report will be extracted from the system by the Financial Manager to closely monitor 
budget availability. The financial reports prepared will compare the actual versus budget and cumulative 
versus appraisal. The timeframe for the submission of financial reports to IFAD will be: (i) semi-annual 
consolidated financial and physical report in the format agreed with IFAD at the beginning (ii) annual 
consolidated financial statements within four months after the end of a fiscal year prepared in accordance with 
IPSAS and IFAD requirements (iii) annual consolidated audit report and a management letter within six 
months after the end of the fiscal year.  
  External Audit. In BiH, all externally funded projects are yearly audited by an external private sector 
201.
auditor appointed for three years at State level through a competitive process. The new auditor for the coming 
three years will be appointed in 2017. During the competitive process the terms of reference for the audit will 
be submitted to IFAD for no-objection. The A/PCUs will prepare their respective annual financial statements in 
a timely manner which will be audited by the selected auditor in accordance with International Standards on 
Auditing (ISA) and IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing. The consolidated audit report 
covering the whole project, together with the separate audit reports for PCU and APCU, including the 
management letters covering the audit observations on internal controls, will be submitted to IFAD within six 
months of the end of fiscal year. Additional details related to financial management are presented in Appendix  
Procurement 
  Country assessment. Although BiH has improved public procurement legislation and system of public 
202.
procurement supervision it is still some weaknesses in that system identified in the COSOP and assessments 
and reports of international organizations, which indicated that borrower's system for procurement is not still 
36 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
fully in line with the IFAD requirements, so that procedures, review and supervision on procurement under 
READP will continue to be carried out following IFAD procurement procedures stipulated in IFAD Procurement 
Guidelines and other relevant documents. 
Implementation arrangement: The PCU in FBiH and the APCU in RS will be responsible for all 
203.
procurement, each for the corresponding part of the project. They will pursue procurement in accordance with 
IFAD Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook, the Project Financial Agreement and the 
accompanying Letter to the Borrower (LTB). Procurement of particular goods, works or services will be 
initiated and implemented by applying an adequate procurement method, based on the estimated value of the 
procurement and thresholds for each methods defined in this PDR and finally confirmed in the LTB. Prior 
review and approval by IFAD CPM will be obligatory for the first five contracts for procurement of goods, works 
and services, regardless of value, and for all other contracts above the agreed thresholds.  
  Procurement planning, reporting and contracting: The cost of procurement will not exceed the available 
204.
funds allocated in the financial agreement and procurement will be in accordance with the approved 
procurement plan as a part of the project AWPB. The first procurement plan will be for the 18 months and 
succeeding for the next 12 months period. Procurement progress reports will accompany the regular project 
progress reports as their annex. The competent procurement officer in each of two PCUs will prepare and 
implement procurement procedures, finalized in the form of the contracts, cooperating with other project team 
members and external stakeholders. Procurement officers will be report to the project managers and 
ultimately to the PCU directors, as signatories of all contractual obligations on behalf of the borrower. 
Governance 
  The A/PCUs will comply with IFAD’s zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or 
205.
coercive actions. They will permit IFAD to inspect their accounts, records and other documents relating to 
tendering, bid submission and contract performance for all procurement for goods, works and services 
financed from resources funded or administered by IFAD. All bidding documents and the contracts will include 
the provision for suppliers, contractors and consultants to ensure compliance with IFAD zero tolerance policy 
towards fraudulence.  
E.  Supervision  
206.
  Project supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD with the participation of key partners where 
relevant. The supervision and implementation support function from IFAD will include (i) start up workshop (ii) 
review of AWPB and regular monitoring of its implementation (iii) review of withdrawal applications and 
relevant procurement documents (iv) comprehensive field supervision missions (v) specialized implementation 
support missions or thematic missions by finance officers, technical staff and consultants to keep the project 
on track (vi) mid-term review of project implementation to assess overall implementation of stated objectives 
mid-way to completion for any corrective measure (vii) relevant knowledge events and workshops to capitalize 
and share knowledge of thematic areas and on performance (viii) support to project completion exercise. 
  The comprehensive field supervision missions will be carried out annually starting 12 months after the 
207.
start-up workshop. Their objective will be to review progress and assist project partners to improve 
implementation. The supervision missions will assess overall physical and financial performance, address key 
issues regarding overall service delivery and BP implementation to meet development objectives, poverty, 
targeting, gender, job creation, as well as identify implementation constraints and propose measures for 
addressing bottlenecks. Field supervisions will follow after reviewing the project progress reports and so the 
A/PCUs will be required to submit their reports ahead of the supervision missions. These missions will end 
with wrap up sessions at the A/PCUs, debriefing the borrower (State) an aide memoire followed by a 
management letter articulating the main findings of the missions and actionable recommendations to address 
the shortfalls. In selecting the supervision team IFAD will balance continuity of team members for consistency 
as well as variety in team members for infusion of new ideas. National and international expertise will be 
considered. The national experts will bring local knowledge while international consultants will have a neutral 
position and bring international experiences.  
37 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
F.  Risk identification and mitigation  
  The main risks that have affected past projects and are likely to influence READP as well are presented 
208.
in the table below along with mitigation measures built into the design to address them; 
Risk 
Mitigation Measures 
 - Management and coordination 
challenges arising from the 
parallel implementation of two on-
going IFAD projects by the 
A/PCUs 
 - Dedicated project managers for READP at PCU and APCU. Additional 
staff for business development and support functions. Field presence 
increased through 5 cluster coordinators in PCU and 7 extension officers 
in APCU. Service providers as implementation partners to follow-up and 
operationalize A/PCUs decisions. 
Rating 
 - High 
 - Diminishing interest of financial 
institutions in credit lines and 
delay in selection of PFIs in past 
project adversely affecting 
disbursements and performance  
 - Strong focus on business leaders 
and private sector can dilute the 
poverty focus of the project. 
 - Market risks arising from crop-
specific approach in past 
projects, specially promoting 
perennial crops with limited 
predictability of prices 
 - READP target households and 
business plan partners can 
overlap with those of RCDP due 
to overlapping geographical 
areas of the two project resulting 
in duplication. 
 - Alternative mechanisms of co-financing starter packages built on recent 
 - High 
project experiences, and harmonized with RCDP will encourage 
participation by financial institution at market rates (not limited to selected 
PFIs) but will not solely depend on them. Catalyzes co-financing by other 
partners, e.g. municipalities and advance financing from business leader.  
 - Targeting survey at the onset of the project to set the theme of the project 
as poverty reduction. Support to business leaders will be contingent on 
their commitment to form backward links to the target households 
identified in the targeting survey. Project resources will be directed 
primarily to target group financing and not private asset financing. 
 - More flexible, demand driven, market led approach to crop selection. 
Target households, business leaders and other BP partners select crop in 
participatory manner considering prevailing market conditions. Focus on 
crop selection from an array of options in each sub-sector instead of 
locking into a specific crop type from onset.  
 - There are around 57,000 rural households living below poverty line in the 
READP clusters. Around 10,500 of them (two-thirds of RCDP target) are 
expected to benefit from RCDP. This leaves ample scope for selecting the 
8,500 READP target households from the remaining 46,500 households 
without overlapping with RCDP. A/PCUs will maintain clear records of 
beneficiary households for each project and will easily compare records to 
avoid duplication as a key criteria for beneficiary selection. 
 - High 
 - Medium 
 - Medium 
 - Environment and climate change 
 - The cluster coordinators and extension officers will be capacitated to 
 - Medium 
effects on crops and 
infrastructure 
disseminate climate information to target farmers to guide their choices 
and timely decision making. They will advise farmers on tolerant crops 
and measures for crop protection. Improved cultivation practices such as 
use of organic fertilizers and adoption of climate resilient infrastructure 
such as drip irrigation will be encouraged. 
 - Incorporate relevant environmental and climate proofing measures to 
safeguard the infrastructure from natural hazards (such as flooding and 
landslides) through designs that take into account the climate risks. The 
aim of the measures is to avoid damages to property and forgone 
economic activity as a result of damages (e.g. failed bridges, damaged 
buildings), effects on health and human life, and impacts on 
environmental services (e.g. erosion, loss of natural capacity to protect 
from future climate change). 
 - Fragile political system can lead 
 - The CPM will have an active role in the selection of new A/PCU staff 
 - Low 
to project management intrusions 
and implementation level delays  
members for RBDP. Removal and appointment of projectors will be in 
consultation with the government.  
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability  
A.  Project costs 
  The project costs are based on parameters collected during the initial design mission in July 2017 and 
209.
final design mission that took place on October/November 2017. The key parameters are presented below: 
38 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
 
 
 
 
The implementation period of the Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project is 
estimated at 5 years.  
Price contingencies aim to cover expected price increase between project preparation and 
project start up as well as throughout the project implementation period. Foreign inflation has 
been assumed at 2.2% and local inflation at 1.5%. 
Physical contingencies aim to cover uncertainties related to units’ costs. They are assumed at 
5%, and they are applied only in production and infrastructure investments.  
Taxes. The levels of taxes in the unit costs were estimated to include Governmental duties and 
taxes. Most costs items include VAT, which account for 17%. As per IFAD rules and regulations, 
local VAT and import taxes are considered as a contribution to project costs by the Government 
of Bosnia and Herzegovina (see financing tables). The Value Added Tax (VAT) applies to 
virtually all expenditure categories except international technical assistance, and staff 
allowances. An average amount of 17% VAT is included for all vehicles and equipment, training 
and workshops, studies (realized by a service provider) funded with IFAD funds.  
 
Exchange Rate. The exchange rate used in the analysis is fixed at 1 EUR=1.96 BAM.  
  Total Project Cost including physical and price contingencies is estimated at EUR 27.683 million over a 
210.
5-year period. Of this EUR 26.184 (94.5%) will be for implementing Component 1 - Enhancement of economic 
opportunities and smallholder integration in value chains, and EUR 1.499 million (5.5%) is for implementing 
component 2 - Project Coordination and Management. Physical and price contingencies are estimated at 9% 
per cent of the total Project costs. The foreign exchange component is estimated only at EURO 2.6 million 
which represent only 9% of the total Project costs. Taxes and duties make up approximately EURO 4.3 million. 
Table 1 summarizes the Project costs by components. A complete set of summary and detailed cost tables 
are attached in Appendix 9. 
Table 1: Project Costs by Components (EUR ‘000) 
B.  Project financing 
  The total project cost is expected to be around EUR 27.683 million. Out of this the share of FBiH is 60% 
211.
and RS is 40%. IFAD contribution will be EUR 11.787 million (43%) as loan in ordinary terms. The remaining 
amount will be co-financed by the Government (15% - totally for VAT), municipalities (9%) and private sector 
(33%). The breakdown of the private sector contribution of includes private enterprises (22%), FOs (1%), and 
beneficiaries (10%). Moreover, private sector contribution of 33% is related only to its co-financing contribution 
in the project specific categories. In addition, it will invest is other business plan implementation areas such as 
financing of private assets and working capital requirements equivalent to at least additional 50% of the 
READP costs.  
212.
  Detailed tables of costs and project financing are presented in Appendix 9. 
39 
%% Total (EUR '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. COMP 1. Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains 1. Development and Implementation of pro-poor business plan_FBiH 10 2676910 3361412. Development and Implementation of pro-poor business plan_RS 6 857586 9141273. Farmers organisations development_FBiH 2944787726234. Farmers organisations development_RS 2363225585825. Enabling Infrastructure Development_FBiH 2 4917793 27024136. Enabling Infrastructure Development_RS 1 5015142 015268Subtotal 21 6462 21923 865994B. COMP 2: Project Coordination Management Unit Total BASELINE COSTS1. Project Coordination Unit_FBiH 72574799932. Agricultural Project Coordination Unit_RS 55068618112Subtotal 1 2751421 417106Total PROJECT COSTS 22 9212 36125 2829100Physical Contingencies 9621031 065104Price Contingencies 1 2111261 33695 25 0942 59027 6839109 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Table 2: Project Components by Financiers (EUR ‘000)  
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
Benefits 
213.
  Over the 5 years of implementation READP is expected to generate the following benefits 
  Employment creation: At least 4,500 full time jobs (or equivalent) created leading to stable income for 
214.
enhanced food security and sustainable livelihood of target households. These jobs will comprise 350 youth 
apprentice and at least 50% of the 8,300 beneficiaries of the starter packages and the FO seed capital 
financing, achieving cash returns equal to at least the minimum net salary earned (BAM 425) from a full time 
job. They include jobs for at least 1,213 women (50% of the youth apprenticeship and 25% of all other jobs).  
Incomes (annual per dunum, 5th year ): Increased revenues for some 8,650 target households as 
215.
direct beneficiaries, who would develop or upgrade their dairy, fruit and vegetable production as well as 
receive youth apprentice support leading to full time jobs in the rural sector; Net income occurring to the target 
households will be strawberry US$ 4,485; raspberry US$ 4,535; cherry and strawberry intercropping US$ 
5,035; gherkin US$ 2,628; tomato US$ 2,139; pepper US$ 2,606; wild mushrooms US$ 4,350; Honey (300 
hives) US$ 2,631; Milk production (3-5 cows) US$ 5,713. 
  Expansion of acreage, production and revenue from project support activities: This includes 
216.
increase in acreage and production of fruits and vegetables and increase of honey and dairy production for 
domestic and export markets. The promotion of business leader agreements and market linkages would 
enhance competitiveness of the targeted households and ensure sustainability.  
  Distribution of the 8,300 direct beneficiaries for different crop production activities is estimated as 4,100 
217.
farmers engaged in MAPs; 3,400 households engages in fruits and vegetables production; 600 households 
engaged in milk production with 2 cows and 200 households engaged in milk production with 3 cows.  
(a) MAPs production for targeted group of 4100 farmers is estimated with 2.9 tonnes per year with a 
value of 8.3 billion BAM.  
(b)
(c)
Additional production of fruits and vegetables from the targeted groups of the 3,400 farmers 
within each category is estimated at 10.2 tonnes per year (latest at year 5), with a value of 1.6 
billion BAM per year.  
Milk production for the targeted group of 600 farmers with assumption of 3 cow-models is 
estimated with additional average production of 39 million litres per year with a value of 21 million 
BAM. Milk production for the targeted group for 200 farmers with assumption of 5 cows is 
estimated additional average production of 2.2 million litres per year with value of 1.2 million BAM  
Import substitution and conservation of foreign currency: Will occur with increased production and 
218.
export of food items.  
  Strengthen farmers’ organisations: Over a period of 5 years; 40 FOs would be supported in terms of 
219.
institutional capacity building and FO seed capital financing. These significant investments in assets such as 
production, storage and processing technologies would result in strengthened organisations with improved 
market linkages providing better services to their members. 
  Strengthen rural infrastructure: At municipality level, significant investments in market facilities and 
220.
further enabling infrastructure would be supported with an outreach to another 5,000 households. Particular 
attention will be given to support climate change resilience, by favouring environmental friendly technological 
40 
                    IFAD   Municipalities   Beneficiaries   FO   SME   The Government   Total      Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %                  A. COMP 1. Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains                 1. Development and Implementation of pro-poor business plan_FBiH   3 443 30.4 822 7.3 1 647 14.6 12 0.1 3 626 32.1 1 759 15.6 11 308 40.8  2. Development and Implementation of pro-poor business plan_RS   2 328 30.8 548 7.2 1 100 14.5 10 0.1 2 420 32.0 1 160 15.3 7 565 27.3  3. Farmers organisations development_FBiH   526 62.7 55 6.5 - - 116 13.8 - - 143 17.0 838 3.0  4. Farmers organisations development_RS   388 64.2 36 6.0 - - 77 12.7 - - 103 17.0 604 2.2  5. Enabling Infrastructure Development_FBiH   2 279 62.7 552 15.2 61 1.7 52 1.4 74 2.0 614 16.9 3 632 13.1  6. Enabling Infrastructure Development_RS   1 398 62.5 335 15.0 35 1.6 42 1.9 49 2.2 378 16.9 2 236 8.1 Subtotal   10 361 39.6 2 348 9.0 2 843 10.9 309 1.2 6 168 23.6 4 156 15.9 26 184 94.6 B. COMP 2: Project Coordination Management Unit                 1. Project Coordination Unit_FBiH   801 94.8 - - - - - - - - 44 5.2 845 3.1  2. Agricultural Project Coordination Unit_RS   625 95.5 - - - - - - - - 29 4.5 654 2.4 Subtotal   1 426 95.1 - - - - - - - - 73 4.9 1 499 5.4     11 787 42.6 2 348 8.5 2 843 10.3 309 1.1 6 168 22.3 4 229 15.3 27 683 100.0   
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
investments. READP will finance 16 kilometers of roads which will reduce losses of fruits and vegetables 
transported by 13% resulting in savings of BAM 620 million. It will also support 11 irrigation systems which will 
lead to increasing the yield by 10-30% for around 3,000 beneficiaries. Additionally, 10 cold storage and 
packing facilities will be financed which will result in at least 5% higher crop prices for farmers leading to 
additional returns of at least BAM 35,000 annually.  
Financial analysis 
  Twelve financial models were developed: (i) strawberry (ii) raspberry (iii) Strawberries intercropped with 
221.
cherries (iv) pepper (v) gherkin (vi) tomato (vii) honey production (viii) Marigold (ix) mint (x) wild mushrooms 
(xi) livestock production 3-5 cows and (xii) livestock production 5-10 cows. Additionally, road, irrigation and 
cold storage models have been developed. Greenhouse production was been considered due to the high 
initial investment cost needed per beneficiary. The analysis compares a “without project” and “with project” 
situation for one dunum (1000 m²) of land. Without project” scenario has been calculated based on the 
prevailing traditional average potato production. Project support includes co-financed starter packages for 
production on one dunum to 8,300 non-commercial target households. Most smallholders are supported to 
produce between 1 and 2 dunum of fruits and vegetables, depending on the type of product, market access 
and availability of family labour and suitable land.  
  Based on NPV analysis, the most promising berries and fruit trees are intercropping mechanism of 
222.
cherries and strawberries, raspberries and strawberries. Production of cherries and strawberries intercropping 
mechanism generates net income of 5,035 BAM per dunum; raspberries generate 4,535 BAM per dunum and 
strawberries 4,485 BAM per dunum. The revenues models for gherkin is the highest among vegetables. Still, 
among the vegetables cultivated in the open field, paprika has the highest NPV of 9,553 BAM per dunum due 
to the low investments inputs/prices. The investment on roads infrastructure is expected to be fully covered in 
three years mainly based on the savings on losses of fruits and vegetables achieved through the use of road 
infrastructure by beneficiaries. Similarly, the investment on the irrigation systems is expected to be recovered 
in 7 years mainly based on incremental yield of 10-30% achieved by beneficiaries from these facilities. 
Likewise the investment in cold storages are expected to be recovered in 7-8 years based on additional 
market price of at least 5% fetched by the beneficiaries of these facilities. Detailed description and analysis of 
the models are presented in Appendix 10. 
Economic analysis 
  Economic Rate of Return: On the basis of the above assumptions, the EIRR of READP will be 35%. 
223.
The high EIRR reflects the ambition and potential leverage of READP, with an approach focused on clear 
comparative advantages and existing economic dynamics in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  
  Sensitivity Analysis: In order to test the robustness of the above results, sensitivity analysis was 
224.
carried out and the results are presented below. The sensitivity analysis investigates the effect of fluctuations 
in Project costs, benefits and delays in implementation on the NPV and EIRR. The results shows that the 
EIRR drops to 31% with an increase in costs of 20% and 26% with increase in costs to 50% still making the 
project economically viable.  
D.  Sustainability 
  The sustainability of READP is linked to the success of the BPs in profitably connecting the target 
225.
households to the business leaders. The commercial success of these linkages will increase the demand for 
more products by the business leaders from the target households thereby (i) assisting the already linked 
households to maintain their partnerships and increase their returns (ii) creating the opportunity for new 
commercial farmers to join the value chain. 
226.
  The features of the design which will support the institutional sustainability of these linkages are: 
  business plan approach, public-private-producer co-financing system, starter packages, agronomic 
support, participatory monitoring of implementation and enabling infrastructure support to establish 
and maintain the linkages between business leaders and the target households 
41 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
 
strengthening the FOs so that they can benefit from the increased business opportunities created 
as a result of (i) more demand for inputs and services by members to increase production and (ii) 
higher demand for bulking, value addition and supply of produce to business leaders 
  assisting municipalities to direct their support to farmers in a manner that makes them more 
competitive and assists their integration in commercial value chains. 
  Similarly, the design features which will support the technical sustainability of the linkages are product 
227.
certification, branding, product identification and other market development support; strengthening the 
extension and advisory services to facilitate access to knowledge, technology and the guidance by target 
households for timely, quality and quantity production; the involvement of the community of financial service 
providers as co-financiers of bankable projects and; market driven approach that assists the business leaders 
and the partnering households to quickly adapt their businesses to changing market demands. The design will 
assist the linkages to overcome climate change and environmental risks by creating awareness about such 
threats and supporting mitigation measures through measures such as selection of tolerant varieties, organic 
farming, drip irrigation; making sure that the construction of enabling infrastructure addresses climate risks 
such as floods and landslides. 
  The complementary relationship with the RCDP will also support READP sustainability. The success 
228.
stories and the lessons learnt by READP will be replicated by RCDP over a wider geographical areas even 
after the close of READP; the policy measures and regulatory support required to sustain the FOs supported 
by READP will be addressed by RCDP; follow-up needed at the relevant municipalities level to ensure the 
effective management of the enabling infrastructure investments by READP, will be handled by RCDP. 
42 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
Governance and administration: Prior to 1991, Bosnia and Herzegovina was a republic in the 
1.
Yugoslav Federation. Following the Bosnian war from 1991-95 it became a sovereign country under 
the terms of the Dayton Peace Agreement in 1995. However, a complex multi-tiered governance 
structure was adopted starting with the State level Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) at 
the top followed by a second tier of governance with two Entities, the Federation of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina (FBiH) and the Republika Srpska (RS), plus the self-governing Brčko District (BD). The 
third tier of governance is unique to the FBiH and consists of 10 cantons. The fourth tier comprises 
143 municipalities, 79 in FBiH and 64 in RS. The municipalities are extremely variable in terms of 
socio-economic development, size and population. BiH is highly decentralised and many public 
services are delivered at the municipality level. 
Demography: BiH has an ethnically diverse population of 3.52 million, with 58% of it living in 
2.
rural areas20. The share of the rural population living in rural area has remained constant in recent 
decade; from 60.5% in 1991 to 58% in 2015. It ranks among the fastest shrinking and aging 
populations in the world due to continued emigration and low fertility. According to the World Bank 
country partnership framework (2016-20) these demographic dynamics create challenges for public 
service delivery, especially in rural areas.  
Economy: After sustained Growth Domestic Product (GDP) averaging 5.1% between 2000 and 
3.
2008, the BiH’s economy was negatively affected by the global financial crisis between 2009 and 
2012, altering BiH's post-conflict economic recovery21. While the country began to rebound in 2013, 
when GDP reached 2.5%, progress was interrupted by devastating floods in May 2014 which dragged 
growth to only 0.8%22. Real growth resumed with GDP growth of 3.2% in 2015. In 201623 the GDP 
growth was 2.8%, valued at USD 16.19 billion and ranked 109 out of 194 countries. It is projected to 
reach 4% by 2019.  
At the end of 2016 the Gross National Income (GNI) per capita was US$ 4,88024 qualifying BiH 
4.
as an upper middle income country. Yet it is the third poorest country in south-eastern Europe. 
Agriculture comprised 7.5%, services 65.1% and manufacturing and industry 27.3 % of the GDP. The 
GDP per capita at US$ 4,802 was equivalent to 38% of the world’s average GDP per capita. In 2016, 
the service sector was the largest contributor to employment, with 50.8%, followed by the industrial 
sector, 31.3%, and the primary agriculture with 18.0%. The economy relies heavily on the export of 
furniture, wood, footwear, minerals and metals.  
5.
The overly complex institutional set-up has resulted into a growing and largely inefficient public 
service, where inter-entity fragmentation has led to an absence of common vision and objectives, lack 
of coordination mechanisms and cooperation between the entities’ specialised agencies to spearhead 
development. A highly decentralized government provides scope for frequent political obstruction and 
gridlocks and has hampered economic policy coordination and reform, while excessive bureaucracy 
and a segmented market has discouraged foreign investment. BiH ranked 81 out of 190 countries in 
the World Bank ease of doing business rankings 2017, which was the lowest amongst the former 
Yugoslav republics. 
This post-war economic landscape has been further hindered by an incomplete privatisation 
6.
process in key sectors and weak rule of law, translating into an unfriendly business environment 
where the private sector is faced with high labour taxes, inflexible labour market policies, poor 
20 World Bank 2016 
21 ''Poverty among those working in agriculture and construction increased between 2007 and 2011, consistent with the 
macroeconomic indicators of sectoral growth during this period, which show declining output in both sectors (Figure 2.11)'' (WB 
SCD: 22) 
22 The estimated cost of the floods in terms of lost output and damages was equivalent to 15 percent of GDP; WBGCPF: 3. 
23 WB at a glance 2017. 
24 World bank 2016 
43 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
transport infrastructure, energy inefficiency and other structural constraints to economic growth. Thus, 
a key economic challenge faced by BiH is the imbalance of the country’s economic model: public 
policies and incentives are skewed towards the public sector rather than the private sector; 
consumption rather than investment; and imports rather than exports. Government spending remains 
high at around 50% of the GDP. Foreign direct investment steadily declined from USD 529 million to 
USD 285 between 2014 and 2016. The engine of growth and employment creation must shift to the 
private sector while simultaneously downsizing the public sector.  
Foreign trade: BiH is characterised by high dependence on imports, resulting in a rather high 
7.
commodity foreign trade deficit25. The country remains a net food importer. In 2015, agricultural 
products only represented approximately 10% of exports, but account for 18% of total imports26. The 
trade deficit of agricultural products and foodstuffs is equivalent to about 1% of the total deficit in the 
balance of payment27, and reveal the low competiveness of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) 
operating in the agri-food sector which require a set of concerted and collaborative actions across the 
public (government and research, extension) and private sector at all level to address innovations 
gaps and up-coming EU integration challenges; from research and innovation, business development 
services, internal quality and safety system, process of business/production process documentation, 
obligatory and voluntary standard adoption, green technology transfer, compliance requests, internal 
management and marketing improvement to capital investment. 
Constraints for SME Development. The World Bank Doing business 2017 has identified a 
8.
number of area constraining private sector development which if addressed would improve the 
business climate and enhance agricultural manufacturing and exports. BiH which ranked 81, behind 
most other economies in the South-Eastern Europe. 
The growth of agribusiness and SMEs suffer from various institutional and regulatory measures 
9.
characterising a poor business environment: 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Compliance with the legal framework are high pushing the least productive farms out of 
business; 
Rigid labour market regulations and tax burden on jobs are preventing competitiveness 
gains of the most productive sectors in the economy; lower employment costs would 
make successful investment more likely, including in agriculture; 
Differences in currencies, laws and regulations, safety standards (e.g. in agriculture or 
transport) as well as increased border crossing times are some of the recent challenges 
facing BiH exporters 
High costs associated with property rights registration and its implications for a well-
functioning land markets; 
(e)
Poorly targeted and inefficient subsidies schemes.  
  With the recent adoption of structural economic reform agenda 2017-2021 and the on-going EU 
10.
accession path, there are strong indications that the business might improve steadily over the next 
few years. 
  Poverty profile: According to the Household Budget Survey in FBiH (HBS) from 201128, one in 
11.
six households live in poverty and approximately 15% of BiH population does not have a public social 
security29. The poverty headcount of BiH in 2015 stood at 16.9% of the population30, and as in many 
other countries in transition, poverty incidence is much higher in rural area at 19%, compared to 9% in 
25 BiH Economic Reform Agenda: 16 
26 Commercial S/article. Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) 2016 Country Commercial Guide. 
27  In  2015,  imports  of  foodstuffs  were  about  four  times the  amount  exported  from  a  15:1  ratio  in  2000; WBS  CSD:  54;  FAO 
STAT. 
28 This represent the latest available data 
29 BiH Economic Reform Program 2017-2019: 61. 
30 UNDP 2015; BiH Economic Reform Program 2017-2019: 109. 
44 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
urban areas31. There are many rural households are living in or near poverty. In 2015, 19%32 of 
households suffer from chronic material poverty and between 22% to 27% are at the risk of falling into 
material poverty, and thus living in a precarious situation, a rate higher than all European countries 
except Bulgaria.  
  Among the critical reasons for poverty has been the high rate of unemployment, stagnating at 
12.
25.4%. High unemployment and inactivity rates (45.5%) significantly challenge the entity 
governments’ ability to reduce poverty. Unemployment among youth (62.3%) and women (30.7%) is 
extremely high, and significantly higher than for men (25.2%)33. 
  The level of inequality in BiH is one of the highest in the Western Balkans with a Gini index at 
13.
33.434. Poverty in BiH is defined by social exclusion and a lack of access to basic services and 
economic opportunities. The 2011 Extended Household Budget Survey (EHBS) reveals that the poor 
and the most vulnerable are most at risks of being socially excluded. Poverty levels are similar in both 
entities (FBiH and RS) but a larger share of the RS population falls within the bottom 40 percent 
income group, notably because of a higher rural population. 
  Between 1990 and 2015, BiH progressed well with the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
14.
increasing life expectancy at birth (+5.7 years), mean years of schooling (+1.6 years) and expected 
years of schooling (+2.6 years). However, it performed poorly in employment, gender and youth and 
across the three basic dimensions of human development: a long and healthy life, access to 
knowledge and a decent standard of living; ranking 81 out of 188 countries and territories, below most 
of its neighbouring countries. 
In effect since January 2016, partnerships between governments, private sector, civil society 
15.
and citizens lie at the heart of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) implementation. An SDG 
roadmap for the country needs to get adopted. The next key milestones include: creation of the 
institutional SDG mechanism for implementation oversight and leadership; nomination of technical 
institutions for advancement of SDGs in the country; assessment of statistical/measurement needs 
and establishment of SDG baselines and targets and financing plan for SDG implementation. 
  Youth unemployment: it ranks among BiH's biggest challenges. Labour market structural 
16.
inefficiency have been identified as a key obstacle to growth and competitiveness. These include rigid 
labour market regulations, high tax burden, unfair competition and insufficient control of unregistered 
labour, and specifically penalize the youth which suffer from a much higher unemployment rates, 
62.3%, more than double the overall unemployment rate, 25.5%35. Young people often do not manage 
to enter into in the labour market for years. A large number of young people have no qualifications 
(31%) or inadequate knowledge and skills for the labour market (90%)36. Consequently, there is a high 
rate of youth migration37, thus making it difficult to project how many additional youth will enter the 
labour market in the medium term. In recent years, and against the magnitude of the phenomenon, 
reducing structural unemployment has gained traction in policy circles. Addressing this challenge is at 
the heart of the Government’s reform program. A state level Sector Planning Document (SPD) entitled 
Employment, Education and Social Policy was elaborated in 2016 and propose interventions which 
will ensure an increase of the number of employed persons through activities in the area of education 
and creating inclusive employment, as well as mitigating the effects of decrease of the number of 
existing jobs. 
  Unemployment bureaus in both entities have been coordinating employment generation 
17.
programs aimed at increasing the share of youth in the formal private sector and reduce employment 
31  Almost  90  %  of  households  in  the  rural  household  survey  declared  a  monthly  income  below  the  calculated  “family 
consumption basket” of 1,370 KM; UNDP Rural Household Survey 2013. 
32 BiH Statistic Agency 2015,  
33 WB 2017. 
34 WB CPF: 7. 
35 The Labour Force Survey for 2016 issued by the Agency for Statistics of BiH 
36 Bosnia Economic Reform: 105. 
37 According to the World Bank, the net migration of BiH was 10 000 between 2008- 2010. 
45 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
in the ‘grey economy’ (informality) and inactivity. Their responsibilities include verifying beneficiaries’ 
eligibility, reviewing all supporting documents, maintaining job seeker database, interfacing with 
employers and job seekers and vice versa, and regular reporting on progress. One such state 
program implemented by the Employment Bureau and its branch offices include subsidizing social 
security contributions for companies willing to employ youth; from 100% in the first to 25% in the third 
year. The retention rate companies is low, questioning the sustainability of these publicly funded 
programs. 
  The majority of donor programmes are focusing on unemployed young people up to 30 years of 
18.
age and without work experience. The World Bank has been financing large employment program, 
including a recently approved EUR 50 million loan aiming to help the governments in both entities to 
scale up and improve the effectiveness of their Active Labor Market Programs (ALMP) and Public 
Employment Services intermediation to increase formal job placements in the formal private sector for 
selected target groups of job seekers, such as youth, unemployed with low skills, long-term 
unemployed, unemployed 40 years of age or older, women, and other disadvantaged groups.  
19.
  Other supply side labor market interventions aimed at increasing the employability of young 
people (mainly by strengthening the capacities of the public employment services) include the U.S. 
Agency for International Development GOLD project, the Swiss Agency for Development Cooperation 
Youth. Program promoting the creation of decent job opportunities for young women and men are less 
frequent. The evidences of such program in the agricultural sector are thin, including the pilot from the 
Swiss funded MarketMaker in the agri-food sector. 
  Agriculture: Agriculture is one of the most important sectors of the BiH economy and a major 
20.
contributor to food and nutrition security. The poor, more likely to work in agriculture than wealthier 
groups, are concentrated in rural areas where rural poverty rates are higher than urban. Half of the 
rural-urban poverty gap can be explained by educational differences. BiH is still a predominantly rural 
country, and as such well performing agricultural value chains are critical elements of rural citizens' 
livelihoods. Improving agricultural productivity, marketing and trade would accelerate rural poverty 
reduction. 
  Agricultural land covers 2.1 million hectares, of which 46.5% is arable and as much as half of 
21.
arable land remains unused. Cultivable land amounts to 1 million ha. However, less than 20% of 
agricultural land is suited to intensive agriculture, for the most part located in lowlands and river 
valleys. The main agricultural crops are corn, wheat and barley. Agricultural exports by value mainly 
consists of fruits and nuts, animal or vegetable fat and oils and fish. These are mainly exported to 
Turkey (27%), Serbia (15%) and Croatia (11%). 
  Although the share of agriculture in GDP is constantly decreasing, from 11% in 2003 and 7% in 
22.
2016, agricultural production is a backbone of the rural economy and generates significant economic 
value, provides for 10% of the country’s exports, generates 8% of GDP and generate employment for 
about 18% of the national labour force38, representing 147,000, of which 65% men and 35% women. 
In 2015, this number of employees rose by 8,000 or 6% compared to the previous year39.  
  Several productivity constraints are hampering the development of the agricultural sector, 
23.
including: poorly developed transport networks and marketing channels, unreliable wholesale linkages 
for processing and bulking, low rate of mechanisation and the very low share of land under irrigation, 
about 1%. The fragmentation of land ownership into small agricultural parcels and limited access to 
affordable credit represent additional major challenges in strengthening the competitiveness of 
agricultural production and food industry.  
  Approximately 600,000 smallholder farms continue to dominate the agricultural sector in BiH, 
24.
50% own less than 2 ha and 89% own less than 5 ha while only 4% have areas beyond 10 hectares40. 
38 See BiH Economic Reform Program 2017-2021: 84. 
39 2015 Labour Force Survey, carried out by the Agency for Statistics of BiH in collaboration with the Institute of Statistics of 
Republika Srpska and the Institute for Statistics of the Federation BiH. 
40 WBG Systematic Country Diagnostic 2015: 27. 
46 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
Farming system are characterised by low landholding size (4.7 ha/farm), and in most cases farms are 
formed from small parcels, often dislocated from each other, which makes the production more costly 
and less efficient. Formal holdings registration gives access to direct support but due to the minimum 
threshold to qualify as a farm, less than 20% benefit from direct subsidies. Land consolidation, greater 
financial inclusion and agricultural information system would support productivity efficiencies. 
  Private sector stakeholders are present along the agricultural value chains and include agro 
25.
processors, traders, buyers, wholesalers and exporters. Previous IFAD projects have developed 
various models in facilitating linkages and increasing supply chains for private lead buyers, notably by 
channelling inputs through the lead buyers and other forms of pre-financing arrangements. These 
arrangements are based on win-win producers-buyers partnerships and can also involve in some 
instances the municipality which will provide public infrastructure to leverage greater private sector 
commitment. 
  Fruit and vegetable. Production of fruits and vegetables is one of the most important sub-
26.
sectors in agriculture in BiH. During the last couple of years there has been an introduction of new 
cultivars and varieties in primary production across the country. Fruits such as plums, raspberries, 
strawberries, cherries, forest fruits and vegetables such as cucumbers and gherkins, tomatoes and 
peppers are attractive for fresh markets as well as processing. Vegetable production in BiH covers 
75,000 hectares (gherkins, paprika, tomato, cucumber, lettuce, etc.), both for fresh consumption 
mainly in the domestic market and for processing in the domestic and EU-market. Annual production 
of the main fruit and vegetables in BiH from 2013-2015 was between 815,736 and 955,821 tons (refer 
appendix 1). 
Table 1: Production of Fruit and Vegetables in BiH 
Main F&V Products 
in tons 
Potato 
Plums 
Apples 
Cabbage and cauliflower 
Tomato 
Onion 
Peppers 
Grapes 
Cucumbers 
Raspberries 
Total  
Source: BiH Statistic Agency 
2013 
371,140 
226,898 
85,117 
69,622 
56,030 
39,739 
38,524 
31,800 
27,876 
9,075 
955,821 
Year 
2014 
300,408 
74,075 
44,795 
59,972 
29,307 
33,346 
28,638 
26,221 
17,807 
10,613 
625,182 
2015 
351,216 
117,565 
91,471 
62,536 
41,182 
37,718 
37,177 
32,809 
30,431 
13,631 
815,736 
  Due to favourable climatic and economic conditions for berry fruit production (raspberries, 
27.
strawberries, blueberries, blackberries and chokeberry), the area with berries has increased over the 
last few years and has reached production above 13,631 tons in 2015. Fruit and vegetable exports 
from BiH have nearly quadrupled since 2008 to some 125 million BAM in 2015. Worldwide BiH is in 
15th place with plum production and 10th place in raspberry production. The raspberry sub-sector 
generates exports of BAM 50 million and employs 50,000-60,000 people in production, harvesting and 
processing. Some 15 companies in BiH are involved berries export.  
47 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
Table 2: Main Fruit and Vegetable Export Crops in BiH 
Top 10 export products 
Frozen raspberries 
Fresh apples 
Fresh pears 
Fresh gherkins 
Fresh plums 
Frozen blackberries 
Processed mixed vegetables 
Frozen strawberries 
Other jams or marmalades 
Pickled gherkins 
Other 
Source: FTC BiH, BiH Statistic Agency 
Total 
2015 (KM) 
50,060,476 
13,912,294 
10,748,565 
10,612,135 
5,736,496 
3,644,729 
3,087,830 
2,009,433 
1,808,094 
1,445,064 
21,564,682 
124,629,799 
Share 
40% 
11% 
9% 
9% 
5% 
3% 
2% 
2% 
1% 
1% 
17% 
100% 
Industrial processing of fruit in BiH involves mainly fruit drying and production of fruit juices (or 
28.
concentrates), syrups, jams and marmalades. There are approximately 20-25 fruit and vegetable 
processors in BiH. About one third of processed fruit and vegetables are imported, as a local 
production cannot meet the local demand. 
Table 3: Export/import of processed fruits and vegetables in 2013, 2014 and 2015 
Year 
2013 
2014 
2015 
Export/import 
Production in thousands of tons 
In million KM 
Source: FTC BiH, BiH Statistic Agency 
Export 
7,055 
19,484 
Import 
21,902 
59,875 
Export 
6,211 
17,540 
Import 
25,055 
64,606 
Export 
5,151 
15,414 
Import 
26,550 
70,481 
  Dairy: In the last decades the dairy sector in Bosnia has developed towards increased 
29.
productivity by reduction of cows alongside increased milk production per animal. At the end of 2015, 
the total milk production was around 666 million litres from around 243,000 cows (refer table below). 
Table 4: Number of milking cows, average milk production per cow/year and total milk production 
Federation BIH 
Republika Srpska 
Year 
No of 
cows 
Milk per 
cow/liters 
1,947 
2,178 
2,433 
2,577 
2,587 
2005  157,000 
2010  145,555 
2013  135,785 
2014  135,233 
2015  135,710 
Source: USAID/Sweden FARMA II project 
Total milk  
000 - lit. 
304,895 
316,997 
330,387 
348,549 
351,144 
No of 
cows 
141,000 
124,000 
109,000 
108,000 
108,000 
Milk per 
cow/liters 
2,232 
2,969 
3,021 
2,938 
2,932 
Total milk  
000 - lit. 
315,029 
368,161 
329,285 
317,359 
316,688 
  Dairies collect approximately one third of milk produced by local farmers, which is still low in 
30.
comparison to other countries such as Slovenia with 80% milk collection). BiH has 100 dairies with 
total production capacity of 2 million litres/day. Approximately 45 dairies exceed capacity of 1,000 
litres/day and 10 dairies exceed capacity of 100,000 litres/day. Six large dairies are market leaders in 
the country with a market share of more than 70%. BiH currently processes less than one quarter of 
its total milk production and with demand for dairy products such as cheese, yoghurt and other milk 
probiotic products are expected to rise by 20% over the next 5 years in the region, the country offers 
an excellent opportunity for added processing. Therefore, conditions to further improve milk 
production meeting EU standards in terms of productivity as well as in terms of hygiene and standards 
are required. 
31.
  Honey. Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has good potential for the production of honey due to its 
varied climate and landscapes. Bosnia, with its continental climate and mountainous terrain, enables 
the production of several high-value types of mono-floral (chestnut blossom, acacia), forest and 
48 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
meadow honey; Herzegovina, on the other hand, with its Mediterranean climate, is ideal for the 
production of other types of honey such as poly-floral honey derived from the nectar of many types of 
Mediterranean herbs. According to FAOSTAT official data, the number of beehives in BiH nearly 
doubled within ten years (2004-2014) from 240,723 to 392,348 beehives. Production has rapidly 
increased and imports have dropped from 270 tons in 2012 to some 180 tons of honey in 2015. 
However, beekeeping accounts for 1% of the total agricultural production in BiH and cannot cover 
local market demand.  
  MAPs/NTFP:. Bosnia and Herzegovina has long tradition in collecting and cultivating of 
32.
medicinal and aromatic herbs, wild berries  and mushrooms. A very rich biodiversity of medicinal and 
aromatic plants and mushrooms in Bosnia and Herzegovina has the potential to contribute 
substantially to the national economy. It is assessed that BiH has over 700 species of medicinal and 
aromatic plants of which around 200 are exploited (balm, immortelle, juniper, chamomile, lavender, 
mint, rosemary, sage, savory, etc.). The annual harvesting of medicinal and aromatic plants in BiH 
varies from 1,500 to 9,000 tons. Still, herbs continue to play an important role in the MAPs sector, 
accounting for about 20% of total exports. Also notable is the recent trend of cultivation, especially for 
plants such as chamomile, lemon balm, mint, marigold, lavender, basil and immortelle. Some 30-40 
companies in BiH are active in MAP export.  
33.
  Essential oils: Production of essential oils has dramatically increased over the last 10 years. 
Most popular oils are immortelle, sage, lemon balm, chamomile, bay laurel, juniper, lavender, heather, 
chaste tree, mint, wild thyme, prickly juniper and rosemary. Certain number of companies also 
specialized in essential oils from conifer trees, such as Black pine, Scots pine, Silver fir and Spruce. 
The United States and France are the key markets for essential oil, with great interest for immortelle 
oil from Herzegovina. To meet the growing demand, over 1,000 ha are planted with immortelle in 
Herzegovina, with seeds taken from the wild plants and in areas where immortelle naturally grows. 
The immortelle oil contains high percentage of alfa-pinene, which is considered to be a broad-
spectrum antibiotic. Therefore, this oil is more and more in demand by pharmaceutical industry.  
  Mushrooms: Mushrooms are important products within NTFP and mainly collected in the 
34.
forest. The most popular mushrooms are Porcini (Boletus edulis), Chanterelle (Cantharellus cibarius), 
Morel (Morchela conica) and Black Trumpet (Craterellus cornucopioides). Most of the producers have 
an organic certificate. The mushrooms from BiH are exported fresh, dried or frozen. Main export 
markets are Italy, Germany, Slovenia, Switzerland and Austria. For fresh wild mushrooms the season 
starts in April and ends in November.  
Table 5: Export Value in the MAP Sub-Sector in BiH 
Value of Export in the MAPs Sub-sector 2011 – 2015 in BAM 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
Essential oils 
1,193,168 
2,247,586 
2,284,432 
3,174,456 
3,208,561 
Mushrooms 
10,443,098 
15,526,441 
14,747,969 
17,206,307 
12,953,397 
Forest Fruits 
Herbs 
6,261,779 
4,871,414 
Natural Shampoo  No info 
2,463,377 
4,652,212 
No info 
5,406,260 
5,734,692 
No info 
5,096,201 
6,643,624 
782.637 
6,392,206 
6,153,041 
681,877 
MAPs 
Transplants 
T O T A L 
No info 
No info 
No info 
20.552 
165,479 
22,769,459 
24,889,616 
28,173,353 
32,923,777 
29,554,561 
Source: BiH Foreign Trade Chamber 
  Mushrooms could be seen in many cases as a by-product of the berry value chain, as often the 
35.
same wholesalers are still buying. Many companies started with mushrooms and then expanded to 
berries which are commercially more important today. MAP and mushroom collection is a sector 
dominated by around 30,000 rural families as collectors. According to recent studies 20% of the 
collectors are young people below 25 years, 60% middle-aged (25-45 years) and 30% elderly 
49 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
collectors. Most collectors belong to rural and unemployed population; 60% of them female. Collection 
of mushrooms and medicinal herbs are the major source of income of 44% of the collectors; for 38% 
of the collectors it is additional income and rest use NTFP for own consumption. Under favourable 
climate conditions, a collector collecting mushrooms within 600 hours (some 100 days) per year, can 
earn up to BAM 2,620 annually41, but NTFP and in particular mushrooms are significantly affected by 
weather conditions and climate change effects such as droughts. Mushroom exporters report on 
imports from other regions to fulfil the contracts as well as starting with mushroom cultivation (e.g. 
shitake). Approximately 93% of NTFP are exported to international markets; sales prices are 2-3 up to 
10 times higher than collector prices.  
  Climatic and environmental challenges: BiH has experienced frequent weather extremes 
36.
and natural disasters over the past decade, causing severe economic losses42. Individual households 
working in the agricultural sector are more vulnerable to weather shocks and lacks the resilience to 
recover from natural disasters and the increasing impacts of climate change, including floods, 
droughts and harsh winters. Building resilience and ensuring the climate proofing of agricultural value 
chains is essential for both sustainable economic growth and rural livelihood. The consecutive climatic 
shocks of 2013 and 2014 revealed an under insured agricultural sector. 
  Financial inclusion: Enhancing access to finance and supporting the development of effective 
37.
rural credit schemes is cornerstone to improve productivity and competitiveness of smallholders 
agriculture and unleash private sector growth. Recent data published by the Central Bank of BiH 
revealed that liquidity in the banking sector are high, as exemplified by the deposits against loans 
ratio, equating to 96.9% by the end of 201543. Despite the high liquidity, a combination of factors from 
both lenders and borrowers are squeezing much needed investment44. On the supply side, 
commercial banks have traditionally been avoiding rural markets, in part due to limited understanding 
of agricultural business and persistent views that rural small rural producers are more risky for lending 
than registered private companies. In assessing loan applications, commercial banks in B&H 
emphasize the quality of the collateral rather than the business profitability and efficiency, further 
disadvantaging small agricultural producers. On the demand side, the main constrains for greater 
borrowing are, in addition to high collateral requirements, high interest rate, and a lack of reliable 
financial accounting records which would prevent banks to assess risk comprehensively. Commercial 
banks are seldom engaging with IFAD's target group and the penetration of financial services in poor 
municipalities remain a challenge. Credit outreach to the agriculture corporate sector, which includes 
individual farmers, amounts to 2% of their total lending portfolio only. On the other hand, the customer 
base of Micro-credit organizations (MCOs) is in majority serving IFAD's target group, predominantly 
coming from the unemployed and other vulnerable groups, women and youth. In recent years, the 
micro-finance sector has increased its lending to agriculture, from 33% in 2011 to 38% in 201545. High 
interest rate charged on MCO loans, about 15% higher than commercial rate, continue to hinder 
access to finance for the poorest segments in rural areas.  
  Historically, IFAD's partnerships with the financial sector has mostly revolved around improving 
38.
access to sustainable financial services through refinancing facility mechanisms, and special credit 
lines for PFIs, with the objectives to incentivise Commercial Banks to scale up its agriculture lending 
to agribusiness SMEs while the MCO sector would deal with individual farmers. This financial supply 
strategy was devised in the post-global financial crisis context. Meanwhile, IFAD's refinancing loans 
have lost their attractiveness, especially since market borrowing for PFIs have become much more 
attractive. Total weighted interest rate on bank deposits decreased to less than 1% at the end of 
41 Source: Sabina Delic et al.: Value chain analysis of NTFP in BiH, published 2017 in Agriculture & Forestry Vol. 63 
42 The estimated cost of the floods in terms of lost output and damages was equivalent to 15 percent of GDP; WBGCPF: 3.  
43 BiH Central Bank Annual Report 2015. 
44 The non-banking financial system is distributed among 25 insurance companies (5% of financial system assets), 8 leasing 
companies (2%), 34 investment funds, and 18 micro-credit organizations (MCOs44) (3% each) and 1 factoring company as of 
end of 2013; WB Systematic Country Diagnostic 2015: 49 and BiH Central Bank 2016 Annual Report. 
45 Data from data from information of the status in banking and microcredit system in two B&H entities 
50 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
201646. The regulatory framework pertaining to liquidity risk management has also evolved towards 
stricter financial supervision regulation in the form of higher reserve requirement to create higher 
liquidity buffers in the banking system. IFAD projects in BiH have been instrumental in demonstrating 
the large demand and absorptive capacity for additional resources for the agriculture. Starting with the 
Livestock and Rural Finance Development Project with lending exclusively to agriculture, there has 
been a shift, in subsequent projects, from to increase financial inclusion at large). This resulted into a 
total of 70+ million BAM47 (excluding the effect of revolving), benefiting 16,150 individuals. 
  EU accession: On February 15, 2016, BiH applied for EU membership. Major rural 
39.
transformation are likely to occur in the agricultural and rural development sector with both the 
anticipated EU accession and membership to the World Trade Organisation (WTO). Tapping into the 
potential of the future membership to the common market will be a function of how quickly and 
effectively BiH can reform the legislative and regulatory environment to comply with the requirements 
of EU accession. With the recently submitted application for EU candidacy status in 2016 and the 
subsequent adoption of a Stabilization and Association Agreement, BiH has made a critical step 
towards EU membership.  
  As the first step to the accession the country received a detailed questionnaire from the 
40.
European Commission in December 2016 on which its readiness to be granted EU candidate status 
will be evaluated. At the moment, it is in the process of preparing responses of BiH to the 
questionnaire received from the EU and, depending on the answer to that questionnaire, the EU will 
or will not approve the candidate status of BiH. If BiH gets the candidate status, negotiations will begin 
and agriculture represent one of the important areas of negotiation. 
  Progress is required in several areas of the economy to reach compliance with the EU’s 
41.
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), which sets standards for participation in the common agricultural 
market. The EU has placed particular emphasis on (i) the development of a unified administrative 
structure (ii) data collection (iii) subsidy administration (transparent EU-aligned agricultural payment 
systems) (iv) food safety (v) veterinary and phytosanitary (plant health) policies and (vi) rural 
development. BiH’s efforts to implement the CAP are impaired by weak coordination and enforcement 
mechanisms (EU, 2012)48.  
  The BiH is currently working to create the required preconditions for the use of pre-accession 
42.
funds of the European Union. Both Entities are working on establishing paying systems to capture 
both EU Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD) and Direct 
Payments. Up to KM 35 million annually have been earmarked to the sector by the commission to 
support BiH's competitiveness of agriculture in the pre-accession phase.  
  With regard to the WTO's accession, negotiations referring to agricultural provision has been 
43.
completed. Further work is however required to align measures across all BiH institutional structure in 
the harmonisation of agricultural incentive policies to comply with open market competition at the 
global and regional level. 
  Rural Development Strategy: National Agricultural and Rural Development Strategy and Plan 
44.
in BiH are designed at both State and entities level.  
  State Level strategy: The State is in the process of formulating its first Strategic plan of rural 
45.
development of the BiH 2018-2021 and will serve as a road map to adopt EU food security and 
phytosanitary measures. This single coherent and comprehensive Strategic Plan for Rural 
Development of BiH compiling the perspective of both Entities vis-à-vis the EU, is a pre-requisite 
together with the establishment of an effective IPARD coordination mechanism to access the IPA 
46 According to Central bank of B&H the total deposits continued their upward trend and they increased by BAM 1.15 billion in 
the end of 2015 compared to the end of 2014, mainly by the continuation of the growth of deposits of private domestic sector, 
primarily  households  (BiH  Central  Bank  Annual  Report  2015).  Large  foreign  ownership  in  the  can  easily  and  financially  lend 
funds for lending in the event of an increased need. 
47 This exclude the effect of the revolving fund. 
48 FARMA 2016: 2. 
51 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
funds. Responsible institutions in BiH responsible for agriculture and rural development are currently 
working on devising a model of nationwide operational structure which will take into account the 
specificities of the constitutional set up of BiH while meeting the requirements of the European 
Commission (EC). The future countrywide Strategic Program has to offer solutions to eliminate 
duplications and lay out a framework for alignment and harmonization. 
  Entity level strategy: Apart from entities specific considerations based on their respective 
46.
landscapes and agro-climatic situation, corresponding strategies of FBiH and RS are substantially 
similar in terms of broad strategic objectives, and are constructed around 4 convergent focal priorities 
namely: (i) improving competitiveness of the agricultural and food sector (ii) institutional development 
and improvement of legal frameworks in order to stimulate agricultural and rural development (iii) 
sustainable use of natural resources; and (iv) improvement of rural livelihoods and diversification. 
Entities sponsored subsidies schemes are generally limited and heavily skewed towards direct 
production rather than investment. Broader social goals and rural development issues remain such as 
food safety standards, environmental issues, and social problems of rural areas - rural poverty, 
depopulation, gender and youth issues, and marginalized rural area - remain unaddressed.  
  At FBiH level a new strategic document, the Mid-term Strategy for the Agricultural Development 
47.
Sector for the period 2015-2019 was adopted by the Parliament in mid-2015 but the corresponding 
program of work still need to be approved. It builds on the previous cycle which specifically supported: 
(i) the return of refugees and displaced persons (ii) sustainable development of natural resources (iii) 
improvement of the profitability and competitiveness of agriculture and food industries (iv) 
strengthening of cooperatives, enterprises and producer organisations and linking them with the food 
industry (v) development of land markets through land consolidation (vi) increasing quantity and 
quality of food to meet domestic and export demands (vii) the institutionalisation of the sector in line 
with EU requirements (viii) state-level agriculture and rural development policies; and (ix) promotion of 
exports of agricultural and food products. 
48.
  The RS adopted a the 2016 2020 Strategic Plan for the Development of Agriculture and Rural 
Areas of Republika Srpska, covering agriculture sector and rural development, and the Strategy for 
forestry Development of the Republika Srpska 2011–2021. Its goal is to improve the well-being of 
rural households and to strengthen rural communities via measures that will increase employment on 
and outside farms and increase the quality of rural life and work in general. These strategies foresee 
the following: (a) improvement of competitiveness of agriculture and forestry (b) rational management 
of natural resources; and (c) rural economic diversification. Within this frame, priorities include: (i) on-
farm investments (ii) investments in processing and marketing of agricultural products (iii) support to 
farmers organisations (iv) human resource enhancement in rural areas (v) support to the rural finance 
sector especially for capital investments in agriculture (vi) diversification of non-agricultural and 
agricultural activities in rural areas (vii) the set-up and development of micro, small and medium sized 
enterprises; (viii) construction and maintenance of rural infrastructure (ix) support to rural tourism; and 
(x) support for local rural development initiatives. Brčko district has also drafted the Strategy of 
development agriculture, food and rural development for period 2008-2013 which was never officially 
adopted.  
49.
  Producers Associations (PAs): Under BiH State Law on Associations and Foundations 
adopted in 2001, Producers Associations (PAs) are considered as not for profit membership Civil 
Society Organizations (CSOs). As such, they benefit from certain exemptions, i.e. taxations on 
donations, grants, membership fees and on any profits from economic activities directly related to the 
achievement of the organization’s goals. On the other hand, for revenue generating activities, PAs are 
treated like any other profit-making enterprises under a standard rate fiscal regime for all activities not 
related to the organization’s goal but cannot distribute profits to its members. There could be around 
200 PAs in FBiH and around 70 in RS49. The interventions have established or supported more than 
200 Producer Associations (PAs) and Cooperatives, with a total membership of 18,750 out of which 
49 A large part of which are dairy or bee-keepers associations as a result of the efforts invested in these sectors during the post-
war period. 
52 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
14,250 were men and 4,500 of women representing 24% of the total membership. The crucial 
intermediation role of PAs in linking producers with upstream market players have long been 
supported by IFAD, as a catalyst for more inclusiveness and ensure sustainability. Approach to PAs 
institutional strengthening has greatly evolved, from providing organisational and technical assistance 
linked to market and value chain development (REEP) to matching grants50 to producer associations 
(PAs) and cooperatives (coops) for small infrastructure, equipment, improved inputs and herd 
improvements (RLDP). In RBDP, PAs and Cooperatives have proved to be very effective in providing 
timely finance to small farmers. In the recently closed RLDP, the PCU supported 24 PAs/cooperatives, 
comprising a total of 2,833 members or assistance with matching grants totalling BAM 269,784. In 
RBDP, project funds are strictly directed to PAs/cooperatives with functioning management structure 
and potential for improved competitiveness. The ongoing RBDP has so far partnered with 10 PAs and 
is expected to cover an additional 50 marketing groups by the end of the project in 2020, with a total 
membership of 4200. Similarly, under RCDP, 60 PAs and cooperatives will benefit from specialised 
extension services and productive/value adding assets. Persistent challenges in working with PAs 
have been their lack of cohesion, commercial mind set still at its early stage, limited outreach to 
poorest farmers and constraints in accessing finance sustainably. 
  The cooperative sector: The role of cooperatives in supporting the growth of the smallholders 
50.
sector have been widely documented worldwide and BiH, with about 90% of farmers falling in the 
category of small and medium farmers averaging 2.5ha of land, is no exception. Well-functioning 
cooperatives can potentially play catalytic role in integrating the smallholders system in profitable 
value chains, providing market entry for small and medium size farmers and encouraging 
competitiveness. The country socialist historical legacy characterised by strong state interference and 
the current complex system of governance have influenced the formal legal and institutional 
framework pertaining to the establishment of cooperatives.  
  The cooperative sector in BiH is a non-governmental sector. Today, around 400 cooperatives 
51.
operating in the agricultural sector have formally registered and more than half are considered active, 
mostly involved in marketing and input supply, exploiting the economies of scale not available to small 
individual producers.  
  The legal framework governing cooperatives is the 2003 Law on Cooperatives passed at the 
52.
state level, which created a new regulatory framework for establishing and operating cooperatives 
based on voluntary membership. In 2009, the RS passed additional regulations with the Law on 
Agricultural Cooperatives of the Republika Srpska, requiring all RS cooperatives to re-register under 
the entity-level law, regardless of prior state-level registration. In these regulations a cooperative is 
defined as a commercial legal entity owned and democratically controlled by its members. It is 
composed of a number of persons who join together to carry out an economic activity of mutual 
benefit. Membership is open to anyone who satisfies certain non-discriminatory conditions. Economic 
benefits are distributed proportionally according to each member’s level of economic interest in the 
cooperative i.e. by a dividend on sales or purchases51. 
Low barriers to entry in the cooperative sector have led some would-be companies to register 
53.
as agricultural cooperatives and operate as private businesses. In fact, the statutory minimum number 
of members according to the state-level Law from 2003, is a cooperative with five members 
(individuals and/or legal entities). Cooperatives are thus relatively easy to establish; five founding 
members and limited capital are required. As a result, a vast majority of cooperatives are family 
centred and operate as commercial enterprises, taking advantage of certain cost effective 
requirements, including reduced registration time, lower operating costs than companies, lower capital 
and workers requirement and access to government subsidies and donor support, generally 
unavailable to companies. For example, registering a cooperative costs about 1,300 KM in FBiH and 
50  Value  of  the  assistance  varied  according to  the  size  of  the  PAs, their  scope  of  work  and  representation  but  average  USD 
5'000. 
51 Rural Business Development Project Design Report 2011. 
53 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
between 1,200 and 1,300 KM in the RS, and the process lasts approximately 30 days. In contrast, 
establishing a limited liability company cost from 4,000 to 5,000 KM and lasting from 30 to 45 days. 
54.
It is widely recognised that the operating rules and principles diverge from the EU cooperatives, 
more specifically as it relates to governance, collective ownership and profit sharing mechanism. The 
below table present an overview of the financial performance of the cooperative sector in BiH. The 
table shows that more than a third of the active cooperatives are generating profits averaging almost 
half a million KM with an average capitalisation value of KM 388,350. 
Characteristics of active coops 
 FBiH 
 RS 
 BiH Total 
Number of active coops 
Number of total coop members 
Number of coop cooperants 
Number of employees/active coop 
Average number of coop members/active coop 
Average number of cooperants /active coop 
% of profitable Active coops 
Value of Capital/ active coop 
Average 2016 revenue/active coop (KM) 
Average 2016 profit per coop member 
120 
2600 
9700 
4.3 
22 
81 
60% 
KM 416,700 
KM 500,000 
KM 1,150 
81 
1842 
4135 
6 
23 
51 
75% 
KM 360,000 
KM 300,000 
KM 14,500 
201 
4,442 
13,835 
5 
22 
69 
67% 
KM 388,350 
KM 400,000 
KM 7,825 
  Active cooperatives in the two entities have established umbrella federations representing 
55.
cooperatives members: the Republika Srpska Cooperative Union (RSCU) and the Federation of BiH 
Cooperative Union (FBiHCU) and Brcko District Coop Union (BDCU). All three entity associations 
have established a BiH level apex, namely the BiH Cooperative Union which has the mandate to 
influence domestic policy making process and authority to represent interested stakeholders role viz. 
external partners, including international organizations. 
  Rural Advisory Services: Inclusive agricultural growth potential can only be realised if 
56.
functioning upstream and downstream services are available to producers, farmers organisations and 
private sector players. Several categories of service providers co-exists in a fragmented landscape 
which differ significantly in scope and operational model between the two entities. 
57.
  Public Extension Services. In the RS, public advisory services are better functioning with 7 
regional branches and a central unit in Banja Luka. In FBiH, the system was originally established at 
canton level with no centralised coordination unit. Currently, and given the cantons' lack of 
capabilities, the advising and supportive functions have come down to the municipalities which initiate 
local initiatives and as a result established small level units headed by an external economic advisers 
to steer development, tasked with mobilising external resources, recruiting and financing their own 
extension officers to implement their municipal rural development action. Again, the RS approach 
differs from the FBiH as the competencies for municipality level development are remaining within the 
responsibility and under the direct guidance of the municipality. Consequently, there is a marked 
difference regarding the level of interaction with agricultural advisors, from 15 % in RS compared to 8 
% in FBiH – an outcome that might be expected given that RS has a public farm advisory service 
whilst FBiH does not as yet52. In both entities, the public service are underfunded, suffer from lack of 
equipment and understaffed. The heavily fragmented nature of public service delivery and the 
absence of adequate legislation and planning documents defining roles of the various government 
levels have resulted in mostly inefficient extension services. 
58.
  Public driven BDS. Established through donor support based on the EU model of regional 
development, they support to private actors, businesses, NGOs and governments in the field of local 
economic development, infrastructure and sustainable agriculture development. In the FBiH, these 
regional semi-public entities are evenly distributed across cantons, and include: 
(a)
The Economic Region Development Agency (SERDA d.o.o), located in Sarajevo; 
52 Rural Household Survey 2013, Annex 5: 40. 
54 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background  
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
 (f)
The Regional Development Agency for Herzegovina (REDAH) 
The Regional Information Centre (RIC)  
The Centre for Rural Development and Agriculture Herzegovina(CRRP).  
The Northeast Regional Development Association (NERDA), based in Tuzla; and 
The Regional Development Agency for Central BiH (REZ RDA), based in Zenica. 
  By contrast, the RS followed a more traditional approach of local subsidiaries to support rural 
59.
SMEs. The RS created the Agency for Development of Small and Medium Enterprises (RARS) in 
2004. 
  These agencies are mostly funded by externally funded programs. The agency currently has 33 
60.
staff and is coordinating the work of 13 local development agencies in the RS, including: 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
 (f)
(g)
(h)
 (i)
 (j)
(k)
 (l)
City Development Agency Banja Luka (CIDEA) 
Agency for Economic Development of the City of Prijedor (PREDA-PD)“ 
Agency for Development of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises of the City of Bijeljina 
Agency for Development of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises of the City of Trebinje 
Development Agency of Municipality Modriča 
Agency for Economic Development of Municipality Mrkonjic Grad Mrkonjić Grad 
Agency for Development of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (APIS) Srbac 
Local Development Agency Kozarska Dubica 
Agency for Development of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Doboj 
Agency for Development of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Ugljevik 
Development Agency of Municipality Čelinac 
Development Agency of Municipality Ljubinje.  
  Others. The above coexist with privately delivered BDS and other stakeholders involve in the 
61.
value chains, including the chamber of commerce in both entities, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Export 
Promotion Agency (BHEPA) and other donor supported advisory centres such as the newly 
established incubation centres in Mostar, Zenica and Banja Luka, under a project funded by the EU. 
  Activities of other donors. READ is harmonised with other donor programmes and will 
62.
develop effective linkages with such donor initiatives both for harmonised implementation as well as 
for knowledge sharing and dissemination of good practices, replication and scaling up of success 
stories. The largest agricultural and agribusiness development program in BiH is supported by USAID 
and Sweden and consist of a grant to foster agricultural market activity (FARMA II), and builds on the 
achievements of the previous phase. Another important sectoral intervention include the GIZ’s 
ProLocal initiative promoting local economic development and agricultural value chain development. 
Under the FARMA umbrella, the Czech Development Agency (CDA) is financing a capacity 
development project aimed at supporting the certification and control of planting material and is 
currently designing a new integrated project to stimulate value addition in the milk value chain. Local 
development and remittances focus programs also have implications for the rural economy; including 
the UNDP Local Integrated Development (LID) and the UNDP Diaspora for Development (D4D). 
55 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Poverty context 
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has relatively strong social indicators, with most of the population 
1. 
having access to water, sanitation and health care. From 1990 and 2015, BiH progressed well on key 
indicators such as increasing life expectancy at birth (+5.7 years) and expected years of schooling 
(+2.6 years). However, it performed poorly in employment, gender and youth and across the three 
basic dimensions of human development: a long and healthy life, access to knowledge and a decent 
standard of living.  
2. 
The country is placed 81st in UNDP's Human Development Index (HDI) ranking, with an 
aggregated score of 0.750 in 2015.53 Poverty is not so much about absolute destitution but is 
characterized by social exclusion, a shortage of access to essential basic services and public goods 
that make up a better standard of living. The poverty headcount of BiH in 2015 stood at 16.9% of the 
population in comparison to 17.9% in 2011: In the two entities the average poverty rate differed slightly 
with 17.0% in FBiH and 16.4% in the RS. According to an UNDP survey 2013, the incidence of 
poverty was lowest in the urban areas of the large cities (10,4%) and highest in rural and semi-urban 
areas of smaller cities (22.3%).  
3. 
Unemployment ranks among BiH's biggest socio-economic challenges and is hampering 
poverty reduction efforts. The youth suffer from a much higher unemployment rates, 54.3%, more than 
double the overall unemployment rate of 25.4%, and women's official or registered unemployment rate 
in 2016 stands just around 30%. Labour force participation rate of women was 34.4% against male of 
58% in 2015. 
Table 1: Greatest Socio-Economic Challenges in BiH (per cent) 
2013 
2014 
Poverty Headcount 
Low rate of activity in the labour market 
High unemployment rate 
High rate of youth unemployment 
WB's Ease of Doing Business  
Low rank according to Corruption Perception 
Index 
Low rank on the UNDP's Human 
Development Index 
Computed from WB SC 2015 and UNDP HDI, 2015 
17.9 
43.6 
27.5 
59.1 
131 
77 
81 
Agriculture and rural poverty 
n.a. 
43.7 
27.5 
62.7 
107 
80 
85 
201654 
25.4 
54.3 
2015 
16.955 
44.1 
27.7 
62.3 
79 
76 
81 
4. 
Agriculture is one of the most important sectors of the BiH economy and a major contributor to 
food and nutrition security. With 217,061 or 30% of total households in FBiH, and 141,629 or 34% of 
total households in RS engaged in agriculture, BiH is still a predominantly rural country, and as such 
well performing agricultural value chains are critical elements of rural citizens' livelihoods.  
5. 
As mentioned earlier, in 2015 the poverty rate in Bosnia and Herzegovina was 16.9%, implying 
that about 500,000 people were living below the poverty threshold. Rural poverty levels are similar in 
both entities but according to estimates a larger share of the RS population falls within the bottom 40 
53 UNDP HDI, 2015. 
54 Agency of Statistics webpage www.bhas.ba 
55 Agency for Statistics of BiH: Household budget survey 2015, publication dated 28.07.2017 
57 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
percent income group, notably because of a higher rural population. The rural poor can be classified in 
the following broad categories: (i) unemployed or with limited employment opportunities, mainly rural 
youth; (ii) households with lack of productive assets and any other income (e.g. pensions) and (iii) 
female-headed household who earn on average 20% less than male headed. Rural poverty is a 
function of landholding size, poor access to productive and marketing infrastructure - i.e. irrigation 
systems, agriculture equipment, etc. and financial exclusion56.  
Public and private marketing infrastructure serving rural producers is still inefficient. Processing 
6. 
capacities such as post-harvest infrastructure such as pre-cooling, cooling, storage and processing 
are still limited causing post-harvest losses, affecting product quality and reducing market access 
opportunities; all of which translates to lower net income for farmers. Overall, rural infrastructure, 
especially in underdeveloped municipalities, is inadequate to provide the necessary services that 
would enable the required sub-sector growth needed for sustainable rural economic development and 
lack the required funding to revitalize such infrastructure.  
Agricultural land covers 2.1 million hectares, of which 46.5% is arable and as much as half of 
7. 
arable land remains unused. Cultivable land amounts to 1 million ha. However, less than 20% of 
agricultural land is suited to intensive agriculture, for the most part located in lowlands and river 
valleys. Although the share of agriculture in GDP is constantly decreasing, from 11% in 2003 and 7% 
in 2016, agricultural production is a backbone of the rural economy and generates significant 
economic value, provides for 10% of the country’s exports, generates 7% of GDP and generate 
employment for about 18% of the national labour force, representing 147,000, of which 65% men and 
35% women.  
Approximately 600,000 farms continue to dominate the agricultural sector, 50% with less than 2 
8. 
ha and 89% with less than 5 ha while only 4% have areas beyond 10 hectares57. Farming system are 
characterised by low landholding size (4.7 ha/farm), and in most cases farm land is fragmented, which 
makes the production more costly and less efficient. Formal farm registration give access to direct 
support but due to the minimum threshold to qualify as a farm, less than 20% benefit from direct 
subsidies. Land consolidation, greater financial inclusion and agricultural information system would 
support productivity efficiencies. The agricultural sector in BiH is experiencing a change in production 
in the recent years: although cereals and fodder still play an important role in production, industrial 
crops such as soya are gaining ground with a growth of 92% from 2015 to 2016. Also the production of 
vegetables has increased by some 20-30%, due to promising export markets in the EU e.g. for 
gherkins (cornichons) and pepper. The same applies for fruits and in particular the berry sub-sector, 
where the production of raspberries has grown in 2016 to 22,160 tons annual production, a surplus of 
62.6% in comparison to 2015, according to the national statistics. But besides these crops with 
significant growth in production and exports, the agricultural sector has still low productivity. 
9.  With regard to extension services for farmers, the two entities follow a different approach. 
Extension offices were established throughout BiH with EU support. In the RS, the system is still in 
place and the AESD (Agricultural Extension Service Department) manages 7 regional-based offices in 
the area of RS, assisted by a central support unit in Banja Luka. Though appreciated, the service is 
still underfunded. In FBiH, the system was originally established at the canton level with no central 
service. It is largely non-operational due to limited interest from the cantons.  
Profile of the rural poor  
10.  Combining income level with land ownership reveal the following typology of rural poor in BiH: (i) 
the very poor, with no productive assets and stable income, heavily reliant on remittances, seasonal 
casual work and the collection of non-timber forest products; (ii) the poor, with landholdings of 
approximately 0.1 to 0.2 ha, 1 or 2 livestock head, and less than 15% of the production marketed; and 
(iii) the borderline poor, made up of more commercially oriented farmers and owning less than 4 
hectares of land.  
56 UNDP Rural Household Survey 2013 
57 WBG Systematic Country Diagnostic 2015: 27. 
58 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
11.  The poorest rural producers are subsistence non-commercial farm households with low output. 
Poor and very poor producers face severe constrains to raise productivity, including: barriers to access 
credit, new technologies such as inputs and improved varieties, and weak marketing linkages. 
Moreover, they are not included in farmers organizations (FOs), nor in value chains. Agricultural output 
for poverty categories (i) and (ii) are supplemented with income from social welfare subsidies, thus 
suffer from high dependency ratio and no or only a single non-farm income-earner in the family. These 
groups would be able to achieve significant livelihoods improvement through stronger and more equal 
participation in farmers organizations. 
Table 2: Target group wealth ranking 
Target Group Wealth Ranking 
Poor 
Borderline Poor 
Very Poor 
Homestead production; 
heavy reliance on social 
welfare/transfer and 
remittances; widows living 
on pension, and war 
returnees are significantly 
marginalized 
Occupation source 
and livelihoods 
Membership based 
org 
Assets availability 
Production surplus 
Proximity to 
markets and 
intermediaries 
Access to financial 
services 
Vulnerability 
Subsistence farming with 
low surplus  
None to low 
Lack or limited access to 
productive assets such as 
land, water and finance; 
often landless and 
economically margina-lised 
Low to medium, mostly PAs 
Land (0,1-0,2 ha) and 
livestock ownership (1-2 
cows); limited access to 
factors of production, 
extension services, and 
finance 
Lack of production surplus to 
sell; poorly integrated into 
markets and value chains 
Lives in remote area; suffer 
from rural infrastructure 
deficit and isolation to 
economic activities 
Little marketable surplus; 
sold on weekly rural market 
Periodic access to rural 
market or minor urban 
centers  
Microcredit loans 
Small surplus for 
commercialisation  
Medium to high, mostly 
Pas, and to a lesser 
extent agricultural coop 
Land (0,3-1,5 ha.) and 
livestock ownership (4-5 
cows) with reliable 
sources of water and 
regular interface with 
extension services 
All surplus marketed 
through cooperatives or 
established contractual 
agreement with 
enterprises; limited 
bargaining power 
Limited access to markets 
as live/operate closer to 
small urban centers 
Microcredit loans and 
commercial loans 
None 
High exposure and sensitivity to climate shocks; low resilience to natural disasters 
(drought, floods, hail, early frosts), resulting in harvest lost, low yield and quality and 
higher cost of production. 
12.  The third group of small-scale producers include those with larger agricultural landholdings and 
some level of crop diversification, combining horticulture and fruits with small scale dairy operations. 
They are integrated into farmers' organizations and benefit from easier access to trainings on farm 
management best practices, production technologies and credit. Sources of incomes are more 
diversified, including wage labour in the formal sector and are consequently less risk averse to borrow 
and invest into farm operations. Further integration in producers associations and agricultural 
cooperatives with would help securing outputs markets, strengthened relationships with lead buyer, 
and ultimately result in increased profitability. 
Findings from the design mission focus group discussions 
13.  Focus group discussions were held in Banja Luka and Sarajevo under the guidance of the two 
Project Coordination Unit, APCU in RS and PCU in FBiH. The discussions were focussing on the main 
challenges in developing market linkages for smallholder farmers in agriculture and possible solutions 
to be included in the READP. Several representatives from various stakeholders’ organisations 
attended the consultation, including: agricultural cooperatives, micro-credit company (MCO), PAs, 
59 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Enterprises, Commercial Banks, Municipalities and PCU Field Coordinators. Representatives from the 
Federation's Brcko District Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) attended.  
14.  A summary of the most common challenges, constraints and opportunities per stakeholder are 
presented below: 
Table 3: Outcomes from the stakeholders consultations 
Stakeholders 
Challenges/Constraints 
Proposed solutions for READP  
Producers 
Associations/Cooper
atives 
Enterprises 
Municipalities  
  Small-scale farmers lack access 
  Support and encourage POs to shift 
to appropriate tools and 
machinery (technologies) which 
decreases yields  
  High prices of inputs restrict use 
by small-scale producers 
  Existence of large number of 
associations without impactful 
services to members  
Import taxes on inputs increases 
producer costs 
 
  High transportation costs 
increases the price of 
cooperatives production  
 
  Export tariffs increase exporters 
costs and decreases global 
competitiveness of the BiH 
products 
Lack of specialised 
Marketing/packaging abilities 
Lack of technical skills/new 
technologies knowledge to meet 
export markets quality 
requirement, thus limiting 
opportunities to access higher 
value markets 
 
 
  Unable to finance raw material 
inputs and purchase large 
processing facilities 
Lack of financial and human 
resources 
Inadequate production and 
marketing infrastructure  
 
their production, diversify and start 
producing more value added products  
  Create competent sector 
representatives at municipalities and 
national level  
  Develop finance schemes for POs (and 
 
 
contracted farmers)  
Involve representatives of producers 
and associations in policy roundtable  
Facilitate study tours/contacts with 
regional and international associations 
to attractiveness to its members  
  Organize trainings and educative 
 
materials for SMEs and producers 
Facilitate and support local supply 
chain linkages 
  Support companies' implementation of 
business plans  
  Exporters have difficulties to access 
commercial funding and increase their 
purchases from small-scale producers 
  Stronger coordination role at municipal 
level to increase synergies among 
development partners 
  Stronger linkages with private sector 
service providers 
Financial Institutions 
 
Lack of collateral and high interest 
rates at MFIs 
 
Involvement of FIs in value chain 
financing  
The Geographic Targeting  
15. 
In Bosnia Herzegovina, the latest census was held in 2013 and the latest household budget 
survey is dated from 2015. Based on the census in 2013, the overall population in BiH amount to 3.53 
million people, whereof 2.22 million live in FBiH and 1.23 million in RS and 83,500 people in Brcko 
district. The household budget survey 2015 defines the average household size in BiH with 2.9 
members: in FBiH 3.0 and in the RS 2.7 members per household. The total number of households in 
BiH is estimated in 2016 at 1.16 million, in Federation at 0.72 million and in RS at 0. 41 million 
households. 
16.  The poverty threshold per person defined in the household budget survey 201558 is at BAM 390 
and for a four-member household at BAM 817. Thus, the relative poverty rate of BiH is 16.9% of 
58 Agency for Statistics of BiH: Household budget survey 2015, publication dated 28.07.2017 
60 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
individuals (at household level 16.5% of households). Still 58% of the population in BiH lives in rural 
areas with a lower share in FBiH with 54% and a higher share in RS with 64% and as in many other 
countries in transition, poverty incidence is much higher in rural area with 19%, compared to 9% in 
urban areas. 
17.  According to agriculture related survey results, there are 363,400 households in BiH (31% of the 
total number of households in BiH) active in agriculture, mostly with subsistence farming. Only 16% of 
these households are selling their produce to the market (14% in FBiH and 18% in RS).  
Table 4: Demographic data of BiH 
Total population (2013) 
Number of households (2016)60 
Share of people in rural areas 
Relative poverty rate (2015) 
Poor households in % (2015) 
HH active in agriculture (2016) 
… of which selling to the market (2016) 
BiH 
3,531,15959  
1,155,736 
58% 
16.9% 
16.5% 
363,400 
16% 
FBiH 
2.22 million 
715,739 
54% 
16,05 % 
217,061 
14% 
RS 
1.23 million 
413,226 
61% 
17,4% 
141,629 
18% 
18.  Project area: The project area is selected based on geographical targeting approach defining 
geographical clusters, which are formed according to agro-ecological zones, contiguity of 
municipalities and production basins etc. The clustering has been done considering a high proportion 
of municipalities classified as underdeveloped and with a relatively higher proportion of people living 
out of agriculture.  
19.  The project area will consist of 10 clusters (five each in FBiH and RS) with an average of 9 
municipalities per cluster selected. The overall population in the selected clusters represents 70% of 
the population in FBiH (1.34 million people) and 60% of the population in RS (0.734 million people).  
Table 5: Structural data of READ clusters 
Cluster RS 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
In total 
No. Of 
people total 
364,544 
108,884 
165,708 
50,100 
44,980 
734,216 
No of 
PAs 
14 
7 
11 
5 
9 
46 
No. Of 
Coops. 
12 
4 
15 
6 
7 
44 
No. Of 
Enterp. 
18 
7 
18 
5 
10 
58 
Cluster FBiH 
No. Of 
people total 
No of 
PAs 
No. Of 
Coops. 
No. Of 
Enterp. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
In total 
267,639 
273,317 
253,057 
189,014 
358,914 
1,341,941 
13 
21 
14 
20 
21 
89 
10 
8 
10 
10 
13 
51 
10 
10 
13 
17 
15 
65 
HH active in 
agriculture 
31,485 
14,946 
19,011 
6,046 
6,937 
78,425 
No. of HH 
active in 
agriculture 
33,739 
43,945 
31,316 
19,211 
39,874 
168,085 
HH selling agr. 
products in the 
market 
4,964 
1,749 
6,646 
1,636 
1,150 
16,145 
No.of HH selling 
agr. products in the 
market 
3,793 
4,547 
4,979 
3,256 
5,599 
22,174 
20.  The majority of the municipalities (52 out of 89 municipalities) represented in the clusters are 
classified as extremely underdeveloped and underdeveloped according to their economic ranking61. 
Furthermore, the share of households active in agriculture is over-proportional in the selected 
municipalities. In RS, the location of the AESD offices has been taken into consideration as well 
(Banja Luka, Gradaiska, Prijedor, Doboj, Bijeljina, Trebinje, Sokolac) to support the clusters with field 
officers from the Agricultural Extension Services Department.  
59 Including Brcko District with a population of 83,500 . 
60 BiH Agency of Statistics 2016 
61 BiH Directorate for Economic Planning: Main criteria for classification: Level of employment/unemployment; number of pupils 
in secondary schools; share of outmigration since census 1991; tax income per citizen.  
61 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
21.  Development status. In total, 89 municipalities (out of a total of 142 municipalities in BiH62) are 
selected for the 10 identified clusters: in FBiH 50 municipalities out of 79 municipalities in total and in 
RS 39 municipalities out of 63 in total.  
(a)
(b)
In the 5 clusters in FBiH are 22 municipalities out of 50 selected municipalities are 
classified as underdeveloped and extremely underdeveloped (44% of the selected 
municipalities in FBiH) and  
In the 5 clusters in RS 32 of the 39 selected municipalities (82% of the selected 
municipalities in RS) are underdeveloped and extremely underdeveloped.  
Table 6: Development status of selected municipalities 
Municipalities 
Total 
number 
in BiH 
Semi- and 
developed in 
BiH 
Under- and 
extremely 
underdeveloped  
in BiH 
READ 
clusters  
Number in 
total 
Semi- and 
developed in 
clusters 
FBiH 
RS 
79 
63 
142 
57 
31 
88 
22 
32 
54 
50 
39 
89 
28 
7 
34 
Under- and 
extremely 
underdeveloped 
included in 
clusters 
22 
32 
54 
22.  As a result of this approach the READP clusters will include 100% of all extremely 
underdeveloped and underdeveloped municipalities63 and 40% of semi-developed and developed 
municipalities in BiH. Some relatively better-off municipalities are also included in each cluster since 
they offer advantages such as the presence of marketing infrastructure and strong farmers’ 
organisations linked or with potential for linkage to target group members in the underdeveloped 
municipalities. In these relatively better-off municipalities READP’s implementation will be directed to 
those pockets with relatively higher concentration of target households. 
23.  The proportion of households in the selected clusters being active in agriculture is significant 
higher than the average in the two entities:  
(c)
(d)
in FBiH with an average of 30.3 % of households active in agriculture: the engagement of 
households in agriculture in the selected clusters ranges from 33.3% to 56.1% 
in RS with an average of 34.2% of households active in agriculture: the engagement of 
households in agriculture in the selected clusters ranges from 36.2% to 50.8% (including 
Banja Luka 25.2%. 
Table 7: Selected clusters in RS and FBiH 
Cluster 
Entity 
Pro-poor crops 
in the clusters 
# of 
municipalities 
Municipalities 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
RS 
RS 
RS 
RS 
RS 
Fruit,Vegetable 
Dairy, NTFP, 
honey 
Dairy, vegetable, 
fruit 
Vegetable, fruit 
MAP, dairy, 
fruit,vegetable, 
honey 
Dairy, berries, 
NTFP, honey 
13 
6 
6 
6 
8 
Krupa na Uni, Istocni Drvar, Ostra 
Luka, Knezevo, Jezero, Kupres, 
Kostajnica, Petrovac, Ribnik, Sipovo, 
Banja Luka. Gradiska, Prijedor 
Vukosavlje, Pelagicevo, D. Zabar, 
Petrovo, Samac, Doboj 
Osmaci, Sekovici, Srebrenica, 
Vlasenica, Bratunac, Bijeljina 
Berkovici, I. Mostar, Kalinovik, 
Ljubinje, Nevesinje, Trebinje 
HH in 
agriculture 
38.7% 
38.7% 
36.2% 
37.6% 
I.S. Grad, Trnovo, Rudo, N. Gorazde, 
Cajnice, H.Pijesak, Rogatica, Sokolac 
50.8% 
62 Brcko not included 
63 Experiences from RLDP have shown that in cooperation with less developed municipalities it is of utmost importance to get at 
the onset of the cooperation to a joint understanding of the available budgets for co-financing at municipal side.  
62 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Cluster 
Entity 
FBiH 
FBiH 
Pro-poor crops 
in the clusters 
Fruit,vegetable 
berries, honey 
Berries, MAPs, 
vegetables, 
NTFP, Honey 
FBiH 
Vegetable, 
berries, dairy 
FBiH 
FBiH 
MAP, dairy, 
berries,vegetable, 
honey 
Dairy, berries, 
NTFP, dairy, 
vegetables 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
# of 
municipalities 
8 
8 
11 
12 
11 
Municipalities 
Zavidovici, Maglaj, Olovo, Doboj 
Istok, Doboj Jug, Zenica, Zepce, 
Tesanj 
Kljuc, Sanski Most, Velika Kladusa, 
Buzim, B.Petrovac, B.Krupa, 
Cazin,Bihac 
D.Vakuf, Fojnica, Kresevo, Jajce, 
Bugojno, Kiseljak, Novi Travnik, 
Busovaca, Travnik, Gornji Vakuf, 
Vitez 
Foca, Pale, Trnovo, Prozor, Konjic, 
Jablanica, Kupres, Tomislavgrad, 
Posusje, Ljubuski, Livno, Gorazde 
HH in 
agriculture 
38.1% 
56.1% 
40.4% 
35% 
Sapna, Domaljevac Samac, Celic, 
Teocak, Odzak, Kalesija, Orasje, 
Zivinice, Tuzla, Gracanica, Gradacac 
33.3% 
Project target group 
24.  Target group: READ direct beneficiaries will be rural very poor and poor, both women and 
men and youth, organized in Producers’ associations (PAs) and Cooperatives active in agricultural 
value chains, or with the potential to be included in them – both at production or value addition stages. 
The total direct outreach of the READP will be 8,650 households. This includes 5,500 poor rural 
households eligible for starter packages; additional 2,000 poor rural youth including 600 poor rural 
women headed households eligible for benefits through preferential starter packages; 350 youth aged 
20-30 years supported with youth employment and 800 rural poor reached through seed capital 
financing of 40 FOs. An additional 5,000 households will be the indirect beneficiaries mainly from the 
infrastructure investment.  
In general, selection of target groups is being performed based on average land plot size and 
25. 
the level of income per household member, following the experiences in RLDP and RCDP. The 
READP target group will comprise (i) rural households with 0.1-0.5 ha (1-5 donums) land available for 
cultivation through direct ownership on indirect arrangements such as leasing or renting (ii) 
households with monthly income less than 817 KM comprising mainly non-commercial farmers (refer 
table below) (iii) unemployed rural youth (below 30 years64) and (iv) poor women headed households 
in rural areas. Only one member per household will be eligible for direct project support in the areas of 
standard starter package, youth starter package and youth apprentice support (refer SC 1 and 2 for 
details about starter packages). 
Table 8: Target Group 
Category 
Average monthly income per 
household member BAM 
Per household 4 
members in BAM* 
Average land size per 
household (area in ha) 
Rural poor 
Borderline poor 
Not poor 
0.1 – 0.5 ha 
0.51 – 1.5 ha 
and above 
*Based on  BiH  household survey  2015  stating  that  4 member  households  with  income  less than 817  KM  per 
month are poor. 
Up to – 389 
390 – 500 
501 and above 
Less than 817 
818-1000 
1000+ 
26.  Applicants that are on one of the criteria (land or income) considered not to be poor will not be 
included for support through the project. Based on experiences from RLDP, some exceptions have to 
be made with regard to the land criteria; if it is proven that the land is unused or used with limited 
results. Nevertheless, the priority should always be given to households that fall in the very poor or 
64 READP is aligned with BiH's youth age classification and existing age categorisation. 
63 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
poor category by both criteria, with special focus on vulnerable categories such as women and young 
adults. 
27.  The targeted population of the project will mainly live in the rural areas of less developed 
municipalities and being engaged in subsistence farming. In the less developed municipalities 
(classified as extremely and underdeveloped) in the selected clusters 22,268 households are engaged 
in agriculture (non-commercial) and in FBiH 40,430 households summing up to 62,698 households 
active in non-commercial agriculture. It is to be expected that all municipalities can be classified as 
rural. The ratio of poor households below the poverty line is not known but the rural poverty in these 
less developed municipalities is significantly higher than the average in BiH. According to UNDP65 
24% of rural households count as poor, compared to 11% of urban households. Thus, non-commercial 
households in the less developed municipalities amount to 5,344 households in RS and in to 9,703 HH 
in FBiH. In total 15,047 rural poor households in the less developed municipalities are in focus of 
the project.  
Table 9: Rural poor households in the selected clusters in RS and FBiH  
Cluster RS 
Population in 
total 
HH active in 
agriculture 
HH selling agr. 
products in the 
market 
Non-commercial 
agricultural households 
All clusters 
Less developed municipalities 
Rural poor households (24%) 
Cluster FBiH 
734,216 
187,675 
78,425 
28,317 
16,145 
6,049 
Population 
in total 
1,341,941 
350,403 
HH active in 
agriculture 
HH selling 
agr. products 
in the market 
22,144 
7,259 
62,280 
22,268 
5,344 
Non-commercial 
agricultural 
households 
In total 
Less developed municipalities 
Rural poor households (24%) 
Rural poor HH in less devel. 
municipalities in all clusters  
Sources: Official Gazette of RS 62/16, BiH Cooperative register, BIH Statistic Agency, Cenzus 2013, Federal 
Development Planning Institutions data for 2016, Ministry of Justice BiH and FBiH, Register of Associations, own 
research 
147,368 
40,430 
9,703 
15,047 
168,085 
47,689 
Institutional actors. READP will also partner with a range of institutional actors and link them to 
28. 
the target group through profitable business models to ensure the sustainability of the livelihood 
opportunities created for the target group. These institutional actors will consist of: (i) Farmers’ 
organisations (PAs and Cooperatives); (ii) Enterprises active in pro-poor value chains; (iii) Service 
providers and (iv) Financial institutions. 
In the context of defining the clusters, available pro-poor products have been identified as well 
29. 
as the presence of FOs and agricultural enterprises in the clusters (Table 5). The majority of the 
identified FOs are located in underdeveloped municipalities. A number of PAs, coops as well as 
enterprises have been involved in previous IFAD funded projects. An overview of potential partners 
(FOs and SMEs) is attached to Appendix 2. 
Targeting Strategy  
30.  The inclusion of rural very poor and poor non-commercial farmers, women and youth in 
selected value chains through cluster based business planning is the core target of the project. In 
order to reach the target group READP will adopt (i) geographical targeting measures to reach those 
areas with higher concentration of targeted households (referring to project area above) (ii) self-
targeting means by enterprises/FOs offering business opportunities for rural poor in proposed VCs 
suitable enough and of interest to the target groups (iii) direct targeting of youth (youth apprentice) 
and (iv) other enabling measures to promote greater chance of linking the target group to 
agribusinesses and inclusive FOs. 
65 UNDP 2013: National Human Development Report 
64 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
31.  Self-targeting. The targeting strategy will be driven by self-identification (call for business 
proposals) of leaders of business ventures (business leader) for specific commodities/produce. The 
project will seek to promote businesses led by leaders and/or FOs integrating smallholders, clustered 
into PA/FOs or linked directly to the business leaders. The approach will not be restricted to specific 
VCs. The self-targeting approach will be based on business proposal presentation and selection and 
Business Plan implementation. The BP should include details on the outreach to poor and within the 
BP process the targeting will ensure providing support primarily to rural poor including women and 
youth. Hence, project targeting will follow a twofold approach: as listed above, rural poor households 
are the core target groups, to be attracted by provision of starter packages and capacity building. The 
same applies for rural women and youth: these two groups will be reached through preferential 
conditions for starter packages and other related measures ensuring their participation in the business 
plans. 
32.  READP will promote self-targeting of target households by focusing on mechanisms and 
activities that has greater involvement of target households. Thus, it will follow a demand driven 
approach for the selection of the crops instead of restricting to specific VCs. This will allow it to support 
the VCs of produce such as vegetable and MAPs that can generate reasonable returns in spite of 
limited initial investments and limited land requirements, therefore enabling higher inclusion of the 
target households who have limited resources. Additionally, the crops supported by the starter 
packages mostly require manual labour for their management which will lead to adoption mostly by the 
target households as is it more common for them to engage in manual labour activities. 
33.  A major line of co-financing investment by READP will be for starter packages that support the 
beneficiaries with the cost of first time commercial production of selected VC crops (starter packages 
are described later in SC1). READP will impose a ceiling of EUR 500 and 800 on the starter packages 
to ensure that these are attractive only for smallholder farmers/target households. Finally, the FO seed 
capital financing is expected to stimulate a range of FO level businesses involving on-farm production 
and processing activities as well as off-farm activities such as tourism and other rural services which 
will create the demand for manual labour for operations once again promoting the engagement of the 
target households. 
34.  Support to Women and Youth: As outlined under SC 1 READ provides co-financing to starter 
packages for 5,500 poor farm households supporting their integration in the proposed business 
ventures. These starter packages are available exclusively to the target groups described above and 
in the defined project clusters. The implementation of the starter packages will be accompanied by 
capacity building measures tailor-made to the needs of rural poor farming households.  
35.  Build on experiences and support provided under RBDP and RCDP, youth aged from 20 to 30 
years and belonging to the target households will be eligible for special initiatives comprising starter 
packages. Thus, the project will reserve 2,000 starter packages (refer SC 1) as specific quota for 
supporting eligible youth (70%) and women headed households (30%). The unit size of these starter 
packages will be higher than the starter packages for rural poor and will finance upto 60% of 
production costs compared to the standard starter packages financing upto 40% of such costs. Access 
to the starter package will assist the youth and the women headed households to develop 
entrepreneurial skills and self-employment. Where relevant specialised youth farmers’ organisations, 
comprising members supported by youth starter packages, will be promoted and strengthened.  
36.  Women and youth’s involved in producers’ organizations should benefit from complementary 
skill development training to feel in competence and knowledge gaps (e.g. participatory planning, 
leadership skills, mentoring etc.). The gender strategy of the project will be based on lessons from 
past and current projects (RLDP, RBDP and RCDP) regarding interventions that can increase 
women’s incomes, enhance their decision-making and empowerment. In particular, READ will refer to 
tools developed under RBDP in establishing a mentoring system to empower especially women.  
37.  Direct targeting of youth: The project will assist 350 youth apprentice in the agricultural and 
rural sector. In order to promote women employment 50% quota will be reserved for young women 
apprentice. An apprentice will be a person undergoing on the job training leading to a full time job. The 
target group of youth is defined as rural youth aged between 20-30 years and coming from poor rural 
65 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
households in the project areas. The selection of the youth will be build on findings from the targeting 
survey and furthermore requires the involvement of Employment Bureau to assist in identification of 
suitable candidates as well as potential co-financier.  
38.  At the end of the apprenticeship period the individual will be absorbed as a regular employee 
resulting in job creation and increased income for the target group household. The project will finance 
upto EUR 2,100 for meeting the apprenticeship costs for a maximum of one year66. The social 
contribution costs will be covered preferably by the employment bureau or the employer. 
Implementation of the targeting approach 
IFAD support will promote the partnership among all stakeholders but will exclusively support 
39. 
the direct support to poor smallholders identified in BP. Some soft activities will benefit all stakeholders 
in the BP, but investment will benefit exclusively the poor. Direct support will be provided through 
starter packages and related training and advisory services to the target groups and institutional 
support in form of seed funding support to FOs and FO capacity building. 
40.  Targeting survey. READP will conduct a targeting survey to identify the locations/communities 
with higher concentrations of the potential target households and to specify the suitable pro-poor 
products from the project supported agricultural sub-sectors, taking into consideration their prevailing 
market demand. 
41.  READP will conduct a targeting survey (see SC 1) guiding the project team in the identification 
of poverty pockets and to identify where to focus on outreach. The study will identify/confirm the 
potential poverty areas and the target groups including assessing gender and youth dynamics in 
designated clusters. The targeting survey will be incorporate experiences from previous projects, in 
particular started in the pilot projects of RCDP and further elaborated under RBDP and RCDP. The 
survey will involve (i) consultations with key actors, such as social service centers, employment 
bureau, heads of the local communities, authorities managing entity level farm registers and financial 
institutions active in the project area (ii) identification of the broad geographical areas and potential 
farmers’ organisations (FO) with higher concentration of the target households (iii) validation visits to 
these geographical areas and FOs and (iv) preparation of a verified list of the geographical pockets 
and FOs with higher concentration of target households.  
42.  These lists will be used during the stakeholder workshops to promote inclusive business plan 
preparation. The agribusinesses and other stakeholder will be encouraged to increase their outreach 
in these poverty pockets. Going forward, the target households identified in the business plans will be 
drawn mainly from the poverty areas identified in the targeting survey.  
43.  Furthermore, the study will specify suitable products from the project supported agricultural sub-
sectors, taking into consideration their prevailing market demand. 
44.  Pre-selection of value chains. The project will promote high value agricultural production 
suitable for integrating the target group, which has relatively small land plots, into the value chain and 
the final market. The products will be characterised by high market demand, high productivity, high 
returns and utilisation of family labour. These will be selected from the following sub sectors: fruits and 
vegetables such as berries, cherries and gherkins, medicinal and aromatic plants, non-timber forest 
products and to a limited extent dairy and other related sectors such as bee keeping/honey 
production. 
45.  Although the final selection of VC will be left to the agribusinesses and their business proposals, 
the project will pre-select suitable pro-poor value chains during the targeting phase based on the 
clusters identified. In view of recent market distortions (low prices) in the gherkin and berry value 
chains, the potential impact (negative/positive) of introducing new crops for small farmers and the risk 
of increasing poverty will be assessed at an initial stage and will be further monitored during the 
implementation. With reference to RBDP, the process of value chain mapping sub-sector and pro-poor 
66 In addition to the cost sharing mechanisms, the sustainability of the youth apprentice scheme will be ensured based on the 
strict  selection  of  the  enterprises  that  demonstrate  their  strategic  labour  force  requirement  for  the  medium  term.  Access  to 
regular employment will be subject to performance assessment. 
66 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
crop pre-selection could be based on principles shown in the table below. This scoring card could be 
also used to assess the crops proposed in the business proposals.  
Table 10: Overview of the subsector selection criteria 
Criteria 
Indicators 
Coefficient % 
Relevance to target group(s)  
•  Large numbers of the target group 
60 
Pro-target group growth 
potential  
Intervention potential/feasibility  
involved (farmers, women, poor HH, 
youth)   
•  Labour intensive activities   
•  Equal distribution of sub-sector  activities 
across the region   
•  Positive growth trends over past 5 years  
•  Good market potential/opportunities   
•  Low entry barriers   
•  Potential for value-added activities   
•  Partner organisations (public and private) 
20 
10 
to work with   
•  Potential intervention areas match with 
project objectives   
•  No overlapping risks with other 
projects/potential synergies   
Other (cross-cutting) criteria  
•  In line with government priorities   
•  Sector activities have minimal negative 
10 
environmental impact   
•  Potential interventions will particularly 
benefit women and other vulnerable 
categories   
Total score  
100  
46.  The value chain analysis will also include a performance analysis to identify the opportunities, 
development potentials and constraints in the VCs. The performance analysis as implemented under 
RBDP refers to the following parameters: (i) Productivity, efficiency and effectiveness within the value 
chain to measure the competitiveness; (ii) Economic relations - relations between the actors of the 
value chain (embedded services, management, competition); (iii) Management in the VC: Identification 
of main players (leaders) and their requirements / rules for participants in the value chain. (iv) 
Furthermore, special attention is on performances and limitations of the business activities of 
associations and cooperatives in selected value chains, in particular in inclusion of the small poor 
farmers. 
47.  Assessment of FOs. Farmers Organisations will be targeted based on criteria including (i) at 
least 25 members, which includes at least 20 members from the READP target group households with 
income less than KM 817 per month (ii) intention to further increase membership particularly from the 
READP target group (iii) cooperative audit (for cooperatives only), indicating that the cooperative 
functions in accordance with the BiH Law on Cooperatives, particularly in relation to the organization 
and management of the cooperative, and maintenance of the cooperative members' ledger; (iv) 
outreach to a wide base of co-operant and rural poor.  
In the process of assessing business proposals, relevant criteria for further assessing farmer 
48. 
associations and cooperatives, as successfully applied in RBDP, are described in the following score 
card (table ). The score card for the assessment of the FOs could be also used as assessment/ 
monitoring tool for the SMEs. 
67 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Table 11: Assessment criteria of the farmer associations and cooperatives (score card)  
Max 
score 
40  
10  
No.   criteria   
Description  
1.  
Relevance to 
target group(s)  
  Numbers of the poor target group 
involved (farmers, women, poor, 
youth)  
2.  
3.  
Gender & Youth 
sensitivity 
Pro-target group 
growth potential  
4.  
Intervention 
potential/feasibility  
  Potential interventions will 
particularly benefit women and 
youth (vulnerable categories) 
  Positive growth trends over past 5 
30  
years   
  Good market 
potential/opportunities   
  Potential for value-added activities 
  (Long-term) Partnership (public 
20  
and private) in business   
  Involvement in value chain   
  Potential intervention areas  
match with project objectives   
  In line with government  priorities  
Comments  
Up to 10 members: 10 points  
10 to 20 members: 20 points  
20 to 30 members: 30 points  
>30 members: 40 points  
Special interventions, high share of 
women & youth: 10 points  
If membership grows: 10 points  
If it is in value chain with growth 
potential: additional 10 points  
If it is starter: additional 10 points  
If there are long-term business 
partnerships in business: 10 points  
If there is established market 
channel: additional 10 points  
Total score  
100  
49.  Specific activities will be undertaken to ensure the organizational strengthening of PAs and 
cooperatives as well as to ensure inclusiveness and empowerment of rural poor, women and youth 
through their organisations. Activities will include: (i) organizational strengthening of PAs and 
cooperatives; (ii) information and mobilisation campaigns; (iii) business counselling for members of 
PAs; (iii) matching grants to leverage investments; (iv) support to ensure active participation of women 
and youth in PAs and cooperatives’ decision-making process; and (v) information campaign on rural 
labour conditions, food safety, enforcement of regulations in agriculture and agribusinesses. 
50.  Targeting of Agribusiness enterprises. The involvement of exporters, wholesalers and 
processors is crucial to ensure effective access of smallholders to productive assets, finance, services 
and markets. Eligible agribusiness companies should comply with the following criteria: (i) proven 
know-how and technical expertise in the subsector; (ii) company’s willingness to use environmental 
friendly production practices and compliance with social, labour and gender standards; (iii) company’s 
strategy is focused on long-term presence and viable business relationships with producers; and (iv) 
proven experience in or formal commitment to establishing business with small producers.  
51.  The BPs submitted by the enterprises will be assessed against criteria including (i) market 
prospects (national/export) and overall profitability of the business model (ii) outreach to the target 
households including youth (iii) potential returns to the target households including youth (iv) 
prospects for partnerships with municipalities, FOs and other donor initiatives and (v) measures to 
address environmental and climate change concerns. 
52.  The number of SMEs engaged in agribusiness in BiH is manageable; thus already previous 
IFAD funded projects could establish linkages to SMEs in the selected sub-components. An overview 
of actors and their businesses in the envisaged sub-sectors is attached in the Annex of Appendix 2.  
Gender and Youth 
53.  Gender. Traditional norms about the roles of women and men hinder women’s economic 
empowerment. Gender inequality manifest itself women's position along agricultural value chains and 
labour market. Women’s heavy domestic responsibilities combined with lack of adequate social 
services such as child care and paid maternity constitute structural constraints in integrating and fully 
participating in value chain activities.  
68 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
54.  Women do provide substantive labour inputs throughout the value chains, however, they are not 
remunerated and often considered as family helpers. Women’s role as an active agricultural producer 
contributor is neglected. This situation is compounded by prevailing social norms and the position of 
women in decision making processes within farming operations. Rural women face numerous 
economic empowerment obstacles. On average today, rural women receive only half as many years of 
schooling than urban men. 
55.  The capacity of women to attend trainings and enhance their skills based on labour market 
requirement is constrained as extensions services favour the head of the households. This prevent 
them from competitively engaging in the labour market. On the other hand, private business service 
providers have limited awareness of the importance of targeting women.  
56.  80% of men own property and have control over productive assets resulting in the economic 
marginalisation of women while they contribute a large share (up to 50%) of the agricultural work. This 
lead to reduced recognition in monetary terms and lack of protection under labour rights. Though men 
and women have equal rights for inheritance and property ownership, only 27%67 of land ownership 
rights in the FBiH are registered under female names, and while the figure is higher in the RS at 40%, 
female-owned properties are generally smaller and less productive. Women have limited access to 
appropriate gender sensitive and time-saving agricultural technology, equipment and machinery, and 
although some activities women undertake are labour intensive they do not have access to hired 
labour.  
57.  The agriculture sector is still highly informal; but also in formalized businesses, women tend not 
to be well represented (Labour force participation rate of women was 34.4% against male of 58% in 
2015) and occupy lower paid jobs while men dominate management positions.  
58.  Women in farmer’s organizations. On average, women are significantly less likely to be 
members of Pas. The number of women cooperatives have increased, however, they are less likely to 
be vertically integrated into value chains. Female entrepreneurship is very low, explained by women’s 
preference for formal and public employment, lack of availability to child care services, no access to 
maternity leave and benefits if in self-employment, social attitudes discouraging women to open a 
business, limited skills and confidence. Female-heads-of-household. The situation is reversed for 
female headed households; i.e. better participation of women in production as well as marketing 
functions since the ownership of land and other farms level productive assets are in the name of the 
women. READP activities will strengthen women-owned PAs through capacity building programs that 
will include technical assistance, project management, business development and financial 
management training. 
59.  Gender targeting strategies 
60.  Along the sub-sectors value chains, women participate in various production and marketing 
functions. The share of women along the different functions of the value chains is often very much 
correlated to the types and volumes of production, as well as amounts of profits generated from the 
sale of the produces. For example, for agricultural production destined for the market, more than 70% 
of the workforce is composed of males. Males are also dominating the transport value chains. On the 
other hand, women are the dominated workforce in manual work commonly believed to require more 
careful details such as the case of sorting, grading of medicinal herbs, and even in the fruits and 
vegetables sub-sectors. Education correlated positively with women's participation in decision-making 
process at the household level. 
61.  The gender strategy of the project will be based on lessons from past and current projects 
(RLDP, RBDP and RCDP) regarding interventions that can increase women’s incomes, enhance their 
decision-making and empowerment. Successful participation of women from poor rural households 
entails an approach that does not add to their workload and requires gender sensitivity to existing 
household division of work in farms operations. 
67 UN Socio Economic Situation of Women in BiH, 2015. 
69 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
62.  The empowerment of women in READ will be ensured through a range of strategies: (i) targets 
will be set for women’s participation in all key activities with women and women-headed households 
receiving priority; (ii) a gender and targeting action plan will be formulated at the implementation stage 
by the PCUs and partners and reviewed after two years; (iii) the terms of reference for service 
providers, field officers and technical experts will include responsibilities for following the gender 
strategy of the project; (iv) the project will be sensitive to arrangements required to enable women to 
participate – such as organizing women only training events for demonstration; (v) inclusion of 
women’s empowerment training as part of the starter package; (vi) the monitoring and evaluation 
framework will include indicators disaggregated by sex to track the project’s performance in promoting 
women’s empowerment in terms of their capacity-building and benefits; (iv) special studies will 
address gender issues and disaggregate data collection, analysis and findings by gender and (vii) the 
A/PCU will encourage to maintain a gender balance in staffing of field officers and service providers; 
(viii) Gender and Targeting Officers in A/PCU should be constantly informed and trained on gender 
and targeting related developments. 
63.  Youth. Young people in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) aged 15 to 24 represent 16 % of the 3.8 
million population of the country. In Bosnia and Herzegovina the overall unemployment rate in 2016 
dropped to 25.4 %, while the youth unemployment rate (15- 24 years of age) increased to around 67% 
in 2016 (World Bank). According to a study dated 201468 the total youth population in the labour force 
is 10.7 per cent of the overall population. Among the active youth on the labour market, the 
percentage of active young men is almost double their female counterparts. Both the youth 
employment and unemployment rate indicate a more favourable labour market situation for young 
men compared to young women (14.1 compared to 7.5 per cent). Thus, male youth unemployment 
rate is slightly lower compared to the registered young women.  
64.  Young people assess their chances to obtain employment in BiH as highly unfavourable. One in 
four young people holds employment which is unrelated to their field of study. Youth with vocational 
education have a particularly hard time finding work. According to estimations, young people in 
general are more likely to find work in the informal labour market, doing menial jobs in poor working 
conditions, and with almost no security. Many youth have a contract for an undetermined (54%) or 
determined (18%) period of time and their wage is only partially declared. Also, the less educated and 
low skilled workers are more likely to be employed informally than higher skilled and better educated 
workers. Furthermore, a low skilled worker is more likely to remain informally employed for a longer 
period. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, most informal employment is held by youth in the 15 to 24 age 
group.  
Informal employment in this group is more than 30% higher than in older age groups. Employers 
65. 
recruit young people without written contract or any formal engagement to avoid taxes and 
responsibility for the staff. For example, work in the informal market is particularly prevalent in the 
Federation of BiH, where 24% of youth have no contracts with employers, while 17% of them lack 
contracts in the Republika Srpska.  
66.  The fact that less than half of all employed people below the age of 29 manage to find work in a 
field in which they were educated, is leading to a high rate of youth migration out of the country. 
According to the World Bank, the net migration of youth of BiH was 10 000 between 2008 - 2010. The 
top 10 destination countries for BiH nationals are, in descending order, Croatia, Germany, Serbia, 
Austria, USA, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Italy and Canada. A massive exodus out on BiH after 
the war was affecting the mind-set of the later generations. In 2006, 73% of young people were ready 
to leave BiH either in pursuit of education or temporary employment, marriage or permanent 
settlement in a foreign country (World Bank). 
67.  An important reason for youth unemployment lies in the difficult economic situation, which has a 
negative impact on the creation of new jobs and employers’ hiring plans. But also lack of working 
experience among young people, represents a problem for employers because they have to invest 
68 MDG Achievement Fund: Youth employment and migration in Bosnia Herzegovina 2014 
70 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
additional time and resources to ensure young people have satisfactory level of productivity and skills 
relevant for job performance.  
68.  A promising examples for getting youth into employment is reported from Austria with the so-
called ‘apprenticeship guarantee’ (similar to internships) for young graduates69. The Government with 
co-financing the apprentice provides this apprenticeship guarantee. Apprenticeship or internships, paid 
or unpaid, have not yet gained a foothold in Bosnia, an understanding of the relevance of an internship 
for young people is not yet well developed in the business sector.  
IFAD funded READ will follow a comparable approach in supporting employment of unemployed 
69. 
rural youth. READP will assist 350 youth apprentice to find full time formal employment in the 
agricultural and rural sector. An apprentice is a rural youth up to the age of 30 undergoing in-house 
training in an enterprise. In order to promote women employment 50% quota will be reserved for 
young women apprentice.  
70.  At the end of the apprenticeship period the individual will be absorbed as a regular employee 
resulting in job creation and increased income for the target group household. The apprentice support 
will be implemented in partnership between the project, the employment bureau at the 
canton/municipality level and an employer. The employer can be a project value chain partner 
including private sector and FOs as well as other enterprises and institutions active in job creation in 
the rural sector.  
71.  The project will finance up to USD 2,500 for meeting the apprenticeship costs for a maximum of 
one year and covering 70% of the employment costs. The employer will bear the remaining 30%. The 
social contribution costs will be covered preferably by the employment bureau or the employer. The 
employer will engage the apprentice, selected jointly by the three stakeholders mentioned above, in 
response to its requirement for a regular full-time employee in the organisation.  
69 MDG Achievement Fund: Youth employment and migration in Bosnia Herzegovina 2014 
71 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Annex I: IFAD READ Targeting checklist 
Targeting checklist 
1. Does the main target group – those 
expected to benefit most – correspond 
to  IFAD’s  target  group  as  defined  by 
the 
(poorer 
households and food insecure)? 
Targeting 
Policy 
different 
2.  Have 
target  sub-groups  been 
identified  and  described  according  to 
their 
socio-economic 
characteristics,  assets  and  livelihoods 
–  with  attention  to  gender  and  youth 
differences  (matrix  on  target  group 
characteristics completed)? 
3.  Is  evidence  provided  of  interest  in 
and  likely  uptake  of  the  proposed 
activities  by  the  identified  target  sub-
groups?  What  is  the  evidence  (matrix 
on analysis of project components and 
activities  by  principal  beneficiary 
groups completed)? 
4. Does the design document describe 
a  feasible  and  operational  targeting 
strategy  in  line  with  the  Targeting 
Policy,  involving  some  or  all  of  the 
following measures and methods: 
4.1 Geographic targeting – based on 
poverty  data  or  proxy  indicators  to 
identify,  for  area-based  projects  or 
projects, geographic areas (and within 
high 
communities)  with 
these, 
concentration of poor people; 
4.2  Self-targeting  –  when  good  and 
services respond to the priority needs, 
resource  endowments  and  livelihood 
strategies of target groups; 
4.3  Direct  targeting  –  when  services 
or  resources  are  to  be  channelled  to 
specific individuals or households; 
Design 
READ  targets  poor  rural  producers  including  women 
headed households and youth 
less 
The  READP  target  group  have  been  defined  along  a 
typology  adapted  to  BiH's  rural  landscape,  and  will 
comprise (i) rural households with 0.1-0.5 ha (1-5 donums) 
land  available  for  cultivation  (ii)  households  with  monthly 
income 
than  841  KM  comprising  mainly  non-
commercial  farmers  (refer  table  below)  (iii)  unemployed 
rural youth (below 30 years) and (iv) poor women headed 
households in rural areas. 
Given  the  high  level  of  unemployment,  there  are  great 
incentives  for  the  project's  target  group  to  adopt  the 
technologies  promoted  and  benefit 
increased 
linkages  with  agribusiness  and  secure  domestic  and 
export. The complementary rural production and marketing 
infrastructure  will  facilitate  this  uptake  by  providing  better 
access to markets. 
form 
The  programme  areas  is  selected  based  on  geographical 
targeting approach. It will consist of 10 clusters (five each 
in  FBiH  and  RS)  with  an  average  of  5  municipalities  per 
cluster grouped together on the basis of two main criteria: 
majority  of  the  municipalities  represented  in  the  clusters 
and 
classified 
underdeveloped  by  each  entity  according 
their 
economic  ranking  and  presence  of  suitable  conditions70 
within  the  cluster  for  developing  and  strengthening  the 
value chains of the project supported produce/crops. 
underdeveloped 
extremely 
as 
to 
The  project  is  demand-driven  and  the  business  plan  will 
represent  a  common  and  agreed  upon  agenda  to  drive 
sectoral growth. 
READP  will  adopt  a  set  of  direct  targeting  measures  for 
increasing income level of youth with special measures for 
women headed households. These steps will also provide 
RCDP with the tools to increase focus on this target group. 
Youth  aged  from  20  up  to  and  including  30  years  and 
belonging  to  the  target  households  will  be  eligible  for 
special  initiatives  comprising  starter  packages  and  youth 
apprentice support.  
70 These include: level of existing activity in the selected sub-sectors; lab our availability and interest of the farmer organizations 
to get involved in the selected VCs, etc. (see RCDP: 26). 
72 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
information 
– 
4.4  Empowering  measures 
including 
and 
communication, focused capacity- and 
measures, 
confidence-building 
organizational  support, 
to 
empower  and  encourage  the  more 
active  participation  and  inclusion  in 
planning  and  decision-making  of 
people  who 
less 
voice and power; 
traditionally  have 
in  order 
incorporated  among 
READP  will  support  youth  and  women's  inclusion  in 
economic  opportunities  provided  gender  considerations 
will  be 
review 
partnership  proposals  and  trained  field  staff  will  address 
youth and women's specific needs in production. Particular 
attention will be placed on exposing both women and men 
of  a  beneficiary  household  to  trainings  and  capacity 
development opportunities 
the  criteria 
to 
gender 
equality 
4.5  Enabling  measures  – 
to 
strengthen stakeholders’ and partners’ 
attitude  and  commitment  to  poverty 
and 
targeting, 
women’s  empowerment, 
including 
policy  dialogue,  awareness-raising 
and capacity-building; 
4.6  Procedural  measures  – 
that 
could  militate  against  participation  by 
the intended target groups; 
– 
4.7  Operational  measures 
appropriate 
project  management 
arrangements,  staffing,  selection  of 
implementation  partners  and  service 
providers. 
5.  Monitoring  targeting  performance. 
Does  the  design  document  specify 
that 
targeting  performance  will  be 
monitored  using  participatory  M&E, 
and  also  be  assessed  at  mid-term 
review?  Does  the  M&E  framework 
allow for the collection/analysis of sex-
disaggregated  data  and  are 
there 
indicators  against 
gender-sensitive 
which 
to  monitor/evaluate  outputs, 
outcomes and impacts? 
procedures 
the  various 
required 
for 
target  groups 
At  the  beginning  of  the  project,  READP  will  organize 
cluster  level  information  and  sensitisation  sessions  and 
field level consultations between agribusinesses and target 
group  and  deliver  training  and  advisory  services  to  the 
target  group  farmers  which  will  increase  their  knowledge 
and skills development and support their integration to the 
value chains.  
Attention  will  be  given  to  costs/contributions,  timing  and 
effective 
administrative 
participation  of 
in  project 
activities.  Transparency  and  clarity  in  procedures  for 
decision-making  will  be  promoted.  All  members  of  groups 
will  be  encouraged  to  participate  in  business  ventures. 
Additional  procedural  measures 
the 
effectiveness  of  the  targeting  strategy  will  further  be 
explored in the final version of the PIM. 
The  gender  and  youth  officer  will  supervise  delivery  on 
gender  activities  by  field  agents  and  service  providers 
dealing  in  capacity  development  activities  and  social 
mobilization - in particular social mobilizers. These officers 
will  also  guide  and  supervise  the  approaches  to  gender 
mainstreaming  and  ensuring 
for 
inclusiveness are translated into effective targeting.  
that  provisions 
increase 
to 
The project M&E system will be based on the logframe; all 
data,  progress  reporting  and  evaluation  format  will  be 
disaggregated by sex and age, so as to be able to produce 
information  on  different  target  groups  and  beneficiaries 
(women, men and youth).  
73 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Annex I: IFAD READ Gender checklist 
Gender checklist 
in 
implementation 
1. The project design report contains – and 
project 
is  based  on  – 
gender-disaggregated  poverty  data  and  an 
analysis  of  gender  differences 
the 
activities  or  sectors  concerned,  as  well  as 
an analysis of each project activity from the 
to  address  any 
gender  perspective 
unintentional 
women’s 
participation. 
2.  The  project  design  articulates  –  or  the 
project implements – actions with aim to: 
  Expand 
economic 
women’s 
empowerment  through  access  to  and 
control  over  productive  and  household 
assets; 
barriers 
to 
Design 
Sex-disaggregated  data  on  poverty  and  gender  have 
been used to analyze women's role in sub-sector value 
chain. 
READ  gender  strategy  promotes  women  economic 
empowerment through their inclusion in business plans 
from which they will benefit as raw materials suppliers. 
Specific  starter  packages  will  be  provided  to  women-
headed households. 
  Strengthen  women’s  decision-making 
role  in  the  household  and  community 
and their representation in membership 
and leadership of local institutions; 
Supported  FOs  will  expand  women  membership  thus 
creating  pathways  for  women  to  access  decision 
making  bodies  and/or  other  management  structure 
within Pas/Ag Coop. 
  Achieve  a  reduced  workload  and  an 
equitable  workload  balance  between 
women and men. 
for  operationalizing 
to 
3.  The  project  design  report  includes  one 
paragraph  in  the  targeting  section  that 
explains what the project will deliver from a 
gender perspective. 
4.  The  project  design  report  describes  the 
the 
key  elements 
the 
gender  strategy,  with 
relevant project components. 
5.  The  design  document  –  and  the  project 
implements  –  operational  measures 
to 
ensure  gender-equitable  participation  in, 
and  benefit  from,  project  activities.  These 
will generally include:  
5.1  Allocating  adequate  human  and 
the 
financial 
gender strategy. 
implement 
resources 
respect 
to 
5.2  Ensuring  and  supporting  women’s 
in  project-related 
active  participation 
activities,  decision-making  bodies  and 
committees, 
including  setting  specific 
targets for participation. 
project/project 
Ensuring 
5.3 
management  arrangements  (composition 
of 
the  project  management  unit/project 
coordination unit, project terms of reference 
for  staff  and  implementing  partners,  etc. 
reflect  attention  to  gender  equality  and 
women’s empowerment concerns. 
that 
The project will promote gender sensitive labour saving 
technologies;  i.e.  to  facilitate  access  to  water  through 
public infrastructure or automated irrigation scheme on 
private landholdings. 
The  gender-related  and  social  inclusion  aspects  of  the 
project  are  summarized  in  the  section  on  project  area 
and target group. 
This is summarized in Appendix 2. 
Specialized  human  resources  accountable  to  ensure 
compliance with the PDR's gender strategy  have been 
provisioned  at  the  level  of  the  A/PCU.  Financial 
resources  specifically  addressing  gender  are  spread 
between sub-components 1/2/3. 
The  business  units  in  which  the  business  plan  will  be 
elaborated  shall  ensure  the  inclusion  of  women  at  all 
level in order to be eligible for financing.  
The 
overall 
responsibility 
Gender  equitable  staffing  has  been  proposed  for  the 
A/PCU. 
the 
implementation  of  the  gender  strategy  lies  upon  the 
A/PCU  coordinator,  supported  by  a  gender  and 
targeting  officer.  The  gender  and  targeting  officer  will 
supervise  delivery  on  gender  activities  by 
field 
coordinators and service providers. 
for 
74 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
5.4 Ensuring direct project/project outreach 
to women (for example through appropriate 
numbers  and  qualification  of  field  staff), 
is 
especially  where  women’s  mobility 
limited. 
5.5 
to  support 
strategic  opportunities  with  government 
and  other  development  organizations  for 
networking and policy dialogue. 
Identifying  opportunities 
6.  The  project’s  logical  framework,  M&E, 
and  learning  systems  specify  in  design  – 
and  project  M&E  unit  collects,  analyses 
and  interprets  sex-  and  age-disaggregated 
performance  and  impact  data,  including 
specific  indicators  on  gender  equality  and 
women’s empowerment. 
Adequate training and technical support on gender and 
youth  will  be  provided  to  service  providers,  extensions 
services and field coordinators. 
The  A/PCU  will  document  and  capitalize  on  the 
experience  of  women’s  participation  in  FOs  and  as 
stakeholder  in  the  business  plans.  The  stakeholders 
platform  developed  under  RCDP  will  be  used  as  a 
vehicle  to  disseminate  lessons  learned  and  influence 
policy at cluster and national level. 
All  data,  progress  reporting  and  evaluation  format  will 
be  disaggregated  by  sex  and  age,  so  as  to  generate 
relevant  information  for  each  of  the  different  target 
groups and beneficiaries. 
75 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Annex 2: Overview of Agribusiness Enterprises the BiH 
Bosanska Krupa 
Local 
Product 
Sector/ Value 
Chain 
Name of Private 
companies – 
marketing 
partners  
registration 
(SMEs or 
Coop) 
Entity  
Municipality  
Agrodar 
Cooperative 
DS&farmer 
Cooperative 
Poljo sementi 
Meggle 
Amanita 
An Fruit 
Mi Trade 
Adriatik group 
Agrona 
Laktalis 
Milkland 
SMEs 
SMEs 
Cooperative 
SMEs 
SMEs 
SMEs 
SMEs 
SMEs 
Cooperative 
SMEs 
SMEs 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
Brcko D. 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
Berries&NTFP  Heko 
F&V 
Bosnaplod 
Berries&NTFP  Herbos nature 
SMEs 
F&V 
F&V 
F&V 
Dairy 
MAP 
Berries 
F&V 
F&V 
F&V 
Dairy 
Dairy 
F&V 
F&V 
Milk 
Crops 
Milk 
F&V 
Drina 
Cooperative 
Jaffa Komerc  
SMEs 
Agrocentar 
Cooperative  RS 
Klekovaca 
Cooperative  RS 
Podgorina 
Agroposavina 
Farm 
Cooperative  RS 
Krupa na Uni 
Cooperative  RS 
Derventa 
Cazin 
Buzim 
Cazin 
Bihac 
Teocak 
Celic 
Zivinice 
Gradacac 
Kalesija 
Bugojno 
Brcko 
Sarajevo 
Ustikolina 
Mostar 
Sipovo 
Drinic 
Main 
source of 
raw 
material 
(Local/imp
orts) 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Intern. 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
76 
Type of partner Private companies 
Grow
er  
Retail/ Super 
Market  
Proces
sor  
Export
er  
Small 
Co.  
Medium 
Co. 
Large 
Co. 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Product 
Sector/ Value 
Chain 
Name of Private 
companies – 
marketing 
partners  
registration 
(SMEs or 
Coop) 
Entity  
Municipality  
F&V 
Fruits 
Donja Japra 
Dubicko 
Potkozarje 
Cooperative  RS 
Novi Grad 
Cooperative  RS 
K. Dubica 
Raspberry 
Poljo MG 
Cooperative  RS 
Poljopodrasnica  Cooperative  RS 
Mrkonjic Grad 
Mrkonjic Grad 
Ratkovo 
Cooperative  RS 
Ribnik 
Vegetable 
Carl Kuehne 
Berries&NTFP  Gljiva Komerc 
SMEs 
SMEs 
Berries&NTFP  Mashroom Trade  SMEs 
Mlijekoprodukt 
SMEs 
Pudja  
Brka 
SMEs 
Cooperative 
Ekoplod 
SMEs 
FBiH  
Brcko D. 
FBiH 
Bios 
Klas 
Cooperative 
SMEs 
Pronatura 
Cooperative 
Frutti Funghi 
SMEs 
Berries&NTFP 
Vrganj promet 
SMEs 
Berries&NTFP  Meli Funghi 
SMEs 
Berries&NTFP 
Starnet, Frozen 
Berries 
Berries&NTFP  Rubus 
Berries 
Soff 
SMEs 
SMEs 
SMEs 
K. Dubica 
Banja Luka 
Laktasi 
K. Dubica 
Livno 
Brcko 
Sarajevo 
Visoko 
Sarajevo 
Zenica 
Visoko 
Buzim 
Buzim and 
B.Krupa 
Bugojno 
RS 
RS 
RS 
RS 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
Milk 
Crops 
Dairy 
Dairy 
Berries 
Berries  
Vegetable 
Berries 
Berries 
Berries 
Main 
source of 
raw 
material 
(Local/imp
orts) 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Type of partner Private companies 
Grow
er  
Retail/ Super 
Market  
Proces
sor  
Export
er  
Small 
Co.  
Medium 
Co. 
Large 
Co. 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
G.Vakug/Uskoplje  Local 
Celic 
Local 
77 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Product 
Sector/ Value 
Chain 
Name of Private 
companies – 
marketing 
partners  
registration 
(SMEs or 
Coop) 
Entity  
Municipality  
F&V and Dairy  Rubus 
SMEs 
FBiH 
Sapna 
Fruits 
F&V 
Maocanka 
Commerce 
Adi 
SMEs 
SMEs 
Brcko D. 
FBiH 
Fruit&MAP 
Jukan Eko Hrana  SMEs 
F&V and Dairy  Agropromet 
Cooperative 
MAP 
Dairy 
Dairy 
Dairy 
Dairy 
Dairy 
Dairy 
Fruits 
Perfect Export 
Bilje 
Agrocentar 
Kupres Milch 
Milchprodukt 
Smajic 
SMEs 
SMEs 
SMEs 
SMEs 
Mljekara Nocko  SMEs 
Farma Spreca 
SMEs 
Inmer 
Agrostenlly 
SMEs 
SMEs 
FBiH 
FBiH 
RS 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
Main 
source of 
raw 
material 
(Local/imp
orts) 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Maoca 
Tuzla 
Tuzla 
Tuzla 
Ljubinje 
G.Vakuf/Uskoplje  Local 
Kupres 
Celic 
Zivinice 
Kalesija 
Gradacac 
Celic 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
Local 
78 
Type of partner Private companies 
Grow
er  
Retail/ Super 
Market  
Proces
sor  
Export
er  
Small 
Co.  
Medium 
Co. 
Large 
Co. 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Producer Associations in Agriculture in BiH  
Entity  
Municipality  
Municipality degree of 
development  
# of 
members  
Main 
commodity  
Udruženje proizvođača voća 
Udruženje žena aktiv, Otoka 
Udruženje žena poljoprivrednica, Sunčica 
Udruženje žena za održivi povratak, Vakat 
Udruženje poljoprivrednika IGM AGRO 
Udruženje proizvođača mlijeka i mesa, Povratnik 
Udruženje poljoprivrednika, Cincar 
Udruženje poljoprivrednika, Fenix 
Udruženje jagodičastog voća, Miker 
Udruženje poljoprivrednika, Zelena oaza 
Udruženje poljoprivrednika, Zdrava malina 
Udruženje voćara, Drina  
Udruženje za poljoprivredu i ruralni razvoj, Gruda 
Udruženje poljoprivrednika Farma Sočanica 
Udruženje poljoprivrednika, Posavina 
Udruženje žena Batkuša 
Udruženje žena Brvnik 
Udruženje voćara, Vinska  
Udruženje žena Đurđevak 
Udruženje uzgajivača ovaca i koza, Kozara 
Udruženje voćara, Novi Grad 
Udruženje kupinara i malinara KIM 
Udruženje Savka MG 
Udruženje žena poljoprivrednih proizvođača Agrar Vražići  
Udruženje orhideja 
Udruženje poljoprivrednih proizvođača  
Udruženje primarnih poljoprivrednih proizvođača Vareš 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
RS 
RS 
RS 
RS 
RS 
RS 
RS 
RS 
RS 
RS 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
Bužim 
B.Krupa 
Underdeveloped  
Underdeveloped  
B.Petrovac 
Underdeveloped  
B.Petrovac 
Underdeveloped  
B.Petrovac 
Underdeveloped  
B.Krupa 
Glamoč 
Drvar 
Teočak 
Čelić 
Underdeveloped  
Extremelly Underdeveloped 
Extremelly Underdeveloped 
Underdeveloped  
Underdeveloped  
Foca-Ustikolina  Extremelly Underdeveloped 
Ravno 
Underdeveloped  
Derventa 
Developed 
Šamac 
Šamac 
Šamac 
Brod 
Brod 
K.Dubica 
N.Grad 
Underdeveloped  
Underdeveloped  
Underdeveloped  
Semi developed 
Semi developed 
Semi developed 
Semi developed 
93  Fruits 
120  Fruits 
30  Fruits 
51  Berries  
38  Milk 
50  Milk 
35  Milk 
40  Milk 
78  Fruits 
60 
30  Raspberry 
130  Berries  
30  Milk 
13  Milk 
70  Vegetables 
8 
10  Pasta 
10  Fruits 
29 
30  Milk  
40  Fruits 
Oštra Luka 
Extremely Underdeveloped 
43  Blackberry 
Mrkonjic Grad 
Developed 
Tuzla 
Stolac 
Developed 
Semi developed 
Foca-Ustikolina  Extremely Underdeveloped 
Vareš 
Extremely Underdeveloped 
20  Plum 
31  Fruits 
200  Jams 
49  Berries  
50  Fruits 
79 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Producer Associations in Agriculture in BiH  
Entity  
Municipality  
Municipality degree of 
development  
# of 
members  
Main 
commodity  
Udruženje/udruga poljoprivrednih proizvođača 
Udruženje proizvođača sira 
Udruženje za uzgoj bobičastog voća – borovnica Bavar 
Udruženje proizvođača zdrave hrane “Plod” 
Udruga poljoprivrednih proizvođača STOLISNIK 
Udruga Hercegovački plodovi mediterana Stolac 
Udruženje za proizvodnju bobičastog voća Polka 
Udruga Voćar 
Udruga za poduzetništvo, agroturizam i žene, Attivo - Kupres 
Udruženje za proizvodnju I preradu ljekovitog i aromatičnog bilja ZEM 
AROMA 
Udruga proizvođača smilja 
Udruženje poljoprivrednika Simental 
Asocijacija organskih proizvođača USK-a 
Udruženje “Povrtlar” 
NVO Udruženje građanki Grahovo 
NVO United Vražići 
Udruženje žena "Emina" 
Udruženje žena za ruralni razvoj općina Pale-Prača 
Udruženje poljoprivrednika općine UPOS 
Udruženje mljekara općine Odžak - Mliječni put 
Udruženje POVRATNIK 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
FBiH 
Kupres 
Kupres 
Jajce 
G.Vakuf/Uskoplj
e 
Semi developed 
Semi developed 
Underdeveloped  
Semi developed 
Livno 
Stolac 
Kladanj 
Orašje 
Kupres 
Stolac 
Stolac 
Semi developed 
Semi developed 
Semi developed 
Semi developed 
Semi developed 
Semi developed 
B.Petrovac 
Underdeveloped  
Bihać 
Bihać 
Developed 
Developed 
B.Grahovo 
Extremely Underdeveloped 
Čelić 
Semi developed 
Foca-Ustikolina  Extremely Underdeveloped 
Pale-Prača 
Extremely Underdeveloped 
Sapna 
Odžak  
B.Krupa 
Underdeveloped  
Extremely Underdeveloped 
Underdeveloped  
31  Milk 
20  Chese  
45  Fruits 
50  Berries  
45  Raspberry 
100  Fruits 
40  Raspberry 
30  Fruits 
20 
30  MAP 
11  MAP 
5  Milk 
20  MAP 
35  Vegetables 
241  Milk 
150  Berries  
20  Fruit 
20  Fruit  
66  Milk 
43  Milk 
50  Milk 
80 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned  
1.
IFAD‘s financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) started in 1996, soon after peace 
was restored following the signature of the Dayton Peace Agreement in December 1995. The overall 
portfolio comprises six projects valued at US$ 167 million with IFAD's funding amounting to US$ 70 
million.  
The IFAD country program in BiH has evolved from emergency relief and rehabilitation in the 
2.
first two projects to supporting private sector led growth and enterprise development. The first 
generation of IFAD projects focused on rehabilitating a decimated livestock sector devastated by the 
war; mostly in the form of directly supply of animals as a mean to reduce the vulnerability of poor rural 
poor households. It resulted in the introduction of 15,000 high quality dairy cows and 13,000 sheep of 
improved breeds. 
3.
The challenges of eradicating rural poverty in BiH are not the same today as they were two 
decades ago when the war ended. In line with IFAD's special mandate to reduce rural poverty, the 
second generation of IFAD's investments in BiH aimed at integrating smallholders into pro-poor 
profitable value chains (VCs), through the provision of basic organizational and technical support to 
producers and their organisations, Producers Associations (PAs) and Agricultural Cooperatives, both 
catalytic intermediaries to enable stronger and more equitable market linkages between producers 
and end markets. The 2008 closed Livestock and Rural Finance Development Project (LRFDP) 
successfully piloted small-scale commercial livestock operations that resulted in increasing outputs 
cost-effectively, improving the quality of milk products and developing market linkages along the dairy 
value chain.  
The 2005 COSOP gave the impetus for IFAD's renewed strategic focus, shifting towards 
4.
livelihood diversification and the growth of the off-farm economy, and increased competitiveness in 
the context of economic transformation and trade liberalisation concurrent to the EU accession 
process. These third generation projects were the Rural Enterprise Enhancement Project (REEP) 
from 2008 to 2012, the Rural Livelihoods Development Project (RLDP) from 2010 to 2016 and the on-
going Rural Business Development Project (RBDP) from 2014 to 2019 as well as the Rural 
Competitiveness Development Programme (2017-2027). The three projects LRFDP, REEP and RLDP 
had a combined outreach of over 116,000 households or some 394,000 people, nearly 18% of the 
country‘s rural population and resulted in annual increase income of 30%71. 
As the pace of modernisation and integration with the EU common market require gains in 
5.
productivity characterised by the transition from non-commercial to commercial agriculture, 
compliance with plethora of EU's regulations and standards, and alignment with the common 
agricultural policy (CAP), the current COSOP 2013-2018 two strategic objectives (SOs) focus on 
Farmer organizations (FOs) and their apex organizations (SO1) and fostering innovations and 
increased competitiveness through the expansion of technological innovation, business development 
and financial services to individual producers or institutional partners (SO2). With several on-going 
interconnected and complementary projects implemented in parallel, IFAD has adopted a country 
wide approach. 
6.
Status of IFAD interventions: IFAD funded interventions have demonstrated that with 
adequate technical and organizational support, resource-constrained smallholders have the potential 
to access and benefit from growing demand for agricultural products, especially in the fruits, 
vegetables and non-timber forest products (NTFP) subsectors. BiH has a diversity of agro-ecological 
conditions and enjoys several comparative advantage, including for labour intensive production that 
require limited area of land to earn a decent family income; for example vegetables, fruits, berries, 
71 See RLDP Project Completion Report 2016: 13. 
81 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
dairy and honey. Alternatively, the strong demand from domestic processing industry72 and potential 
increase exports of agricultural products implies strong growth potential for smallholders capable of 
adopting technological innovations, adapting their business model and fully integrate into the 
European and global market, especially when in compliance with the EU requirement and standards 
The most recent generation of IFAD projects supported income diversification, strengthening of 
7.
rural livelihoods in the context of economic transformation and post-conflict stabilization, and 
preparing to meet the new requirements introduced by the EU accession process. Projects included 
the Rural Enterprise Enhancement Project (2008-2012), the Rural Livelihoods Development Project 
(2010-2015), the on-going Rural Business Development Project (2014-2019) and the Rural 
Competitiveness Development Programme (2017-2027). IFAD’s BiH portfolio is valued at US$ 234.2 
million, of which IFAD funding amounts only to US$ 83.3 million; this proves IFAD’s ability to leverage 
and catalyse ARD investments from other partners e.g OFID IFAD projects have directly benefited 
over 145,000 households or some 480,000 people which is nearly 20% of the country’s rural 
population73.  
In terms of impact these projects have resulted in increased income and livelihood of the rural 
8.
communities. For example, the Rural Enterprises Enhancement Project (REEP) resulted in an 
increase in average monthly agricultural income for beneficiary households of over 60% from KM 
11,700 in 2008 to 18,720 in 2012, mainly as a result of increased sales of milk, meat and fruits. In 
2016, the project completion report of Rural Livelihood Development Project (RLDP)  reported an 
increase of 48% in the monthly income of beneficiary households to KM 1,214 in 2015 in comparison 
to KM 822 in the baseline survey 2012 and more than 90% of the participating farmers belong to the 
category of unemployed and 1,500 households in FBIH benefited from the project creating minimum 
1-2 ‘jobs’ per household to maintain the production. Overall, partner financial Institutions have 
disbursed 5,687 smallholder loans (valued at US$ 22 million) and 146 on-farm and off-farm SMEs 
loans (valued US$ 6.6 million) and IFAD funded projects funded the construction of 350 small rural 
infrastructure schemes (237 feeder roads with a total length 285.5 km, 15 small bridges, 77 village 
water supply systems and 21 animal watering points), aimed at improving market linkages and rural 
living conditions. As a result, the overall food security situation has improved and rural livelihoods 
have become more diverse, strengthening their resilience in dealing with climate change induced 
variability. 
Lessons learned from the implementation of IFAD projects in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
The proposed Rural Enterprise and Agricultural Development project (READ) builds on IFAD's 
9.
past and on-going experience and accumulated knowledge over more than two decades of in-country 
operations. Significant learnings and best practices have emerged from the Rural Enterprise 
Enhancement Project (REEP, closed in 2013), the Rural Livelihood Development Project (RLDP, 
closed in 2016) and the implementation of the on-going Rural Business Development Project (RBDP, 
closing scheduled for 2019). Coupled with other donor funded results and experience active in the 
agricultural sector, this wealth of knowledge on what works and under which circumstances has fed 
into the READ design. 
Lessons learned can be categorised into the following: i) design, implementation and 
10.
sustainability of value chain development interventions; ii) pro-poor targeting strategy and 
methodology; iii) institutional strengthening and capacity building of farmers’ organisations; iv) 
fostering sustainable multi-stakeholders (public-private) partnerships, and iii) considering BiH's 
uniquely decentralised system of governance, implementation arrangement. 
11.
Inclusive Value chain development. With READ, IFAD's value chain development 
interventions are transitioning from a PA based to a more marked-led value chain approach. This 
72  ''BiH  imports  nearly  two  thirds  of  the  food  it  consumes,  mainly  processed  foods,  while  it  exports  lower  value  food 
commodities'' (WB 2015: 59). 
73 The number of indirect beneficiaries is not included in this figure. 
82 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
approach is grounded into a series of best practices deriving from lessons learned designed to 
maximise outreach, scalability, impact and sustainability.  
12.
  Strategic Vision. The rational for READ is rooted in a clear strategic vision and is explicitly 
designed as a pro-poor value chain and inclusive business development project. This strategic focus 
cut across all project activities and comprehensively provide the enabling conditions for better access 
to markets and employment generation; two fundamental intermediate outcomes to improve rural 
livelihoods. To avoid isolated and fragmented efforts, READ will streamline the inclusive VC approach 
at all levels, facilitating its internalization by all project's partners. 
  Synergies and interconnectedness. Older generation projects reflected one-dimensional 
13.
project design, mostly focused on increasing production as a mean to reduce rural poverty. READ 
concentrate its resource on the participatory identification, financing and implementation of business 
plans (BPs) allowing target household to integrate in pro-poor value chains. Involving business 
leaders, FOs, target households and municipalities in BP development will result in impactful VC 
development. READ has a sound internal logic to ensure complementarities among sub-components 
which combined contribute to a more efficient flow of products and increased value addition along 
targeted VCs. READ will benefit from the anticipated policy, institutional and technical success of 
RCDP, maximising efficiencies in the allocation of human and financial resources74.  
14.
  Enterprises linkages. Experiences in RLDP and RBDP have both shown the key role played 
by institutional actors in driving the inclusion of IFAD's target groups to domestic and export markets. 
Given their limited capacity, READ will expand the scope of partners beyond PAs and cooperatives to 
include any commercially driven entities committed to expand its supply chains of raw materials from 
smallholders. Committed agribusiness Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) will therefore be 
supported and incentivised to intensify business and marketing activities and establish backward 
linkages with individual producers or their organisations. Initially sceptical about their potential, 
A/PCU's matching grants piloted under RLDP have proved useful in leveraging private sector 
investment. In the piloted areas RLDP reached out to some 1.500 target households leveraging a total 
investment of BAMs 767.706,73 for additional productivity enhancing and processing technologies 
(mechanisation, irrigation, cold storage facilities) with a 54% contribution of the project75. RBDP has 
further scaled up the matching grant instruments to trigger and deepen private sectors' interest. 
Institutional strengthening. Empowering PAs and agricultural cooperatives has been a 
15.
cornerstone of IFAD's interventions in BiH. Although challenging, continuous and comprehensive 
institutional development and technical advisory services in production, business development 
services and organisational development services to PAs and cooperatives is crucial to enable them 
expand their memberships base with poorer households, improve management capacities and 
accountability, mobilise finance, deliver better production and marketing services and effectively play 
their intermediation role between producers and end markets. READ will thus continue providing 
sustained support to institutional actors with the aim to assist their transformation into profit making 
cooperative or SMEs. Based on the recurrent challenges observed, READ will complement the 
proven tools to assist PAs and cooperatives with supporting seed capital financing necessary for their 
commercialisation and institutional transformation process. 
  Access to finance. The availability of targeted financial services to stakeholders along the 
16.
value chains is a necessary condition for sub-sectors growth. Recovering from the set backs caused 
by the international financial crisis starting in 2008, the financial sector in BiH is currently 
characterized by a large number of banks and MFIs for a country of its size, leading to intense 
competition for micro and SME clients. However, the benefits of high competition for MSMEs are 
partly offset by conservative lending policies. Still, the financing sector is well financed offering 
comparable low interest rates in comparison to previous years. In view of significant delays in recent 
projects (RLDP and RBDP) to disburse the IFAD loans earmarked for rural finance, and based on 
74 It is expected that RCDP will be in its 3rd year of implementation when READ becomes effective. 
75 RLDP PCR: 13. 
83 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
extensive consultations with representatives from both entities' Ministry of Finance and a preliminary 
assessment of IFAD's comparative advantage in rural finance, READ does not incorporate credit 
lines. However and equally important, it will support linkages between business plans partners and 
participating financial institutions (PFIs). 
  Advisory and Business Development Services (BDS). Professionalising and expanding 
17.
access to the range of available advisory and BDS to support the emergence of functional PAs, profit 
making cooperatives, enterprises and individual producers have been a common feature of IFAD 
funded programs. Past assessment concluded that constraints are occurring on both the supply and 
demand side, thus hindering the coordinated delivery of services and development of new markets. 
READ will build on the BDS related provisions taken in both RBDP and RCDP to make available 
appropriate technical and business development services at local level (using various instruments e.g. 
the voucher scheme to be set-up by RCDP76), and which entails technical assistance to business 
development and marketing plans encompassing all VCs development strategies: products 
upgrading, functional upgrading and horizontal and vertical integrations77.  
  Climate resilient public or private rural infrastructure. While the agricultural sector in BiH is 
18.
vulnerable to climate change and other natural disasters, sustainable growth will require the 
construction and rehabilitation of crucial infrastructural facilities for production, processing, value 
addition and marketing. Unlike privately owned and financed infrastructures (i.e. cold storage 
capacities maintaining product quality and extending product availability on markets) which directly 
support value chain development, the experiences with public rural infrastructure is mixed and reveal 
that investments are not generally targeted at value chain development. The on-going RBDP is 
addressing the experiences linking rural infrastructure investments to VC development. READ's 
instrument to prevent discrepancies will be on prioritizing Business Plans (BPs) detailing enabling 
marketing infrastructure requirements that effectively complements and leverages the development of 
inclusive value chains, demonstrating impacts through ex-ante feasibility studies. BPs identifying 
infrastructure financing to achieve mutually benefiting investments in the pursuit of business 
objectives could be jointly formulated by small-scale producers, collectors and their organisations and 
agribusiness companies, with concerned municipalities and financial institutions, if needed. READ will 
ensure mainstreaming climate-change resilience and adaptation in the process of BP development to 
include climate change resilient and environmentally friendly infrastructure and technologies. 
  Targeting strategy. Ineffective targeting has been a major challenge in IFAD's operations, 
19.
putting at risk the overall development objectives of rural poverty reduction. Several factors has often 
led to ad hoc selection of beneficiaries, including: i) the distribution of the poor across a wide 
geographies of municipalities, ii) absence of differentiated criteria across criteria considering farming 
patterns and seasonality, iii) the joint A/PCU-municipalities selection of beneficiaries based on 
established and often inaccurate lists, iv) lack of capacity from overstretched service providers, v) lack 
of expertise within A/PCU and vi) underperforming monitoring enabling taking timely corrective actions 
In addition, IFAD's missions have consistently highlighted the weak participation of the poor in 
20.
project-supported PAs and the guiding principles that supported SMEs should be demonstrating 
effective commitment to establish backward linkages with poor small producers and collectors with a 
long-term business perspective. The READ design has factored these shortcomings in developing its 
targeting strategy, essentially built on i) the lessons learnt from the proven RLDP pro-poor inclusive 
value chain development pilot projects and ii) the minimal eligibility criteria developed under RCDP for 
project supported PAs, cooperatives and agribusiness companies. Given the limited resources 
available, READ will not be a nation-wide program but will form clusters of municipalities based on 
level of socio-economic development. These clusters will include 95% of all extremely 
underdeveloped and underdeveloped municipalities; in order not to exclude the poor households 
76 The market driven voucher scheme has been designed to leave beneficiaries with the options to select from a range of pre-
selected private sector service providers, for extension as well as business development. The vouchers is subsidized but not 
free of charge for smallholders.  
77 Eligible activities can include advisory activities and investments.  
84 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
falling outside these municipalities, READ will incorporate a maximum of 35% of semi-developed and 
developed municipalities in the country. Specific attention will be paid to include and support women-
headed households and youth participation in rewarding VCs. 
  Value Chain Governance. Aligned with READ's strategic vision, the cluster-based 
21.
implementation is a valuable mechanism to address value chain constraints, especially those 
requiring the transformation of stakeholder relationships. Stakeholders consultations held during the 
design revealed that potential partners are not conversant with value chain approach to sub-sector 
development. It is imperative for READ to align incentives of project's partners with the project's 
strategic vision READ will benefit from the various mechanisms engineered by RCDP to foster the 
institutional aspect of value chain enhancement, including the cluster stakeholder platforms and (ii) 
the Subsector Stakeholder Platform to facilitate downstream market linkages with SMEs, exporters 
and other private sector entities along the value chain. The involvement of local Municipalities and 
their agencies in the coordination and co-financing of the interventions will contribute to empowerment 
and sustainability.  
Implementation arrangements. A recurrent bottleneck of IFAD operations in BiH has been the 
22.
time lapse between project design and implementation and translating into changing conditions at 
municipalities, sub-sectors and individual households. In addition, the role of the A/PCU continues to 
evolve towards market linkage enablers. Capacity for effective coordination is not a sufficient 
condition anymore to succeed in bringing about systemic change: heavy emphasis should be put on 
adaptive management and facilitation skills. To cater for the specific implementation requirement of 
READ, core A/PCU staff structure will be complemented by specialized expertise reflecting this newly 
focused role on brokering partnerships between producers and end markets. READ will provide 
continuous capacity building of A/PCU and partner institutions, train the team on facilitation 
techniques, rigorous M&E practices, performance analysis and oversight functions, thus allowing the 
replications and scaling-up of approaches and experiences gained in previous projects. 
23.
  Monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The main lessons learned from project implementation in 
the field of M&E pertains to its functionality, or lack thereof, to provide effective feedbacks loops to: i) 
improve projects' steering and ii) support informed decision making. This in turn has affected the 
project's ability to take timely corrective measures and the overall quality of reporting. The main gaps 
highlighted in the various M&E related assessments are: fragmented approach relying on service 
providers with limited capacity and understanding of reporting requirement to prove impact and 
improve project implementation; inconsistent monitoring of the accrued benefits for each categories of 
stakeholders, incomparable performance across entities given the lack of harmonisation in the 
approach to baseline methodology preventing robust comparison and overall poorly defined and 
measurable indicators. While the APCU and PCU will maintain ultimate responsibility for M&E and 
reporting READ, In line with the shifting focus of A/PCU as market enablers, READ puts a strong 
emphasis on shared responsibilities and accountability in the monitoring of subsector performance. 
Stakeholders attached to BPs shall become part of the monitoring system. BPs monitoring and 
reporting will be based on the contractual provisions developed under RCDP. READ will develop 
instruments to guide stakeholders under the overall leadership of A/PCU M&E officer and will 
strengthen its field presence with field coordinators to ensure adequate follow-up/ monitoring. 
85 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Project Description 
The project has two components: (i) A technical component titled enhancement of economic 
1.
opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains and (ii) Project management and 
coordination. 
Component 1: Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value 
chains – EUR 26.2 million (95% of project cost) 
The expected outcomes of this component are (i) production, productivity, marketing of 
2.
produce and profitability of target group households improved based on 4Ps models (ii) enhanced 
FOs for increased integration of farmers in markets (iii) market access of target group households 
enhanced through improved market infrastructure. The component is supported by three mutually 
reinforcing sub-components; (i) development and implementation of pro-poor BPs (ii) development of 
farmers’ organisations and (iii) enabling infrastructure development. 
Sub component 1.1: Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans 
This subcomponent will increase the adoption and implementation of 4-Ps based business 
3.
models by business leaders along the value chains. Business leaders comprising SMEs and FOs will 
be the originators of the BPs. The Project will assist around 150 business leaders to develop BPs and 
will facilitate BP implementation agreements between different partners targeting poor households in 
the selected project areas. With transparent targeting measures the project will ensure the 
identification of locations/communities with higher concentrations of the potential target households 
and the selection of suitable pro-poor sub-sectors and crops. It will co-finance the implementation of 
standard starter packages (5,500) and preferential starter packages for youth (1,400) and women 
headed households (600) which will transform 7,500 non-commercial households to commercial 
households in agriculture by developing their profitable linkages to the business leaders. Additionally, 
it will provide apprentice support for the employment of 350 youth (50% women) by linking them to 
employers in the rural sector. 
The main BP development related activities are (i) selection of service provider (ii) targeting 
4.
survey (iii) stakeholder awareness and sensitisation workshops (iv) call for proposals and selection of 
eligible applicants (v) development of detailed BPs and implementation agreements. The main BP 
implementation related activities are (i) market development assistance (ii) farmers’ training, advisory 
and capacity building services (ii) co-financing starter packages and youth apprentice support (iv) 
assisting other external linkages e.g. to financial institutions, certification bodies and (v) creating a 
supportive setting for BP implementation. 
Development of pro-poor business plans 
Activity 1 - Selection of service provider: The A/PCUs will prepare terms of reference for 
5.
service providers to be selected. The terms of reference of the service provider (SP) will differ 
between the two entities. The PCU is already experienced in implementing current IFAD projects by 
partnering with service providers. Whereas in the RS, the APCU implements current IFAD projects by 
partnering with the Agency for Extension Services (extension agency - EA) which currently does not 
have experience in the BP methodology. Also, the RCDP, which will start prior to READP, will invest in 
business development services (BDS) and implement a voucher system for financing advisory 
services. READP will take the RCDP experiences into consideration both for SP selection and 
financing arrangements. 
SP selection by PCU: The PCU will competitively hire a service provider company (SP) to 
6.
support the READP BP development and implementation process. Depending on performance, the 
SP will be retained for implementing other READP sub-components. The PCU will contract 5 field 
officers as cluster coordinators, one in each of the five clusters, for field presence and quality 
implementation of READP. The SP selection criteria will include significant in-house expertise and 
87 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed roject description 
experience in the sub-sectors, participatory targeting of individual beneficiaries, BP development, rural 
area development, environmental protection and climate change mitigation capacities, youth 
employment, stakeholder coordination, procurement, technical and financial reporting and donor 
interaction. The SP will (i) implement the targeting survey (ii) conduct sensitisation workshops before 
call for business proposals (iii) provide technical assistance for developing detailed BPs (iv) facilitate 
implementation agreements and implementation by BP partners. 
SP selection by APCU: The APCU will also contract a SP for implementation of this sub-
7.
component. However, the ToR of the SP will be adjusted to include training and capacity building of 
the extension agency (EA) to support the implementation of the BPs. Once trained, the SP and the EA 
will collaborate for implementing subcomponent 1 and 2. The EA will provide field coordination though 
7 regional extension officers located in the 5 project clusters. 
After tendering the SP selection will be done by the A/PCUs in consultation with the IFAD 
8.
CPM. The PCUs will orient the selected SP/EA to the project objectives, target group, approach and 
implementation steps. The cluster coordinators and the extension officers will be mandatorily included 
in the orientation activities. The orientation process will comprise (i) workshops for discussions 
between the SP/EA, A/PCUs’ staff and RCDP BDS providers (ii) field visits to farmers’ organisations, 
business leaders and municipalities. 
Activity 2 - Targeting survey: READP will conduct a targeting survey to identify the 
9.
locations/communities with higher concentrations of the potential target households and to 
recommend the suitable pro-poor products from the project supported agricultural sub-sectors, taking 
into consideration their prevailing market demand. In consultation with the A/PCUs, the SP/EA will 
develop the questionnaires, checklists and other tools for conducting the targeting survey. These tool 
will be reviewed and approved by the A/PCUs followed by field level implementation of the survey by 
the SP/EA in coordination with the cluster coordinators and extension officers.  
10.
The survey will involve consultations with key actors (social service centers, employment 
bureau, heads of the local communities, authorities managing entity level farm registers, financial 
institutions, business leaders active in the project area) and identification of the areas/communities 
mainly in the underdeveloped and extremely underdeveloped municipalities that have higher 
concentration of potential target households. A verified list of these geographical pockets will be 
developed and profiles of these geographical pockets will be developed in terms of (i) crop production 
experiences of target households and recommendations of potential crops suitable to the conditions 
and capacities of the target households (ii) current marketing arrangements followed for agricultural 
produce from these pockets along availability and access to crop production inputs and services by 
the target households (iii) identification of opportunities and constraints against women and youth 
involvement in project supported activities (iv) identification of FOs with higher concentration of the 
target households (v) recommendations of the areas/pockets specially in the underdeveloped 
municipalities where the business plan implementation should commence (vi) listing of interested 
enterprises and potential rural sector jobs they can potentially offer that can engage the youth 
apprentice.  
These findings will be discussed during the stakeholder workshops (Activity 3) to promote 
11.
inclusive BP preparation. The business leaders and other stakeholders will be encouraged to increase 
their outreach in these poverty pockets. Going forward, the target households identified in the BPs will 
be drawn mainly from the poverty areas identified in the targeting survey (details in activity 7). 
Activity 3 - Stakeholder awareness and sensitisation: Cluster level stakeholder 
12.
sensitisation workshops will be organised prior to the business planning exercise. The SP/EA in 
coordination with the A/PCUs will be responsible for organising these. The cluster coordinators and 
extension officers will be co-facilitators. These workshops will be attended by representatives from 
target municipalities, business leaders, financial institutions, input suppliers, farmers’ organisations 
and target households. 
88 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
The process of generating eligible pro poor business ideas will be stimulated during these 
13.
workshops. The participants will be informed about the concept of linking business leaders to target 
households using the BP methodology. The steps involved in the BP development process will be 
explained. Sample proposals and the templates for submitting BP proposals will be shared. The 
multiple criteria against which the business proposals will be evaluated will be transparently 
communicated.  
The workshops will clarify that (i) viable BPs are expected to include an array of producers 
14.
including larger farmers but with strong focus on the project target households (ii) the role of the 
project is to facilitate and ensure the sustainable integration of target households in the business 
models and that this is clearly reflected in the BP target and investment projections and to monitor 
that these target households are actually reached during BP implementation process (iii) the BPs 
should consider the inclusion of various project promoted social, environmental and business issues 
such as gender and youth inclusion, climate change adaptation and marketing opportunities (iv) the 
business plans should incorporate geographical targeting, self targeting and direct targeting measures 
in line with the READP design along with the incentives for doing so where relevant. Resource person 
discussions and audiovisual sessions will be held during the workshops to assist full understanding of 
these concepts, best practices and approaches. 
Activity 4 - Call for proposals and selection of eligible proposals: Every year (for three 
15.
years) the A/PCUs will announce a call for business proposals (expression of interest), through 
newspapers and the internet, inviting business ideas from interested business leaders. After the 
announcement, the SP/EA, along with the cluster coordinators and extension officers will follow up 
with potential cluster level business leaders and assist them to submit proposals to the A/PCU. It is to 
be noted that previous IFAD projects have already established linkages to SMEs active in 
agribusiness who can be potential leaders. An overview of actors and their businesses in the 
envisaged sub-sectors is attached in the Annex of Appendix 2. These businesses will be encouraged 
to respond to the call for proposals. 
16.
These proposals will present (i) background details and rationale (ii) description of the 
business model/concept (iv) targeting strategy and measures to be adopted specifically for including 
women and youth (v) the selected produce (vi) raw material supply, production/processing and 
marketing approach (vii) mechanisms for benefitting and potential outreach to target households 
(including youth) (viiii) estimation of investments required and expected returns and (ix) measures to 
address environmental and climate change concerns. The produce selected will be demand driven 
based on consultations between the business leaders, target households and other stakeholders and 
would not necessarily be limited to one item or commodity. 
Selection of eligible proposals: Screening and shortlisting of the business proposals will be 
17.
done by a selection committee appointed by the A/PCUs in consultation with IFAD CPM. The 
committee will include representatives from the A/PCUs, SP/EA and development partners to ensure 
harmonisation with similar initiatives. The selection process will involve (i) screening and shortlisting 
eligible proposals (ii) validation visits to the shortlisted business leaders (iii) final selection of 
proposals. 
Screening proposals: The A/PCUs in consultation with the SP/EA will develop objective 
18.
criteria and scoring method for reviewing and ranking the proposals. They will organise selection 
committee meetings and will sensitise the members about the scoring indicators. More weightage will 
be placed on indicators related to the targeting aspects such as (i) past experience of linkages with 
target group households directly or through PAs and willingness invest in solving VC related problems 
of target households e.g. by extending pre-financing support or providing training services (ii) 
willingness to select crop/produce suitable for production by target households and involving 
engagement of mainly women and youth as wage labour in the production cycle (iii) bulk of the targets 
households planned to be drawn from the underdeveloped and extremely underdeveloped 
municipalities and (iv) plans for new full time jobs in the future (to manage the organisation growth 
from BP implementation) that can absorb youth through the youth apprenticeship support.  
89 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed roject description 
The business proposals and subsequently the BPs submitted by the business leaders will be 
19.
further assessed against criteria including (i) proven know-how and technical expertise in the 
subsector (ii) willingness to use environmental friendly production practices and compliance with 
social, labour and gender standards (iii) strategy for on long-term presence and viable business 
relationships with smallholder producers (iv) market prospects (national/export) and overall profitability 
(v) targeted outreach to the target households including youth (vi) market prospects (national/export) 
and overall profitability of the business model (vii) potential returns to the target households including 
youth (viii) prospects for partnerships with municipalities, FOs and other donor initiatives and (ix) 
measures to address environmental and climate change concerns.  
The selection committee will review, score and shortlist around 200 proposals for around 250 
20.
proposals received. Out of these around 175 will proceed with detailed BP development and 150 of 
the these will actively implement the business plans (see table below). 
Details of phasing 
Business proposals 
No of business proposals received 
No of proposals selected  
Business plans 
No of business plans prepared 
No of new BPs implemented 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Total 
75 
60 
50 
40 
100 
80 
75 
65 
75 
60 
50 
45 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
250 
200 
175 
150 
Validation and final selection: Final selection of the proposals will be based on field visits to 
21.
confirm the critical areas presented in the screened proposals. The A/PCUs in consultation with the 
selection committee will develop the validation checklist for each screened proposal. Validation visits 
will be carried out by the SP/EA in coordination with cluster coordinators and extension officers with 
oversight from the A/PCUs. They will visit the business leaders and the proposed business partners 
such as municipalities, FOs and the target households to confirm their interest and technical and 
financial ability to participate. Based on confirmations obtained through the validation process the 
A/PCUs will prepare the final list of eligible business leaders which will receive technical assistance 
from READP for their development into detailed BPs. 
Activity 5 - Development of detailed business plans and implementation agreements: 
22.
The SP/EA will deliver technical assistance to the selected business leaders and FOs to develop 
detailed BPs. The lessons learned and good practices from the RCDP programme in implementing 
the BP approach will be considered and adopted. 
Actions involved: The SP/EAs will hold detailed consultations, site visits and stakeholder 
23.
workshops with the business leaders, target households, FOs and municipalities. They will assist the 
business leaders with (i) data collection and analysis (ii) marketing and profitability assessment (iii) 
formulation of the targeting strategy, targeting steps and actual target selection (described in the 
targeting section) with specific focus on the inclusion of women and youth (iv) identification of other 
business partners (v) outreach and financial target setting (vi) financial planning, identification of 
financial sources (vii) implementation agreement with other stakeholders. They will also be 
responsible for writing the BP in coordination and consultation with the business originators. 
Main elements of the BPs: The final BPs will describe how the business will progressively 
24.
increase the profitability and sustain the inclusion of the READP target households. They will present 
(i) the nature of business including forward and backward linkages to other value chain actors (ii) 
ownership and management structure proposed for implementation of the business model (iii) 
domestic and export market analysis (iv) strategic plan for achieving the business objectives (v) 
targeting strategy and implementation steps for ensuring target group, mainly women and youth 
inclusion in the promoted VCs (vi) specific measures to support target household inclusion including 
advisory, extension, operational measures, partnership agreements and monitoring needs (vii) 
operational needs including implementation arrangements and partnership requirements (viii) financial 
plan estimating the total investment and co-financing needs and (ix) enabling infrastructure 
90 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
requirements such as roads, water supply and bridges expected to be implemented through 
municipality involvement 
25.
Performance target setting: The BPs will present 5 years projected growth targets in key 
areas such as market share increase; increase in profitability and return on investment; increase in 
the quantity of produce purchased from the target households; increase in the number of target 
households linked to the business; increase in the total returns to the target households and increase 
in direct and indirect employment of youth in the business.  
BP co-financing plan: The detailed activities in the BPs will be divided into expenditure 
26.
categories; (i) fixed and working capital needs including producer starter packages and seed capital 
financing for FOs (ii) market development investments including study tours, trade fair participation, 
certification (iii) training and advisory needs and (iv) enabling infrastructure necessities. Co-financing 
plan will be prepared indicating contributions from different partners; business leaders, READP, 
municipalities, FOs and the producers, according to the guidelines presented below. Contribution of 
the business originators and the target households will be regarded as self-contribution from their own 
resources (self-financing), in-kind or from borrowings from financial institutions. 
Categories 
Training and advisory 
Market development 
- Study tours (abroad) 
- Trade fair participation 
- Certification 
- Other marketing support 
Starter package 
- Standard 
- Youth and women 
Enabling infrastructure  
Assets for FOs  
(details in subcomponent 1.2) 
READP [ceiling in 
EUR] 
100% 
Others* 
70% [8,000] 
40% [4,000] 
40% [4,000] 
50% [4,000] 
Upto 40% [500] 
Upto 60% [800] 
30% 
60% 
60% 
50% 
60% 
40% 
details in subcomponent 1.3 
Upto 70% [17,500] 
30% 
*Other cofinanciers include municipalities, business leaders, FOs and beneficiaries 
Training and advisory services financing: The project will bear the costs for BP related 
27.
training and advisory services to the target households except costs for transport and 
accommodation. These services will be provided by the READP contracted service providers, field 
coordinators and extension officers. The cost of domestic study tours for target households will be 
covered by the project. 
Market development costs financing: BP partners will be eligible for co-financing for 
28.
READP initiated market development activities such as (i) study tours abroad - 70% of costs to a 
maximum of EUR 8,000 (ii) trade fairs – 40% of costs to a maximum of EUR 4,000 (iii) international 
standards and certifications - 40% of costs to a maximum of EUR 4,000 and (iv) other marketing 
support such as branding, product identification, packaging, promotion material - 50% with maximum 
of EUR 4,000. The business leaders will be eligible for receiving project financing for these activities 
only as performance incentives for achieving at least 60% of linkages to target households in 
underdeveloped and extremely underdeveloped municipalities through BP implementation. 
Starter package financing: Starter package describes the initial size of the investment 
29.
required by a target household to become a commercial farmers. It is the size of investment required 
by a target household to produce the quality and the quantity of product required for developing 
marketing linkage with the business leaders for the first time according to the details in the BP. The 
estimated starter package requirement for producing the project supported products in 1-2 dunums of 
land (and with 1-3/3-5 cows) is around EUR 2,500. The starter package will be co-financed by 
READP, municipalities, advances from the business leaders and self-contribution of the producer in 
harmony with experiences of the RLDP and RBDP (see lessons learnt). It will also be in harmony with 
the starter package approach adopted for RCDP and will smoothen its implementation by the A/PCUs.  
91 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed roject description 
In circumstances where the contributions from the other partners are not sufficient to meet the 
30.
full financing needs of the starter package, the producer households will borrow from financial 
institutions (bank or MFI) to meet the gap. It is expected that 40-60% of the beneficiary households 
may have to borrow from financial institutions. Taking into account the co-financing contributions from 
other partners the borrowings from banks/MFIs are expected to finance between 15-25% (EUR 700) 
of the starter package (production costs). Beneficiary households can borrow from any financial 
institution of their choice based on terms and conditions offered. The project will facilitate the linkage 
of beneficiary households to financial institutions by actively promoting the financing opportunities 
offered by READP amongst the banks/MFIs active in the project clusters.  
READP will promote market-based interest rates. The co-financing from the MFI/banks will 
31.
utilise existing liquidity in the banking system and will be based on market driven interest rates 
(currently around 15%) thus avoiding market distortion. However, since other co-financiers will 
shoulder almost 75% of the size of the starter package the beneficiary household will pay market 
driven interest rate only on around 25% of the starter package, thus resulting in an affordable, 
competitive and effective interest rate of around 3% on the full cost of the starter package. These 
financial linkages will assist the future commercial growth of the target household.  
32.
The starter packages will potentially lead to the involvement of several MFIs and Banks 
resulting in competitive services and interest rates. They will also help the A/PCUs to fulfil the demand 
for lower interest rates for the borrower and faster disbursement of project funds by directly financing 
input costs for first time commercial farmers. Most importantly, the implementation of the starter 
packages will involve the A/PCUs directly in target household selection leading to improved targeting 
performance. Two types of starter package co-financing will be offered by the project. 
33.
Standard starter package: The standard starter package co-financing from READP will be 
valued at a maximum of EUR 500 and will benefit 5,500 households. It will co-finance up to 40% of 
production costs in-kind by supplying items such as planting materials, agrochemicals, fertilizers and 
small equipment. The target households provided with starter packages (i) will be contractually linked 
to business leaders for selling the produce (ii) would have undergone training and skills development 
and (iii) will receive agronomic advice from the project during the production cycle in order to meet the 
quantity and quality standards required by the buyers. These conditions will make these producers 
bankable and attractive as potential clients of banks/MFIs.  
Youth and women starter package: Project contribution to this type of starter package is 
34.
valued at maximum EUR 800 and will promote self-employment of 2,000 youth (30% women headed 
households). It will co-finance upto 60% of production costs in kind as described above. The starter 
packages for youth will offer financial institutions with the opportunity to get access to a large number 
of young farmers by contributing a small share of the starter package and thereby developing linkages 
to a new segment of the microfinance market. Their support towards the future growth of youth as 
commercial farmers will significantly increase their portfolio and long-term profitability.  
35.
Continuous appraisal of the business plans: The BPs will be developed over a period of 3-
6 months and the process of their development will be subjected to continuous appraisal. The A/PCUs 
will organise biweekly BP progress review meetings with the SP/EA. During these meetings the BPs 
under preparation will be continuously divided into three categories, strong, moderate and borderline, 
based on criteria including (i) commitment of the businesses leaders in terms of time and resources 
devoted to the BP development exercise (ii) commitment of the business leaders in terms of their 
willingness to discuss and develop the partnership ideas and implementation arrangements (iii) 
business leaders’ acceptance of activities to keep the BPs focused on inclusion of target households 
and (iv) ability of the business leaders and other BP partners to supply co-financing in a timely 
manner. During the review meetings the nature of the challenges facing the moderate and borderline 
BPs will be discussed along with mitigation measures. The SP/EAs will be responsible for follow-up 
and implementation of these measures to ensure that majority of BPs get strong rating. The strong 
BPs will be prioritised for implementation. 
92 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
36.
BP implementation agreements: In preparation for the implementation of the BPs the 
SP/EA, in coordination with the A/PCUs, will develop templates for implementation agreements/MoUs 
between the various implementation partners identified in the BPs (municipalities, FOs, financial 
institutions and the project). These agreements will define (i) financing commitments of the partners in 
different categories for implementing the business plans guided by the allocations presented in the co-
financing table (ii) ownership, management and revenue sharing (if any) roles (iii) targeting roles and 
responsibilities (iv) monitoring and review responsibilities. The SP/EA will be responsible for 
organising meetings, facilitating negotiations and ensuring the development of the written agreements 
between the partners. These agreements will be accompanied by draft action plans indicating 
implementation responsibilities and time schedules.  
Implementation of pro-poor business plans 
37.
Activity 6 - Market development support: The activities under market development support 
will be planned in the BPs but project financing for their implementation will be based on performance 
incentive basis. Therefore, only for the business leaders who have achieved at least 60% of linkages 
to target households in underdeveloped and extremely underdeveloped municipalities through BP 
implementation will be eligible for this support.  
In consultation with the SP/AE the business leaders will identify the specific market linkage 
38.
and business development areas where they require assistance in order to increase their national and 
export market share of the BP produce. These will be presented in the BPs. Responding to these 
needs the SP/EA in coordination with the A/PCUs will provide assistance in the selected areas 
described below. Strong emphasis will be placed on collaboration with other donor projects providing 
support in similar areas and well as on coordination with RCDP initiatives in these areas.  
Quality assurance and certification support: The SP/EA will guide the business leaders on 
39.
importance, mechanisms and process for obtaining different kinds of certification and will also link 
them to relevant certification bodies where required. The A/PCUs will co-finance eligible business 
leaders for the introduction of international standards such as HACCP, ISO, Global GAP and HALAL. 
Eligibility will be based on (i) clear assessment that certification will be an advantage for production 
and marketing (ii) presence of signed contract between the business leader and a certification 
company on standards’ implementation (iii) higher partnering outreach to target households.  
40.
Trade fair participation, study tours, other marketing support: READP will support 
representatives from the business leaders to participate in trade fairs and study tours that assist them 
to understand the market demand for different products as well as develop linkages for the marketing 
of their existing produce. Participation in local, regional and international trade fairs (e.g. Biofach, Fruit 
Logistica, ANUGA), regional marketing platforms and business networking activities will be supported 
along with local and international study tours. Other market development activities such as product 
identity, certification and brand development initiatives will be supported in collaboration with the BiH 
Foreign Trade Chamber, RCDP initiatives and other donor programmes.  
41.
Activity 7 - Farmers’ training, advisory and capacity building services: The SP/EA will 
identify the specific areas of farmers’ training and advisory services in the BP development stage in 
consultation with the business leaders and the FOs. These will be clearly reflected in the BPs.  
Training for farmers: Based on inputs from the BPs the SP/EA will draft the annual farmers’ 
42.
training plan which will be reviewed and finalised by the A/PCUs. The SP/AE along with the cluster 
coordinators and extension officers will be responsible of delivering the trainings and advisory 
services. Where relevant additional technical specialists will be hired to support training and advice in 
specific areas. The objective of the training will be assist the target households to timely adopt the 
different applications for quality and quantity production as agreed with the buyers.  
Target households will be trained on (i) quality standards (GAP, hygiene, EU quality 
43.
standards) (ii) production of fruit and vegetables, MAPS/ NTFP, dairy as identified in the BPs (iii) 
environment training e.g. climate change and pest management (iv) investment related trainings and 
93 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed roject description 
(iv) training on organising into FOs. Training will involve on-farm inputs and exposure trips to 
demonstration farms in the country. Where relevant the training courses will be open to all farmers 
involved in the BP, including relatively larger farmers to get to larger quantities and economies of 
scale.  
44.
Advisory services: The SP/AE, in collaboration with the cluster coordinators and regional 
extension officers in the FBiH and RS respectively will provide production related advisory services 
and practical guidance to the farmers according to the BP agreements. These will focus on support 
related to (i) standards implementation, e.g. assistance in application (ii) production, e.g. access to 
seeds, fertilizer, advice in the field in production (iii) product value addition, e.g. access to processing 
equipment, packaging and post-harvest handling, bulking including storage (iv) investment regarding 
equipment to meet BP targets, tender process, installation and implementation and (v) access to 
finance, e.g. linkage to formal financial sector and agricultural insurance (vi) organising farmers into 
FOs. These inputs will be delivered through regular on-site visits by service providers as well as 
cluster coordinators and extension officers to enable real-time solutions to farmers’ production related 
problems. Advisory services will be concentrated mainly on the target households.  
Activity 8 – Delivery of starter packages and youth apprentice support:  
Starter package: Both the standard and the youth starter packages will be implemented in 
45.
the same way and will be strictly linked to the BPs. The SP/AE will ensure that each BP and 
implementation agreement clearly reflects the starter package requirements along with estimated 
outreach, potential co-financing partners, co-financing shares and draft action plan indicating 
implementation schedule and responsibilities. Eligible production related investments supply and 
cover by the grant include: planting materials, agrochemicals, fertilizers and small equipment. Prior to 
implementation the SP/AE will organise cluster level planning workshops. The A/PCUs will invite 
interested financial institutions to these workshops. In these workshops (i) the inputs/services 
financed by the starter packages will be finalised (ii) identification of the target households to be linked 
to the business leaders will commence and (iii) partners including the financial institutions (where 
relevant) will re-affirm their co-financing commitments and finalise implementation arrangements.  
The SP/AE will ensure that the above steps are strongly directed towards the inclusion of the 
46.
targeted households. Identification of target households will start by focusing of the geographical 
locations with higher concentration of the target households particularly in the underdeveloped and 
extremely underdeveloped municipalities as identified during the targeting survey. The SP/EA will 
along with the representatives of the business leader, municipalities and the FOs will visit these 
communities and conduct awareness and orientation campaigns sensitising the local population about 
the project and seeking applications from interested households. During these visits the criteria for 
target household selection already explained during the cluster level workshops will be further 
explained. 
The applications by interested households will be collected by the SP and field coordinators in 
47.
coordination with the municipalities. Participatory poverty/wealth ranking of these applicants will be 
conducted in focus group discussion with community representatives and FOs active in the areas. 
This exercise will lead to the participatory classification of the applicants (poor households) into three 
sub categories - extremely poor, very poor and poor. 
The applications in the three categories will be screened and shortlisted by the SP/EA in 
48.
consultation with the business leaders, FOs and municipality representatives according to READP 
poverty targeting criteria. First priority will be selection of candidates from the extremely poor category 
followed by candidates from very poor and poor categories. In case there are more applicants than 
the available number of packages the candidates will be selected based on lower average annual 
income per family member. The project will conduct household visits for shortlisted candidates to 
verify and validate the household selection. Thereafter, the SP/EA in coordination with the cluster 
coordinators and the extension officers will facilitate municipality level discussion workshops between 
the shortlisted households and the business leaders leading business agreements and contractual 
94 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
arrangements between them. The quota for youth starter packages and starter packages for women 
will be respected during the selection process and the bureau of employment at the municipality will 
be involved in the identification of the target youth beneficiaries for the youth starter packages. The 
SP/EA will ensure that 30% of the youth starter packages are directed to women-headed households.  
The SP/EA will assist with the (i) finalisation of the contractual agreements between the target 
49.
households and the business leaders and BP implementation partners (ii) additional sensitisation of 
the farmers where required (iii) involvement of FOs in identification and negotiation with input 
suppliers (iv) coordination between business leader, FOs and final target households leading to 
compilation of the list of starter package beneficiaries which will be submitted to the A/PCUs for 
financing.  
The A/PCUs will assess and approve these proposals based on (i) compliance with the 
50.
conditions for starter packages contributions by the project (ii) co-financing commitment for the full 
package by other business partners (iii) presence of buyer contract (iv) completion of initial training 
and skills development. The A/PCUs, in coordination with the business leaders and the FOs will start 
the procurement process for the starter package inputs to be co-financed by them. The project will 
directly pay the selected vendors on evidence of delivery of the inputs to the approved target 
households.  
Youth apprentice support: READP will assist 350 youth apprentice to find full time 
51.
employment in the agricultural and rural sector78. Thus, it will include jobs which are created as a 
result of the project supported BP implementation activities by the business leaders as well as jobs 
offered by any other public or private agency. The project will actively promote the inclusion of youth 
apprentice in the business proposals and BPs submitted by the business leaders and this will be an 
important criteria for the selection of these business proposals and plans for READP support. The 
inclusion of youth apprentice will be promoted in business proposals and plans as response to the 
need for new full time jobs by the business leaders to manage future organisational growth resulting 
from the successful implementation of the project supported BPs. 
An apprentice is a rural youth up to the age of 30 undergoing in-house training in an 
52.
enterprise. In order to promote women employment 50% quota will be reserved for young women 
apprentice. At the end of the apprenticeship period the individual will be absorbed as a regular 
employee resulting in job creation and increased income for the target household. The apprentice 
support will be implemented in partnership between the project, the employment bureau at the 
canton/municipality level and an employer. The project will bear the costs of an apprentice for one 
year to a maximum of EUR 2,100 which can be used for paying both the net salary and the mandatory 
government contributions for taxes, health and pension funds. The administration of these payments 
will be done through the employment bureaus.  
In order to implement the scheme the project in partnership with the employment bureaus will 
53.
invite expressions of interest from individual youth interested in receiving apprentice support as well 
as from employers interested in employing such youth. The announcement of the scheme will be 
done by the project at the cluster level in coordination with the employment bureaus. In order to be 
eligible the youth must be from the cluster, belonging to a target group household and the job should 
pertain to delivery or procurement of goods and services in the rural areas.  
The employer can be a project value chain partner including private sector and FOs as well 
54.
as other enterprises and institutions active in job creation in the rural sector. They can be 
headquartered anywhere in BiH but the job offered must be related to supporting the rural operations 
in the project area. The employer will engage the apprentice in response to its requirement for a 
regular full-time employee in the organisation. Where there are multiple applicants for a single position 
the apprentice will be selected competitively and transparently through competitive selection process 
conducted by panel including the employer, employment and the project. In order to be eligible for 
78 Access to regular employment will be subject to a transparent performance assessment at the end of the scheme. 
95 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed roject description 
apprentice support, the offer of employment by the employer will be for at least three subject to 
transparent performance assessment at the end of the apprentice period. 
On pilot basis READP will reserve the appointment of at least 25 young apprentices as 
55.
coordinators/managers in FOs as a part of management support to promising FOs primarily the PAs 
which benefit from READP seed capital financing. READP will partner with the agricultural universities 
for selecting fresh graduates who are ready to serve as young apprentices in the FOs. Where 
required such apprentices can be guided by the universities during the course of the apprenticeship. 
Based on transparent performance evaluation at the end of the apprentice period the apprentice can 
continue working for the FO if so required or receive an apprenticeship certificate from the 
project/university that can assist the person to secure other rural sector jobs.  
56.
Activity 9 – Support to business leaders to develop external linkages: The SP/AEs in 
coordination with the A/PCUs will assist the business leaders to develop external linkages in areas 
such as financial support, certification and sources of business management and operational 
guidance where needed. For assisting financing needs the project will facilitate their introduction and 
negotiations with financial institutions by highlighting the role of the project as a co-financier of the 
BPs. Also, a substantial proportion of credit lines to PFIs from past IFAD supported projects will be 
repaid by the PFIs to the government in the course of READP implementation. In FBiH, the PCU has 
initiated the process of pooling these repayments into a special fund for financing agricultural sector 
projects. In RS, these repayments are already pooled in a central account of the Ministry of Finance 
referred to as the partner fund. READP will facilitate negotiations with relevant actors to facilitate the 
investment of these funds for assets and working capital financing of the partner business leaders.  
Activity 10 – A supportive setting for BP implementation: The A/PCUs will develop a 
57.
supportive setting for BP implementation by (i) establishing BP implementation oversight committees 
(ii) developing BP implementation monitoring system and (iii) organising BP implementation review 
and planning workshops. These will support regular consultation, implementation planning and 
feedback between the BP partners for smoother, target oriented BP implementation.  
BP implementation oversight committees: These will comprise representatives from the 
58.
municipalities, business partners (PAs, buyers, processors, farmers, municipalities and project), and 
project– including members from A/PCU teams, SPs, AE and cluster level field officers and extension 
officers. They will be responsible for planning and implementation review of the BPs. The committees 
will be headed by selected municipalities and will (i) track the BP implementation progress against the 
BP targets at the cluster level (ii) identify and address the reasons for gaps in target achievement (iii) 
support the development and implementation of joint action plans between the different partners and 
(iv) swiftly resolve partnership issues and conflicts in the collaborative arrangements.  
BP implementation monitoring system: In coordination with A/PCUs, SP and AE the 
59.
oversight committee will define the reporting needs of the business partners and ensure their regular 
reporting to the project and the municipalities. The cluster coordinators and the extension officers in 
coordination with the SP, AE and the M and E specialists at A/PCUs will be responsible for collection 
and cluster wise consolidation of these reports. The project will organise information and orientation 
workshops for capacity development of the members of the oversight committee to analyse and 
interpret the cluster reports.  
BP implementation review and planning workshops: The project will organise regular 
60.
cluster level BP implementation review and planning workshops attended by the implementation 
oversight committee and other relevant stakeholders. The oversight committees in coordination with 
the A/PCUs and the SP/AE will organise these workshops. The SP/AE will co-facilitate these 
workshops along with the committee members. These meetings will identify and address the reasons 
for gaps on target achievement by the business partners. They will strengthen the collaboration 
between the partners, assist conflict resolution and planning for future actions. 
96 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Sub component 1.2: Farmers’ Organisations Development  
This subcomponent will strengthen FOs to increase their outreach to target households and to 
61.
develop into viable inclusive farmers’ institution. The project will also support the transformation of 
PAs to cooperatives as well as the transformation of owner centric cooperatives into inclusive 
institutions. Strengthening the FOs will empower them to increase their membership from the target 
households, become effective partners under business schemes and increase their capacity to take 
informed decisions about their business. The main activities will be (i) seed capital financing to 40 
FOs (FO seed capital financing) and (ii) institutional development training and advisory support. Given 
the parallel implementation of READP and RCDP, the approach for the two programmes will be 
harmonized on the basis of lessons learnt of the RBDP implementation. Specifically, the MTR of the 
ongoing RBDP identified a major challenge for the counterpart financing from FOs for the seed capital 
financing and modified accordingly the ratio for RBDP funds to FOs mobilized funds to 70:30 ratio. In 
addition, the support for both seed capital financing and capacity building support will be also aligned 
as detailed below.  
The identification of the FOs to be supported by READP will be driven by the BPs call for 
62.
interest and subsequent selection. In order to avoid the risk of duplicating support, FOs already 
supported by RCDP (or RBDP) will not qualify for READP assistance unless there is good 
performance registered by these FOs from previous assistance from RCDP (or RBDP) and there is an 
increase in the FOs membership following RCDP (or RBDP) support. In such cases FOs that have 
already benefited from RCDP (or RBDP) support can also benefit from READP support but for 
activities limited to (i) start up packages for members that have not benefited from start-up packages 
under RCDP (or RBDP) (ii) additional capacity building support for business expansion and 
consolidation. As a result, the seed capital financing will be directed mainly to the FOs not yet 
supported by RCDP (or PBDP) to ensure a greater outreach of IFAD supported interventions. 
63.
Activity 1 - FO seed capital financing: The project will provide upto EUR 17,500 as seed 
capital financing to 40 eligible FOs to finance business assets identified in a profitable BP linked to 
project target households directly benefitting an average of 20 members per FO79. The seed capital 
financing to FOs is expected to generate outreach to around 800 target households. The co-financing 
arrangement80 includes up to 70% READP contribution, while the remaining counterpart funding will 
be provided by FOs through contribution by members – cash or through loans, contribution from 
partnering business leaders, and support by Municipalities. 
64.
In order to be eligible for seed capital financing the FOs should be Producers’ Associations 
(PA) or Cooperatives (coop) with (i) at least 25 members, which includes at least 20 members from 
the READP target group households with income less than KM 817 per month (ii) intention to further 
increase membership particularly from the READP target group (iii) cooperative audit (for 
cooperatives only), indicating that the cooperative functions in accordance with the BiH Law on 
Cooperatives, particularly in relation to the organization and management of the cooperative, and 
maintenance of the cooperative members' ledger. The A/PCUs through the SP/EA will provide 
institutional development training and advice to interested FOs. Consequently, those FOs which are 
initially not eligible for FO seed capital financing can qualify in later years by fulfilling the above 
conditions through project training and advisory support. 
65.
During the targeting survey (SC1) the SP/AE will identify the potential FOs based on the 
above criteria which may be suitable for seed capital financing. The SP/AE will follow-up to facilitate (i) 
their participation in the cluster level sensitisation workshops (ii) submission of business proposals 
(either as Business Leaders or as Business Partners of an Agribusiness Company) in response to the 
call for proposals (iii) competitive selection (based on criteria described in SC 1) for detailed business 
plan development assistance from the project.  
79 This pertains to the additional number of poor members in the FOs who will benefit from the FO seed capital financing 
support in addition to the members who already benefit from individual starter packages.  
80 The share of co-financing will be a selection criteria; only a lower percentage will be considered for FOs co-financing. 
97 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed roject description 
The seed capital financing of EUR 17,500 from the project will co-finance productive assets at 
66.
the FO level such as machinery and equipment, means of transport, small storage facilities, bulk 
procurement of crop production inputs and value adding equipment such as driers and small 
processing equipment. These assets will allow the FO to render services to the members such as 
production, processing and bulking, that will enhance the profitability of these members while 
simultaneously strengthen their linkage to other business leaders. The BPs should present the 
management and operational procedures as well as the revenue model for the implementation of 
these activities. The financial plans for these investments must realistically show that the income 
earned by the partnering FOs from these services will be sufficient to meet the maintenance and 
replacement costs of this asset after its productive life as well as can generate surplus towards capital 
formation and increasing the returns to the members The SP/EA will provide management advice to 
the FOs qualifying for seed capital financing so that the BP implementation by the FOs is assisted, full 
utilisation of the project financed assets are achieved and the BP outreach and financial targets are 
met.  
67.
Activity 2 - Institutional development training and advisory support: SP/EA in 
coordination with the A/PCUs will develop training and advisory plans defining the required 
institutional development training and advisory services for FOs. The project will recruit professional 
trainers and advisors experienced in cooperative movement and the defined technical areas. Capacity 
building support packages will be flexible depending on the needs of the FOs and aiming at assisting 
FOs to (i) increase membership outreach to the target households (ii) strengthen their institutional 
foundation through better governance, management and operational procedures and (iii) support 
profitable implementation of their business and hence profitable implementation of their BPs (where 
relevant). These activities will be targeted at FOs applying for BP support, including the ones that do 
not immediately qualify for FO seed capital financing. By adopting the recommended institutional 
strengthening measures the initially non-qualifying FOs can achieve the eligibility criteria and 
subsequently receive FO seed capital financing. 
68.
Training areas: The training inputs will cover (i) organizational structure (ii) governance and 
management (iii) tailored women FOs leadership programmes (iv) market intelligence and marketing, 
standards e.g. GAP, GHP, HACCP, GlobalGAP, ISO, organic, SPS, EU standards and negotiation 
skills (v) accounting, finance and bookkeeping (vi) BP development, costing and financing (vii) 
contract development with other chain stakeholders (viii) collective/bulk marketing and procurement of 
inputs (ix) management of common storage facilities and equipment (x) technology development for 
agricultural intensification and productivity enhancement (xi) financial literacy and linkages with banks 
(xii) savings mobilization and approaches to implement internal savings schemes for addressing 
social needs, business expansion and collateral requirements of the banks (xiii) sustainable adoption 
of climate resilient crop development that will be accompanied with approaches for sustainable use of 
natural resources. Trainings programmes will be complemented by exchange and learning visits, 
within the country and in Europe. These visits will provide exposure and learning for further expansion 
of FOs business model, to develop environmental sustainable strategies, and to promote market 
compliance. Promising FOs with limited net margin to cover the recurrent costs during start-up and 
growth stages will receive management support from READP through the placement of youth 
apprentice to manage both the commercial and institutional development aspects of these FOs. 
Subcomponent 1.3: Enabling Infrastructure Support  
69.
This subcomponent will improve the profitability of the target households, connect business 
leaders to the target households and improve the market participation of the beneficiaries. The BPs 
will identify the full range of infrastructure requirements for their successful implementation including 
privately owned and publicly owned or co-owned investments. Under this subcomponent the project 
will support publicly owned or co-owned investments. Public ownership will be considered when a 
municipality has majority ownership of the infrastructure. READP will support two categories of 
infrastructure activities (i) publically owned and managed infrastructure such as public water supply, 
which benefits multiple farmers in a defined area, or the establishment and rehabilitation of feeder 
98 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
roads, culverts and small bridges which connect business leaders and target households; (ii) 
publically owned infrastructure, such as irrigation structure, cooling and packing facilities, which is co-
managed in partnership between the municipalities, FOs and private sector. 
70.
The activities in this subcomponent will involve (i) stakeholder sensitisation about 
infrastructure investments (ii) identification of eligible proposals (iii) selection and prioritisation of 
infrastructure investments(iv) design, procurement and implementation (v) monitoring, supervision 
and training. The PCU will implement the infrastructure related activities through the selected SP 
while APCU will implement these directly through the in-house infrastructure engineer. The A/PCU will 
orient the SP and infrastructure engineer on the above aspects who will then orient the other 
stakeholders. The main tasks of the SP and the infrastructure engineer will be technical and financial 
analysis of screened proposals, review and approval of engineering designs, procurement of civil 
works and submission of evaluation reports and supervision of civil works. The A/PCU and the SPs 
will also support stakeholders to identify important social, environmental and climate issues early in 
the BP process, with adaption and mitigation measures factored in the BP process from the outset.  
Activity 1 - Stakeholder sensitisation about infrastructure investments: This will be done 
71.
in full coordination with municipalities during the orientation workshops organised before the call for 
business proposals. The SP and the infrastructure engineer will be responsible to ensure that the BPs 
clearly present (i) the enabling infrastructure requirements in the geographical locations with higher 
concentration of target households including potential increase in outreach to target households from 
these investments (ii) the impact of these infrastructure on the profitability of the business leaders. 
The A/PCU and the SPs will advise stakeholders to incorporate into the business plans the relevant 
environmental and climate proofing measures to safeguard the infrastructure from natural hazards as 
well as to promote measures that reduce the adverse environmental impact of these investments by 
supporting energy and water efficiencies.  
Activity 2 - Selection and prioritisation of infrastructure investments: The A/PCUs will be 
72.
assisted by the SP and the infrastructure engineer to coordinate the selection and prioritisation of 
eligible infrastructure investments. Business leaders will, in coordination with the municipality, identify 
infrastructure development needs that will enable the implementation of their BPs that are aligned with 
READP development objectives. Identification will be undertaken in a participatory and demand-
driven manner to ensure the investments improve the market access of smallholders and off-farm 
entrepreneurs through upgraded infrastructure that benefits the rural poor smallholder farmers, 
women and youth, and strengthen the value chain.  
The infrastructure selection process will be anchored by the SP and the infrastructure 
73.
engineer. It will involve (i) long-listing all potential infrastructure items as presented in the BPs (ii) 
participatory discussion at the municipal/cluster level to shortlist the more important infrastructure 
items and examine opportunities for harmonization with infrastructure proposals identified in other 
BPs as well as municipal infrastructure plans, priorities and budgets. Screening criteria will include (i) 
contribution to increasing the outreach of the BP to the target households (ii) contribution to the 
profitability of the target households (ii) performance of the business leader in the implementation of 
the BP (iv) link between infrastructure and value chain development for municipality identified 
proposals. 
Final selection will be based on feasibility studies of the shortlisted infrastructure items, which 
74.
will include mainstreaming and assessments related to environment and climate change. Final 
infrastructure evaluation will be based on criteria including (i) number of individuals assisted per USD 
1,000 of investment (ii) co-financing by other stakeholders (iii) expected Increase in the value and 
volume of products sold by target households using better infrastructure (iv) technical and financial 
viability of the project (refer PIM). The selected infrastructure will be ranked based on this assessment 
and finalised for design and implementation according to the priority. 
75.
Activity 3 - Design, procurement and implementation: The municipalities in coordination 
and with inputs from the private sector where relevant will be responsible for developing the designs 
99 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed roject description 
for the selected infrastructure. The SP and the infrastructure engineer will review the proposal and 
incorporate relevant environmental and climate proofing measures to safeguard the infrastructure 
from natural hazards (such as flooding and landslides) through designs that take into account the 
climate risks. The aim of the measures is to avoid damages to property and forgone economic activity 
as a result of damages (e.g. failed bridges, damaged buildings), effects on health and human life, and 
impacts on environmental services (e.g. erosion, loss of natural capacity to protect from future climate 
change). In addition READP will promote measures that reduce the adverse environmental impact of 
these investments by supporting energy and water efficiencies.  
76.
Following the above, the SP and the infrastructure engineer will tender for implementation of 
the works. The municipality along with the SP and the infrastructure engineer will be responsible for 
monitoring the implementation process. Following the technical acceptance of the works the SP and 
the infrastructure engineer will train the actors engaged for the management of the infrastructure 
where relevant. They will also facilitate the development of management agreements between 
different actors for operating the infrastructure (refer to PIM). Such agreements will be based on best 
practices and experiences in Bosnia and elsewhere. In case of irrigation systems, for example, the 
municipality will establish a mechanism for the collection of fees for irrigation water use, which will be 
used to cover maintenance and repair costs of irrigation systems. The municipality, in consultation 
with the project and POs, will determine which entity will be responsible for the collection of water use 
fees. A Water User Association (WUA) may be formed for this purpose or an existing will be used in 
case of READP activities that build on the existing World Bank Irrigation Development Project, which 
has introduced participatory approach to water management and created WUAs. The fees collected 
will be paid into a municipality bank account established solely for the purpose of accruing funds 
collected from irrigation water users and will be paid to the municipal utility company, which will be 
responsible for the maintenance and repairs of irrigation systems.  
77.
Activity 4 - Monitoring, supervision and training: The SP and the infrastructure engineer 
will conduct periodic monitoring and follow-up visits to the infrastructure sites to assess the quality of 
implementation and the generation of benefits according to the projections in the BPs and feasibility 
studies. They will also provide technical assistance to overcome any issues and bottlenecks observed 
during the follow up visits. READ will provide tailored training to WUAs on organizational aspects of 
managing WUAs as well as technical aspects of operating irrigation systems to ensure optimum water use, 
optimum yields and minimum adverse impact on the environment. 
Activity 5 - Financing arrangements: The approved infrastructure investments will be co-
78.
financed by READP in partnership with municipalities and, whenever applicable, other entities such as 
business leaders, FOs, individual farmers. The expected average investment by municipalities and 
others shall be 25%, however, the eligibility and co-financing proportions expected from municipalities 
and other entities will vary according to their economic development category. The developed and the 
semi developed municipalities will not be eligible for project financing for roads, bridges, village water 
supply and rural markets. Their cost contribution for other infrastructure projects will be higher (50-
70%) compared to the less developed municipalities (5-15%) as presented in the table below. 
However, the actual co-financing commitment to an infrastructure project will be one of the key criteria 
for the selection of an infrastructure for financing. The expected average investment through IFAD 
financing is 75% (may vary between 95% and 30% depending on the development category of the 
municipality) but in all cases IFAD financing in different infrastructure categories will be subject to 
ceilings (in EUR) as defined in the table below. These ceilings are only applicable to IFAD financing. 
There is no ceiling on the total size of infrastructure investment as long as the infrastructure 
development meet READP objectives.  
100 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Minimum contribution from municipality and other entities*  
Extremely 
Underdeveloped 
Underdeveloped 
Semi-developed 
Developed 
IFAD 
[ceiling in 
EUR] 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
X 
X 
X 
50% 
50% 
X 
50% 
X 
X 
X 
[75,000] 
[75,000] 
[40,000] 
70% 
[100,000] 
70% 
[50,000] 
X 
70% 
[75,000] 
 [85,000] 
[10,000] 
Publically managed 
infrastructure 
- Rural roads 
- Small bridges 
- Domestic water supply 
Infrastructure co-managed 
in partnership between the 
public and the private 
sector 
- Cold storage and packing 
facilities 
- Small storage and 
packing facilities 
- Rural market 
- Irrigation for agricultural 
production 
- Small marketing 
infrastructure 
*other entities include SMEs, FOs, individual farmers 
Component 2: Project coordination and Management  
The expected outcome of this component is efficiently and effectively managed project with 
79.
knowledge management integrated in all aspects of operations. The The Ministry of Finance and 
Treasury of Bosnia and Herzegovina(MOFT) will have overall responsibility of READP and will 
coordinate with the Entity Ministries of Finance and Agriculture. At entity level, the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry (MAWMF) in the FBiH and the Ministry of Agriculture 
Forestry and Water Resources (MAFWR) in the RS will have the overall responsibility for the 
implementation as the Lead Agencies. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the entity 
Ministry of Agriculture or its designated representative would be set up in each Entity to provide 
overall guidance to the Project at Entity level. READP implementation in each of the two Entities will 
be carried out by the existing A/PCUs that are well-versed with the systems and procedures for IFAD 
projects implementing. Dedicated project managers, additional staff and technical service providers 
will be deployed for the core project activities. Service providers and field coordinators will be hired to 
strengthen the implementation process. Further details on project management and coordination is 
presented in the in the section “Organisational Framework”.  
101 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Appendix 5: 
arrangements  
Institutional aspects and implementation 
Institutional Framework and Overall Responsibility  
The READP will be implemented by Government and non-government institutions and private 
1 
sector partners. The The Ministry of Finance and Treasury of Bosnia and Herzegovina(MOFT) will 
have overall responsibility of READP and will coordinate with the Entity Ministries of Finance and 
Agriculture. At entity level, the Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry (MAWMF) in 
the FBiH and the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Resources (MAFWR) in the RS will have 
the overall responsibility for the implementation of the project as the Lead Agencies. FBiH and RS will 
entrust PCU/APCU respectively with the responsibility of coordinating and managing project activities. 
A Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the entity Ministry of Agriculture or its 
2 
designated representative would be set up in each Entity to provide overall guidance to the Project at 
Entity level. The PSC would meet once or twice per annum. The A/PCUs Project Directors will be the 
Secretaries of the PSCs. It is advisable that PSC have the same composition as the PSC for the on-
going IFAD supported RCDP. Each PSC will ensure that (i) project activities are in compliance with 
the Government and IFAD strategies and policies and goals and objectives defined at project design; 
(ii) endorse strategic orientations taken up by the project (iii) review and approve project Entity level 
Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB); (iv) oversee the transparent selection of service providers 
and partner institutions; (v) ensure that Project interventions are coordinated with other development 
programmes and projects and (vi) ensure adherence to the highest standards of financial 
management and audit.  
Project Implementation Arrangement 
The READP project has two components: (i) A technical component titled Enhancement of 
3 
economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains and (ii) Project 
management and coordination.  
4 
Component 1 comprises of three sub-components: (i) Business plan development and 
implementation; (ii) Farmer development support and (iii) Enabling infrastructure support. The project 
will be implemented in close partnership with business leaders (farmer organisations and private 
agribusiness enterprises); business plans will be the key mechanism for the participation of target 
group households in the project. Further relevant partners in the business plan implementation 
process are project area municipalities, providers of technical and business services, financial 
institutions and relevant private sector market intermediaries. 
5 
Entry point and mechanism for Component 1 is through the promotion of Public-Private-
Producer Partnerships (4P) outlined in Business Plans (BPs) between business leaders and target 
group smallholder farmers. These BPs will build on institutional arrangements and the lessons learned 
from the ongoing RCDP. In particular, the READP project will make use of the experiences and 
achievements of RCDP in Business Development Services (BDS) as well as in establishing and 
operating cluster stakeholder platforms. The project will engage service providers, cluster 
coordinators and extension officers to support the business plan development process. 
Selection of service provider to support the business plan development: Service 
6 
providers will play a key role in implementation together with cluster coordinators and extension 
officers. Overall, the APCU/PCU will have the main responsibility to contract service providers through 
a competitive process. Three modalities of service providers can be selected, according to the specific 
services required: (i) single private or public service provider (consulting companies, regional 
development agencies, NGOs, Universities); or (ii) a consortia of service providers, the latter being 
needed because the broad range of training and advisory needs (organizational development, 
103 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
technical and business-related aspects), or a wide geographical coverage may require different 
service providers. 
In FBiH, the PCU will hire a service provider (company) competitively to support the business 
7 
plan development and implementation process. Depending on performance, the company will be 
retained for assisting the implementation of the other sub-component on FO seed capital financing. 
The PCU will also contract 5 field officers as cluster coordinators, one for each selected cluster, to 
ensure field presence of the PCU and assist quality implementation process. In the RS, the APCU 
currently implements its projects in partnership with the Agency for Extension Services (extension 
agency) which implements its activities through 7 regional extension offices. For business plan 
development, the APCU will also contract a service provider competitively for implementation of the 
relevant sub-components. Field coordination in the RS will be undertaken by the 7 regional extension 
officers located in the 5 project clusters in RS. The A/PCU and the SPs in both entities will be 
responsible support stakeholders to identify important social, environmental and climate issues early 
in the BP process, with adaption and mitigation measures factored in the BP process from the outset. 
The PCUs will develop detailed ToR for the selection of the service providers (draft ToR are 
8 
attached to this appendix). As outlined above, the two PCUs use different approaches in project 
implementation, the TORs for service providers in RS will be slightly adjusted to include training and 
capacity building of the extension agency to support the implementation of the business plans. The 
PCUs will launch a public tender (via newspapers and internet) for the selection process of the service 
providers according to the proven procedures. The evaluation of the tender will follow the set criteria 
in the ToR such as significant in-house expertise and experience in the sub-sectors, targeting, 
business plan development, rural area development, youth employment, stakeholder facilitation and 
coordination, procurement, technical and financial reporting and donor interaction.  
Once selected and contracted, the A/PCUs will orient the service providers and the extension 
9 
agency to the project objectives, target group, approach and implementation methodologies, including 
the social, environmental and climate issues. The coordination units will mandatorily include the 
cluster coordinators and the extension officers in these orientation activities. The orientation process 
will be handled through (i) detailed information sessions and workshops for discussion between the 
service provider/extension agency, the project staff and the business development service (BDS) 
providers developed through RCDP (ii) field visits to farmers’ organisations and municipalities 
Sub-component 1.1. Business plan development and implementation 
The service providers in close coordination with cluster officers and extension service will be 
10 
responsible for (i) implementing the targeting survey (ii) conducting sensitisation and consultation 
workshops prior to launching the business planning initiative (iii) providing technical guidance to the 
business leaders during the detailed business plan development process which includes identifying 
important social, environmental and climate issues to ensure that adaptation and mitigation measures 
are factored in the BP process from the outset (iv) ensuring the quality of the final business plans (v) 
facilitating negotiations the implementation agreements between different BP implementation 
partners, assisting in BP implementation process including training and advisory services. 
The targeting survey implemented by the service providers, will assist in identifying the target 
11 
groups present in the clusters. In consultation with the A/PCUs, the service providers and the 
extension agency will elaborate the methodology for the targeting survey such as questionnaires and 
checklists for guiding focus group and stakeholder discussions. The A/PCUs will approve these tools 
followed by field level implementation of the survey by the service providers and the extension agency 
in coordination with the cluster level field coordinators in FBiH and the extension officers in RS. The 
targeting study will be implemented in close partnership with project area municipalities. Key sources 
in the targeting process are local authorities at municipal level such as extension workers, social 
service centres, employment bureau, heads of the local communities. Cluster coordinators/extension 
officers will assist the implementation of the study at cluster level. 
104 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Business proposal appraisal and development process. In coordination with the A/PCUs 
12 
the service provider and the extension agency will be responsible for organising cluster level 
stakeholder awareness and sensitisation workshops, at least 5 in each Entity. Main goal of the 
workshops will be to promote the project and explain its approach, guiding principles, target groups, 
pro-poor and inclusive approaches, strategies and implementation modality, clusters approaches; pre-
identified municipalities and clusters of municipalities; sub-sectors, public-private linkages, leverage 
points etc. These workshops will be co-facilitated by the cluster coordinators and the extension 
officers in FBiH and RS respectively. To assist full understanding of the BP concepts, the project will 
distribute informative literature, organise resource person discussions and audiovisual sessions 
during the workshops. The collection of relevant informative literature (e.g. production manuals, 
market studies, export information etc) will be in the responsibility of the service providers; if required 
the A/PCUs will initiate compilation and printing of additional information.  
13 
Following the stakeholder orientation workshops the PCUs will launch a call for proposals 
(expression of interest) inviting business ideas from interested business leaders. The call for proposal 
will be announced through newspapers and the internet. After the announcement, the service 
provider/extension agency, in coordination with the cluster level cluster coordinators and the extension 
officers will follow up with cluster level agribusiness and help assist them to submit their proposals to 
the A/PCUs.  
BP appraisal committees. For business proposal appraisal the PCUs will assemble selection 
14 
committees constituted by the PCUs in consultation with the IFAD CPM. The committees will involve 
also development partners. READP will benefit from experiences and institutional set-ups of RCDP in 
which also establish a technical committee for business proposal appraisal is foreseen. In RCDP, the 
committee will be composed of three to four members: a representative of a development 
organisation with strong pro-poor orientation; a representative of a financial institution; and an 
agribusiness specialist hired to provide technical advice to the project and a VC specialist when 
necessary.  
15 
The A/PCUs in consultation with the service provider and the extension agency will develop 
objective criteria and scoring method for ranking the proposals. The A/PCUs will organise selection 
committee meeting and sensitise the members about the scoring system. The committee will review 
the viability and the pro-poor nature of each BP and provide a written technical opinion to the 
APCU/PCU. The A/PCUs in consultation with the selection committee will develop a validation 
checklist with the points to be addressed during further validation visits. Validation visits will be carried 
out by the service providers and the extension agency in coordination with cluster coordinators and 
extension officers with oversight from the A/PCUs. 
16 
The service providers and the extension agency will deliver technical assistance to the 
business leaders to develop the selected proposals into detailed business plans. The process will 
involve consultations, site visits and stakeholder workshops involving the business leaders, target 
households, farmers’ organisations and municipalities. The business plans will be developed over a 
period of 3-6 months. The A/PCUs will organise monthly business plan preparation progress review 
meetings with the service providers and the extension agency. The service providers and the 
extension agency will be responsible for follow-up and implementation measures. 
In preparation for the implementation of the business plans the service provider and the 
17 
extension agency will facilitate agreements/MoUs between the different implementation partners 
identified in the business plans (municipalities, farmers’ organisations, financial institutions and the 
project). The service providers and the agricultural agency will be responsible for developing the 
templates for these agreements in coordination with the A/PCUs. They will be responsible for 
organising meetings, facilitating negotiations and ensuring written agreements between the partners. 
Business Plan implementation. The business plan will be implemented using 4Ps 
18 
arrangement involving partnership and contractual arrangements between the business leaders 
105 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
enterprises (Private), the project (Public), the municipalities (Public), target households (Producer) 
and farmers’ organisations (Public/Private) to fulfil the following responsibilities.  
Agribusiness/business leader responsibilities (Private): The business leaders will be 
19 
responsible for organising all its marketing aspects, private infrastructure, working capital investments 
and operational requirements. Where relevant they will also supply quality planting material and other 
production inputs, including advance financing support to the target households. They will also be 
responsible to ensure the inclusion of the target households in the business models. 
20  Municipality responsibilities (Public): The municipalities will collaborate in the identification of 
the target households. They will provide an enabling setting for the implementation of the business 
plans by (i) supporting discussions between different business plan partners to foster development of 
synergies between different BP, including infrastructure, proposals (ii) co-financing the individual 
starter packages, FO seed capital financing and enabling infrastructure needs and (iii) overseeing the 
overall project implementation (e.g. quality of construction, regulatory compliance – including 
environmental) and ensuring proper management and maintenance of the developed infrastructure.  
Beneficiary responsibilities (Producer): The target group households will be responsible 
21 
partners in the business planning and implementation process. They will (i) co-finance the starter 
packages and produce the selected crops (ii) supply the agreed quantities and qualities to the 
business leader and (iii) participate in strengthening the farmers’ organisations by lobbying and 
advocating for more inclusive approach. 
Farmers’ organisations responsibilities (Public/Private): Farmers organisations will be 
22 
aggregators in the linkages between the target group farmers and the business leaders. They will 
assist members to meet the quality and quantity requirements of the final buyer by (i) providing the 
members with access to advisory assistance and (ii) relevant machinery and agronomic inputs.  
Project responsibilities (Public): The project will assist (i) market development activities (ii) 
23 
training and advisory services to develop the agronomic knowledge of the target group households 
and (iii) support mainly to non-commercial farmers through starter packages to assist their first time 
linkage to the business leaders.  
24  Market development activities. Service providers will guide the business partners in the 
process of introducing international quality standards and certifications and will also link them to 
relevant certification bodies where required. Participation in local, regional and international trade fairs 
(e.g. Biofach, Fruit Logistica, ANUGA) will be supported along with local and international study tours. 
The service providers and the extension agency will be responsible for the coordination and 
implementation of these activities with guidance and oversight from the A/PCUs.  
Farmers’ training, advisory and capacity building services: The project will provide training 
25 
and advisory services to the target group households, business leaders and the farmers’ 
organisations present as business intermediaries. The service provider and the extension agency will 
be responsible of drafting the annual work plan including an annual training plan. The training plan will 
be reviewed and finalised by the A/PCUs. The service provider and the extension agency along with 
the cluster coordinators and the extension officers will also be responsible of delivering the trainings. 
Where relevant additional technical specialists will be hired to support training and advice in specific 
areas. Training costs will be included in the tendered packages of the service provider.  
The service provider and the extension agency along with the cluster coordinators and the 
26 
extension officers will also be responsible of the provision of the advisory services. The A/PCUs will 
harmonise the implementation with the RCDP approach for BDS. Thus, advisory services could be 
financed through a voucher system (as foreseen in RCDP) or directly contracted through the PCUs. 
Delivery of starter packages. In coordination with the A/PCUs the service provider and the 
27 
extension agency will organise and facilitate cluster level implementation planning workshops for the 
partners to re-affirm their commitments for financing the starter packages and to discuss 
implementation arrangements. The service provider and the extension agency will be responsible for 
106 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
organising and facilitating the implementation planning workshops and for providing technical inputs to 
support the discussions in these workshops. They will facilitate the negotiation process between the 
partners in the workshop and secure written co-financing and other implementation related 
commitments by the end of the workshop. They will assist the business leader to secure contracts 
with the target households and to compile the list producers eligible for READP starter package 
financing. The A/PCUs will then start the procurement process in coordination with the business 
leaders and the farmers’ organisation leading to the identification of the vendor to supply the project 
financed inputs to the linked households. The A/PCUs will complete the payment for these packages 
directly to the selected vendors on evidence of delivery of the inputs to the approved households. 
Finally, the service provider, cluster coordinators and the extension officers will assist the delivery and 
verification of the delivery of the starter package inputs to the target groups and prepare reports 
based on which the project will disburse the starter package contribution. 
28 
Business plan oversight committees. A/PCUs will establish cluster level business plan 
oversight committees responsible for planning and implementation review of the business plans. The 
committees will comprise representative from the municipalities, business partners (PAs, buyers, 
processors, farmers, municipalities) and project including members from A/PCUs teams, service 
providers, extension agency and cluster level cluster coordinators and extension officers. These 
committees will be headed by selected municipalities. The project will organise regular cluster level 
business plan implementation, review and planning workshops which will be attended by the BP 
oversight committee and other READP target group representatives. The A/PCU in coordination with 
the service providers will facilitate the organisation and guide the implementation of these workshops.  
The oversight committee will also ensure follow-up monitoring visits in coordination with the 
29 
cluster coordinators and extension officers, especially with regard to the supported investments. 
Monitoring forms should be created and door-to-door visits to a representative sample of target 
groups and FOs should be performed. As lesson learnt from the RLDP pilot projects the PCUs have to 
ensure active communication on phone as well as through regular (or ad hoc) meetings with the 
stakeholders (municipalities, business leaders, FOs) to resolve critical issues. 
Youth apprentice support:  
In order to implement the scheme the project in partnership with the employment bureaus will 
30 
invite expressions of interest from individual youth interested in receiving apprentice support as well 
as from employers interested in employing such youth. The announcement of the scheme will be 
done by the project at the cluster level in coordination with the employment bureaus. In order to be 
eligible the youth must be from the cluster, belonging to a target group household and the job should 
pertain to delivery or procurement of goods and services in the rural areas.  
31 
The employer can be a project value chain partner including private sector and FOs as well as 
other enterprises and institutions active in job creation in the rural sector. They can be headquartered 
anywhere in BiH but the job offered must be related to supporting the rural operations in the project 
area. The employer will engage the apprentice in response to its requirement for a regular full-time 
employee in the organisation. Where there are multiple applicants for a single position the apprentice 
will be selected competitively and transparently through competitive selection process conducted by 
panel including the employer, employment and the project. In order to be eligible for apprentice 
support, the offer of employment by the employer will be for at least three subject to transparent 
performance assessment at the end of the apprentice period. 
32  On pilot basis READP will reserve the appointment of at least 25 young apprentices as 
coordinators/managers in FOs as a part of management support to promising FOs primarily the PAs 
which benefit from READP seed capital financing. READP will partner with the agricultural universities 
for selecting fresh graduates who are ready to serve as young apprentices in the FOs. Where 
required such apprentices can be guided by the universities during the course of the apprenticeship. 
Based on transparent performance evaluation at the end of the apprentice period the apprentice can 
107 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
continue working for the FO if so required or receive an apprenticeship certificate from the 
project/university that can assist the person to secure other rural sector jobs. 
Sub component 1.2: Farmers organisations development.  
This subcomponent will support around 40 farmers’ organisations with (i) Farmers’ 
33 
organisations seed capital financing and (ii) institutional development training and advisory support.  
FO seed capital financing: The project will support up to EUR 17,500 as business grants to 
34 
around 40 qualifying farmers’ organisations which can be used by them to finance assets identified in 
a business plan. Eligible farmers’ organisations for the seed capital financing will be selected 
competitively following the same steps described in sub-component 1. The selected business 
proposals will be developed into detailed business plans with technical assistance support from the 
project delivered through service providers and the extension agency. In all cases the service 
providers will assure that the business plans are focused on increasing the outreach and income of 
the target households. The purchase of the selected equipment/assets will follow IFAD procurement 
regulations under supervision of A/PCUs.  
35 
Institutional development training and advisory support: Training service providers will be 
contracted for developing the training calendar, organising the institutional development training and 
advisory activities and for implementing these according to schedule. Trainings programmes will be 
complemented by exchange and learning visits, within the country and in Europe. These visits will be 
organised by the service provider in close coordination with A/PCUs.  
Sub-component 3: Enabling infrastructure support.  
READP will support two categories of infrastructure activities (i) publically owned and managed 
36 
infrastructure such as public water supply, which benefits multiple farmers in a defined area, or the 
establishment and rehabilitation of feeder roads, culverts and small bridges which connect business 
leaders and target households; (ii) publically owned infrastructure, such as irrigation structure, cooling 
and packing facilities, which is co-managed in partnership between the municipalities, FOs and 
private sector. The activities under this subcomponent will involve (i) stakeholder sensitisation about 
infrastructure investments (ii) identification of eligible proposals (iii) Selection and prioritisation of 
infrastructure investments (iv) design, procurement and implementation (v) monitoring, supervision 
and training. 
Implementation arrangements. The project will be responsible for the implementation of the 
37 
infrastructure related activities directly or through selected service providers. The implementation 
arrangements for this component will be slightly different in the two entities as was the case in 
previous IFAD funded projects.  
In FBiH, the implementation of schemes will be managed by a competitively selected Service 
38 
Provider, and executed on the basis of a tripartite Memorandum of Understanding among the PCU 
and project area municipalities as per the format developed under the previous IFAD projects. The 
main tasks of the Service Provider will be technical and financial analysis of preliminary screened 
proposals, review and approval of engineering designs provided by municipalities, incorporation of 
relevant environmental and climate proofing measures, procurement of civil works and submission of 
evaluation reports and supervision of civil works. Coordination of the Service Provider activities will be 
the responsibility of the PCU Rural Infrastructure Engineer.  
In RS, the implementation of this component will be managed directly by the APCU. The staff 
39 
involved in the infrastructure component implementation will consist of a Rural Infrastructure Engineer, 
Procurement Manager and a Financial and Economic Analyst contracted on a short term basis. The 
tasks of the PCU/APCU are outlined in the Project Implementation Manual. In both cases, the actual 
construction of the scheme will be contracted out to private sector contractors.  
108 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Design, procurement and implementation. The service provider in close coordination with 
40 
the PCU respectively the APCU will be responsible for ensuring that the infrastructure items are 
clearly identified in the business plans along with clear justifications for seeking external investment 
for supporting their implementation.  
The municipalities in coordination and with inputs from the private sector will be responsible for 
41 
developing the designs for the selected infrastructure, which includes independent technical review 
and environmental assessment as per the applicable laws in BiH, as well as daily supervision of 
commissioned works following project appraisal and procurement procedure implemented by the 
A/PCUs. 
42 
A/PCU's appraisal of the proposed infrastructure will include (i) a site assessment to confirm 
that engineering design and the project as a whole reflects the situation on the ground, (ii) checking 
that the design is feasible in the local context (taking into account relevant permits, permissions, as 
well as environmental and climate change mitigation and adaptation measures) (iii) suggest 
improvements to the design to ensure best outcomes during operation, including climate resilience.  
Final Approval of Schemes: All the proposals for infrastructure investment co-financing will be 
43 
approved by the relevant Project Steering Committees (PSC) established in each Entity. The PCU 
and APCU will review and evaluate applications and provide recommendation to the PSC for 
competitive grant award. After approval by the PSC a request for review and no-objection for each 
proposal will be sent to IFAD prior to final decision on grants award. 
44 
Procurement processes, selection of contractor, construction supervision and final acceptance 
of works shall follow existing A/PCU-established procedures, which are in line with IFAD procurement 
procedures. The project will also conduct an internal environmental review to ensure the project will 
comply with relevant laws in BiH as was all IFAD environmental policies. 
For most of the enabling infrastructure, municipalities will be responsible for operations and 
45 
maintenance of infrastructure and these will be financed from their own budgets. In some cases, the 
responsibility may be transferred to an association - as is the case of irrigation infrastructure which is 
owned by the municipality but managed by a Water Users Association or cold storages, constructed 
by the municipality and leased to a FO or private agribusiness enterprise. The A/PCUs facilitate the 
development of management agreements between different actors for operating the infrastructure 
according to the mechanisms described earlier.  
Supervision and training: The project will conduct periodic monitoring and follow-up visits to 
46 
the infrastructure sites to assess the quality construction as well as subsequent use to assess the 
generation of benefits according to the projections in the business plans and the feasibility studies. 
Following the technical acceptance of the works, the project will train the actors engaged for the 
management of the infrastructure where relevant. The project will also provide technical assistance to 
overcome any issues and bottlenecks observed during the follow up visits. While capacities for 
maintaining enabling infrastructure in municipalities is generally high, in some cases additional 
technical assistance is required - for example in operational and technical management of irrigation 
systems - where capacities of both Water User Associations and municipalities need to be increased.  
Project Management and Coordination (Component 2). 
Project Coordination Units. In each Entity, project coordination will be entrusted to the 
47 
existing Project Coordination Units, the APCU in RS and the PCU in FBiH. These units will 
demonstrate a clear orientation towards targeting and social inclusiveness in line with the IFAD RB-
COSOP (2013-2018). Both, the APCU and the PCU incorporate responsibilities for the overall project 
management and monitoring, organizing start-up and annual workshops for participatory annual 
programming, preparation of AWPBs and bi-annual reporting against the AWPBs, fiduciary 
management as well as smooth integration of READP into their on-going operations. They will also be 
responsible for providing logistical and administrative support to IFAD and supervision missions, mid-
term review and project completion missions.  
109 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
48 
Parallel to READP, the APCU and PCU are implementing the IFAD funded RCDP which is 
planned for two cycles: (i) from 2017-2021 and (ii) 2022-2026. Thus, salaries of the staff of both units 
are already financed under RCDP. Accordingly, only supplementary staff specifically hired for READP 
implementation will be funded by this project. The additional staff to be hired by the APCU and PCU 
will include for the APCU a Project Manager and Business Development Officer supervising BP 
implementation, and for the PCU a Project Manager and an Accountant.  
4P projects aim to involve the private sector more closely. This approach brings with it the 
49 
requirement for project management arrangements that include skills, capacities and experience of 
working within such a collaborative framework. With implementation of two projects following a 
complementary approach, the A/PCUs require strengthened management capacity. As in RCDP, also 
in READP intensive planning, facilitation and coordination activities are envisaged by the Project. This 
will require substantial field presence but also strong capabilities in facilitation, follow-up and impact 
monitoring. This will require, among others, a detailed description of roles and responsibilities of 
service providers and other implementing partners, reflected in agreements and terms of reference, 
and related contractual arrangements. 
50 
The two projects in parallel alongside with large numbers of business plans and involved 
stakeholders calls for a considerable increase in support services for A/PCUs from service providers 
and other implementation partners. Thus, for the implementation of READP the PCU/APCU will recruit 
after a competitive process, technical assistance and service providers based on performance-based 
contracts and oversee and supervise their work. In FBiH, the PCU is contracting service providers for 
project implementation support. In the RS, the APCU currently implements its projects in partnership 
with the Agency for Extension Services. For implementation of READP, the APCU will additionally 
contract a service provider competitively for implementation since the extension agency currently 
does not have experience in the business plan methodology. 
The project will require substantial field presence since the project area, selected based on 
51 
geographical targeting approach, will consist of 10 clusters (five each in FBiH and RS) with an 
average of 9 municipalities per cluster. With regard to the field presence of the PCUs, in the RS it is 
expected that the field coordination will be undertaken by regional extension officers based in the 7 
regional branches of the Agency of Extension Services. In the FBiH, the PCU will contract 5 field 
coordinators as cluster coordinators, one for each cluster, to ensure field presence of the PCU and 
assist quality implementation process. 
APCU and PCU will be responsible for coordination and liaison with municipalities, business 
52 
leaders, FOs and target households in the clusters and implementing partners. Thus, PCU/APCUs will 
enter into MOU with the relevant business plan partners in implementation of project activities, 
including project area municipalities, private agribusiness enterprises, producer associations and 
cooperatives (key mechanism for the participation of the target groups). These MOUs will detail the 
roles and responsibilities of each party in business plan implementation, the modality of allocation and 
control of project resources and the monitoring and reporting arrangements. 
53  Monitoring. The Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be a key management tool for 
the Project and will serve the primary purpose of providing data and feedback to improve the 
effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, relevance and impact of Project activities. Monitoring will be 
coordinated by the PCU/APCU, but should be assisted primarily by the contracted service providers, 
extension officers and cluster coordinators. Data collection will be actively assisted by the business 
leader partners; this support from the local stakeholders will foster greater ownership and 
accountability. The PCUs will harmonize the approach in monitoring with the chosen approach in 
RCDP to allow synergies and comparison of project achievements. A detailed M&E review will provide 
recommendation on the measures to take to accommodate READP requirements.  
AWPB. The AWPB represents the key planning document for the Project and its 
54 
implementation. The APCU/PCU will prepare Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) and submit it to 
the Project steering committee (PSC) for approval and to IFAD for its non-objection at least two 
110 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
months before the beginning of the relevant fiscal year. Service providers at cluster levels will facilitate 
the identification, prioritisation and planning of BPs and complementary activities that will be part of 
the AWPB. During the implementation year, flexibility to proactively respond to realities of 
implementation will be considered, and proposed adjustments to the AWPB can be made and 
informed to IFAD and Entity-level PSCs. The final Project Implementation Manual (PIM) will outline 
further guidelines and details for the overall format of the AWPB, and more importantly, on the process 
for its elaboration. 
Partnerships. READP will build on the positive experiences of USAID and SIDA funded 
55 
FARMA I and II projects, GIZ, OXFAM, etc. and RED/LED agencies, Czech Development Agency, 
Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA) and the Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC). 
In addition, EU, World Bank and IFC’s investments in technical capacity building regarding Food 
Safety Standards in the country will be utilized for the benefit of smallholders by IFAD projects. 
56 
Annexes: (i) Draft Job Description for Project Manager (APCU and PCU); (ii) Draft Job 
Description of Business Development Officer (APCU) (iii) draft job description of accountant (iv) Draft 
ToR for Service providers; 
111 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Annex II: Draft Job description and ToR 
Draft Job Description: Project Manager for READP (PCU/APCU) 
Duties and responsibilities  
The Project Manager for READP will be heading the APCU READP team and will be responsible for 
READP overall implementation. The Project Manager will report to the APCU Director.  
The following draft job description will in particular outline the responsibilities related to the READP 
implementation complementing the general job description for Project Managers in APCU.  
To this end s/he will be responsible for: 
  Preparation of the final Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Preparation of the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) including budgeting and submit it to 
the Director for approval of Project steering committee (PSC) for approval and to IFAD for its 
non-objection 
  Participation in PSC meetings 
  Logistics and implementation support to IFAD supervision missions, MTR  
  Preparation of the project closing report 
  Coordination with other development projects related to READP 
  Coordination with APCU project manager responsible for RCDP 
  Coordination among the READP team and defining clear responsibilities and tasks. 
  Liaising in close coordination with the APCU Director with the Agency for Extension services 
and prepare ToR for the selected extension officers and contract arrangements. 
  Development of ToR and implementation of tender process for contracting service providers to 
support the implementation of the project and to train the extension officers  
  Coordination with cluster based municipalities, especially with regard to their involvement in BP 
implementation and financing as well as the required support for implementation of enabling 
marketing infrastructure.  
  Coordination, implementation and supervision of in the PIM and AWPB defined activities under 
Component 1 especially in close coordination with the Business Development Officer in charge 
for sub-component 1 and sub-component 2 as well as the APCU Rural Infrastructure Officer 
and the Procurement Officers in charge for for sub-component 1.3.  
  Coordination closely with the M&E Officer for the implementation of the M&E system and timely 
implementation of baseline study and impact study. M&E Officer will especially closely 
coordinate with the Business Development Officer and the APCU Rural Infrastructure Officer as 
well as with SP and EO. 
  Capacity building of APCU READP team members to further develop the required skills and 
capacities for READP implementation. 
Required Skills and Experience 
  Education. Master degree in business administration, economics, agriculture, management 
or related areas. 
  Experience. Minimum 10 years working experience in coordination of development projects; 
  Proven management and organization skills. 
  Language. Fluent spoken and written English. 
112 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Draft Job Description: Business Development Officer for READP (APCU) 
Duties and responsibilities  
The Business Development Officer for READP will be a member of the APCU, reporting to the APCU 
Project Manager and will be the focal point for READP project activities related to component 1 aiming 
at enhancing economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains. To this end s/he 
will: 
  Organise and play and active role in the start-up workshop, promotion/awareness campaign of 
the READP project as focal point for its Component 1; 
  Support preparation of the TOR and the documentation to hire service providers (SP) for 
implementation of Component 1, sub-component 1.1 and 1.2 on Business Plan Implementation 
with particular focus on training and advising recruited extension service staff in subject matters 
related to business s plan development and implementation.  
  Prepare ToR for the 5 (PCU) cluster coordinators (CC) and (APCU) extension officers (EO) 
supporting project implementation in the selected clusters 
  Briefing of service provider including workshops with RCDP staff and CC and EO. 
 
Initiate in close coordination with SP, CC, EO the development of a methodology for the 
targeting study and supervise implementation and reporting. 
  Organise in coordination with SP, CC and EO stakeholder sensitization workshops in each 
cluster of the project areas.  
  Develop background information and ToR for ‘Call for business proposals’, to be published in 
internet and newspapers.  
  Coordinate the follow up field visits of SP, EO and CC to assist stakeholders in application.  
  Assist the A/PCUs project manager in establishing BP appraisal committee and furthermore 
contribute to development of BP screening criteria.  
  Follow-up on the process of identification and preparation of Business Proposals through 
periodic reporting and field visits; 
  Supervise the further development of selected business proposals  
  Together with the Project manager of the PCU/APCU participate in the BP approval session; 
  Update information about sub-sectors and value chains relevant for BP development; 
  Coordinate in close cooperation with SP, EO and CC the identification and specification of 
required starter packages and launch after A/PCUs approval the tender process.  
  Supervise the procurement process and distribution of starter packages to the determined 
target households. 
  Coordinate the development and implementation of training plans to be prepared by SP/EO 
  Monitor the functioning of the voucher scheme in RCDP and contribute to the decision making 
process on advisory services; 
  Supervise training and advisory services and ensure close communication with all stakeholders 
including municipalities and private sector partners; 
 
Initiate, support approval by project manager and follow up/participate in market development 
activities implemented by SP such as quality assurance/certification processes, trade fair 
participation and study tours.  
  Organise in cooperation with SP; CC and EO BP implementation review and planning 
workshops in the selected clusters 
113 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
  Coordinate with SP, CC and EO support to FOs in term of training and advisory services for 
institutional strengthening.  
  Assist the project manager in close cooperation with SP in FO seed capital financing measures 
such as specification, selection, approval of required investments, coordination with 
municipalities on co-financing means, establishment of linkages to the finance sector, launching 
tender processes and support procurement and distribution. 
  Liaise with the PCU/APCU M&E officer to set up an appropriate M&E system for systematic 
data collection and reporting related to all key activities supported by component 1; 
  Prepare the TOR and the documentation to re-hire SP, if relevant, to support the 
implementation of BPs; 
  Monitor the performance of approved BPs and progress made against baseline indicators 
through periodic reporting and field visits; 
  Monitor the effective application of measures to mainstream inclusion of poor farmers, women 
and youth men and women in supported BPs; 
  Coordinate with SP and M&E Officer the preparation of Knowledge-sharing products 
(guidelines, manuals, case studies, lessons learnt) to document and share the results of the 
component 1. 
Required Skills and Experience 
  Education. Master degree in Business Administration, economics, agriculture, economic 
sciences or related areas; 
  Experience. Minimum 5 years working experience in coordination and monitoring of value 
chain development projects; 
  Knowledge of gender and targeting issues; 
  Proven communication and organization skills. 
  Language. Fluent spoken and written English 
114 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Draft Outline of TOR for Accountant (PCU) 
 1.
Activity and Task: 
 
 
 
Assist the FM in the implementation of a sound financial management system; 
Prepare financial reports, including monthly funds reconciliation, and monthly, quarterly, 
semiannual and annual expenditure statements; 
Prepare transaction vouchers, and input all transactions into the project accounting system 
before submission to the FM for approval; 
  Opening and closing of the project accounts; 
 
 
Timely payment of project liabilities upon verification of the invoices received and ensuring 
that the project procedures are strictly adhered to; 
Process monthly payroll, salary payment to staff and all project contributions related to 
salary payments; Ensure registration and deregistration of employees; 
  Monitor data on credit disbursements under the credit lines; 
  Manage and report on the use of Petty Cash in accordance with the approved procedures; 
 
Prepare cash flow forecasts as required; Carry out the accounting of the documents in the 
various project books and journals and/or the accounting software 
  Monitoring contracts with all project partners and financial returns from Implementing 
Partners, if any, including periodic visits to their offices; 
 
 
Verify all accounting entries; 
Assist in the preparation and monitoring of annual operational budgets; 
  Maintenance of a well-organized and up-to-date filing system for accounting and financial 
records as well as an fixed asset tagging system; 
 
 
 
 
Perform physical inventory of project assets each year; Prepare the annual financial 
statements; 
Assist the FM in the closing of the financial year and the preparatory work for the annual 
audit and provide assistance to the external auditors as required; 
Prepare monthly bank reconciliation statements of all bank accounts maintained by project  
Assist the FM in the preparation of direct payment requests and withdrawal applications, 
including statement of expenditures (SOE) in line with IFAD guidelines of expenditures; 
  Undertake any other duties as they may be requested by the supervising authorities. 
 2.
Profile: 
 
2 year Bachelor's degree or secondary education in the business administration and 
accounting 
  Minimum five (5) years of working experience in accounting of which three (3) in an 
equivalent position with an information flow equal to that of a project 
  Certified accountant license 
  Good knowledge of the English language 
  Good computer skills and use of accounting software 
 
Experience in the banking sector is a plus 
115 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Draft Outline of TOR for Service Providers for READP Business Plan 
Development (A/PCUs) 
Background. The main component of the IFAD funded READP project is a technical 
 1.
component titled Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value 
chains. This Component 1 comprises of three sub-components: (i) Business plan development and 
implementation; (ii) Farmer development support and (iii) Enabling infrastructure support. The project 
will be implemented in close partnership with business leaders (farmer organisations and private 
agribusiness enterprises); business plans will be the key mechanism for the participation of target 
group households in the project. Further relevant partners in the business plan implementation 
process are project area municipalities, providers of technical and business services, financial 
institutions and relevant private sector market intermediaries. 
 2.
Entry point and mechanism for Component 1 is through the promotion of Public-Private-
Producer Partnerships (4P) outlined in Business Plans (BPs) between business leaders and target 
group smallholder farmers. The project will engage service providers to support the business plan 
development process (sub-component 1 and 2 of the project). 
 3.
Modalities. Service providers will play a key role in implementation and will be selected 
through a competitive process. Three modalities of service providers can be selected, according to 
the specific services required: (i) single private or public service provider (consulting companies, 
regional development agencies, NGOs, Universities); or (ii) a consortia of service providers, the latter 
being needed because the broad range of training and advisory needs (organizational development, 
technical and business-related aspects), or a wide geographical coverage may require different 
service providers. 
In FBiH, the PCU will hire a service provider (company) competitively to support the business 
 4.
plan development and implementation process. Depending on performance, the company will be 
retained for assisting the implementation of the other sub-component on FO seed capital financing. 
The PCU will also contract 5 field officers as cluster coordinators, one for each selected cluster, to 
ensure field presence of the PCU and assist quality implementation process.  
 5.
In the RS, the APCU will also contract a service provider competitively for implementation of the 
relevant sub-components. Field coordination in the RS will be undertaken by the 7 regional extension 
officers located in the 5 project clusters in RS. The TORs for service providers in RS will include 
training and capacity building of the extension agency to support the implementation of the business 
plans.  
 6.
After contracting, the A/PCUs will orient the service providers to the project objectives, target 
group, approach and implementation methodologies. The coordination units will mandatorily include 
the cluster coordinators and the extension officers in these orientation activities. The orientation 
process will be handled through (i) detailed information sessions and workshops for discussion 
between the service provider/extension agency, the project staff and the business development 
service (BDS) providers developed through RCDP (ii) field visits to farmers’ organisations and 
municipalities 
Scope of Work  
The Service Provider will be responsible for supporting the A/PCUs in the process of Business 
 7.
Proposal Selection, Business Plan Development and Implementation in the frame of the READP 
Project. The service provider will closely liaise with A/PCUs READP team, in particular with the 
Project Manager, READP Business development Officer as well as with A/PCU M&E Officer.  
The service providers in close coordination with A/PCUs READP team, cluster officers and 
 8.
extension service will be responsible for  
i. 
Implementing a targeting survey  
116 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
ii.  Conducting sensitisation and consultation workshops prior to launching the business planning 
initiative (iii)  
iii.  Providing  technical  guidance  to  the  business  leaders  during  the  detailed  business  plan 
development process  
iv.  Ensuring the quality of the final business plans  
v.  Facilitating negotiations the implementation agreements between different BP implementation 
partners,  
vi.  Assisting in BP implementation process including training and advisory services 
vii.  Assist and support the M&E data collection in READP. 
The tasks in detail: 
  The  targeting  survey  implemented  by  the  service  providers,  will  assist  in  identifying  the  target 
groups present in the clusters. The main tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Elaboration  of  the  methodology  for  the  targeting  survey  such  as  questionnaires  and 
o 
checklists for guiding focus group and stakeholder discussions.  
Implementation of the survey together  with the extension agency  in coordination with the 
cluster  level  field  coordinators  in  FBiH  and  the  extension  officers  in  RS.  The  targeting 
study  will  be  implemented  in  close  partnership  with  project  area  municipalities.  Key 
sources in the targeting process are local authorities at municipal level such as extension 
workers, social service centres, employment bureau, heads of the local communities.  
  Business proposal appraisal and development process. The main tasks for the SP under this 
activity are: 
o 
o  Organisation of cluster level stakeholder awareness and sensitisation workshops, at least 
5 in each Entity. These workshops will be co-facilitated by the cluster coordinators and the 
extension officers in FBiH and RS respectively.  
To  assist  full  understanding  of  the  BP  concepts,  the  project  will  distribute  informative 
literature,  organise  resource  person  discussions  and  audiovisual  sessions  during  the 
workshops.  The  collection  of  relevant  informative  literature  (e.g.  production  manuals, 
market studies, export information etc) will be in the responsibility of the service providers; 
if required the A/PCUs will initiate compilation and printing of additional information.  
  Call for BP proposals. The PCUs will launch a call for proposals (expression of interest) inviting 
business ideas from interested business leaders. The call for proposal will be announced through 
newspapers and the internet. The main tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o 
Follow  up  with  cluster  level  business  leaders  and  help  assist  them  to  submit  their 
proposals to the A/PCUs. 
  Business  Proposal Appraisal  and  BP  Development. The A/PCUs  expect  some  150  business 
plans to be approved over 4-5 years of project implementation. With these 150 BPs it is expected 
to reach out to some 7,500 target group households including  youth. The main tasks for the SP 
under this activity are: 
o  Support development of criteria and scoring method for ranking the proposals.  
o  Validation visits of the selected BPs in coordination with cluster coordinators and extension 
officers with oversight from the A/PCUs. 
o  After  selection  of  BPs,  technical  assistance  to  the  business  leaders  to  develop  the 
selected  proposals  into  detailed  business  plans.  The  process  will  involve  consultations, 
site  visits  and  stakeholder  workshops  involving  the  business  leaders,  target  households, 
farmers’  organisations  and  municipalities.  The  business  plans  will  be  developed  over  a 
period of 3-6 months.  
o  Monthly  business  plan  preparation  progress  review  meetings  with  A/PCUs,  and  the 
follow-up  and 
responsible 
extension  agency.  The  service  provider  will  be 
implementation measures. 
for 
o  Development of templates for MoU agreements in coordination with the A/PCUs to prepare 
implementation of the business plans  
117 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
o 
Facilitation  of  agreements/MoUs  between  the  different  implementation  partners  identified 
in  the  business  plans  (municipalities,  farmers’  organisations,  financial  institutions  and  the 
project).  
o  Responsible  for  organising  meetings,  facilitating  negotiations  and  ensuring  written 
agreements between the partners. 
o  Provision of support to FO in applying for seed capital financing: Up to 40 FOs will be 
supported  in  seed  capital  financing  based  on  BPs  in  line  with  the  overall  BP  eligibility 
criteria. The main tasks under this activity are:  
  The  selected  business  proposals  will  be  developed  into  detailed  business  plans 
with technical assistance support delivered through service providers  
  The  service  providers  will  assure  that  the  business  plans  are  focused  on 
increasing the outreach and income of the target households.  
  Market development activities. The main tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Guidance of business partners in the process of introducing international quality standards 
and certifications  
Linkages to relevant certification bodies where required.  
o 
o  Preparation  and  implementation  of  participation  in  local,  regional  and  international  trade 
fairs (e.g. Biofach, Fruit Logistica, ANUGA) in close coordination with A/PCUs 
o  Preparation  and  implementation  of  local  and  international  study  tours  in  coordination, 
guidance and oversight from the A/PCUs.  
  Farmers’ training, advisory and capacity building services. The main tasks for the SP under 
this activity are: 
o  Drafting  the  annual  work  plan  including  an  annual  training  plan. The  training  plan  will  be 
o 
o 
reviewed and finalised by the A/PCUs.  
The service provider and the extension agency along with the cluster coordinators and the 
extension  officers  will  also  be  responsible  of  delivering  the  trainings.  Where  relevant 
additional technical specialists will be hired to support training and advice in specific areas.  
The service provider will be responsible of the provision of the advisory services. A semi—
annual  workplan  for  the  implementation  of  the  advisory  services  will  be  prepared  and 
approved by A/PCUs 
o  Costs for training and  advisory services  will be  included  in the tendered packages of the 
service provider. 
 
Institutional  development  training  and  advisory  support.  In  the  context  FO  seed  capital 
financing the selected FOs will be supported with training and advisory services.  The main tasks 
for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Developing a training calendar,  
o  Organising 
the 
institutional  development 
implementing these according to schedule,  
training  and  advisory  activities  and 
for 
o  Preparation  and  organisation  of  exchange  and  learning  visits,  within  the  country  and  in 
Europe in close coordination with A/PCUs. 
  Delivery of starter packages. The main tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Organisation  and  implementation  of  cluster  level  implementation  planning  workshops  for 
the  partners  to  re-affirm  their  commitments  for  financing  the  starter  packages  and  to 
discuss implementation arrangements.  
  Facilitate  the  negotiation  process  between  the  partners  in  the  workshop  and 
secure written co-financing and other implementation related commitments by the 
end of the workshop.  
o  Assistance to the business leaders to secure contracts with the target households and to 
compile the list producers eligible for READP starter package financing.  
118 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
o  Assistance  in delivery  and  verification of the delivery  of the starter package  inputs  to the 
target  groups  and  preparation  of  reports  based  on  which  the  project  will  disburse  the 
starter package contribution. 
o  Organisation  of  regular  cluster  level  business  plan  implementation,  review  and  planning 
workshops 
  Monitoring of READP implementation. The main tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Assistance to the A/PCUs M&E Officer in data collection and coordinating the involvement 
of BP agribusiness partners in data provision, 
o  Preparation  of  Knowledge-sharing  products  (guidelines,  manuals,  case  studies,  lessons 
learnt) to document the results of the component 1. 
  Reporting. The main tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Contribution to the AWPB 
o  Preparation of reports according to the reporting schemes and cycles of the A/PCUs (still 
to be defined). 
Required Skills and Experience 
  Profound knowledge of business plan development,  
  Profound knowledge of targeting, gender and youth issues 
  Experiences in implementing targeting studies 
  Experiences in rural area development projects, stakeholder facilitation and coordination, 
procurement, technical and financial reporting and donor interaction. 
  Experience in fruit & vegetable, MAPs/NTFP, dairy and honey sub-sectors. 
  Significant in-house expertise in the above mentioned areas are required 
  Proven organization knowledge. 
  Language. Fluent spoken and written English 
119 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge 
management 
A.  Introduction 
This appendix serves as the strategic foundations for establishing an operational Planning, 
1. 
Monitoring & Evaluation and Knowledge Management architecture in the Rural Enterprise Agricultural 
Development Project (READP), to be positioned within the lead implementing agencies in the 
respective BiH entities81.  
Alongside the international development community increased focus on measuring and 
2. 
improving results, and particularly since the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness in 2005, IFAD has 
consistently thrived to improve development effectiveness.  
This appendix therefore builds on the most recent key corporate and country level requirement, 
3. 
including: i) IFAD's Development Effectiveness Framework82; ii) IFAD's corporate Result and Impact 
Management System (RIMS); ii) IFAD's Knowledge Management (KM) Strategy; and iv) IFAD Result-
Based Country Result Management Framework83.  
IFAD's Development Effectiveness Framework aims to facilitate evidence-based decision 
4. 
making and emphasize the following objectives in the design and implementation of project level M&E 
and KM functions: 
a. Strengthening the focus on results through the project cycle;  
b. Enhancing self-evaluation and learning for results; 
c. Fostering the use of evidence in project management; 
d. Linking project M&E to corporate result reporting. 
The implementation of READP is anchored in the ‘Management for Development Result 
5. 
(MfDR)84 approach geared to:  
a. Prove impacts: verifies that IFAD is doing the right things;  
b. Improve impacts: verifies that IFAD is doing things right. 
This implies that all activities should be planned with the intention to prove or demonstrate 
6. 
achievements and impacts based on robust results measurement. Equally important is the notion of 
determining which development interventions are yielding the best results, based on which take 
corrective actions in resources allocation can be made to improve impacts.  
B.  Planning  
7. 
Result based planning process consist in a set of complementary instrument meant to 
ensure annual objectives are set realistically, whilst subsequently human and financial resources are 
allocated to deliver on outreach targets. 
Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB) and corresponding Procurement Plans85 will be the 
8. 
project’s key planning instruments. The purpose of the AWPB is to provide the PMU with a timetable 
for implementation of a set of scheduled activities, together with their respective budgets. AWPBs are 
formulated taking into account the Project Design Report, supervision report recommendations and 
legal agreements, contract and management agreements of service providers and participating 
81 In the FBiH, the Program Coordination Unit (PCU) and in the RS, the Agriculture/Program Coordination Unit (A/PCU). 
82 Approved by IFAD Executive Board in December 2016. 
83 As detailed in the Result-Based Country Strategy and Opportunities Program (RB-COSOP). 
84 ‘Managing for development results (MfDR)’ is synonymous with ‘results-based management (RBM)’, 
but as a concept it incorporates the newer ideas inherent in the 2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.  
85 See Appendix draft PIM section on procurement. 
121 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
partners, the overall project's targets, procurement plans and development priorities of target 
communities.  
Set against the project LogFrame, planned activities should have clear financial allocations, 
9. 
which would be the basis for funds release and for financial control. A quality AWPB facilitates the 
preparation of progress reports and the work of the supervision missions. 
10.  The AWPB is an essential covenant in the legal Financing Agreement; failure to prepare it on a 
timely basis may lead to delay or suspension of fund disbursement by IFAD. The first AWPB would be 
prepared, together with the Procurement Plan for the first 18 months of the project and be presented 
for discussion during the start-up workshop for submission to IFAD for no objection. Considering that 
the AWPB has to be review, approved and validated by the Entity-level Project Steering Committees 
(PSC) and IFAD (review, approval and no objection) before (30 to 60 days) before the beginning of 
the fiscal year, the elaboration of the AWPB would be prepared, discussed and approved several 
months before the beginning of the financial year covering the AWPB.  
11.  The process for designing AWPB will be participatory, reflecting a bottom-up prioritisation 
process from the business units at cluster level, as per READP's demand-driven nature. A wide array 
of Business Plans partners and stakeholders found in the business units should be involved, including 
IFAD's target groups, the private sector, rural producers and their organisation, specialised service 
providers and municipalities.  
12.  READP will build on the practices established by RCDP whereby AWPB progress are 
discussed and review during Annual Stakeholder Review and Planning Workshops, providing input to 
the Projects’ AWPBs for the succeeding year, thus closing a circle of participatory, demand-driven 
planning and implementation. During the implementation year and considering the AWPB as a living 
document, flexibility to proactively respond to realities of implementation will be considered, and 
proposed adjustments to the AWPB can be made and informed to IFAD and Entity-level PSCs. 
Concurrently, failures to meet two consecutive quarterly targets by more than 25% will trigger 
collective corrective decisions at the level of the PSC, in collaboration with IFAD. The final Project 
Implementation Manual (PIM) will outline further guidelines and details for the overall format of the 
AWPB, and more importantly, on the process for its elaboration. 
13.  A Start-up Workshop will be conducted at the onset to present the steps underpinning the 
planning and annual work plan process as well as the monitoring and evaluation system. Under the 
guidance of the A/PCUs staff and with the collaboration of project partners, a special session on M&E 
system and associated process to brief participants about the Project Logical Framework, progress 
reporting and evaluation arrangements. A session will also be held to familiarize the participants with 
IFAD’s new RIMS system, performance based contracting system and key performance indicators 
regarding targeting effectiveness, backward linkages and the impact pathways to foster the 
development of more inclusive value chains and increase the competiveness of rural enterprises.  
D.  Monitoring and Evaluation 
14.  The project M&E system and processes would be established and managed in accordance with 
established IFAD procedures by the project team with support from IFAD, and are built around the set 
of selected indicators outlined in the logical framework. IFAD's latest procedure for designing log-
frame were considered, including the reformed RIMS, and the key provision introduced to enhance 
results-based management through realigning the log-frame with the findings generated by the 
Economic and Financial Analysis, especially in the setting of initial, intermediate and final targets and 
assumptions. 
15.  The most significant changes introduced by the new IFAD's RIMS framework pertains to the 
willingness to strengthen linkages between project M&E and corporate results reporting. Now 
mainstreamed into project management, the log-frame must contain a number of RIMS core 
122 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
indicators, complemented by project-specific indicators (PSIs), designed to measure specific results 
that may not be adequately captured by the core indicators86. 
16.  Organisational structure and human resources covering the current projects RBDP and RCDP 
are already in place: in each entity with one M&E officer. The A/PCUs are accountable for reporting 
project's progress and achievements and have the overall responsibility for M&E. Reflecting the 
variations in the implementation arrangements, the APCU and the PCU approach to M&E differs and 
are not harmonised.  
17.  The READP M&E system will take advantage of the existing infrastructure and make 
improvement during the project start-up, building on existing strengths and weaknesses. READP 
should learn from previous shortcomings87 and aim to align, where possible, with RCDP's M&E 
system to enable consistent use of a common set of key performance and management indicators, 
thus establishing a strong base for comparison88. The READP's M&E system will generate qualitative 
and quantitative information for the A/PCUs and the Ministry of Agriculture on the project's progress 
and implementation performance. 
18.  The structure shall reflect the various levels of the result chains and is categorised along two 
overarching key functions: output monitoring & outcomes/impacts result monitoring. Both are based 
on participatory process and, like in RCDP, it is expected that stakeholders external to the PCUs will 
play a key role, including specialised services providers and business plan facilitators, Producers 
Associations, municipalities, beneficiaries and private stakeholders/investors. 
19.  The annex below outlines the various levels of the envisioned READP' s M&E architecture, and 
defines stakeholders' roles and responsibilities. Against the outputs to be generated, annual workshop 
review will assess level of monitoring and result reporting performance across sub-sectors and cluster 
recommend corrective measures. In particular, the recruitment of additional human resource, i.e. 
additional field coordinators to strengthen reporting from the business unit level shall be considered.  
20.  The ToRs of the SPs, cluster coordinator and extension agents contains strong M&E specific 
deliverables. Performance will be reviewed on annual basis, including the relevance and adequacy of 
the support provided in the 10 clusters and 90 municipalities. 
21.  Output Monitoring. The AWPB will provide a framework for the immediate physical and 
financial progress, and orient the PCUs and other stakeholders in continuous monitoring of input 
delivery and implementation of activities. During the first six months of implementation, a set of 
performance indicators will be developed to measure components' progress at outputs level. To this 
end, the PCUs will develop monitoring instruments and associated tools in the form of harmonised 
templates89 to track progress during the period from 1st of January to December 31st of a given year, 
ensuring the collection of disaggregated information. Inclusiveness monitoring will start at this level 
against the benchmark established at start-up with regard to each category of beneficiaries (very poor, 
poor, borderline poor).  
22.  Outcome assessment are concentrated on assessing the intermediate results of the project's 
combined outputs on targeted households and other project beneficiaries. Progress and likelihood to 
achieve expected outcomes should be measure at mid-term stage or earlier, and reported to IFAD on 
annual or biannual basis, depending on the type of indicator and the measurement methodology. 
Measuring outcome indicators, will be undertaken with the project M&E budgets and capacities, 
complemented with small-N quantitative surveys and other qualitative methodologies such as focus 
groups, in-depth interviews, participatory assessments to triangulate findings and enrich overall 
assessment of project performance. The practices of measuring RIMS 2nd level outcomes through 
rating based assessments will be discontinued. During implementation, it will provide the 
management with clear information on performance and progress towards achieving expected 
86 IFAD will only aggregate the core indicators for corporate reporting.  
87 The most generally identified in previous projects see Appendix III for an overview. 
88 A list of overlapping indicators is found in annex. 
89 See monitoring tools proposed in the annexe. 
123 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
development objectives, including identifying the most successful interventions and hindering factors. 
It also represents a critical step towards evaluating the project impact at completion.  
Impacts assessment will focus on the higher level of result defined in the log-frame and include 
23. 
the limited set of development objectives the project intends to achieve. The Impact of READP will be 
reported in the project completion reports (PCR). Since RIMS impact completion survey are no longer 
mandatory, READP will determine in consultation with IFAD the project's most appropriate impact 
assessment need, drawing on combined quantitative, qualitative or mixed method approach that 
credibly and reliably measure the project performance to satisfy the five standard impact evaluation 
criteria defined in the PCR, including impact and sustainability of results, contribution to capacity 
development and the achievement of global environmental goals.  
24.  Reporting on the rural poverty impact will require READP to undertake a household survey, 
complemented with a market assessment survey quantifying READP induced impact in the various 
sub-sectors it intervened and the wider market system. The final evaluation should identify follow-up 
activities and generate actionable lessons learnt for IFAD and government counterparts. 
25.  Baseline studies. RIMS baseline survey are no longer mandatory. Instead, implementing units 
will commission a baseline study as a tool to establish final baseline data and targets for log-frame 
indicators. The baseline study will be conducted in a selected sample of geographical clusters across 
representative sub-sectors comprising READP's direct and indirect individual and institutional 
beneficiaries. It shall be aligned with the key priorities of the project set in the complementary sub-
components, and refer to key dimension of systemic change READP aims to bring about: 
  Productivity efficiencies of rural producers; 
  Level of inclusion in selected subsector in various geographical cluster; with a special focus on 
youth and women; 
  Transformation of Farmers Organizations and their Institutional performance; 
  Value chain governance, business environment and the broader enabling environment for pro-
poor sustainable growth development; 
  Current and existing climate resilient infrastructure to determine the growth impact associated 
with production and marketing infrastructure. 
26.  Management information system (MIS). Immediately after the start-up workshop, A/PCUs 
should procure a centralise and integrated computerised management information system. The MIS 
will be designed based on M&E system requirement. Associated database will contain all relevant 
data (project inputs, outputs and outcomes) collected by project stakeholders and consolidated by the 
PCU and APCU. Given READP special emphasis on monitoring business plans' inclusiveness, 
especially on women and youth, the system will have to provide gender and age disaggregated data 
on all key indicators. This overall responsibility to maintain and continuously update the MIS will be 
the respective M&E Officers in the PCU and APCU with assistance of all project team members and 
project implementation partners. 
27.  Reporting processes will capture data periodically from different sources and stakeholders 
about project interventions, which are consolidated at different levels, processed, analysed, classified 
and presented into customized tables that are used for the preparation of different reports. The set of 
reports constituting the minimum reporting requirements include: (i) monitoring reports, (ii) (semi) 
annual progress reports (iii) financial reports; (iv) audit reports; and (v) completion reports. 
Additionally, at project start-up, the M&E officer will be supported to identify additional reporting 
requirement providing relevant information for cluster wide steering, trends in business units 
performance along geographical clusters/sub-sector and joint assessment performance of service 
providers and field coordinator for stronger accountability. 
28.  The different reports of the M&E would be categorized by period covered, partners producing 
them as well as by the Project objective and result chains hierarchy. The M&E Officer would be 
responsible for running the internal M&E and organizing the baseline and impact assessment survey. 
124 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
The M&E unit at the PMU would develop formats, questionnaire and other data collection tools that 
would be used to identify baselines and progress during the course of the Project. 
29.  A start-up workshop will be organized in the six months after entry into force year to establish 
planning, financial management, governance, procurement, M&E, project organizational and 
operational modalities, technical specifications and processes.  
30.  A Mid-Term Review will be carried at mid-year of the Project’s third year. The review would 
cover, among other things: (i) physical and financial progress as measured against AWPBs; 
(ii) performance and financial management of contracted implementing partners; (iii) an assessment 
of the efficacy of technical assistance and capacity building activities; (iv) and strategic 
recommendations to ensure achievement of the development objectives. 
31.  A Project Completion Review team will undertake a final evaluation of the project within the 
last six months prior to the project completion date, going beyond the mid-term evaluation in terms of 
assessing the overall relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, and sustainability against the impact 
achieved. Additional evaluation criteria would include gender equality and women's empowerment, 
innovation potential for scaling up, adaptation to climate change, and targeting. A completion rural 
households survey shall be done prior to the PCR mission. The assessment of project achievements 
would be in line with IFAD's project completion guidelines and the IOE Evaluation Manual90. The PCR 
will put an emphasis on lessons learnt which should be significant in that they have a real or assumed 
impact on operations; valid in that they are factually and technically correct; and applicable in that they 
identify a specific design, process, or decision that reduces or eliminates the potential for failures and 
mishaps, or reinforces a positive result. The PCR will have to be submitted to IFAD within 6 months of 
the completion date. IFAD itself may also undertake a formal Evaluation of the project through its 
Independent Office of Evaluation (IOE). 
E.  Knowledge Management 
32.  Given the innovative features of READP, learning and knowledge management would be a key 
underlining theme in which the dissemination of project experiences and results to stakeholders and 
other development partners would be crucial. 
33.  READP focus on increasing competiveness, strengthening farmers’ organization and 
generating youth employment is aligned with national development priorities. Success with any of 
these elements would have a significant potential for scaling up, as significant EU resources are 
expected to be available for rural sector development.  
34.  Particular emphasis will be put on the enabling factors underpinning the successful 
implementation of joint business plan, with the view to document the experience and disseminate the 
results for wider policy impact to scale up. To that end, knowledge gained will be translated into 
messages, manuals, concepts and strategies, and disseminated to the various target groups and 
stakeholders, using appropriate means of communication.  
35.  A knowledge-sharing and learning culture will be promoted at all level, from the A/PCUs to the 
business units, through the clusters and other stakeholders. KM processes within READP would be to 
ensure that knowledge generated is systematically identified, analysed, documented, used to improve 
programme performance; communicated to policy makers to inform Government’s policy making 
process; and shared with key stakeholders. All activities related to KM should also be aligned with 
IFAD's Knowledge Management Strategy91.  
36.  Knowledge management and communication responsibilities will be shared among all project 
staff, with the overall responsibility to prove and improve impact through effective KM process 
belonging to the Project Director and the M&E Officer. Service providers will have a key responsibility 
for sharing lessons learnt during the Project through preparation of special case studies and Learning 
90 Available at https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/bfec198c-62fd-46ff-abae-285d0e0709d6 
91 Available at https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/ad197dcd-93f9-4e50-ab3d-d773619a89e5 
125 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Notes. Provision would be made in the budget for preparation of case studies of success and failure 
and for technical and learning notes on key aspects of the programme. 
37.  During the final year of READP implementation, as part of the preparation of the IFAD-required 
Project Completion Report/Impact Assessment, the M&E data collected over the Project 
implementation period will be used as part of a thorough assessment of Project achievements. 
Table 1: READP Monitoring and Evaluation Organisational Framework 
Level 
A/PCU  
Cluster 
Busines
s Units  
Cluster 
M&E 
Stakeholders 
PCU & A/PCU 
M and E 
specialists  
Business 
Development 
Officer (BDO) 
Rural 
Infrastructure 
officer 
Service 
Providers (SPs) 
Service 
Providers (SPs) 
Fields/Cluster 
Coordinators 
(FBiH; PCU; 5x) 
Extension 
officers (RS; 
REOs) 
Municipality 
Private 
Agribusiness 
Farmers 
Organisations 
Agriculture 
Cooperatives 
M&E Platforms 
BP 
implementation 
oversight 
committees 
Responsibilities 
Define reporting needs and 
requirements from business partners 
& clusters level aggregators 
Entity wide consolidation 
Outputs 
Baseline report/Mid-Term/End line; 
Evaluation/impact assessment  
Monthly/Quarterly/Bi-Annual and Annual 
progress report 
Data aggregation from business 
partners & clusters level aggregators 
Results Measurements against KPIs 
Developing data collection tools; 
formats/questionnaires 
Knowledge-sharing products 
MIS maintenance/updating 
Data collection 
Cluster wise consolidation of 
business partners' reports 
Primary data collection  
Cluster level consolidated Business Plan 
progress reports  
Data provision 
Monitoring & Progress Reports 
Planning and implementation review 
of the BPs; and  
Ensure regular reporting to the 
project and the municipalities 
126 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement 
arrangements 
A.  Financial Management Assessment (FMA) of the Project 
In October 2017, IFAD undertook an FM assessment of the PCU/APCU managing the ongoing 
1.
RBDP project as per IFAD guidelines and the risk was assessed as low. Additionally an assessment 
at design of the financial management system has been carried out to verify the conformity of the 
current system of RBDP with IFAD policies on fiduciary risks. 
Country context and inherent risks. The structure of the country government is composed by 
2.
two different levels of authorities with the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) at the central level 
and the two entities of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and the Republika Srspka 
(RS) at a lower level, with the addition of a third independent area which is Brčko District (DB). All the 
three, entities and district, have their own Houses of Parliaments and Governments and interrelations 
with the state level. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina with a TI Corruption Perception Index Score92 of 39 in 2016, ranking 
3.
as 83rd out of 176 countries, is rated as medium risk for perceived corruption. The score has improved 
from 42 of the year 2013. In the year 2017 IFC/WB’s Ease of Doing Business Report93, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina is ranked 81st out of 190 countries. The CPIA ratings in public sector management and 
institutions cluster average94 (1=low to 6=high) which measures public sector management and 
institutions cluster including property rights and rule-based governance, quality of budgetary and 
financial management, efficiency of revenue mobilization, quality of public administration, and 
transparency, accountability, and corruption in the public sector, has been stable at 3.3 from 2007 to 
2013. The first Public Expenditures and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment published in 
2014 rate the Public Financial Management systems separately at the state and entity level. The 
report identified several areas that require improvement including: (i) Legislative scrutiny of external 
audit reports, (ii) Scope, nature and follow-up on external audit reports, (iii) effectives of internal audit, 
iv) Competition, value for money and controls in procurement and (v) performance audits performed 
by the Supreme Audit Institutions. As a result the inherent financial management risk and country risk 
is rated as Medium. 
4.
In the COSOP 2013-18 the main country risks with respect to the fiduciary aspects, include: (i) 
the complex governance structure of the country (dating back to the Dayton Agreement); (ii) the lack 
of a uniform and consistent budget discipline across the system of public resource management; (iii) a 
weak compliance with procurement laws; iv) a weak capacity of internal audit; and v) widespread 
corruption. A major risk identified is related to the complex governance structure which results in time 
consuming intra-entity and state level consultations. 
Table 1: Inherent risk of the country 
Anticorruption and Good Governance Framework. The primary responsibility of detecting 
5.
fraud and corruption lies with the borrower. However, it should be noted that IFAD’s applies a zero-
92 https://www.transparency.org/country/BIH 
93 http://www.doingbusiness.org 
94 http://data.worldbank.org 
127 
Initial risk evaluationMitigating measuresFinal evaluation of the risk1. Index TI39.02. Note PSRMediumInherent risk of the countryMediumContinuation of project management by the current PCU/ APCU and strengthening of the capacities of the project unitssatisfactory 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in projects financed through 
its loans and grants. 'Zero tolerance' means that IFAD will pursue all allegations falling under the 
scope of this policy and that appropriate sanctions will be applied where the allegations are 
substantiated. This policy applies to IFAD-funded activities whether supervised directly by IFAD or by 
a cooperating institution. IFAD shall take all possible actions to protect from reprisals individuals who 
help reveal corrupt practices in its project or grant activities and individuals or entities subject to unfair 
or malicious allegations. It is important that the all project staff, project parties and stakeholders of the 
project are familiar with IFAD’s as well as the national anticorruption policies and whistle blowing 
procedures. The IFAD anticorruption policy is available on the IFAD website at 
www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/index.htm). The website also provides instructions on how to 
report any alleged wrong doing to the Office of Audit and Oversight 
(http://www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm). The national anticorruption policies and 
whistle blowing procedures are under the responsibility of the Agency for the Prevention of Corruption 
and Coordination of the Fight against Corruption. 
Taxation. As per IFAD policy, none of the IFAD proceeds of its financing can be utilized for the 
6.
payment of Taxes during the course of project implementation. 
Financial Management Risk Assessment. In accordance with IFAD’s Financial Management 
7.
Guidelines, a financial management assessment at design was undertaken on the current 
arrangements of the PCU/ APCU which are managing RBDP project. The detailed findings of the 
assessment and mitigation actions are summarized in table No. 2. The financial management 
arrangements and the capacities of the existing PCU/ APCU are adequate to meet IFAD’s 
requirements and the initial risk rating is considered as medium. Given the proper implementation of 
the mitigation actions, the residual risk will be further decreased to low. 
Table 2: Summary of FM Risks at design and mitigating actions 
128 
Risk CategoryInitial FM Risk Rating (H/M/L)*Proposed Risk Mitigating MeasuresResidual FM Risk Rating (H/M/L)*A. Inherent Risks:Country level:a)   Complicated process of ratification which is the cause of delay of 2-3 years for the entry into force of the agreementHb)   Follow up on ratification processB. Project Control Risks:Organization and Staffing:MLa)    The steering committee for the PCU has not been nominated by the FBiHb)   Nomination of steering committee to be done upon entry into force of the project. The composition of the committee to be clarified with IFADa)   Limited staff for the financial management at PCU considering also that three projects will have to be manageda)   A qualified accountant is recruited from the starting of the projectBudgeting:a)     Budget preparation follows an approach follows an approach from top to bottoma)     Project budget preparation will follow a participatory approach with the involvement of the different stakeholders of the projectb)     The budget monitoring is not done through the features of the accounting system by the PCUc)     Interim financial reports showing progress against budgets to be submitted to IFAD semi-annuallyd)     Budget controls to be done in the accounting softwareMLFunds Flow & Disbursements:a)     Complexity of the administrative setting of the country with state and entity levela)     Funding will be channelled separately for the two entities. Two schedule 2 to be prepared for the financing agreement, two DA and separate designated signatory for the PCU/ APCUb)     The process of WA signature at the ministry level takes from 4 to 8 daysb)     The MoFT should expedite the signing process of WAs and an alternate signatory system should be put into place to avoid delay for absences of authorized personc)     The project has no policies/procedures for the measuring and accounting of the in-kind contribution of the beneficiaries c)     A policy for the capturing of the beneficiary contribution will be developed as a section of the financial manual: This section would include also the evaluation of the in-kind contributionLL 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Risk on Financial Management. Taken as a whole, the risk of the financial management of the 
8.
project is moderate, considering the mitigating measures which have been suggested. The financial 
management modalities which have been proposed would allow to satisfy the requirements of IFAD 
and to provide regular and precise financial information. 
B.  Lessons learnt and proposed implementation arrangements 
The strengths and weaknesses of the implementing mechanism on financial management 
9.
identified are: 
10.
  Strengths: 
(a) Experience of the PCU/APCU of RBDP in project management; 
(b) Familiarity of the PCU/APCU of RBDP with IFAD procedures; 
(c) Capacity of the PCU/APCU on disbursement and accounting procedures satisfactory; 
(d) Joint will of the government and IFAD to capitalize and transfer the good practices to the 
new project. 
129 
Internal Control:a)     The overall internal control system in place is adequate, however the project has not developed a Financial Manual which defines the financial proceduresa)     Financial and administrative procedures will be documented within the framework of a financial manual. The preparation of the financial manual will be a condition for first disbursementb)     The payment order approval from the Ministry delays the flow of the payment process of a week on averageb)     The MoFT should expedite the preparation and signing of the payment order and an alternate  signatory system should be put into place to avoid delay for absences of authorized personMLAccounting Systems, Policies & Procedures:a)     The project is equipped with a good customized accounting softwares however the system is not being exploited in the budget monitoring functionalityLa)   FM/PCU will start to use the budget monitoring feature of the systemLb)     The contributions from the beneficiaries are not accounted in the accounting systemb)     The FM will account the financial and in-kind contributions from the beneficiaries in the accounting system c)     Accounting is on cash basis, IPSAS standardc)    A formal bank reconciliation will be prepared on a monthly basis and archived in the bank foldersReporting & Monitoring:a)     The FM/PCU is involved in the budget monitoring only for the preparation of the expendituresa)     The FM/PCU will be responsible for the financial budget analysisb)     Budget monitoring and financial reports will be prepared separately by PCU and APCU on a semi-annual basisb)      Financial reports will be extracted from the Financial systemc)     Schedule 2 of the Financing agreement and Costab will be prepared with separate categories and budget provision for PCU and APCULLInternal Audit:a)     The APCU/PCU are not included in the IA exercise of the LPAa)     The possibility to include the project under the IA of MOA to be explored. Capacity to be developed in this aspect during start up and early implementation.HMAuditing:a)     The TORs of the Auditor are not cleared by IFAD with No-objectiona)     The PCU/ APCU should ensure that during the selection process of the auditor at the state level, the clearance from IFAD for the TORs is provided (following the same process that the WB follows)b)     All past audit report have been unqualifiedb)     MoF to provide separate and consolidated audit reports as per current practicec)    The procurement process for the new auditor for the years 2017-2018 will be finalized by MoF by the end of 2017Project Fiduciary Risk at design:MEDIUMOVERALL FM RISKLOW* H=High, M=Medium, L=LowML 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
11.
  Weaknesses: 
(e) The long time taken by the ratification process. The major concern in this regard, which has 
affected negatively the implementation of the past projects, is the delay which has been 
experienced in all IFAD projects in the ratification process of the financing agreements, and 
therefore in the entry into force and starting-up of the projects. Although an improvement 
has been noted in the ratification of the latest RCDP, however on average the elapse time is 
of 2 to 3 years (from IFAD board approval to start-up). During the design, meetings have 
been arranged with difference donors and in particular with the WB, which seems to have 
managed to reduce the lag to 12-14 months; 
 (f) The complexity of the country Government administrative arrangements is often cause of 
delays in the process of approvals (payment approvals, withdrawal approvals, etc.); 
(g) The delay in the appointment of the Project Steering Committee (PSC) by the FBiH has 
been cause of lack of strategic planning and guidance for the PCU; 
(h) The financial management functions have been translated merely into accounting and 
disbursement activities, missing out the broader strategic role of financial management. The 
financial budget monitoring performed by the FMs is not satisfactory: the accounting system 
has not been exploited in the features of producing financial reports and the financial 
manager is not thoroughly involved in the financial analysis of the project performances; 
 (i) The project has not developed a separate Financial and Administrative manual for IFAD 
projects which defines financial and administrative processes and procedures and 
generates a system which is independent from the managing style of specific persons. The 
risk is that in case of change of staff and management style the financial management is 
affected; 
 (j) The project has not developed a procedure for monitoring, measuring and capturing in the 
financial system of all actual beneficiary contributions (both for the financial and the in-kind 
contributions). The funds received from the beneficiaries might be bigger than what has 
actually been recorded by the projects so far. 
  An additional source of risk in financial management is the heavy workload which might occur 
12.
at the time of starting of READ, since at that stage there will be three different IFAD projects managed 
by the same implementing units. Especially for the PCU where there is only one Financial Manager 
responsible for all financial aspects, this could be cause of constraints and bottlenecks. 
13.
  Proposed mitigating measures. From its start-up, READ will ensure that: 
 (i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
The MoF at Entity level identifies an alternate system of signatories to avoid delays 
in the process of approvals (payments, WAs, etc.); 
The MoF of FBiH will appoint the PSC at the start-up stage of the project; 
The PCU/ APCU will adopt a Financial and Administrative Manual which will 
include also a section on the procedure for measurement and accounting of the 
beneficiary contributions; 
The FM of both units will shift from a role of mere accounting to a higher level of 
financial management. They will take full responsibility over the budget spending, 
the monitoring and the analysis of the budget (together with the M&E officer which 
will consolidate the financial and physical performances of the project). The FM will 
carry out periodical field visits to be able to relate to the project performances at 
the ground level; 
The accounting will continue to be done with the current accounting system, 
namely FMS for PCU and a customized database from Access for APCU, with an 
upgrading in its use over the feature on financial report preparation. The APCU 
may consider the option of adopting a proper financial management software. 
130 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
14.
In this regard it will be necessary: 
  To duplicate the results of RCDP approval, IFAD country management will continue to have a 
close follow up in the ratification process and consider also synergies and collaborations 
which could be developed with the WB country office to benefit from the advantages and 
opportunities offered by the availability of a WB country office; 
  At PCU level an accountant will be added to the current organogram of the unit and the 
recruitment process will be initiated at the starting-up of the project. The accountant will be 
trained by the FM on all IFAD procedures. At APCU level the work time divided between IFAD 
and WB projects will have to be clearly identified; 
  The financial reports will have to be prepared by the FM directly from the accounting system 
on a monthly basis to have the overall control over the budget availabilities, and on a 
quarterly basis for the preparation of the financial reports; 
  The FM and the Director will ensure that the expenditures incurred by the project are included 
in the provision of the approved AWPB and if not, the expenditures are supported by no-
objection from IFAD; 
  PCU/ APCU will have to ensure that at the stage of AWPB preparation all the stakeholders 
have been consulted and their inputs included in the budget. The participatory approach of 
the budget performances will include an annual review of the AWPB performances with the all 
the stakeholders of the project; 
  The finalization and adoption of the Financial and Administrative manual will be a pre-
condition for disbursement; 
  The formats of the financial reports will be agreed with IFAD at start-up. 
15.
Implementing arrangements. The The Ministry of Finance and Treasury of Bosnia and 
Herzegovinawill be the signatory to the financing agreement with IFAD. The State Ministry will, in turn, 
sign Subsidiary Loan Agreements with the Entity Government of the Federation of Bosnia 
Herzegovina (FBiH) and Republika Srpska (RS). The Ministry of Finance of the FBiH and RS will sign 
a project agreement with IFAD to take over their respective responsibilities over the funding and the 
lending mechanism. The Federation’s Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry 
(MAWMF) will be responsible for the Project in the FBiH, and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Water Management (MAFWM) for the Project in RS. These Ministries will be through their respective 
Project Coordination Units (PCU and APCU respectively) and will be responsible for the overall 
financial management of the Project including coordinating all financial reports from implementing 
partners. 
  Project Coordination Units. The proposed project will take advantage of the coordination 
16.
mechanism already in place for the other IFAD projects in both entities. The current units responsible 
for the implementation are the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in FBiH and the Agriculture Project 
Coordination Unit (APCU) in RS. Both units have an established system and experience in project 
coordination and monitoring, accounting, managing, disbursement and reporting on IFAD financed 
projects and the APCU is also managing projects financed by the World Bank. In October 2017, the 
IFAD APCU/PCU showed moderately satisfactory performances with regards to financial 
management and according to the risk assessment the APCU/PCU have been rated as low risk. The 
2016 project Audit reports have been received in a timely manner and have been unqualified. 
C.  Project financing profile 
  Financing conditions for the IFAD loan. The IFAD loan will be given on ordinary terms, and 
17.
denominated in Euro. The currency of the designated accounts and repayments will be in Euro. The 
IFAD reference rate applicable to loans on ordinary terms is based on an SDR weighted, EURIBOR 
(for euro loans) 6-month composite rate of the four currencies which constitute the SDR basket 
(United States Dollar, Japanese Yen, Euro and Great Britain Pound), available on first business day of 
131 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
January and first business day of July, plus a variable spread. The IFAD reference rate is published 
on the IFAD website. 
Table No. 3: Allocation of funds by category/ source of funds, in US$ million 
  The duration of the project is of 5 years. The total project cost is US$ 33.803 million. The total 
18.
contribution of IFAD will be of US$ 13.9 million as a loan with ordinary terms. The loan will be divided 
by the two entities and US$ 8.468 million will be borrowed to the FBiH and US$ 5.432 will be 
borrowed to the RS. 
  The contribution of the Government at entity level is represented by the compensation of taxes 
19.
and is of a total amount of US$ 5.01 million, of which US$ 3.021 for the FBiH and US$ 1.989 for the 
RS. The contribution of the municipalities is estimated at US$ 2.979 million, of which US$ 1.808 for 
the FBiH and US$ 1.171 for the RS. 
20.
  The contribution of the beneficiaries is estimated at US$ 3.972 million, of which US$ 2.388 for 
the FBiH and US$ 1.584 for the RS. The contribution of the SME is estimated at US$ 6.702 million, of 
which US$ 4.008 for the FBiH and US$ 2.694 for the RS. The contribution of the farmer organizations 
is estimated at US$ 1.24, of which US$ 0.743 for the FBiH and US$ 0.497 for the RS. 
D.  Financial Management Arrangements 
  FM Organization. The project will make use of the experience already developed in the past 
21.
years and follow the financial arrangements in place for the management of RBDP and the two 
coordination units of PCU for FBiH and APCU for RS. The project will develop a Financial and 
Procedure manual (as a pre-condition for disbursement) which will define the financial arrangements 
in details, including the organization and staffing, internal controls, flow of funds, budgeting, 
accounting, financial monitoring, financial reporting, and audit procedures. A separate section of the 
manual will be dedicated in the monitoring, measuring and capturing in the accounting system of the 
beneficiary contributions. 
  The Project Steering Committee (PSC) has not been appointed by the FBiH, which results in 
22.
lack of guidance, planning and supervision for the PCU and a non compliance with the provisions of 
the loan covenant. The elections of 2018 may be cause of further delay in the appointment of the 
members of the committee. The Director of the PCU will follow up with the MoF and MoAWMF to 
ensure that the Government order is issued by the start-up of the project. 
  FM Staffing. Both the units are endowed with capacitated financial staff with long year of 
23.
experience with IFAD projects. The Financial Managers are responsible for the financial management 
and disbursement. However while the FM in APCU in RS is supported by an accountant, the FM of 
PCU is the only person working on financial activities. For internal control purposes and segregation 
of responsibilities, to ensure continuity of the project and as a back-up and assistance to the FM, 
especially in the coming scenario where in the same unit there will be three different IFAD projects to 
be managed at the same time, an additional accountant will be recruited at PCU. The FM/PCU will be 
132 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
responsible for his/her training on IFAD procedures. Both the units are also equipped by a 
Procurement officer, a secretary/assistant and a driver for their respective functions. 
24.
  Budgeting. The Annual Work Plan Budget (AWPB) will be prepared by the Project Manager in 
a fully participatory approach and based on the inputs from the stakeholders, with the collaboration of 
the Financial Manager, the M&E Officer, the Procurement Officer and the various specialists. The 
budget will be prepared in a format acceptable to IFAD. The format of the AWPB will indicate at least 
the expenditure items by activity, components, expenditure categories, implementing entities as well 
as sources of financing and divided on a quarterly basis. In addition the detailed cost tables should 
indicate the unit cost and quantity for each item and physical targets/indicators for each activity. The 
AWPB must be in line with the project description and objectives. 
  The AWPB will be submitted to the PSC for approval and IFAD for no-objection by the Director 
25.
of the PCU/ APCU at least two months before the beginning of the concerning fiscal year. It is 
important to notice that for an expenditure to be eligible under IFAD financing, it has to be included in 
the AWPB approved by the relevant national authority and IFAD (i.e. received the IFAD’s no-
objection). Therefore proper budget discipline will have to be enforced. 
  Budget control. At the beginning of each year the amounts approved in the AWPB will be 
26.
inserted in the budget module of the accounting/reporting software by the FM to ensure full use of the 
budget controls features. Monthly reports will be extracted from the system by the FM to have close 
monitoring and control of the budget facilities. Interim financial reports will be submitted to IFAD on a 
semi-annual basis. 
  The capacity on budget spending will be monitored closely evaluating the planning, performing 
27.
capacities and efficiency of the project. From the review of the financial budget results of 2016 
(RBDP), for both units, the ratio of project towards operating costs is slightly imbalanced, with an 
excessive amount of administrative expenditures compared to the project activities implemented. The 
ratio will have to be closely monitored by the PM and FM to ensure satisfactory level of project 
performances. 
  Counterpart and government contribution. The Government contribution up to the amount 
28.
detailed in project costs and financing (see Appendix 9 for details) will cover taxes and will be paid 
from a separate account based on the approved AWPBs. The funds will be transferred by the state 
treasury to the project through withdrawal applications prepared by the APCU/PCU and approved by 
the MoF. The municipalities and other stakeholder partners in the BPs will agree on and make 
arrangements to determine how their contributions will be handled based on agreed financing 
percentages. The Counterpart and government contribution will be captured in project accounting and 
financial reports and included in the audit. The beneficiary contributions, both financial and in-kind, 
from the municipalities and BP partners’ contributions will be measured and captured by M&E 
systems, incorporated in the accounting system of both Entities and included in performance reported. 
Internal Control. The project will have to develop a Financial and Administrative Manual which 
29.
defines roles and responsibilities and will include a specific section on internal control. The 
procurement for the Financial Manual will be included in the budget of the first year. The FM will be 
responsible to ensure the compliance with the clause of the Manual. The compliance with the internal 
control in place will be subject of the supervision missions and the annual audits. 
30.
In order to guarantee the control mechanism, all payment requests will be prepared by the 
accountant, certified by the Procurement Officer and the Finance Manager for their respective area of 
responsibility and approved by the Director. The procurement officer will certify the execution of the 
activity and compliance with contracts, the FM will be responsible for the verification of budget 
availability, budget lines to account and financial verification of the expenditure. The requests for 
payment will be submitted to the MoF of the concerning Entity. Once the request of payment is 
approved by the MoF, a payment order will be sent back to the PCU/ APCU for the final payment. In 
order to speed up the process of payment approval, a mechanism of alternate signatories should be 
arranged at the Ministry level. 
133 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
  Accounting. The accounting will be done on cash basis following the IPSAS standards. Both 
31.
the units will continue to use the system already in place, namely FMS for the PCU and a customized 
database in Access for APCU. APCU may consider an upgrade of the system or a shifting to an 
accounting software customized to IFAD project requirements. 
  Both PCU and APCU will have to improve the budget control facilities of the accounting system 
32.
which will be extracted directly from the accounting software. At the beginning of each fiscal year, and 
upon AWPB approval, the FM will ensure that the approved budget provisions are inserted in the 
software. The FM will extract financial report from the system on a monthly basis to ensure an overall 
control over the budget availabilities, and on a semi-annual basis for the preparation of the financial 
and physical report. The FM will have to ensure the accounting in the system of the contributions, 
both financial and in-kind, of the beneficiaries. 
  A formal process of monthly bank reconciliation will have to be prepared for all bank accounts 
33.
managed by the accountant of the PCU/ APCU. Each reconciliation will be verified by the FM and 
approved by the PM. 
  All fixed assets will be maintained safely and recorded in a register. Each asset will have to be 
34.
tagged for easy identification and controls. The register will be updated and verified on an annual 
basis. The procedures will be identified in the Financial Manual. The responsibility for ensuring the 
update and the verification of the register is at FM level. 
  Financial Reporting. In order to have immediate reports with a nullified risk of error and to 
35.
have analysis of actual versus budget and cumulative versus appraisal provisions, the financial 
reports will be prepared from the accounting system used at PCU/ APCU by using the reporting 
feature already available in the software. The responsibility of preparing such reports will be of the 
FM. At the starting of the project and at the beginning of each fiscal year the FM will ensure that the 
appraisal amounts and the approved budget amounts will be entered in the system. The report will 
provide analysis by components and activities, categories and sources of funds. The financial report 
will be prepared on a semi-annual basis and will be given to the M&E for further analysis and crossed-
checking verifications with the physical achievements of the project and the preparation of the 
Financial and physical report.  
36.
  The FM will also be responsible for the preparation of the financial statements of the project, 
which will be in compliance with the IPSAS- cash and IFAD requirements. The PCU/ APCU will submit 
them to IFAD, through the Ministry of Finance and Treasury no later than four months after the closing 
of the concerning fiscal year. The project Financial Statements will include inter-alia: (i) statement of 
project management responsibilities including a management statement that the project funds have 
been utilized for the intended purposes as specified in the relevant financing agreements; (ii) 
statement of cash receipts and payments (by category and by financier); (iii) statement of cash 
receipts and payments (by component); (iv) statement of comparative budget and actual amount; (v) 
statement of Designated Account movements; (vi) Statement of Designated Account Reconciliations; 
(vii) SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement; (viii) cumulative use of funds by category of expenditure 
for each of the IFAD financing sources, and (ix) Notes to the Financial Statements. 
37.
  A consolidate annual audit report and a management letter, together with separate audit report 
for PCU and APCU, will have to be submitted to IFAD no later than six months after the completion of 
the concerning fiscal year. 
38.
Internal auditor. The Supreme Audit Institutions of the country have achieved significant 
results in a complicated environment and with very limited resources, but their financial independence 
remains unsecured. Both the MoAWMF at entity level have an internal audit office which is also the 
representative of the Supreme Audit Institutions (SAIs) at entity level. The capacity of such entity 
could not be fully evaluated during design. A preliminary assessment was arranged at the Supreme 
Office for the RS which conducts public audit also on the APCU accounts. The capacities of the office 
sound good, however in light of the fact that the FBiH office could not be met, a full assessment will 
have to be conducted at a later stage. 
134 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
  External audit. The current arrangements in Bosnia and Herzegovina are that all externally 
39.
funded projects are yearly audited by an external auditor from the private sector appointed for three 
years at State level through a competitive process. For the years 2013-2016 the auditor selected was 
Deloitte doo Sarajevo, with an extension of the appointment for the 2016 done on an exceptional 
basis due to the delay in the starting of the new procurement process. It would be advisable that the 
appointment of the auditor for the coming three years will be done before the ending of 2017. The 
TORs of the auditor will have to be submitted to IFAD for no-objection. The Director of PCU/ APCU 
will have to ensure that in the course of the procurement process the TORs are sent to IFAD for its 
clearance. 
  The audit report will be submitted to IFAD annually no later than 6 months after the end of the 
40.
concerning fiscal year. The Audit Report will include the following elements: (i) an opinion on the 
Project’s financial statements; (ii) a separate opinion on the eligibility of expenditures included in the 
WA /Statement of Expenditure procedure; and (iii) a separate opinion on the compliance of the use of 
the Designated Account with the financing agreement. The TORs of the auditor will have to ensure 
that all three opinions will be included in the audit. In addition to the audit report, the independent 
auditor will prepare a management letter which will include comments and recommendations on the 
adequacy of the financial management system, and on the system of internal controls. The 
management letter should also include a follow up section on the status of implementation of previous 
year’s recommendations.  
  The APCU and PCU will prepare their respective annual financial statements in a timely 
41.
manner which will be audited by the selected auditor in accordance with the procedures and criteria 
set forth in IFAD's Guidelines on Project Audits (for Borrower's Use). The consolidated audit report 
covering the whole project, together with the separate audit reports for APCU/RS and PCU/FBiH 
including the management letters covering the audit observations on internal controls will be 
submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of the fiscal year. 
E.  Disbursement procedures 
IFAD Disbursement Procedures. Three standard disbursement procedures may be used for 
42.
withdrawal of financing: (i) Advance to the Designated Account (DA); (ii) Direct payment; and (iii) 
Reimbursement. However, it is expected that most expenditures will be through the designated 
account using the imprest mechanism. Replenishment of the Designated Accounts from the loan 
account at IFAD will be by way of Withdrawal Applications (WAs), supported by appropriate 
documentation or Statements of Expenditure and duly signed by the authorized representative of the 
Borrower. 
  Disbursement arrangements and Flow of funds. Separate bank accounts will be opened 
43.
and maintained for each financing source and for each entity. Accordingly, there will be one 
designated account in Euro for each entity to receive the loan facilities from IFAD, and two operating 
accounts in BAM for each entity (one for each financing instrument by entity) to receive financing from 
the respective designated accounts. In addition, there will be two separate counterpart accounts for 
the government contribution (one for each Entity) and separate bank accounts for Beneficiaries 
contribution at each entity’s level. The project bank accounts will be operated under the joint signature 
of the Project Director, the Financial Manager of the APCU/PCU and the appointed person of the MoF. 
A detailed flow of funds is shown in the annexed chart. 
  Conditions for first withdrawal. As per standard IFAD practices, the following conditions 
44.
related to financial management are to be met before the first withdrawal can be realized:  
 
 
IFAD has received from the Minister of Finance, a letter designating the name(s) of official(s) 
authorized to sign withdrawal applications, which includes their authenticated specimen 
signature(s); 
IFAD has received documentation evidencing the opening of the bank accounts designated to 
receive IFAD Loan and in advance;  
135 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
  An updated Project Implementation Manual and a Financial and administrative procedure 
manual, have been prepared by the project and approved by IFAD; and 
 
IFAD has given its no-objection on the first AWPB and procurement plan related to the first 18 
months of the project. 
  Withdrawals (WAs) from the IFAD Loan Account. After IFAD financing has entered into force 
45.
and the conditions for first disbursement have been duly complied with and upon request by the 
borrower, IFAD will make an initial deposit to the Designated Accounts (Authorized Allocation). The 
ceiling of the authorized allocation will be based on the budgets for six months for each financing 
source based of the highest peak of projected yearly expenditure. Between the date of entry into force 
of the Financing Agreement and the Financing Closing Date, the PCU/ APCU may request 
withdrawals from the Loan Account of amounts paid or to be paid for eligible expenditures. PCU/ 
APCU should submit a withdrawal for replenishment or reimbursement as soon as the amount of 
expenditures incurred, but not yet submitted, has reached the 30 per cent of the amount of the initial 
advance. For the Direct payment procedure the minimum amount for submission of a request of 
payment is EUR 100,000. 
  Start-up funds. To ensure smooth implementation, the project will receive start-up funds to 
46.
cover expenditures related to start up activities after the date of entry into force and before the 
fulfillment of the conditions precedent to withdrawal. The start-up funds will be deposited in the 
Designated Account after IFAD has received from the Minister of Finance and Treasury: (a) a letter 
designating the name(s) of official(s) authorized to sign withdrawal applications, which includes their 
authenticated specimen signature; (b) documentation evidencing the opening of the bank account 
designated to receive IFAD Loan in advance; and (c) a duly signed withdrawal application. The 
required amount for start-up activities will be calculated and determined during the final design 
mission. The start-up funds were estimated to XXXX EUR 
  Statement of Expenditure (SOE). The SOE thresholds shall be determined in the light of the 
47.
associated risk for each expenditure category and will be duly documented in the Letter to the 
Borrower. The initial estimate is that the SOE threshold will be EUR 200 000 for all contracts under all 
categories. The project will retain the relevant support documents and make them readily available for 
inspection and review by IFAD supervision missions and the auditors. 
F.  Supervision, Implementation Support and Implementation Readiness 
48.
Implementation Readiness. A list of key tasks is summarized below: 
Table No.4: List of key tasks 
136 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
  Supervision and implementation support plan. The project will be directly supervised by 
49.
IFAD in accordance with IFAD guidelines. The supervision process will be complemented by desk 
review of withdrawal applications, progress and financial reports, the annual financial statements, and 
annual audits. From a financial management perspective, a financial management specialist will 
participate in missions annually to supervise and provide implementation support to the project and 
follow up the fiduciary risks. The supervision plan will include: 
 - Follow-up on the identified mitigation actions identified in the project design; 
 - Review of fulfilment and adequacy of the staffing requirements for both PCU and APCU, 
including identification of any need for the strengthening of the PCU/ APCU; 
 - Review of the Financial and Administrative Manual and procedures in place; 
 - Review of financial system exploitation and report produced through the accounting 
software, with a particular focus on the budget monitoring reports;  
 - Verification of the fixed asset register update and physical verification of assets through spot 
checks; 
 - Detailed review of expenditure claimed under the SOEs: eligibility, availability and 
completeness of the documentation, correctness of calculations and application of 
threshold; 
 - Review of disbursement and of the flow of funds, correctness use of the project accounts; 
 - Review of the calculation of the contribution from the beneficiary and its recording in the 
financial software; 
 - Verify the process of the budget preparation and monitoring; 
 - Undertake at least two on-site visits that will involve visits to the implementing partners, 
municipalities and co-operatives, etc. 
137 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Flow of Funds Chart 
138 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
I.  Country context and IFAD procurement guidelines 
A.  Country Assessment 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has Law on Public Procurement. The Law on Public Procurement of 
1. 
BiH was adopted in 2004 for the first time, and re-adopted in 2014 (Law with the same title but with 
changed content). The Law on Public Procurement of BiH is applied to the whole territory of Bosnia 
and Herzegovina and, unlike many other areas, there are no other Law s that treat the same matter at 
entity level. There are two public procurement bodies in BiH for enforcement of the Law on Public 
Procurement: the Public Procurement Agency and the Procurement Review Body. The Public 
Procurement Agency is an independent administrative authority and its main function is to ensure the 
proper implementation of the Law, while the Procurement Review Body is responsible for the public 
procurement review and remedies. However, the implementation of the Law is at every institution that 
performs public procurements. 
2. 
The first Country Procurement Assessment Report for Bosnia and Herzegovina by The World 
Bank group (2002) noted that "procurement has not to date been considered to be a core function of 
government, worthy of specialized staff and dedicated organizational units" and in that time "state 
does not even have its own law on public procurement". Regarding the Law, the situation was 
changed because Bosnia and Herzegovina got the first Law on Public Procurement in 2004 and 
improved the same Law in 2014.  
The EBRD in its assessment of Commercial Laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina (2014), based on 
3. 
their appraisal of public procurement in BiH in 2010, affirmed the Law on Public Procurement of BiH, 
but at the same time identified its inconsistencies and shortcomings with the general assessment of 
"low to moderate compliant with international standards". One of the findings was that it is necessary 
to establish a specialized procurement function within contracting authorities. Similarly, the EU funded 
IPA project found that the main problems in public procurement system in BiH is the lack of well-
trained staff in contracting authorities responsible for public procurements in BiH. Due to that from the 
beginning the practice applied in IFAD projects is establishment of specialized project coordination 
units and permanent engagement of procurement specialist within them. 
The World bank in the Public Expenditure and Financial Assessment (2014) highlighted that 
4. 
"certain common trends warrant attention, especially related to the principles of competition and 
transparency in public procurement" and stressed that if open competition is a default method in 
public procurement "entities seems to use less open competition method". As a country, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina got lowest score in this assessment for public access to complete, reliable and timely 
procurement information (rating C) and justification for use of less competitive procurement methods 
(rating D).  
New Law on Public Procurement in BiH, because of harmonizing the previous one with the EU 
5. 
directives for this area, was adopted in 2014. The period since its adoption is rather short and there 
are no serious independent assessments of the efficiency of its application. In its report for BiH from 
2016, the European Commission noted in relation to procurement procedures that "some progress 
has been achieved in the field of public procurement in the last year" and at the same time 
"procurement is particularly vulnerable to corruption and more efforts are needed to prevent this 
during the procurement cycle." The public procurement regulations are to a large extent in line with 
the regulatory framework in developed countries and EU legislation, but the main problem remains in 
their application.  
EC in its monitoring report of public administration in BiH (from 2016) concluded that "the legal 
6. 
framework for public procurement remedies in BiH is mainly compliant with the EU remedies 
directives, except that concessions are not covered. The PRB is not yet working properly, due to weak 
administrative resources and the absence of key staff in the branch offices. PRB decisions are no 
longer being published." 
Therefore, most international donors and creditors retained approach to use their own 
7. 
procurement procedures on the procurements financed by their funds.  
139 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
In the IFAD's Country Strategic Opportunity Programme for Bosnia and Herzegovina (2013) 
8. 
weak compliance with procurement laws has been identified as one of the risks in procurement and 
concluded that borrower's system for procurement is not still fully in line with IFAD requirements and 
Procurement Guidelines, so that (following provision of paragraph 7 of IFAD Procurement Guidelines) 
procurement procedures, review and supervision on procurement within READP will be carried out in 
accordance with alternative procedures, apropos IFAD procurement procedures. 
B.  Capacities of project coordination units. 
In Bosnia and Herzegovina there are two project coordination unites, PCU of the FBiH and 
9. 
APCU of the RS, that have years of experience in the implementation of IFAD funded projects in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina ( the RS APCU deals also with procurement for the World bank projects). 
Both project units have one procurement officer each.  
10.  The function of procurement in the PCU is executed by a procurement officer who has a one-
year experience in procurement according to IFAD procedures, but has previous experience in 
conducting procurement under local procedures. The other members of the PCU team have many 
years of experience in implementing procurement procedures, so that as a team they have 
undisputed competencies for conducting procurement according to IFAD procedures. 
11.  And in the APCU function of procurement is executed by procurement officer in cooperation 
with rest of the APCU team. APCU procurement officer has ten years of experience in procurement in 
accordance with IFAD and the World bank procurement procedures. At the same time, APCU serves 
several IFAD and WB funded projects and has three procurement officers which leaves the possibility 
to exchange opinions among them and combine these human resources in case of need. Other 
members of the APCU team also have experience in preparation of terms of references, participation 
in evaluation committees and implementation and monitoring of performing signed contracts. 
In the last audit reports of the implementation of IFAD projects by both project units there were 
12. 
no objections and mismatches in application of procurement procedures. 
In general, the existing project units have a well-developed and recognizable procurement 
13. 
function, which is carried out by the procurement officers, with the support of other project team 
members, which all have many years of experience in the implementation of IFAD projects. And with 
the prior and post reviews support by the CPM, following the agreed thresholds in the financing 
agreements, it can be concluded that the capacities of both project units in terms of performing the 
procurement function are sufficient and satisfactory for efficient implementation of the new projects 
without the need to undertake specific institutional or human prerequisites. 
C.  General Conditions 
IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing apply to all financial 
14. 
agreements between IFAD and borrowers. The financing from the IFAD loan shall be used exclusively 
to finance expenditure which, inter alia "is procured in conformity with Fund's Procurement 
Guidelines". The revised General Conditions (2009) adopted a new approach to procurement 
financed by IFAD loans and grants in a way that "procurement of goods, works and services financed 
by IFAD shall be carried out in accordance with the provision of Borrower/Recipient's procurement 
regulations, to the extent such are consistent with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines". The General 
Conditions explicitly foresee possibility of suspension rights of loan withdrawals if procurement has 
not been carried out in according with IFAD Procurement Guidelines which means that application of 
IFAD Procurement Guidelines is mandatory within IFAD financed projects.  
D. 
IFAD Procurement Guidelines 
15.  Obligation of IFAD borrowers is to ensure that the procurement process is carried out in 
conformity with the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines (available at IFAD web site) and with the 
procurement plan agreed between IFAD and the Borrower. The IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines 
are more focused on the general principles, standards and policies and less on details of 
procurement. More detailed instructions for procurement goods, works and services are prescribed in 
the IFAD Procurement Handbook (available at IFAD web site). 
140 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
16.  Procurement under IFAD funded projects and supplementary funds apply IFAD Project 
Procurement Guidelines (amended and adopted in 2010), unless otherwise agreed (i.e. use existing 
national procurement system), The use of Borrowers/Recipient's procurement system is always 
subject of verification by IFAD. The exception is international competitive bidding when the World 
bank procurement procedures are always applied. 
IFAD expects higher degree of transparency and openness within the procurement processes 
17. 
undertaken under READP. IFAD will participate in procurement process by prior and post review of 
procurement procedures and documents but that supervision role doesn't in any way absolve 
borrower from its obligation to properly implement IFAD and national procurement regulations. IFAD 
will review following aspects of procurement process: (1) contract packaging; (2) applied procedures 
and procurement methods; (3) bidding documentation; (4) composition of bid evaluation committee; 
(5) bid evaluation and award recommendations and (6) draft contracts. 
If it is proposed in project design and agreed during loan negotiation some procurement can be 
18. 
undertaken by community (Community based procurement activities) or left to intermediaries 
selected by transparent competitive process and supervised by PCUs and IFAD. 
In accordance with IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its activities and 
19. 
operations special attention are dedicated to implementation of high standards of ethics and integrity 
during execution of procurement. 
20.  Foreseen methods of procurement in IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines are as follows: 
a) 
International competitive bidding (ICB) is procurement method for high-value purchases which 
can be interested and performed by international business companies. In case of applying 
ICB method procurement procedure will be guided in accordance with the World bank 
guidelines for ICB. 
b)  Limited international biding (LTB) is essentially ICB method with direct invitation of supplier 
without public advertisement for that purchase and it is used for specific purchases when 
number of potential suppliers are limited and value of purchase small.  
c)  National competitive bidding (NCB) is the preferred procurement method if there are no 
rational reasons and arguments for applying another method of procurement. This 
procurement method is applied if goods or works are available locally with prices same or 
below those on the international market. Regardless of the name, this method does not 
exclude the right of foreign companies to participate in the bidding process. Procurement 
needs are publicly announced through newspapers or websites so that they are available to 
all interested bidders under the same conditions. Biding document for NCB may be in local 
language with offering and payment in local currency. The procedure implies reasonable time 
for bid preparation and submission public bid opening. 
International or national shopping is procurement method used for standard small value 
commodities widely available and ready for delivery or civil works with a small value. It is 
carried out by collecting and comparing price quotations from several suppliers (usually not 
less than three). Request for quotations (request for proposal) is sent directly to identified 
potential suppliers (bidders). Quotations (bids) by invited suppliers can be sent by mail, 
electronic mail or facsimile and thus do not require procedure of public opening. In case of 
international shopping purchaser is solicit to quotations from minimum three suppliers from 
minimum two different countries. 
d) 
e)  Direct contracting without competition is the least competitive method. Because of that direct 
contracting by single or sole-source selection is used in exceptional cases with obligatory 
prior approval of IFAD, based on detailed justification for expectation. 
For services, there is only one method of procurement, and attention is put on method of 
selection of service provider or consultant. There are used two procurement processes – 
Request for proposal or Request for quotation.  
f) 
g)  Besides IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines, there is IFAD Procurement Handbook which 
precisely elaborate when and how some procurement methods (Module F5) will be used. 
21.  Criteria for determining which of the above methods will be applied to which procurement is the 
total estimated value of each procurement (regardless of the number of sources from which it is 
financed) and thresholds are agreed during the loan negotiations. Procurement matters are subject of 
141 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
negotiation but generally are not included in the Financial Agreement than to Letter to the Borrower as 
legal obligation of borrower agreed between IFAD and borrower.  
II. Procurement arrangements under the Project 
22.  Procurement activities will be carried out by two project units responsible for project 
coordination within the country. Procurement under the project will perform using competitive 
procedures with justified exceptions. 
E. 
Implementation arrangements 
Institutional responsibility for procurement. The Ministry of Finance and Treasury at the 
23. 
state level, representing the borrower, is accountable to IFAD for all actions and decisions in relations 
to project funded procurement. The practical responsibility for the execution of this obligation will be 
delegated to existing PCUs at the entity levels. In the procurement process competitiveness will be 
preferred through competitive bidding procedures. In principle, in every single procurement 
opportunity to promote competition should be pursued to achieve the best value of the money 
(wherein best value doesn't compulsory mean the lowest price!). Procurement procedures must be 
undertaken in a way to satisfy and competitiveness and efficiency which will be satisfied through 
preparation meaningful procurement plans, by selecting proper procurement method and binding of 
respective purchases into rational packages. Only in exceptional circumstances, single source and 
direct contracting can be considered with prior approval of IFAD. 
24.  Application of procurement regulations. Getting in account attitude from country 
assessment chapter that national procurement system in BiH are still not fully consistent with IFAD 
expectations and procurement regulations, procurement for READP will be performed in accordance 
with IFAD procurement procedures defined and elaborated in IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines 
and IFAD Procurement Handbook following thresholds stipulated in the Letter to Borrower.  
Incompatibility of regulations. Since the loans, which the BiH borrows, are treated as public 
25. 
revenue and are supported by co-financing from entities' budgets, projects with international financing 
are also subject to certain supervision by in the country public auditors (e.g. the Supreme Office for 
the Republic Srpska Public Sector Auditing). IFAD encourages the institutions of BiH to monitor and 
supervise procurement in the framework of IFAD-funded projects and co-financed from public funds 
through their official independent bodies, but in case of incompatibility and divergence of IFAD and 
national procurement procedures in that process (for example, because of different thresholds, and 
therefore different procurement methods) IFAD regulation have advantage and prevail over national 
regulation. This is in accordance and with the Law on Public Procurement of BiH whose article 10 
foresees exemptions of appliance of that Law, inter alia and in the case of "c) Contracts awarded in 
accordance with an international agreement according to which a special procedure of international 
credit or donor arrangements is applied." 
F. 
Risks in procurement 
26.  Potential risks that may affect procurement efficiency within READP and measures for their 
mitigation can be as it is shown in table 1. Responses to avoiding and mitigation these risks are 
shown in the column three of the same table. 
142 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Table 1. Summary of potential risk at procurement design and proposed risk mitigating actions 
Risk rating 
Proposed risk mitigation measures 
Potential risk 
Organization and staffing 
a)  Delay in defining needs and 
specifications for procurement. 
b)  The overload of procurement officer 
due to the parallel implementation of 
several projects. 
Insufficient number of technically 
acceptable bids. 
c) 
d)  Unclear and non-transparent 
evaluation criteria that leave space for 
bidders' complaints. 
e)  Lack of coordination between all 
partners in the implementation of 
complex procurement. 
f)  Conflict in the responsibilities of 
different institutions regarding the 
project supervision and audit. 
g)  The changes in the status of project 
coordination units and staff. 
M 
L 
L 
L 
M 
L 
L 
Budgeting 
h)  Problems with conditional co-financing 
M 
of some project interventions (lack of 
funds and delay). 
Polices & Procedures 
i)  Weak and incompetent supervision of 
M 
contract performances. 
H-high, M-medium, L-low 
G.  Staffing 
Begin the process of preparing the specifications 
in a timely manner and use external expert 
assistance if it is necessary. 
Optimizing the distribution of tasks and, in case 
of need, hiring additional staff to perform 
procurement. 
Better advertising of bid invitations and greater 
transparency in procurement procedures. 
Defining clear and enforceable evaluation criteria 
in advance. 
Better organization and clear definition of the 
role of each partner. 
Clear division of competences and consistent 
application of regulations, and in case of conflict 
of regulations application more valid regulation. 
Consistently maintain the status of project units 
until the end of the project and prevent sudden 
organizational changes and replacement of staff. 
Timely plan the necessary financial contribution 
and protect it from a reduction in the case of a 
budget deficit. 
Mandatory involvement of obligation to monitor 
and report in contracts for works and services 
and inventive design of M&E system. 
27.  The procurement activities and tasks will be performed by two current procurement officers 
in the two existing project coordination units (PCU and APCU), who are qualified and familiar with 
IFAD procurement procedures. If needed, recruit new staff instead of the existing one, selection of 
that person should follow a competitive selection process and the candidate must satisfy minimal 
qualifications and requirements in the term of reference for READP procurement officer described in 
PIM and the appointment should be subject to IFAD no objection. 
28.  Although PCU's procurement officers are qualified and experienced, it is necessary to continue 
building their capacities through occasional attendance on specific training sessions for 
procurement staff of IFAD projects (e.g. on the topic of e-procurement). This is particularly relevant to 
the procurement officer in the PCU of the FBiH considering her short experience in procurement 
according to IFAD procedures. It would be useful for procurement staff to visit the project area from 
time to time to get to know more about the conditions and beneficiaries of project interventions for 
which they carry out procurement. 
29.  Procurement officers are part of the project teams and their activities and the results are 
conditioned by the good cooperation with other team members in terms of preparation quality and 
accurate specifications, bills of quantities, and job descriptions that are the subject of contracting. 
H.  Bidding documents 
30.  Both project units will use already developed and used forms of bidding documents, which will 
be improved and upgraded within READP. In case of procurements that have not appeared in 
previous projects, new formats of tender documents will be prepared. There are some biding 
document templates available, developed by international donors or national institutions in BiH. In the 
143 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
IFAD Procurement Handbook, there are some indications of content and elements of biding 
documents for specific types of procurement which can guide procurement staff in their preparation. A 
challenge will be the preparation of sole specifications and descriptions of requirements for goods, 
works and services as distinct respond on the specific needs of project beneficiaries. In case of lack of 
"in-house" knowledge and experience, external consultants may be used to develop quality bases for 
initiating procurement procedures and to evaluate received bids. In case of applying ICB procurement 
method, the World bank biding document templates will be used. 
I.  Procurement Plan  
31.  The first 18-monts READP procurement plan will be prepared as a part of project design. If the 
period from the project design to start of the project implementation is prolonged, this first 
procurement plan will be updated at the READP start-up workshop. Than PCUs will follow up 
preparation of next 12 months procurement plans, which will be harmonized with AWPB for respective 
year. Procurement plan will consist of minimum data such as: items of procurement, its affiliation to 
project component and subcomponent, quantity and estimated value of purchase, type and method of 
procurement, type of review, starting and ending date of procurement. Having in mind that AWPBs 
must be submitted to IFAD for approval two months before beginning of a year, procurement plan 
must follow the same dynamics of its preparation (in the second half of current year for the next year). 
In the preparation of procurement plan procurement, a manager has to closely cooperate with 
respective project team members. 
J.  Register of contracts 
32.  Both PCUs will maintain registers of contracts with relevant data (number of contract, subject of 
procurement, contractor, type and method of procurement, biding data, bid evaluation data, 
good/work/service delivery data, etc.). Updated register of contracts will be submitted electronically to 
CPM every three (3) months. 
K.  Procurement progress report 
33.  Procurement progress report will accompany regular project progress reports as their annex 
but can be prepared and considered separately in particular cases (e.g. for need of project 
supervision). Procurement progress report will be prepared based on procurement plan, data from 
register of the contracts and other data sources. 
34.  The procurement progress report should include information on the procedures carried out, 
their progress, the relevant dates for certain key steeps in the procurement process, the number and 
names of bidders, the date and value of the contracts or invoices and status of their execution. The 
procurement report should mention conditions and eventual problems with procurement in reporting 
period, as well as auditor's opinion toward procurement issues. 
L.  Procurement records  
35.  PCUs will collect, maintain and file complete original documentation for each subject of 
procurement in paper and electronic form (where possible). Procurement records and documentation 
will be available to IFAD for supervision and other purposes and to auditors for project audit. In 
accordance with the IFAD General Conditions the borrower is obligated to keep original records and 
documents for at least ten (10) years thereafter. 
M.  Procurement supervision and audit 
36.  Supervision of procurement under the RBADP will be part of project supervision by IFAD. 
Besides supervision and follow-up missions appointed by IFAD, project procurement will be 
continuously supervised by IFAD CPM, primarily through prior confirmation of certain steps in the 
procurement procedures and giving approval for signing contracts or by post review. 
37.  Procurement audit will be carried out as a part of project audit subsequently by an external 
auditor selected by Ministry of treasury and finance of BiH and approved by IFAD. 
N.  Monitoring of contract performance 
38.  Results based type of contracts will be applied in case of engaged service providers Payment 
of services will be in accordance with achieved performances what requires clear identification of 
expected results in ToRs, their monitoring during service delivery and elaborated payment schemes. 
144 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
The service providers must establish and maintain clear evidences of performances of their services, 
separated of their other activities which will allow insight to project and other supervisions. 
O.  Procurement items and methods 
39.  The subject of procurement will be goods, works or consultancy of non-consultancy 
services. 
40.  The following procurement methods will be used for procurement of goods and works:  
a) 
International competitive bidding (ICB) or alternatively Limited international bidding (LIB);  
b)  National competitive bidding (NCB);  
c)  Shopping, international or national (IS, NS), and  
d)  Direct contracting (DC). 
41.  The following procurement methods will be used for procurement of non-consultancy or 
consultancy services95:  
a)  Request for quotations – internationally or nationally announced; 
b)  Shopping – international or national, and 
c)  Single source selection. 
P.  Procurement thresholds 
42.  Although the thresholds for some procurement methods will be finalized during the project 
negotiation and stipulated in the Letter to the Borrower, it is expected that the following thresholds are 
confirmed as the criteria for delineation of procurement method (same as for the ongoing RCD 
project). 
Table 2. Thresholds for determining the appropriate procurement method96 
Procurement method 
Contract estimated value 
Type of 
procurement 
Goods 
Works 
International competitive bidding (ICB) 
or Limited international biding (LIB) 
National competitive bidding (NCB) 
International or national shopping (IS or NS) 
International competitive bidding (ISB) 
or Limited international biding (LIB) 
National competitive bidding (NCB) 
Non-consultancy 
services 
International or national shopping (IS or NS) 
Request for quotations - internationally 
Request for quotations - nationally 
Consultancy 
services97 
International or national shopping (IS or NS) 
Request for proposal - internationally 
Request for proposal - nationally 
> 200,000 EUR 
≤200,000 EUR 
>50,000 EUR 
≤50,000 EUR 
> 1,000,000 EUR 
≤1,000,000 EUR 
>100,000 EUR 
≤100,000 EUR 
> 100,000 EU 
≤100,000 EU 
>20,000 EUR 
≤20,000 EUR 
> 100,000 EUR 
≤100,000 EUR 
In any case of READP preferred procurement should use the methods that provide greater 
43. 
competitiveness. Although direct contracting and single sourcing don't provide the elements of 
expected competitiveness (paragraph 27 of IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines) those methods 
can be selected in exceptional circumstances with rational clarification and mandatory prior approval 
by IFAD CPM.  
95 The explanation in IFAD Procurement Handbook (Module F4) helps to distinguish nature of non-consultancy and consultancy 
services. 
96 In case of disagreement thresholds for some procurement methods in READP design report and Letter to Borrower (LTB) the 
leading thresholds will be those that are listed in LTB. 
97 Bid evaluation for consultancy services can be done using one of following methods: quality and cost-based selection 
(QCBS), quality-based selection (QBS); fix budget selection (FBS); least cost selection (LCS); selection based on consultant 
qualifications (CQS) or sole source selection (SSS).  
145 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
44.  Although IFAD's procedure for shopping method envisages that in certain cases it can be 
carried out with less than three tenders (usually not less than three), it should be attempted that, 
having in mind the set threshold for this method, for higher value purchases within this value class, 
procurement should be implemented based on at least three offers and using bid submission in 
closed envelopes. 
45.  For some procurement arrangements PCUs will have to have IFAD prior review and approval 
for next procurement steeps (called "no objection") or contract award, and for some post review of 
procurement documentation and procedure (paragraph 80 of IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines). 
Subject of prior review by IFAD is award of any contract valued more than it is identified below and 
any contract concluded by direct contracting or single source selection.  
Table 3. Thresholds for procurement which are subject to mandatory IFAD prior review or approval 
Goods 
Works 
Non-consulting services 
Consultancy services  
- legal entity 
Consultancy services  
- individuals  
Direct contracting or  
single source selection  
Draft biding documents,  
Bid opening and evaluation report,  
Minutes of negotiation and  
Draft contract for the first five (5) contracts 
Draft biding documents,  
Bid opening and evaluation report,  
Minutes of negotiation and  
Draft contract for the first five (5) contracts 
Draft biding documents,  
Bid opening and evaluation report,  
Minutes of negotiation and  
Draft contract for the first five (5) contracts 
Term of reference,  
Request for expression of interest (optional),  
Short list,  
Request for proposal,  
Technical and financial evaluation report,  
Minutes of negotiations and  
Draft contract for the first five (5) contracts 
Term of reference,  
Request for expression of interest,  
Short list,  
Request for proposal,  
Technical and financial evaluation report, Minutes 
of negotiations and  
Draft contract for the first five (5) contracts 
or any contract 
of estimated value 
> 50,000 EURO 
or any contract 
of estimated value 
>100,000 EURO 
or any contract 
of estimated value 
>20,000 EURO 
or any contract 
of estimated value 
>50,000 EURO 
For the first 5 contracts or 
any contract 
of estimated value 
>20,000 EURO 
regardless of the value, 
based of justified and 
approved exceptions 
46.  Estimated contract value will be relevant for selection of procurement method, regardless of 
final value of contract. In case that the payment of contract is financed from more than one source, 
the estimated value of contract is determined based on the financial contribution of all co-financiers. 
47.  Despite that if having national thresholds are lower than indicated, for purchase of goods, works 
and services under REBDP, will be used thresholds agreed during negotiations and verified in the 
Letter to the Borrower will be used. 
International competitive bidding procedure is mandatory if estimated value of single 
48. 
procurement is above the following thresholds: USD 200,000 for goods; USD 1,000,000 for works or 
USD 100,000 for services. If the PCUs does not have the resources or experience to deal with 
international procurement they may hire procurement agent specializing in handling international 
procurement.  
146 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
49.  Estimated number of contracts is dominant but not sole factor that affect decision on selection 
of procurement method. Other issues should be also considered such as nature of procured goods or 
works, interest of international bidders, number of potential national suppliers and critical time of 
delivery. 
.
147 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Q.  Eighteen months procurement plan 
Table 4. Eighteen months procurement plan 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Unit cost 
(BAM) 
2019  
(BAM) 
2020  
(BAM) 
18 months  
(BAM) 
Expend. 
category 
Procurement  
method 
Responsible 
agency 
Part A - the Federation of BiH 
392,157 
0 
392,157 
1. 
1.1 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
H.1 
H.2 
I. 
J. 
J.1. 
J.2. 
J.3. 
1.2. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
1.3. 
A. 
A.1. 
A.2. 
15,686 
44,118 
98,309 
0 
33,333 
14,706 
7,843 
15,686 
14,706 
39,216 
lump sum 
3,137 
14,705 
19,607 
3,137 
333 
14,706 
per workshop 
lump sum 
lump sum 
per workshop 
person-day 
per fair 
Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains 
Development and implementation pro-poor business plans - FBiH 
Contracting of service provider to support the business 
plan development and implementation1 
Stakeholder sensitation and cluster level business plan 
workshops 2 
Quality assurance and certification support (co-financing) 
Contracting field officers for clusters 
BP implementation review and planning workshops 
Advisory services as BP implementation support  
Trade fair participation co-financing 
Study tours  
domestic 
abroad (co-financing) 
Other marketing support (co-financing) 
BP financing 
 Individual farmer starter packages (co-financing)3 
Starter packages for youth and women headed 
households (co-financing) 
Youth apprentice (co-financing) 
Farmer organization development - FBiH 
Training and business development assistance for FOs 
implementing BPs1 
Market linkage training and implementation support 
Exchange visit at domestic level 
Exchange visit in Europe 
Trainings 
FO seed capital financing3 
Targeted Infrastructure Development - FBiH 
Oversight, training and advisory services for infrastructure 
development4 
Preparation, selection and prioritization 
Design and formalization of project 
lump sum 
unit 
per trip 
per trip 
unit 
lump sum 
23,529 
19,608 
7,843 
15,686 
7,843 
49,019 
per trip 
per trip 
lump sum 
7,843 
15,686 
14,706 
lump sum 
lump sum 
1,562 
937 
3,921 
5.882 
lump sum 
unit 
unit 
3,922 
1,176,471 
470,588 
123,529 
141,176 
19,608 
7,843 
15,686 
7,843 
147,059 
65.635 
39.365 
23,529 
73,529 
147,464 
3,137 
50,000 
14,706 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
15,686 
31,372 
29,412 
TRAINING 
TRAINING 
TA 
QCBS 
International 
NS 
OTHER 
CQS 
NS 
QCBS 
FB 
NS 
NS 
NS 
7,843 
29,412 
49,155 
3,137 
16,667 
0 
7,843 
15,686 
14,706 
2,549,020 
3,725,491 
GRANTS 
ICB/NCB 
705,882 
185,924 
1,176,470 
308,823 
GRANTS 
GRANTS 
ICB/NCB 
OTHER 
0 
19,608 
0 
0 
7,843 
196,076 
141,176 
39,216 
7,843 
15,686 
15,686 
343,135 
TRAINING 
TA 
TRAINING 
TRS 
TRAINING 
GRANTS 
QCBS 
QCBS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
ICB/NCB 
65,482 
39,255 
TA 
TA 
QCBS 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
148 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Component/subcomponent 
Construction and commissioning 
Operation and maintenance  
Mainstreaming and assessments related to environment 
and climate change 
Infrastructure Investments5 
Irrigation infrastructure 
Cold storage facilities 
Rural roads 
Small bridges 
Storage and packing facilities 
Village water supply 
Rural markets 
Other small infrastructure proposed by municipalities 
Project coordination management - FBiH 
Investment cost 
A. Technical Assistance areas for PCU 
Project Start Up Workshop 
Comprehensive baseline study 
Annual Review and Planning Workshop 
Annual Project Assessment (interentity workshops) 
Project completion 
Annual Audit 
Technical Advisors/Consultants (national) 
Training Area 
Knowledge management workshops 
Training for PCU staff (external) 
Vehicles (procurement)  
Office Equipment and furniture 
Computers and accessories 
Photocopier 
Office Equipment and Furniture 
Telecommunications 
A.3. 
A.4. 
A.5. 
B. 
B.1. 
B.2. 
B.3. 
B.4. 
B.5. 
B.6. 
B.7. 
B.8. 
2 
I 
A. 
A.1. 
A.2. 
A.3. 
A.4. 
A.6. 
A.7. 
A.8. 
B. 
B1. 
B.2. 
C 
D. 
D.1. 
D.2. 
D.3. 
D.4. 
Unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
lump sum 
unit 
per annum 
per annum 
lump sum 
per annum 
per annum 
lump sum 
lump sum 
unit 
unit 
unit 
set 
set 
Unit cost 
(BAM) 
2019  
(BAM) 
2020  
(BAM) 
18 months  
(BAM) 
Expend. 
category 
Procurement  
method 
Responsible 
agency 
283,671 
15,357 
43,137 
748,235 
259,804 
277,247 
155,882 
207,843 
72,745 
239,020 
20,784 
9,724 
24,310 
9,726 
3,888 
0 
7,780 
4,863 
TA 
TA 
TA 
WORKS 
WORKS 
WORKS 
WORKS 
WORKS 
WORKS 
WORKS 
WORKS 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
5,098 
0 
233,371 
TRAINING 
TRAINING 
VEHICLES 
5,816  EQUIPMENT 
1,937  EQUIPMENT 
8,314  EQUIPMENT 
1,553  EQUIPMENT 
International 
NS 
NCB 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NCB 
NS 
NS 
QCBS 
NS 
NS 
QCBS 
QCBS 
QCBS 
QBS 
NCB 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
76,768 
366 
284,282 
15.400 
980 
41176 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
748,235 
259,.804 
277,247 
155,882 
207,843 
72,745 
239,020 
20,784 
9.724 
24.310 
4.863 
0 
0 
3.890 
0 
0 
0 
233,371 
5,816 
1,937 
8,314 
1,553 
0 
0 
4.863 
3.888 
0 
3.890 
4.863 
5,098 
0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
187,058 
259,803 
92,415 
155,882 
103,921 
72,745 
239,019 
20,784 
9.723 
24.309 
4.862 
3.888 
24.309 
3.890 
4.862 
5,098 
9,850 
77,780 
2,907 
968 
8,313 
776 
149 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Unit cost 
(BAM) 
2019  
(BAM) 
2020  
(BAM) 
18 months  
(BAM) 
Expend. 
category 
Procurement  
method 
Responsible 
agency 
II. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
C.1. 
C.2. 
C.3. 
Recurrent Costs 
PCU salary 
Field allowances 
Vehicle and equipment 
Vehicle O&M6 
Vehicles & Equipment insurance (CASCO) 
Vehicle Registration 
each 
per annum 
Per annum 
Per annum 
Per annum 
58,196 
11,667 
11,667 
2,916 
2,916 
116,392 
11,667 
11,667 
2,916 
2,916 
58,196 
5,833 
174,588 
17,500 
SALARIES 
SALARIES 
QBS 
OTHER 
5,833 
2,916 
2,916 
17,500 
5,832 
5,832 
O&M 
O&M 
O&M 
SSS  
NS 
SSS 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
150 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Unit cost 
(BAM) 
2019  
(BAM) 
2020  
(BAM) 
18 months  
(BAM) 
Expend. 
category 
Procurement  
method 
Responsible 
agency 
Part A - Republika Srpska 
1. 
1.1. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
H.1 
H.2 
I. 
J. 
J.1. 
J.2. 
J.3. 
1.2. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
1.3. 
A. 
A.4. 
A.5. 
B. 
B.1. 
B.2. 
27,451 
lump sum 
7,843 
15,686 
14,706 
per trip 
per trip 
lump sum 
3,137 
14,705 
19,607 
3,137 
333 
14,706 
per workshop 
lump sum 
lump sum 
per workshop 
person-day 
per fair 
Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains 
Development and implementation pro-poor business plans - RS 
Contracting of service provider to support the business 
plan development and implementation1 
Stakeholder sensitation and cluster level business plan 
workshops 2 
Quality assurance and certification support (co-financing) 
Contracting field officers for clusters 
BP implementation review and planning workshops 
Advisory services as BP implementation support  
Trade fair participation co-financing 
Study tours  
domestic 
abroad (co-financing) 
Other marketing support (co-financing) 
BP financing 
 Individual Farmer Starter packages (co-financing)3 
Starter packages for youth and women headed 
households (co-financing) 
Youth apprentice (co-financing) 
Farmer organization development - RS 
Training and business development assistance for FOs 
implementing BPs1 
Market linkage training and implementation support 
Exchange visit at domestic level 
Exchange visit in Europe 
Trainings 
FO seed capital financing3 
Targeted Infrastructure Development - RS 
Oversight, training and advisory services for infrastructure 
development 
Operation and maintenance  
Mainstreaming and assessments related to environment 
and climate change 
Infrastructure Investments5 
Irrigation infrastructure 
Cold storage facilities 
lump sum 
unit 
per trip 
per trip 
unit 
lump sum 
23,529 
19,608 
7,843 
15,686 
7,843 
49,019 
lump sum 
lump sum 
187,058 
259,803 
3,921 
5.882 
lump sum 
unit 
unit 
3,922 
367  
980 
unit 
unit 
15,686 
14,706 
98,309 
0 
16,667 
14,706 
7,843 
15,686 
14,706 
784,314 
313,725 
82,353 
141,176 
19,608 
7,843 
15,686 
7,843 
98,039 
109,804 
0 
109,804 
23,529 
29,412 
147,464 
3,137 
25,000 
14,706 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
15,686 
31,372 
29,412 
TRAINING 
TRAINING 
TA 
QCBS 
NS 
OTHER 
CQS 
NS 
QCBS 
FB 
NS 
NS 
NS 
7,843 
14,706 
49,155 
3,137 
8,333 
0 
7,843 
15,686 
14,706 
1,666,666 
2,450,980 
GRANTS 
ICB/NCB 
470,588 
123,530 
874,313 
205,883 
GRANTS 
TRAINING 
ICB/NCB 
QBS 
0 
19,608 
0 
0 
7,843 
147,057 
141,176 
39,216 
7,843 
15,686 
15,686 
245,096 
TRAINING 
TA 
TRAINING 
TRAINING 
TRAINING 
GRANTS 
QCBS 
QCBS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
ICB/NCB 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2,933 
7,843 
2,443 
6,863 
TA 
TA 
187,058 
259,.804 
187,058 
259,804 
WORKS 
WORKS 
QCBS 
QCBS 
NS 
NCB 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
151 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Component/subcomponent 
Rural roads 
Small bridges 
Storage and packing facilities 
Village water supply 
Rural markets 
Other small infrastructure proposed by municipalities 
Project coordination management - RS 
Investment cost 
A. Technical Assistance areas for APCU 
Project Start Up Workshop 
Comprehensive baseline study 
Annual Review and Planning Workshop 
Annual Project Assessment (interentity workshops) 
Project completion 
Annual Audit 
Technical Advisors/Consultants (national) 
Training Area 
Knowledge management workshops 
Training for APCU staff (external) 
Vehicles (procurement)  
Office Equipment and furniture 
Computers and accessories 
Photocopier 
Office Equipment and Furniture 
Telecommunications 
Recurrent Costs 
APCU salary 
Field allowances 
Vehicle and equipment 
Vehicle O&M6 
Vehicles & Equipment insurance (CASCO) 
Vehicle Registration 
B.3. 
B.4. 
B.5. 
B.6. 
B.7. 
B.8. 
2 
I 
A. 
A.1. 
A.2. 
A.3. 
A.4. 
A.6. 
A.7. 
A.8. 
B. 
B1. 
B.2. 
C 
D. 
D.1. 
D.2. 
D.3. 
D.4. 
II. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
C.1. 
C.2. 
C.3. 
Unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
lump sum 
unit 
per annum 
per annum 
lump sum 
per annum 
per annum 
lump sum 
lump sum 
unit 
unit 
unit 
set 
set 
each 
per annum 
Per annum 
Per annum 
Per annum 
Unit cost 
(BAM) 
2019  
(BAM) 
2020  
(BAM) 
18 months  
(BAM) 
Expend. 
category 
Procurement  
method 
Responsible 
agency 
92,415 
155,882 
103,921 
72,745 
239,019 
20,784 
6,788 
24.239 
2.908 
2,908 
24.309 
2,908 
3,878 
5,098 
2.670 
77,780 
2,907 
968 
8,313 
776 
58,196 
11,667 
11,667 
2,916 
2,916 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NCB 
NS 
NS 
QCBS 
NS 
NS 
QCBS 
QCBS 
QCBS 
QBS 
NCB 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
184,831 
155,882 
207,843 
0 
0 
20,784 
184.058 
155,882 
207,843 
0 
0 
20,784 
WORKS 
WORKS 
WORKS 
WORKS 
WORKS 
WORKS 
6,788 
24.239 
2.908 
0 
0 
2,908 
0 
0 
0 
233,371 
5,816 
1,937 
8,314 
1,553 
116,392 
11,667 
11,667 
2,916 
2,916 
0 
0 
2.908 
2,908 
0 
2,908 
3,878 
5,098 
0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
6,788 
24,239 
5,816 
2,908 
0 
5,806 
3.878 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
TA 
5,098 
0 
233,371 
TRAINING 
TRAINING 
VEHICLES 
5,816  EQUIPMENT 
1,937  EQUIPMENT 
8,314  EQUIPMENT 
1,553  EQUIPMENT 
58,196 
5,833 
174,588 
17,500 
SALARIES 
SALARIES 
CQS 
OTHER 
5,833 
2,916 
2,916 
17,500 
5,832 
5,832 
O&M 
O&M 
O&M 
SSS  
NS 
SSS 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
APCU 
PCU 
1  The assumption that the all services for the period of five years will be contracted at the beginning of the project. 
2  Based on the assumption that the each workshops will be procured singly. 
152 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Unit cost 
(BAM) 
2019  
(BAM) 
2020  
(BAM) 
18 months  
(BAM) 
Expend. 
category 
Procurement  
method 
Responsible 
agency 
Procurement of goods that are the subject of the grant will be grouped into several packages (dependence of the size of grouped packages their procurement may be a 
national or international). 
3 
4  All five subgroups of services within this sub-component will be procured at once. Because estimated value is higher than EUR 100,000 an international call should be used. 
5 
6 
The starting assumption that the works will be procured individually. In the case of grouping into larger procurement packages, procurement will be carried out using more competitive 
procurement methods. 
Single source selection method because in warranty period they are no available 3 or more authorized service suppliers. 
Procurement methods for goods and works: 
Procurement methods for non-consultancy services: 
International competitive biding 
ICB 
NCB  National competitive biding 
NS  National shopping 
QCBS  quality and cost-based selection 
QBS  quality based selection 
CQS 
FB 
consultant quality selection 
fix budget 
SSS   Single source selection 
OTHER  Other procurement method 
153 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
A. 
Introduction  
This section describes the assumptions underlying the derivation of project costs, estimated 
1. 
project costs and financing plan. The project costs are based on parameters collected during the initial 
design mission in July 2017 and final design mission that took place on October/November 2017. The 
key parameters are presented below: 
Project Duration. The implementation period of the Rural Enterprises and Agricultural 
2. 
Development Project is estimated at 5 years.  
3. 
Price contingencies. Price contingencies aim to cover expected price increase between 
project preparation and project start up as well as throughout the project implementation period. 
Foreign inflation has been assumed at 2.2% and local inflation at 1.5%. 
Physical contingencies aim to cover uncertainties related to units’ costs. They are assumed 
4. 
at 5%, and they are applied only in production and infrastructure investments.  
Taxes. The levels of taxes in the unit costs were estimated to include Governmental duties and 
5. 
taxes. Most costs items include VAT, which account for 17%. As per IFAD rules and regulations, local 
VAT and import taxes are considered as a contribution to project costs by the Government of Bosnia 
and Herzegovina (see financing tables). The Value Added Tax (VAT) applies to virtually all expenditure 
categories except international technical assistance, and staff allowances. An average amount of 17% 
VAT is included for all vehicles and equipment, training and workshops, studies (realized by a service 
provider) funded with IFAD funds.  
6. 
B. 
Exchange Rate. The exchange rate used in the analysis is fixed at 1 EUR=1.96 BAM.  
Total Cost 
Total Project Cost including physical and price contingencies are estimated at 27.683 EUR 
7. 
million (54.259 BAM million) over a 5-year period. Component 1 on ‘Enhancement of economic 
opportunities and smallholder integration in value chains’ is the main investment component 
representing 26.184 EUR million (51.321 BAM million) of total project costs. Component 2 covers the 
costs for ‘Project Coordination and Management’, represent 1.499 EUR million (2.938 BAM million) of 
the total project costs. A complete set of summary and detailed cost tables are attached in Appendix 
9. 
Table 1. Project Costs by Components (EUR) 
To enable easy monitoring of progress, the below graph forecast the expected disbursement 
per year. This will allow us continuously track progress during supervisor and follow up mission.  
155 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
READP- Expected Disbursment (000 
EURO) 
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
expected disbursment
(000 EURO)
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
C. 
Project Financing 
A total of 11.787 EUR million (23.102 BAM million) of IFAD-financing is expected to be 
8. 
mobilized for READP over the five-year implementation period. The IFAD loans will be used to co-
finance: (a) Component 1; and to fully finance (b) Component 2 on Programme Management i.g. the 
Project Coordination Units in both Entities. The project will co-finance (c) Business Proposals (BPs) 
implemented under sub-component 1.1 (c) FO seed capital financing implemented under sub-
component 1.2 as well as (c) to enabling infrastructure development implemented under sub-
component 1.3. 
9. 
The overall Project is expected to be financed according to the following allocation: (a) 43% 
from IFAD loans; (b) 9% from Municipalities; (c) 10% from Beneficiaries; (d) 1% from FO; (e) 22% 
from private sector and (f) 15% from Government. 
The Government of BiH will finance taxes and duties on imported goods, and Value Added Tax 
10. 
(VAT) for a total amount of 4.229 EUR million (8.289 BAM million). The amount of taxes will be the 
contribution of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.  
156 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 2: Project Components by Financiers (EUR) 
157 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 3. Expenditure Accounts by Financiers (EUR) 
158 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 4: Expenditure accounts by components – totals including contingencies (EUR) 
159 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
1. 
Introduction 
READP’s goal is to contribute to rural economic development and poverty reduction by 
1. 
improving livelihood, generating revenue and enhancing the living standards of target households. 
READP’s development objective is to increase the income of rural poor households and rural youth by 
engaging them in profitable agribusiness and employment opportunities. READP will unlock new rural 
business opportunities by better connecting and integrating farms, farmers’ organisation and 
agribusinesses to commercial markets. It will create new avenues for self, salaried and wage 
employments for beneficiaries.  
Project target group and main beneficiaries are rural poor and extremely poor households in 
2. 
selected areas defined as clusters. READP will support 4-Ps (Producer, Private, Public, Partnerships) 
based business models that increase the income of the target households by developing profitable 
marketing linkages between them and sustainable agribusinesses. The entry point of READP 
investments will be pro-poor business plans (BP) developed collaboratively by business leaders 
(agribusiness and FOs) and other private, public and producer partners facilitated by the project.  
The pro-poor BPs will describe the business model and partnership needs for profitably linking 
3. 
the target households to agribusinesses based on marketing opportunities for the selected produce. 
The selection of the produce will be market-led mainly from the fruit and vegetable, MAPS/NTFPs and 
dairy sub-sector.  
Expected Project Benefits 
The achievement of the project objectives at the end of the project will be measured by the 
4. 
following indicators, (i) At least 8,650 households or around 25,000 household members have 
benefited from the project services (ii) At least 80% of the direct beneficiaries (8,650) have increased 
their income by at least 30% (iii) Assets of the beneficiary households have increased by at least 25% 
(iv) At least 4,500 full time jobs (or equivalent) created leading to stable income for enhanced food 
security and sustainable livelihood of target households (v) At least 75% of supported rural enterprises 
reporting an increase in sales through 4P arrangements (vi) At least 80% of beneficiaries reporting 
increase in production (vii) At least 80% increase in contracts between public and private entities (viii) 
at least 80% members reporting new or improved services provided by their organisations and (ix) at 
least 5,000 households reporting improved physical access to markets, processing and storage 
facilities. 
Target groups 
READ direct beneficiaries will be rural poor population, men, women and youth. The project 
5. 
would target 8,650 direct beneficiaries over a period of 5 years, providing support to the target groups 
of the very poor and poor, and support greater participation in targeted value chains. In order to reach 
the target group READP will adopt (i) geographical targeting measures to reach those areas with 
higher concentration of targeted households; (ii) self-targeting means by selecting crops and 
enterprises suitable enough and of interest to the target groups; (iii) direct targeting actions to include 
rural youth and women headed households. 
The programme areas is selected based on geographical targeting approach. It will consist of 
6. 
10 clusters (five each in FBiH and RS) with an average of 9 municipalities per cluster. Details of the 
targeting strategy is presented in the targeting section of the PDR and in Appendix 2.  
2. 
Financial analysis 
Methodology. The aim of the financial analysis is to examine the financial viability and 
7. 
incentives for the Project target group as a result of their engagement in Project activities.  
161 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
8. 
Twelve financial models were developed: (i) strawberry; (ii) raspberry; ; (iii) cherry & 
strawberry; (iv) gherkin; (v) pepper; (vi) tomato; (vii) honey production; (viii) livestock/milk production 
3-5 cows (ix) livestock/milk production 5-10 cows; (x) marigold; (xi) mint; and (xii) wild mushrooms. In 
addition roads, cold storage and irrigation system models have been developed. The greenhouse 
production has not been considered due to the high initial investment cost needed per beneficiary.  
With and without project scenarios: The analysis compares a “without project” and “with 
9. 
project” situation for one dunum (1000 m²) of land.  
 
 
“Without project” scenario has been calculated based on the prevailing traditional average 
potato production. The WOP scenario considers production of average 1.8 tons of potato 
annually resulting in gradual increase in income due to the required investment. ( e.g. 
purchasing potato beetle and in the first few years more days needed for the total labour). 
“Without project” scenario has been adjusted for purpose of the comparison to “with 
project”. The adjustment is made taking into consideration number of labour working days 
needed in those two scenarios. It has been taken net income on 1 dunum/year divided by 
the number of labour working days needed for the potato production (12 days) and 
multiplied with the number of labour working days needed for the “with project” crop 
scenario.  
  The net income for Without Project scenario (e.g. in our case Potato), shows gradual 
increase in yield and revenues (e.g. 1st year 345 BAM/dunum, 2nd year 350 
BAM/dunum, 3rd year 380 BAM/dunum, etc.).  
Project support includes co-financed starter packages for production on one dunum. Most 
10. 
smallholders are producing between 1 and 2 dunum of fruits and vegetables, depending on the type 
of product, market access and availability of family labour and suitable land. 
11. 
Project Target Beneficiaries. The broad target group for the Project will be non-commercial 
farmers of the four sub-sectors a) fruit; b) vegetables; c) NTFP/MAPs and d) dairy. The final decision 
on the value chains will be market-led. The Project will have a poverty focus and it is estimated that 
the number of beneficiaries directly supported with starter packages for production will be 8,300. In 
addition, 350 beneficiaries will be supported through youth apprentice activities. 
Sources. The following source of information gathered during the initial design mission have 
12. 
been used to set up the analysis: a) interviews with farmers and cooperatives; b) other donors 
involved in the sector, in particular projects financed by USAID, GIZ, Oxfam Italia; these development 
partners are involved in value chain development. Information on labour and input requirements for 
various operations, capital costs, prevailing wages, yields, farm gate and market prices of 
commodities, input and farm-to-market transport costs were collected in the field respectively provided 
by the PCUs. Conservative assumptions were made both for inputs and outputs in order to take 
account of possible risks.  
13.  Opportunity Cost of Capital. A discount rate of 11% has been used in this analysis to assess 
the viability and robustness of the investments and in order to consider the profitability of the foreseen 
investments with market alternatives. The selected value is calculated as an average of the actual 
market interest rate on loans, which is 7% and microfinance institutions interest rates, which is around 
15%. 
162 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 11. Financial Analysis 
163 
 Strawberries  Raspberries  Strawberries+Cherries \a PepperGherkinsTomato Livestock/milk production , 2-5 cowsLivestock/milk production, 5-10 cowsHoney Production, 50 hives MarigoldMintMushroomsPY1(472)(3,592)(3,688)(125)(505)(350)(3,004)(18,882)(6,973)(109)(459)1,119PY21,808603382255467(70)(2,560)1,858(5,679)322111,119PY31,7681,173(58)1,0756755501,4401,8581,75032811,119PY4282,1031871,0757475501,4401,8581,750323311,119PY51,8081,9232,5471,0756355501,4401,8581,750322011,119PY61,7682,1034,7371,0757475509661,8581,750323311,119PY7286734,6771,0757475509651,8581,750322011,119PY81,8088534,9371,0756755509641,8581,750323311,119PY9..1,7686734,6771,0757475509631,8581,750322011,119PY20288534,9371,0756755509521,8581,750323311,11911,6955,47544,5179,5536,1564,4454,4943003,8992031,97111,8525,9672,79322,7134,8743,1412,2682,2931531,9891041,0066,047-32%39%-114%79%18%7%11%29%45%-1.92.02.12.51.61.41.51.41.11.71.8-MAP Model's net incremental benefits ( in "000 BAM) PRODUCTIONFARM MODELSMAP MODELSFruit model 'net incremental benefits ( 01  ha)                                                                                                   ( in "000 of BAM)Vegetable model'net incremental benefits (0.1 ha)   ( in "000 of BAM)Milk Production's net incremental benefits (0.1 ha ( in "000 of BAM)  NPV (BAM)    NPV (EUR)  FINANCIAL ANALYSIS  FIRR (@7%)   B/C  
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Summary results from crop models and Key Assumptions. Incremental net income as 
16. 
shown in Table 11 is the difference between current (WOP scenario) and assumed farmer income and 
yield revenues received due to the project. Incremental net income of all fruits, vegetables, MAPs and 
milk/livestock models vary from year to year due to the described investments. The summary results 
of the crop models and the key assumptions are presented below; 
  Marigold, Mint, Raspberry, Gherkin, Pepper, Tomato, Honey Production and Milk 
Production is showing gradual increase in yield. 
  Strawberry and cherry: Concept for the intercropping mechanism of strawberry and cherry 
has been developed in the following way: First three years of strawberry production, in 
order to have continuous income while waiting for the cherry trees few years gradual 
increase in yield. Strawberry for the first three years shows gradual increase, however 
keeping in mind that the best yield for ad hoc strawberry given within 1 year. Although first 
year shows the best yield (e.g. strawberry), later on yield gradually decreases and this has 
been taken into consideration  
  Mint: Yield for the first few years gradually increase for Mint. However incremental net 
income in some years is lower due to the costs of additional inputs mainly manure. 
  Raspberry: Raspberry shows gradual increase in yield, except where in 7th year when 
decrease in yield occurs due to the old seeds. In 9th year investment in new seeds is 
made again resulting in gradual increase in yield. 
  Gherkin: Gherkin shows gradual increase in yield, however due to the wire investment 
every second year slightly lower income is reflected. 
  Pepper shows gradual increase in yield. 
  Tomato shows gradual increase in yield, income as well.  
  Honey production shows gradual increase in yield, (e.g training, purchasing hives and 
equipment gradually each year.) 
  Milk production, shows gradual increase in yield due to the gradual investment needed 
(e.g. purchasing cows) 
17.  With reference to Table 11 on Financial Analysis, the crop models are based on the following 
underlying assumptions: 
18.  Open Field Crop Models - Fruits:  
Strawberry: Financial incremental income varies due to necessary investment costs every 
19. 
third year (e.g. seeds). Strawberry is type of crop where investments in new plantation are required 
every third year; thus variation in income varies consequently. The highest yield is achieved at the first 
year upon planting seeds. However, due to the relatively higher investment costs in the first year the 
incremental net benefit from strawberry cultivation is limited to BAM -472. Initial investment and 
operations costs are covered from READP starter packages, household cash flows and pre-finance 
option from buyer. Positive cash flow is achieved. Income from yield due to intercropping mechanism 
is able to repay the pre-financing part in the next year. 
Raspberries: Main investment costs (e.g. seeds, operating costs) occur with planation at 
20. 
production start, resulting in negative income in the first year. Income varies from year to year due to 
the assumption of yield variations year by year. Project will assess sources of IFAD starter package, 
municipality subsidy and household cash flows or pre-finance option to cover initial investment and 
operational costs, however at the cash flow analysis it has been reflected that farmers due to the 
intercropping mechanism yield could repay back the pre-financing part in the next two years 
21. 
Strawberry and cherry: Intercropping mechanism with strawberries allows farmers to 
generate income already in the first three years on the land under cherry production. Cherry fruit tree 
are assumed to reach first significant harvest in 3rd to 4th year. Therefore to achieve continuous 
income strawberry intercropping has been taken into consideration in the model for the first three year 
164 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
only. Investment costs in cherries are comparable high; the crop model is based on imported high 
quality seedlings from Turkey with a price of BAM 24/seedling. The variety chosen is known for high 
yields and high market demand ensuring good selling price. The market price for cherries can reach 
BAM 3.00 per kg, thus cherries are a very promising crop when market access is assured. Fruit tree 
such as cherry yield for at least 20 years therefore is considered as suitable longer-term investment. 
Project will assess sources of household cash flows or pre-finance option to cover initial investment 
and operational costs, however at the cash flow analysis it has been reflected that farmers due to the 
intercropping mechanism yield could repay back the pre-financing part in the next two years 
22.  Open Field Crop Models: Vegetables  
Pepper: Gradual increase in yield has been taken into consideration, later on, achieving 
23. 
3 tonnes per year with constant 0.95 BAM price. Pepper has low initial investment costs. As annual 
crop pepper provides yields and income within the first year. Project will assess sources of IFAD 
farmer package. 
24.  Gherkin: Income from gherkins varies due to necessary investment in wiring every second 
year. It has been assumed in the model to replace the wire required for gherkins instead of each year 
every second year. Gherkins main production is based on three classes (e.g. ratio among three 
classes: 70/20/10). Based on the class type prices vary from 1.20 BAM to 0.20 BAM. Project will 
assess sources of IFAD starter packages, municipalities subsidy and household cash flows or pre-
finance option to cover initial investment and operational costs, however at the cash flow analysis it 
has been reflected that farmers due to the intercropping mechanism yield could repay back the pre-
financing part in the next year 
Tomato: tomato model has been based on gradual increase in yields over years. In the 
25. 
financial model, beyond investing in irrigation, With project situation invests on better quality seeds 
that allow farmers to produce higher yields than in the without project situation. Project will assess 
sources of IFAD farmers package, Municipalities subsidy and household cash flow or pre-finance 
scenario, however at the cash flow analysis it has been reflected that farmers due to the intercropping 
mechanism yield could repay back the pre-financing part in the next year. 
26. 
Livestock/Milk Production Model:  
Livestock/Milk Production: In average 3 and 5 cows have been assumed for these farm 
27. 
models. Revenues will arrive from milk and calf sales together with current paid subsidies. Milk 
production has been estimated for a period of 6 years in relation to cow lifecycle period. Negative 
incremental income at the first year is due to the higher investment costs (e.g. purchasing cows); 
however already at the second year income is positive. Project will assess sources of household cash 
flows or pre-finance option to cover initial investment and operational costs, however at the cash flow 
analysis it has been reflected that farmers due to the intercropping mechanism yield could repay back 
the pre-financing part in the next two years 
28.  Wild Mushrooms and others MAP: 
Honey production: 50 hives has been assumed per family. High first year investment cost is 
29. 
due to the bee hives purchase together with further equipment costs for honey production. In the 
northern part of the country prices per kg honey are up to 15 BAM while in the southern part of BiH 
the price is at 10 BAM/kg. In the model an average price of 12.5 BAM/kg is considered. Subsidies of 
BAM 4,90 per beehive have been taken into account.  
30.  Marigold: Gradual increase in yield per year has been taken into consideration; with constant 
average 1 BAM price. Marigold has low initial investment costs. As annual crop marigold provides 
yields and income within the first year. It has been assumed that half of the seeds purchased first year 
will be reused at the next year seedlings (planting), hence, instead of 800 grams next year will be 
purchased only half ( 400 grams) and so on. Project will assess sources of IFAD farmer package. 
165 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
31.  Mint: It is 2 years plant with the highest yield reached every second year. It has been taken 
into consideration, gradual increase in yield while the price remained the constant average of 0.60 
BAM price. Project will assess sources of IFAD farmer package. 
32.  Wild mushrooms (boletus/porcini/penny bun): With organized trainings, and materials 
received (e.g. brochures), project is targeting current and future collectors within BiH. Currently, at the 
national territory it has been estimated to be 4000 collectors, each of them optimally picking wild 
mushrooms up to 600 kg/yearly. It has been calculated that half of those collectors are selling fresh 
wild mushrooms, while the other half is selling them in dried shape. In order to get 1 kg of dried wild 
mushrooms, there is a need of 10kg the fresh ones. Prices across fresh and dried wild mushrooms 
enormously vary, with average fresh wild mushrooms between 6-8 BAM/kg and dried ones reaching 
prices between 60-100 BAM.  
33. 
Total revenue has been assumed based on average yield and crop price per kg ; average net 
income has been presented on 1 dunum/BAM. Net income before labour costs and after labour costs 
taken from 5th year is also shown in table 13. .Production, including investment, operating and labour 
costs are reflecting initial first year costs. Market prices of fruits, vegetables and MAPs can fluctuate 
as horticulture is typically characterized by volatile market prices year by year. However, with modern 
technologies and strong market linkages, organized smallholders will be competitive in the targeted 
subsectors, even in an EU market context. 
34. 
Summary results of the crop models 
Table 12. Main Assumption and Shadow Prices 
35. 
Profitability results: A summary of the results is presented in Tables 12 to 13 below. All 
financial models indicate that profitability of the targeted interventions is good; benefits/costs ratio for 
all models is robust and viable and ranges between 1.1 to 2.5 for the different crop models (details is 
table 12 below). It can be concluded that investments and diversification in the fruits, vegetables, MAP 
and livestock subsectors provide the required leverage to reduce rural poverty and to improve 
financial viability of small farm holdings in BiH. These results are valid in areas where (i) linkages to 
buyers are ensured and farmers adopt the required technologies to obtain targeted yields, as outlined 
in the business plans; (ii) farmers have access to the co-financed starter packages.  
As shown in Table 13 and 14, all financial models present a positive NPV and positive internal 
36. 
rates of return. By looking at the NPV’s figures, the highest one is intercropping mechanism of 
cherries and strawberries, strawberries, paprika and wild mushrooms. Production of intercropped 
cherries and strawberries gives NPV of 30,126 BAM per dunum; due to the higher robust cherries 
price at the market jointly with strawberries production included at the initial three years in order to 
166 
MAIN ASSUMPTIONS & SHADOW PRICESPrice (EUR)Input pricesPrice (EUR)Strawberry1.02Fertilizer2.30Raspberry1.28Pesticides 15.31Cherry1.28Rural wage \p.d.15.31Pepper0.48Irrigation cost ( 1dunum)153.06Gherkin0.61Tomato0.64Honey 6.38Milk0.28Marigold0.51Mint0.31Fresh Mushrooms (boletus)3.5740.82Output (kg or l)Dried Mushrooms(boletus)FINANCIALOfficial Exchange rate (OER)1.96Discount rate (opportunity cost of capital)11%Shadow Exchange rate (SER)2.01Output conversion factor1.18Standard Conversion Factor 1.03Input Conversion factor0.85Labour Conversion factor0.85ECONOMIC 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
achieve continuous income. Among the vegetables cultivated in the open field, paprika has the 
highest NPV – 9,553 BAM per dunum due to the low investments inputs/prices. Wild Mushrooms NPV 
of 11,852 BAM is due to the low investment costs and robust prices for fresh and dried mushrooms. 
Initial cost of production: For all financial models of fruits cultivated in the open field, total 
37. 
costs of production (investment and inputs) in year 1 vary between 2,360 and 7,160 BAM per dunum. 
Cherry production has higher investment costs due to the high quality seeds needed for the purpose 
of optimizing higher yield production activities. Vegetables total costs of production vary between 
1,084 BAM and 2,651 BAM. Pepper has the lowest initial costs due to the low seeds prices at the 
market. MAPs initial production costs vary between 9,808 for honey production and 53 BAM 
mushrooms. Purchase of 50 beehives considered at the first few years is reflected in higher initial 
costs. Wild Mushrooms costs are very limited mainly in the form of collectors’ trainings and brochure 
costs. 
Return on family labour: The cost of seasonal labour in rural BiH is 30 BAM/day. The crop 
38. 
models are based exclusively on family labour, since small land plots up to a family can manage two 
dunum. The return for the family labour in the financial models is profitable varying between 49 BAM 
and 175 BAM/day. Again evidence that investments in the targeted subsectors contribute to poverty 
reduction.  
39. 
Results from individual crop models 
40. 
Strawberry & Cherry Crop Models: Cherry with high value seeds is promising for under 
condition that market is assured and price per kg remained robust. At present, cherry prices can reach 
up to 3 BAM/kg due to high demand from export markets. Although cherries require high investment 
costs and first harvest will start after three years, market demand is growing and wholesalers and 
exporters are willing to pay interesting farm gate prices such as 3 BAM/kg. Intercropping with 
strawberries is improving the income situation to bridge the first three years without harvest. This 
results in a net income of 5,035 BAM/dunum (year 5).  
Raspberry Crop Models: Among the promising fruits in BiH is still raspberry, although prices 
41. 
dropped in 2017 after high yields in the main exporting countries and still filled cold storage of local 
exporters being less competitive due to high prices paid to producers in 2016. With quality seedlings, 
drip irrigation and appropriate technology and crop husbandry, yields of 1.2 to 1.5 tonnes per dunum 
can be achieved already from the second year. Prices of raspberry were quite good from 2007 to 
2016, between 1.60 BAM and 3.20 BAM per kg. In 2017, the average price will most probably not 
exceed 2.20 BAM/kg. However, the coming years a recovery of the price is to be expected. The 
financial model shows that raspberry production in BiH is profitable in case prices are higher than 1.50 
BAM/kg. The price in the model is based on 2,50 BAM/kg. Smallholders are expected to be still eager 
to invest in raspberry production because: (i) a net income of 4,535 BAM/dunum (in year 5) is 
attractive in rural BiH; (ii) the market is volatile but with the presence of wholesale buyer in the area 
still guaranteed; (iii) almost optimal yields are obtained from year 2 onwards for almost 10 years; (iv) 
operational costs, except for family labour, are low after the initial investment; (v) production is based 
on family labour. The financial profitability indicators are attractive: return to family labour is 113 
BAM/day.  
42.  Gherkin Crop Models: production of gherkins crop for processing as pickles is developing 
rapidly in BiH and it is the very promising crop, among the vegetables open field production, according 
to our financial indicators. Gherkins are annual crops, which are quite labour intensive. The production 
cost consists mainly of family labour. Wholesale buyers are developing out-grower schemes and are 
currently guaranteeing buying the entire production, which results in interesting farm gate prices (1.20 
BAM per kg for grade I). Strong demand results in a net income of 2,606 BAM/dunum.  
Pepper Crop Model: The highest NPV of 9,553 BAM/dunum among vegetables in the models; 
43. 
the low initial investment costs and constant robust yield across years. B/C ratio of 2.5 and return to 
family labour of 100 BAM. 
167 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Tomato Crop Model: Considered as gradual increase in yield across years with NPV of 4,445 
44. 
and B/C ratio of 1.5.  
Dairy Model. Milk production model with 3 cows estimation shows average net income of 
45. 
5,713 BAM and milk production with 5 cows is estimated with average net income of 9,489 BAM. 
Additional revenues come from yearly calf sales, included in our analysis. B/C ratio varies from 1.4 to 
1.5.  
46.  MAP model. With project support it is expected to support target group farmers to invest in 
cultivation of selected MAPs to allow more constant income from MAPs. Models are developed for 
marigold, mint, honey production and wild mushrooms ( e.g. boletus).  
Medicinal  and  aromatic  plants  substantially  contribute  to  the  national  and  local  economy  of  the 
country  with  700  different  species  out  of  which  200  or  29%  are  used  for  commercial  purposes. 
Diversity  of  climate  and  vegetation,  clean  environment  and  tradition  are  good  preconditions  for  the 
production of high quality raw materials, essential oils and different herbal products.  
Herbs are accounting about 20% of total exports within national MAPs sector, while recent trends of 
cultivation is noticed for plants such as mint, marigold, lavender, chamomile, lemon, balm, basil and 
immortelle.  
47. 
Honey model. Initial Honey production (investment and operating costs) for 50 in the first two 
years are due to the purchasing hives and equipment needed. Honey production with capacity of 50 
hives presents net income of 2,631 BAM ( year 5). Honey production of 50 hives has net present 
value of 3,899 BAM. 
48.  Marigold: At the initial costs needed (investment and operational) it has been assumed that 
every year needed to seeds marigolds at the while half of the seeds bought first year has been reused 
at the next year planning, therefore instead of 800 grams has been bought only 400 grams for the 
second year. NPV is 203 BAM, net income 354BAM/dunum, B/C ratio 1.74 and return to family labour 
70.80 BAM. Marigold has low initial costs of 286BAM/dunum.  
49.  Mint: Initial investment and operating costs are low, accounting for 690 BAM. NPV value in the 
amount of 1,971, B/C ratio 1.75 and return to family labour 145 BAM.  
The calculations in Table 12 are based on an average yield kg/dunum assumed in our model 
50. 
analysis. Production, including investment, operating and labour costs has been presented in Table 12 
reflecting initial first year costs. Total net income taken from 5th year has been assumed based on 
average yield and crop price per kg.
168 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 13: Financial profitability indicators (2017) 
Model  
Strawberry 
Raspberry 
Cherry+Strawb
erry \a 
Gherkin 
Pepper 
Tomato  
Honey 
Production  
Marigold 
Net present 
value 
BAM/dunum 
Internal 
Rate of 
Return (%) 
11,695 
5,475 
30,126 
6,156 
9,553 
4,445 
3,899 
203 
- 
32% 
39% 
114% 
- 
79% 
11% 
29% 
B/C 
Ratio 
1.92 
2.00 
2.12 
1.62 
2.50 
1.43 
1.09 
1.74 
Return to 
family labour 
(BAM/day) 
Average Revenue 
per year 
BAM/dunum 
Average Net 
Income per year 
BAM/Dunum 
Net income (after 
labour costs (year 
5) BAM/dunum 
Net income 
(after labour 
costs) (year 
5) 
Average 
Incremental 
Income 
BAM/dunum 
Incremental 
income, (year 
5) 
BAM/dunum 
89.70 
113.38 
162.09 
82.13 
100.22 
79.23 
175.43 
70.80 
4,985 
3,763 
7,710 
3,920 
2,850 
3,850 
7,130 
3,860 
3,860 
6,718 
2,519 
2,511 
2,069 
1,824 
4,485 
4,535 
5,035 
2,628 
2,606 
2,139 
2,631 
354 
3,135 
3,155 
4,075 
1,556 
1,826 
1,329 
2,181 
1,148 
687 
3,595 
747 
1,075 
474 
942 
25 
1,808 
1,808 
2,547 
635 
1,075 
550 
1,750 
32 
- 
- 
580 
445 
347 
1.75 
45% 
4,494 
1,971 
79.09 
11,852 
145.00 
Mint 
Wild 
Mushrooms ( 
boletus/porcini) 
Livestock 
Production, 3- 
5 cows 
Livestock 
Production, 5-
10 cows 
Livestock 
Production, 3- 
5 cows 
Livestock 
Production, 5-
10 cows 
a\ intercropping mechanism: strawberries production assumed for the first three years at 1 dunum where yielded fruit trees( e.g., cherries) ,so beneficiaries might have continuous income while waiting for fruit tress to bring first 
19,600 
11,760 
7,435 
4,344 
2,700 
48.91 
9,489 
9,489 
48.91 
4,350 
8,452 
4,930 
4,350 
5,713 
4,350 
1,119 
51.87 
5,713 
51.87 
18% 
1.38 
1.37 
1.52 
1.38 
460 
204 
690 
485 
300 
511 
300 
821 
657 
457 
221 
821 
7% 
7% 
8% 
331 
1,858 
1,440 
1,119 
1,858 
1,440 
yield production. 
169 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 14: Financial analysis of crop budget ( 2017) 
Model  
Strawberry  
Raspberry  
Cherry+Strawberry 
Gherkin  
Pepper 
Tomato 
Honey Production* 
Marigold 
Mint 
Wild Mushrooms, Boletus 
(Porcini)*** 
Milk Production, 3- 5 cows ( l)* 
Milk Production, 5-10 cows ( 
l)* 
Average Yield 
kg/dunum* 
Production & investment cost, including 
labour (year 1) BAM/dunum 
Average Production & 
investment cost, including 
labour BAM/dunum 
2,493 
1,505 
2,746 
4,000 
2,900 
2,800 
625 
445 
1,150 
330 
6,480 
10,800 
3,945 
2,360 
7,160 
2,624 
1,084 
2,651 
9,808 
286 
690 
53 
10,491 
30,851 
2,510 
1,844 
2,587 
2,305 
1,030 
2,597 
5,306 
248 
340 
53 
6,830 
11,148 
*1 where applicable dunum terminology 
**1 Honey production is not related to the dunum-limited capacity, but on 50 hives 
*** not related to the dunum capacity , rather on the average collected mushrooms ( e.g. boletus) per year/per one collector-as 
per current situation in BiH-data taken upon discussion with PCU/APCU staff. Where written average production costs, it relates 
to the training costs and small operational costs per one collector needed 
51. 
Road Model: Project will finance 16 km of the rural roads at the targeted clusters.  
According to the scenario assumptions: (i) 50% of all targeted beneficiaries production will be 
52. 
transported via rural roads (ii) in case of current rural traffic infrastructure it has been assumed 15% of 
losses of the production value will occur due to the non-adequate condition of roads; (iii) in case of 
improved condition, losses will drop to 2%; (iv) benefits of road improvement is estimated as a saved 
value of 13% less losses in the amount of 620 million/BAM; and(v) return of investments is considered 
to be achieved at third year. 
Irrigation Model: Project will finance 11 irrigation systems at the targeted clusters, each 
53. 
having 80 ha capacity. It has been assumed per one irrigation system in total 220 direct beneficiaries 
who receive starter packages from the project and 47 indirect ones. Total number of beneficiaries for 
all 11 irrigation systems is estimated to be 2420 direct beneficiaries and 513 indirect ones. (Assuming 
our direct farmers has on average 1 to 5 dunums, and that they will irrigate all of the arable land than 
the utilisation capacity of the irrigation system will be 82.5%, leaving space for other indirect farmers 
to benefit from the irrigation system). It has been estimated that total investment costs could be 
returned within 7 years under assumption that targeted farmers without irrigation system could yield 
less around 10-30%, while with investment scenario could bring additional value due to the irrigation 
system.  
Additional value has been calculated upon increasing average yield/capacity due to the 
54. 
irrigation system for 10-30% (e.g. depending on the crop) and deducting operational variable costs 
needed for such activity; (e.g. total consumption cost per m3 of water used for irrigation equates the 
price of water consumed for irrigation in agriculture with the marginal cost of making it available for 
use. The marginal cost of an additional unit includes delivery costs (in BiH, the main cost is electricity 
cost for pumping the water from the water source to the reservoir), costs of building, maintaining and 
operating the infrastructure to make the unit available (this includes the labour cost at the Water User 
Association, which is responsible for managing the irrigation system i.e. recording water use per 
farmer). Our model assumes that pump station, reservoirs and primary water supply pipeline for 
170 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
irrigation have already been completed. In BiH, these primary irrigation infrastructures have been 
completed through the WB project.  
Cold storages Model: Project will finance 28 cold storage and packing facilities at the 
55. 
targeted clusters. Following crops have been selected for the overall usage of those cold storage 
facilities: strawberries, raspberries, fresh wild mushrooms, gherkins, peppers, tomatoes and mints 
.Each cold storage at our model has 100 tonnes capacity with the possibility to achieve yearly 
turnovers up to 590 tonnes. Under assumption that our selected farmers is supplying to the facilities 
50% of his/her average annual yield/dunum, total amount of stored capacity is able to reach full 
capacity of the annual turnover. Based on the above selected crops and under scenario that targeted 
farmers will supply to the facilities half of his/her average yearly yield/dunum; it has been estimated 
5400 direct beneficiaries who will receive starter packages to be able to stored their yearly average 
total production of crops at the purchased 10 cold storage facilities. It has been taken into 
consideration at least 5% higher crop price sold by the farmers due to the supplying to the facilities. 
Total additional value due to the better price for 5400 targeted farmers is 350.91 BAM making possible 
to return investment on the purchasing facilities within 7.5 years. 
Youth Apprentice Model: 350 direct youth beneficiaries could benefit out of the project. Social 
56. 
benefit per one youth is calculated on the yearly basis in the amount of 10.3 thousand/BAM, where 
social costs covered due to the project is 6,000 BAM. Difference across social benefit/yearly and 
social costs covered by the project is presenting incremental net benefit in the amount of 4,296 BAM 
per youth. Finally, total incremental benefit for all 350 youths is estimated to be 1.5 million/BAM.  
Table 15. Number of beneficiaries related to the Infrastructure: 
No. of Beneficiaries 
Direct Beneficiaries 
Indirect Beneficiaries 
Irrigation 
Systems 
2,420 
513 
Cold Storages 
5400 
- 
C.  Benefits and Beneficiaries 
57. 
The main benefits of the Project would be:  
 i.
 ii.
iii.
iv.
 v.
Expansion of acreage of fruits and vegetables, increase of honey and dairy production for 
domestic and export markets; the promotion of agribusiness agreements and market linkages 
would enhance competitiveness of the targeted households and ensure sustainability; 
Increased revenues for some 8650 target households as direct beneficiaries, who would 
develop or upgrade their dairy, fruit, vegetable production and youth apprentice activities;  
Support to the fruit and vegetable sub-sectors would lead to increased production earnings; 
additional production of fruits and vegetables from the targeted groups of the 3400 farmers 
within each category is estimated at (i) 10.2 tonnes per year (latest at year 5), with a value of 
1,6 billion BAM per year; (ii) MAPs production for targeted group of 4100 farmers is estimated 
with 2,9 tonnes per year with a value of 8,3 billion BAM. Milk production for the targeted group 
of 600 farmers with assumption of 3 cow-models is estimated with additional average 
production of 3,9 million litres per year with a value of 2,1 million BAM. Milk production for the 
targeted group for 200 farmers with assumption of 5 cows is estimated additional average 
production of 2,2 million litres per year with value of 1,2 million BAM. 
Creation of 4,500 new jobs or equivalent created through the 350 youth apprentice and at 
least 50% of the 8,300 beneficiaries of the starter packages and the FO seed capital financing 
achieving cash returns equal to at least the minimum net salary earned (BAM 425) from a full 
time job. 
Farmers organisations would be enhanced; over a period of 5 years; 40 FOs would be 
supported in terms of institutional capacity building and support to FO seed capital financing. 
These significant investments in assets such as production, storage and processing 
171 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
 vi.
technologies would result in strengthened organisations with improved market linkages 
providing better services to their members; 
At municipality level, significant investments in market facilities and further enabling 
infrastructure would be supported with an outreach to another 5,000 households. Particular 
attention will be given to support climate change resilience, by favouring environmental 
friendly technological investments. 
D.  Economic analysis 
58.  Objective. The objectives of the economic analysis are: (i) to examine the overall Programme 
viability, and (ii) to assess the Project’s impact and the overall economic rate of return; and (iii) to 
perform sensitivity analyses to assess the benefits from a broad welfare perspective.  
Key Assumptions. The physical inputs and productions established in the financial analysis 
59. 
provided the basis to determine the viability of the programme investment in terms of opportunity 
costs and quantifiable benefits to the economy as a whole. The estimate of the likely economic 
returns from project interventions are based on the following assumptions: (i) Project life has been 
assumed at 20 years; (ii) Project inputs and outputs traded are valued at their respective market 
prices, and goods are expected to move freely within the Project area in response to market demand; 
(iii) an economic discount rate of 11% has been used; (iv) The economic analysis is based on direct 
costs and benefits, while social and indirect benefits have not been taken into account of the “average 
farmer” compared to the best farmer.  
53. Project Economic Costs and Benefits. The economic analyses include the investment 
60. 
and incremental recurrent costs of Project components. The Project financial costs have been 
converted to economic values by removal of price contingencies, taxes and duties. In order to avoid 
double counting, the final aggregation considered only those costs that were not included in the 
financial models. Furthermore, it has been assumed that after the 10th year, the incremental net 
benefits of each model will be the same as for the incremental net benefits obtained after the fifth year 
of the Project, when the cost of replacing/maintaining of some specific equipment is considered for 
most of the models.  
Project Phasing. Table 16 shows the phasing and adoption rate of producers assuming 90% 
61. 
of the beneficiaries of starter packages adopt the measures. In addition, youth apprentice adoption 
rates and phasing activities has been taken into consideration. Table 17 summarizes the number of 
participating beneficiaries during the implementation period and the related phasing of the investment. 
172 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 16. Beneficiary Adoption Rate and Phasing 
Table 17: Number of Farmers and Phasing in Activities 
Economic Pricing: Economic pricing was undertaken using the following assumptions: (a) the 
62. 
opportunity cost of labour is EUR 25.5 /day, or 80% of financial cost of labour, which is justified given 
high rural unemployment; (b) the shadow exchange rate (SER) has been calculated at 1 EUR=2.0134 
BAM and (c) the standard conversion factor for the exchange rate has been calculated at 1.03; (d) the 
conversion factors for outputs and inputs have been calculated starting from FOB and CIF prices 
when data were available; when data were not available CFs were calculated starting from the 
financial price, deducting any duty or tax and multiplying it by the SCF; overall all CF vary between 
0.85 (for imported inputs) and 1.18. 
173 
BENEFICIARIES, ADOPTION RATES AND PHASINGPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5TotalAdoption ratesStrawberries10404055100Adjusted (adoption rate)93636559090%Raspberries10404055100Adjusted (adoption rate)93636559090%Cherries+Strawberries10404055100Adjusted (adoption rate)93636559090%Pepper10040040050501,000Adjusted (adoption rate)90360360454590090%Gherkin602402403030600Adjusted (adoption rate)54216216272754090%Tomato15060060075751,500Adjusted (adoption rate)13554054068681,35090%Honey Production 502002002525500Adjusted (adoption rate)45180180232345090%Livestock Production (3-5)602402403030600Adjusted (adoption rate)54216216272754090%Livestock Production (5-10)2080801010200Adjusted (adoption rate)1872729918090%Marigold15060060075751,500Adjusted (adoption rate)13554054068681,35090%Mint15060060075751,500Adjusted (adoption rate)13554054068681,35090%Wild Mushrooms ( boletus )3015024012060600Adjusted (adoption rate)271352161085454090%Youth Apprentice35140140350350Adjusted (adoption rate)3212612632031590%No. of Targeted Beneficiaries8,650Adopting Beneficiaries7,785 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 18. Conversion Factors 
CONVERSION FACTORS 
Conversion Factor (SCF) for imported chemicals 
Factor (SCF) for exported agric/ products 
Shadow Wage Rate Factor (SWRF) 
0.85 
1.18 
0.85 
SCF 
SCF 
SWRF 
Economic Rate of Return: On the basis of the above assumptions, the EIRR of READ would 
63. 
be 35% and the Net Present Value (NPV) would amount to EUR 16 millions. EIRR has been 
calculated based on the models’ net incremental income. The high EIRR reflects the ambition and 
potential leverage of READ, with an approach focused on clear comparative advantages and existing 
economic dynamics in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
174 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 19. Economic Analysis 
175 
 Strawberries  Raspberries  Pepper  Gherkin  Tomato  Marigold  Mint Y112,909(26,089)(1,902)52,20323,225(25,635)(245,730)(447,019)(261,076)8,815(32,284)35,651135,32441,21470,18352,565(607,646)1,694,247(2,301,893)Y282,499(87,526)21,292301,250171,264(96,043)(1,182,626)(1,663,917)(988,057)64,533(74,126)213,909541,296288,495210,548262,826(1,934,383)4,825,191(6,759,574)Y3205,355(13,640)133,235573,366499,2131,083(1,699,050)(1,167,276)(763,072)181,621131,046499,120541,296453,350350,913420,522347,0835,954,661(5,607,578)Y4262,716180,569237,451959,846792,655401,366(508,194)893,933375,678267,855438,521641,726135,324453,350350,913420,5226,304,2323,926,3252,377,907Y5224,733251,140250,4491,048,599897,871689,194521,587956,013403,801282,491527,391713,029453,350350,913420,5227,991,0831,712,4646,278,619Y6226,533309,026380,4351,111,250930,493740,831685,8021,241,602562,462292,720654,716713,029453,350350,913420,5229,073,685263,0008,810,685Y7262,716302,354576,6531,153,782939,388776,404827,0061,219,846562,462292,720649,370713,029453,350350,913420,5229,500,516263,0009,237,516Y8224,733254,758687,8591,153,782955,669776,404827,0061,132,765562,462292,720673,776713,029453,350350,913420,5229,479,750263,0009,216,750Y9226,533200,437725,5691,153,782945,791776,404827,0061,045,469562,462292,720658,900713,029453,350350,913420,5229,352,887263,0009,089,887Y10262,716195,196739,7391,153,782945,059776,404827,0061,034,105562,462292,720673,776713,029453,350350,913420,5229,400,778263,0009,137,778Y11223,674187,201740,3871,132,746936,133776,404827,0061,022,713562,462292,720658,900713,029453,350350,913420,5229,298,161263,0009,035,161Y12222,297139,723744,6551,069,635901,126776,404827,0061,022,173562,462292,720673,776713,029453,350350,913420,5229,169,792263,0008,906,792Y13258,480(45,906)743,4361,143,264904,418776,404827,0061,021,633562,462292,720658,900713,029453,350350,913420,5229,080,632263,0008,817,632Y14224,733(165,421)745,0361,143,264938,126776,404827,0061,021,093562,462292,720673,776713,029453,350350,913420,5228,977,014263,0008,714,014Y15226,53317,430743,8171,143,264941,419776,404827,0061,020,553562,462292,720658,900713,029453,350350,913420,5229,148,322263,0008,885,322Y16262,716210,477745,0361,153,782943,412776,404827,0061,020,013562,462292,720673,776713,029453,350350,913420,5229,405,619263,0009,142,619Y17224,733286,471743,8171,153,782946,705776,404827,0061,019,473562,462292,720658,900713,029453,350350,913420,5229,430,288263,0009,167,288Y18226,533314,320745,0361,153,782943,412776,404827,0061,018,933562,462292,720673,776713,029453,350350,913420,5229,472,199263,0009,209,199Y19262,716319,561743,8171,153,782946,705776,404827,0061,018,393562,462292,720658,900713,029453,350350,913420,5229,500,281263,0009,237,281Y20224,733320,938745,0361,153,782943,412776,404827,0061,017,853562,462292,720673,776713,029453,350350,913420,5229,475,938263,0009,212,938NPV@11% (million BAM)32,224 NPV@11% (million EUR)16,005 EIRR35% Rural Roads  Livestock/milk production , 5-10 cows  Livestock/milk production , 2-5 cows  Honey Production (50 hives)  Cherries+Strawberries  ECONOMIC ANALYSIS Mushrooms  Youth Apprentice  Irrigation Systems  Cold Storages Net Incremental Benefits Total Benefits          ( '000 BAM) Net Incremental Eco costs ('000 BAM)CASH FLOW ('000 BAM) 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Graph 2. Economic Incremental Cash Flow 
Sensitivity Analysis: In order to test the robustness of the above results, a sensitivity analysis 
64. 
has been carried out, the outcomes of which are presented in Table 18 below. The sensitivity analysis 
investigates the effect of fluctuations in Project costs, benefits and delays in implementation on the 
NPV and EIRR. It shows the economic impacts that a decrease in project benefits - of up to -50% - 
will have on the project’s viability. Similarly, it shows how the economic viability of the project will be 
affected with an increase – of up to +50% - in project costs and with one and/or two years delay in 
project implementation. A sensitivity analysis shows that the EIRR drops to 31% with an increase in 
costs of 20%. With an increase of costs by 50% to 26%, the project is still economically worthy. The 
decrease of benefits from 20% to 50% still yields a higher EIRR, and a delay of project aggregate 
benefits by 1 to 2 years still yields a higher EIRR. Finally, the analysis shows that the economic 
viability of the project remains attractive by preserving positive NPV and EIRR in each case. 
Table 20: Sensitivity Analysis (2017) 
176 
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS (SA)     ∆% Link with the risk matrix EIRR NPV (EUR M) Base scenario         35%  16,005  Project benefits -10% Combination of risks affecting output prices, yields and adoption rates 33%  15,284  Project benefits -20% 30%  14,562  Project benefits -50% 20%  4,396  Project costs   10% Increase of construction material prices 33%  15,284  Project costs   20% 31%  14,562  Project costs   50% 26%  12,398  1 year lag in ben. Risks affecting adoption rates and low implementation capacity 29%  13,178  2 years lag in ben. 25%  10,630  Production costs  10% Low management & negotiating capacity of farmers groups 24%  13,683  Production costs  20% 21%  11,361  Investment prices 10%  Market price fluctuations 25%  10,755  Investment prices 20% 24%  10,027  Adoption rates   -10% Extension services outreached is limited, low uptake of good practices, vaccination uptake is low, epidemic diseases 24%  9,330  Adoption rates   -20% 22%  7,176            Yields   -10%       
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Appendix 11: Draft project implementation manual98 
Content 
I. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
  Project Introduction 
  Project idea 
  Project goals and objectives 
  Project approach, focus, subsector approach 
  Description of project components 
II. 
  The arrangements and modalities of implementation component 
Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in 
value chains 
A. 
A.1 
A.2 
A.3 
B. 
  Modalities of implementation Component I 
  Modalities of development and implementation of pro-poor business plans  
  Modalities of implementation farmers’ organisations development 
  Modalities of implementation infrastructure investment support 
  Environmental and Social Management Framework 
III. 
  The arrangements and modalities of implementation component Project 
Page 
Organization & Management  
Institutional and implementation arrangements 
  Project implementation modalities 
  Asset management 
Internal rules for personnel 
  Human resource management 
  Financial and Disbursement Procedures 
  Financial arrangements 
IFAD disbursement procedures and flow of funds 
  Accounting system and audit 
  Planning, budgeting and reporting 
  Procurement Procedures  
  Procurement arrangements 
IFAD procurement procedures 
  Procurement system and audit 
  Procurement planning and reporting 
  Monitoring & Evaluation and Knowledge Management 
Introduction 
  Planning 
  Monitoring and Evaluation 
  Knowledge Management 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
IV. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
V. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
VI. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
98 The final version of the READP PIM will be fine-tuned by each project unit (PCU and APCU) after the effectiveness of the 
IFAD loan for READP. The implementation arrangements will be discussed with stakeholders at the start-up workshop based 
on which the completed version of the PIM will be sent to IFAD CPM for approval. 
177 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Abbreviations & Acronyms 
AES 
APCU 
AWPB 
BAM 
BDS 
BP 
BPEC 
CPM 
CQS 
DA 
DC 
EA 
ESMF 
EU 
EUR 
- 
(Agricultural) Extension Service 
-  Agricultural Project Coordination Unit 
-  Annual work plan and budget 
-  Bosnian marks (currency of Bosnia and Herzegovina) 
-  Business development service 
-  Business plan 
-  Business Plan Evaluation Committee 
-  Country Programme Manager 
-  Selection based on consultants' qualifications 
-  Designated account 
-  Direct contracting 
-  Extension Agency (Agricultural Extension Agency of the RS MoAFWM) 
-  Environmental and Social Management Framework 
-  European Union 
-  Official currency of euro zone 
EURIBOR 
-  EUR interbank offered rate 
FBiH 
FBS 
FO 
GAP 
GHP 
-  Federation of Bosna i Herzegovina 
-  Fix budget selection 
-  Farmers' organization 
-  Good agricultural practice 
-  Good hygiene practice 
HACCP 
-  High accident critical control points 
HH 
ICB 
IFAD 
IPM 
IPSAS 
ISO 
LIB 
LTB 
-  Household 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
International competitive biding 
International Fund of Agricultural Development 
Integrated pest management 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board 
International Organization for Standardization 
-  Limited international biding 
-  Letter to the borrower 
MAFWM FBiH 
-  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Forestry  and  Water  Management  of  the  Federation  of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
MAFWM RS 
-  Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Water Management of the Republika Srpska 
178 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
MAPs/NTFPs 
-  Medical and aromatic plants / Non timber forest products 
M&E 
MFI 
-  Monitoring and evaluation 
-  Micro financial institution 
MFT BiH 
-  Ministry of Finance and Treasury of Bosnia and Herzegovina 
MIS 
NGO  
NCB 
NS 
PA 
PCU 
PFI 
PSC 
PCR 
PDR 
PY 
WBS 
QCBS 
RBDP 
RCDP 
-  Management information system 
-  Non-governmental organization 
-  National competitive biding 
-  National shopping 
-  Project account 
-  Project Coordination Unit 
-  Project financial institution 
-  Project Steering Committee 
-  Project completion report 
-  Project design report 
-  Project year 
-  Quality-based selection 
  Quality and cost-based selection 
-  Rural Business Development Project 
-  Rural Competitiveness Development Project 
READP 
-  Rural Enhancement and Agricultural Development Project 
RS 
-  Republika Srpska 
SECAP 
-  Social, environmental and climate assessment procedure  
SME 
SOE 
SP 
SPS 
SSS 
ToT 
VC 
WA 
-  Small and medium enterprise 
-  Statement of expenditure 
-  Service provider 
-  Sanitary and phytosanitary standards 
-  Single source selection 
-  Training of trainers 
-  Value chain 
-  Withdrawal application 
179 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
I.  Project Introduction 
A.  Project idea 
The development hypothesis. The business leaders (SMEs or FOs who offer market linkages 
1.
to the target households along with other services such as supply of crop production inputs, advisory 
inputs and pre-financing support) can be motivated and driven by their commercial interests to anchor 
and lead the process of including youth and poor households in their raw material supply chains 
resulting in job creation, income generation and poverty reduction of these households. This requires 
producers’ access to information, skills, finance, and services from FOs that can support them to 
become commercial producers by producing and selling the quality and quantity of products required 
by the business leaders. 
Agribusiness models. READP will support 4-Ps (producer, private, public, partnerships) 
2.
based business models that increase the income of the target households by developing profitable 
marketing linkages between them and sustainable business leaders. The business model will 
integrate the business leaders enterprises (private), the project and the municipalities (public), target 
households (private producer) and farmers’ organisations (private). 
3.
(Agri) Business leaders. The (agri) business leaders can be capable private enterprises or 
farmers’ organisations (producers’ associations and cooperatives) with the interest and potential to 
develop partnerships with the target households. In general, the natural formation of these marketing 
linkages often face challenges as they depend on partnerships between different private and public 
actors, who do intend to form linkages with the target households, but with diverging interests. In this 
case, agribusinesses appear in the role of leaders in establishing and maintaining a value chains. 
4.
Targeting strategies. READP promotes the inclusion of very poor and poor non-commercial 
farmers, women and youth in selected value chains through the development and implementation of 
cluster based business plans for connecting producers to buyers. In order to reach the target group 
READP will adopt: (1) geographical targeting measures to reach those areas with higher 
concentration of targeted households (refer programme area above); (2) self-targeting means by 
selecting crops and enterprises suitable enough and of interest to the target groups; (3) direct 
targeting actions to include rural youth and women headed households and (4) other enabling 
measures to promote greater chance of linking the target group to business leaders. 
5.
Pro-poor business plans. READP will broker linkages between the business leaders and the 
target households by: (1) mobilise and harmonise the commercial and social interest of private, public 
and producer stakeholders; (2) incentivise and catalyse collaboration between them and (3) monitor 
and ensure that these target households are actually reached during project implementation. READP 
investments will be guided by pro-poor business plans (BP) developed collaboratively by the business 
leader and other private, public and producer partners facilitated by the project.  
B.  Project goals and objectives 
Goal. READP’s goal is to contribute to rural economic development and poverty reduction by 
6.
improving livelihood, generating revenue and enhancing the living standards of target households. 
Objectives: READP’s objective is to increase the income of rural poor households and rural 
7.
youth by engaging them in profitable agribusiness and employment opportunities. READP will unlock 
new rural business opportunities by better connecting and integrating farms, farmers’ organisation and 
business leaders to commercial markets. It will create new avenues for self, salaried and wage 
employments for beneficiaries.  
C.  Project approach, focus, subsector approach 
8.
Sub-sectors focus. The pro-poor business plans will describe the business model and 
partnership needs for profitably linking the target households to business leaders based on marketing 
180 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
opportunities for the selected produce. The selection of the produce will be market led mainly from the 
fruit and vegetable, MAPs/NTFPs and dairy sub-sector. 
Responsibilities. Different stakeholders in the project business model have a different 
9.
responsibilities whose simultaneous, proper and timely fulfillment lead to achievement synergy effect.  
a)  Private business leaders will be responsible for: 
 1) marketing aspects, private infrastructure, working capital investments and operational 
requirements;  
 2) supply of quality planting material, other production inputs including advance financing to the 
producers and  
 3) including the target households in the business models. 
b)  Farmer's organizations will be responsible for: 
1)  negotiate  better  terms  and  conditions  for  their  members  and  adopt  measures  to  safeguard 
members interests; 
2)  improve their services to increase the membership from the target households; 
3)  assist members to meet the quality and quantity requirements of the buyer by providing access 
to advisory assistance, machinery and agronomic inputs and  
4)  where  relevant  ensure  the  proper  management  and  maintenance  of  enabling  infrastructure 
investments.  
c)  Project, trough project coordination units, will be responsible for: 
1)  sensitise and mobilise the stakeholders; 
2)  assist market development, training and advisory services to support competitive production by 
target households; 
3)  co-finance starter packages for competitive production by first time commercial farmers; 
4)  co-finance enabling production and marketing infrastructure investments and 
5)  plan,  monitor  and  provide  oversight  to  ensure  that  the  project  resources  are  being  used  as 
agreed and planned. 
d)  Municipalities will be responsible for: 
1)  assisting consultation and discussions between different business plan partners; 
2)  co-financing starter packages, FO seed capital financing and enabling infrastructure needs and  
3)  ensuring proper management and maintenance of the developed infrastructure. 
e)  Rural households in the position of agricultural producers will be responsible for: 
1)  co-finance the starter packages and produce the selected products; 
2)  supply the agreed quantities and qualities to the business leader and  
3)  participate in strengthening FOs by lobbying and advocating for more inclusive approach. 
10.
  The role of the project. Diagrammatic representation of role of the project is given below 
181 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
  Service providers. Contracted service providers for business plan development and 
11.
implementation and for infrastructure component implementation will play a key role in project 
implementation in FBiH, together with cluster coordinators. In the RS the ministry's Agricultural 
Extension Service (AES), strengthened with field extension officers, and temporary using short term 
consultant will leverage development of business, while infrastructure component APCU will 
implement itself, without using service provider. The framework ToR for the service provider for 
implementation component one is enclosed to this manual which will be modified in the case of the 
RS. 
D.  Description of project components 
12.
  The project has two components:  
1)  Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains and  
2)  Project management and coordination.  
  The first component is the core component aimed to achieve the project goal and objectives, 
13.
while the second component has task to ensure organizational and other conditions for its 
implementation. 
  Subcomponents. The project component Enhancement of economic opportunities and 
14.
smallholders integration in value chains has three subcomponents: 
1) 
2) 
3) 
Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans; 
Farmers organisations development and 
Enabling infrastructure support. 
  Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans. Under this subcomponent 
15.
the project will assist poor households to transform from non-commercial to commercial farmers, with 
special attention to youth and women headed households. That assistance focuses on integration of 
agricultural households into value chains based on development and implementation business plans 
in which centre are buyers and processors of agricultural and MAP/NTF products.  
16.
In the FBiH business plan development and implementation will be supported by a service 
provider. A qualified service provider will be contracted through competitive procurement procedure for 
the whole project life. The role of service provider company will be: implementation of the targeting 
survey, conduct sensitisation workshops before call for business proposals, provide technical 
182 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
assistance for developing detailed business plans and facilitate implementation agreements and 
implementation of business plans. In addition, the PCU will contract 5 cluster coordinators, one in 
each cluster, for field presence and quality implementation of READP. 
17.
In the RS, the APCU will develop and implement business plans in cooperation with Agricultural 
Extension Agency (hereinafter only EA), one of department of the MAFWM RS, with which APCU has 
operation experience from the implementation of previous IFAD projects. Because, EA does not have 
significant experience with business plans methodology, additional service provider will be contracted 
for training and capacity building of the EA to ensure the efficient implementation of the business 
plans. The EA will provide project field coordination though 7 regional extension officers. 
18.
  The APCU and PCU will orient the service providers and Extension Agency to the project 
objectives, target group, approach and implementation steps. The cluster coordinators and the 
extension officers will be mandatory included in the orientation activities. The orientation process will 
comprise: workshops for discussions between the SP/EA, PCUs’ staff and RCDP BDS providers, field 
visits to farmers’ organisations, agribusinesses and municipalities. 
  Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans sub-component activities. 
19.
Pro-poor business plans will be implement trough following activities: 
1)  Selection of service providers; 
2)  Conducting targeting surveys; 
3)  Stakeholder awareness and sensitisation; 
4)  Call for proposals and selection of eligible proposals; 
5)  Development of detailed business plans and implementation agreements; 
6)  Market development support; 
7)  Farmers’ training, advisory and capacity building services; 
8)  Delivery of starter packages and youth apprentice support; 
9)  Support to business leader to develop external linkages; 
10)  A supportive setting for business plan implementation. 
20.
  These activities are described more detailed later. 
  Main elements of the business plans. The final BP will describe how the business will 
21.
progressively increase the profitability and sustain the inclusion of the READP target households. 
They will present: (1) the nature of business including forward and backward linkages to other value 
chain actors; (2) ownership and management structure proposed for implementation of the business 
model; (3) domestic and export market analysis; (4) strategic plan for achieving the business 
objectives; (5) targeting strategy and implementation steps for ensuring target group, mainly women 
and youth inclusion in the promoted VCs; (6) specific measures to support target household inclusion 
including advisory, extension, operational measures, partnership agreements and monitoring needs; 
(7) operational needs including implementation arrangements and partnership requirements; (8) 
financial plan estimating the total investment and co-financing needs and (9) enabling infrastructure 
requirements such as roads, water supply and bridges expected to be implemented through 
municipality involvement.  
  Training and advisory services. The project will finance all the costs for training and advisory 
22.
services to the target households except costs for transport and accommodation of trainees. These 
services will be provided by the READP contracted service providers, field coordinators and extension 
officers. The cost of domestic study tours for target households will be covered by the project.  
  Co-financing business plans. Implementation of selected business plans will be co-finance 
23.
from the project by co-financing cost of market development, co-financing starting packages, co-
financing farmers' organization strengthening and co-financing market linking infrastructure.  
  Market development activities. The beneficiaries identified in business plans will be eligible 
24.
for project co-financing for market development activities such as study tours with up to 70% of total 
cost, trade fairs with up to 50% of total cost, international standards and certifications with up to 40% 
183 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
of total cost and other marketing support such as branding, product identification, packaging, 
promotion material with up to 50% and with upper limits for such types of support. 
25.
  Starter packages. The project will co-finance standard starter packages up to EUR 500 each 
and starter packages for youth and women starter up to EUR 800 each. The starter packages will be 
provided to only those producers who are: (1) contractually linked to an business leader for selling the 
produce; (2) have undergone training and skills development for addressing all production needs and 
(3) will receive agronomic advice from the project during the production cycle in order to meet the 
quantity and quality standards required by the buyers.  
  Business plan implementation agreements. In preparation for the implementation of the 
26.
business plans the contracted service provider or Extension Agency, in coordination with the PCUs, 
will develop templates for implementation agreements between the different implementation partners 
identified in the those plans (municipalities, farmer organizations, financial institutions and the 
project). These agreements will define: (1) financing commitments of the partners in different 
categories for implementing the business plans; (2) ownership, management and revenue sharing (if 
any) roles; (3) targeting roles and responsibilities and (4) monitoring and review of responsibilities. 
The SP/EA will be responsible for organising meetings, facilitating negotiations and ensuring the 
development of the written agreements between the partners. These agreements will be accompanied 
by draft action plans indicating implementation responsibilities and time schedules.  
  Market development support. The project will deliver financial support to worthy agribusiness 
27.
companies who connect and development value chains in identified clusters. That support can be for 
qquality insurance and certification, trade fair participation, study tours and other marketing support. 
  Trainings and advisory services for farmers. Specific trainings and advisory services for 
28.
farmers will be delivered based on prior annual plans prepared by SP or EA and approved by 
respective PCU. These services will be delivered through on-site visit by technical specialists and 
continuous guidance by the project SP/AE staff, cluster coordinators and extension officers or hired 
short term consultants. Potential common areas and topics of training and advisory services are: 
quality standards (GAP, hygiene, EU quality standards), production of fruit and vegetables, MAP/ 
NTFP, dairy production, environment training e.g. climate change and pest management, investment 
related trainings and training on organising into FOs. Training will involve on-farm inputs and 
exposure trips to demonstration farms in the country. Advisory services will be mainly limited on the 
target households, but not always mandatory.  
  Youth apprentice support. The project will assist youth apprentice to find full time employment 
29.
in the agricultural and rural sector. In order to promote women employment 50% of quota will be 
reserved for young women apprentice. The apprentice support will be implemented in partnership 
between the project, the employment bureau at the canton/municipality level and an employer, based 
on transparent selection process and defined selection criteria. 
  Support to business leaders to develop external linkages. The SP/AEs in coordination with 
30.
the PCUs will assist the business leaders to develop external linkages in areas such as financial 
support, certification and sources of business management and operational guidance where needed. 
Also, some credit lines funded from the past IFAD supported projects and served by PFIs will be 
available and during the READP implementation. 
  A supportive setting for business plan implementation. The PCUs will develop a supportive 
31.
setting for BP implementation by: (1) establishing BP implementation oversight committees; (2) 
developing BP implementation monitoring system and (3) organising BP implementation review and 
planning workshops. 
  Farmers organisations development sub-component activities. Objectives of this 
32.
subcomponent are to increase market access and profitability of target households through 
strengthened farmers associations. That will happened by: 
 1)
FO seed capital financing and 
184 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
 2)
Institutional development training and advisory support. 
  Strengthening the FOs will empower them to increase their membership from the target 
33.
households, become effective partners under business schemes and increase their capacity to take 
informed decisions about their business.  
  FO seed capital financing. The project will provide grants to eligible farmers organizations up 
34.
to EUR 17,500 as support to their business activities which contribute improvement of the business of 
targeted households. Purchased assets will allow the FOs to render services to the members such as 
production, processing and bulking, that will enhance the profitability of these members while 
simultaneously strengthen their linkage to the private enterprise, or investment in processing and 
value adding equipment which allow FOs to collect and process products themselves. Eligible for this 
type of project support are FOs that have at least 15 members (from the READP target group) and 
demonstrate intention to further increase number of members; plus (only for cooperatives) have a 
regular audit, operate in accordance with the law on cooperatives and maintenance the book of 
cooperative members. 
35.
Institutional development training and advisory support. The project will develop and 
deliver training and advisory services for FOs. They will conduct training of trainers (ToT) programme 
to capacitate a set of social mobilizes to deliver these training to FOs. The training will cover: (1) 
organizational structure; (2) governance and management; (3) market intelligence and marketing, 
standards e.g. GAP, GHP, HACCP, Global GAP, ISO, organic, SPS, EU standards and negotiation 
skills; (4) basic accounting, finance and bookkeeping; (5) BP development, costing and financing, 
contract development with other chain stakeholders, collective/bulk marketing and procurement of 
inputs, management of common storage facilities and equipment; (6) technology development for 
agricultural intensification and productivity enhancement; (7) financial literacy and linkages with 
banks; (8) savings mobilization and approaches to implement internal savings schemes for 
addressing social needs, business expansion and collateral requirements of the banks and (9) 
sustainable adoption of climate resilient crop development that will be accompanied with approaches 
for sustainable use of natural resources. 
  Enabling infrastructure support subcomponent. The project will support (re)construction of 
36.
two categories of infrastructure: 
 a) marketing infrastructure, such as cold storage/pre cooling facilities, packaging facilities, 
collection points, drying and distillation units and  
 b) production infrastructure, such as irrigation facility and village water supply systems or some 
common infrastructure which connect business leaders and targeted households such as 
rehabilitation of feeder roads, culverts and small bridges.  
37.
  The project will support (re)construction only publicly owned or co-owned infrastructure.  
38.
In the FBiH infrastructure related activities will implement the PCU indirectly by using service 
provider for that type of activities, and in RS APCU will implement those activity directly by in-house 
staff (primarily by infrastructure engineer and procurement officer). 
  Enabling infrastructure activities. The activities in the subcomponent Enabling infrastructure 
39.
support will be implemented following steps: 
1)  stakeholder sensitisation about infrastructure investments;  
2)  identification of eligible proposals;  
3)  selection and prioritisation of infrastructure investments;  
4)  design, procurement, implementation and financing; 
5)  monitoring, supervision and training. 
  Stakeholder sensitisation about infrastructure investments. Infrastructure supported by the 
40.
project needs to be connected with value chains and business plans prepared for their establishment 
and strengthening. This approach will be introduced and presented to rural households and local 
authorities by service provider and PCU's teams. They will present to the stakeholders the objectives, 
185 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
selection criteria, ownership, management arrangements and project support available under this 
subcomponent.  
Identification of eligible proposals. The identification of proposal for infrastructure investment 
41.
will been done in a participatory and demand-driven way and could come from agricultural producers 
level or from municipality level. The project will publically advertise call for proposal collection and 
leave a reasonable time for their submission.  
42.
  Selection and prioritisation of infrastructure investments. All received proposals for 
investment in infrastructure (re)construction form a long list of potential infrastructure projects. After 
that infrastructure service provider in FBiH and infrastructure engineer in RS check each proposal and 
in according of fulfilling eligibility criteria make a short list of infrastructure projects. Final selection of 
the projects from the short list has done based on feasibility study prepared for each project proposal. 
Those studies have to identify and clarify: number of infrastructure beneficiaries and cost of 
infrastructure per beneficiary, possibilities of co-financing investment cost, expected increase in 
quantity and value of products sold using improved infrastructure and technical and financial viability 
of the project. 
43.
  Selection criteria. Criteria for final selection and prioritisation of the infrastructure projects are:  
1)  their contribution in strengthening value chains in implementation of business plan;  
2)  their contribution to increase profitability of the target households;  
3)  their influence on performance of the business leaders in the implementation of the BP;  
4)  their link with municipality identified priorities. 
  Design, procurement, implementation and financing. Project design will be done by 
44.
municipalities on whose territory infrastructure is located. Service provider (in FBiH) or infrastructure 
engineer (in RS) will check project design and participate in preparation of the tenders together with 
procurement staff. Procurement and contracting of infrastructure works will be done by PCUs. 
Infrastructure works will be co-financed by the READP, municipalities and other potential stakeholders 
(rural population, business companies, other donors, etc.). Upper limit for co-financing infrastructure 
works from READP is 70-80% of total investment cost in extremely underdeveloped and 
underdeveloped municipalities and 30-50% in semi developed or developed municipalities.  
  Monitoring, supervision and training. Official supervision during infrastructure 
45.
(re)construction will be done by supervisory authorities nominated by municipalities and additionally 
monitored and checked by infrastructure engineer from APCU or service provider on behalf of PCU. 
186 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
II.  Implementation arrangements for component 1: Enhancement of economic 
opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains 
  The project component Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in 
46.
value chains will be implemented trough three subcomponents: (1) development and implementation 
of pro-poor business plans; (2) farmers organisations development and (3) enabling infrastructure 
support. The simultaneous implementation of these three components has a synergistic effect on the 
achievement of project objectives and impact. 
  Responsibilities for implementation component I have two project coordination units supporting 
47.
by service providers which will be contracted as consultants or technical assistance. 
 A. Modalities of implementation Component 1  
  Modalities of implementation component Enhancement of economic opportunities and 
48.
smallholders integration in value chains is further described by its three subcomponents. 
A.1. Modalities of development and implementation of pro-poor business plans  
  The first subcomponent, Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans will be 
49.
implemented trough ten interconnected activities.  
  Selection of service provider (A1:SC1:C1). Successful implementation of a complex project 
50.
such as READP requires strengthening the project teams in the two project units (in particular, 
bearing in mind that they will be implement 2-3 IFAD projects simultaneously) with service providers 
where relevant. Therefore, it is important that at the very beginning of the project implementation 
competent and experienced service providers, who will, in cooperation with the PCUs, take over the 
implementation of a part of the project activities. The PCU, which is in charge of the project 
implementation in the FBiH, has already implemented some earlier projects in that way, and the 
APCU, which is in charge of the project implementation in the RS, previously relied on the Agricultural 
Advisory Service that is the one of department in the RS Ministry of Agriculture. This time, for the 
need of READP implementation, RS APCU will also hire service provider which will jointly work 
together with advisors. The term of reference for service provider who will support implementation of 
component one is in annex 1 of this manual. That ToR should be a little modified and adapted in the 
RS according to the way of implementation the first project component. In a general, service provider 
can be single private or public service provider (consulting company, regional development agency, 
NGO or university) or a consortia of several service providers. 
  The service provider will be contacted by competitive procurement method selected in the 
51.
procurement plans based on estimated value of its overall services. Service provider selection will be 
done by the PCUs in consultation with the IFAD CPM. It is important to contract the service provider 
as soon as possible, at the very beginning stage of the project, because its participation is necessary 
and very important for the fast and proper start of the project activities. 
  The service providers role are: (1) implement the targeting survey: (2) conduct sensitisation 
52.
workshops before call for business proposals; (3) provide technical assistance for developing detailed 
BPs, and (4) facilitate implementation agreements and implementation by BP partners. The technical 
assistance during the business plan preparation and implementation will be focused on strategic 
targeting of poor rural households. 
  Targeting survey (A2:SC1:C1). The READP target group are: (1) rural households with 0.1-0.5 
53.
ha (1-5 dunums) land available for cultivation; (2) households with monthly income less than 817 
BAM; (3) unemployed rural youth (below 30 years); and (4) poor women headed households in rural 
areas. On the beginning of the project PCUs will conduct targeting survey to identify the 
locations/communities with higher concentrations of the potential target households and to specify the 
suitable pro-poor products from the project supported agricultural sub-sectors, taking into 
consideration their prevailing market demand. The survey will be carried out by the same service 
187 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
provider selected for whole support to implementation the first component. SP (alternatively EA in the 
RS) will develop the questionnaires, checklists and other tools for conducting the targeting survey. 
  The survey will involve: (1) consultations with key actors, such as social service centres, 
54.
employment bureau, heads of the local communities, authorities managing entity level farm registers 
and financial institutions active in the project area; (2) identification of the broad geographical areas 
and potential farmers’ organisations (FO) with higher concentration of the target households; (3) 
validation visits to these geographical areas and FOs and (4) preparation of a verified list of the 
geographical pockets and FOs with higher concentration of target households. These lists will be used 
during the stakeholder workshops to promote inclusive business plan preparation. 
55.
  The survey will involve consultations with key actors (social service centres, employment 
bureau, heads of the local communities, authorities managing entity level farm registers, financial 
institutions, business leaders active in the project area) and identification of the areas/communities 
mainly in the underdeveloped and extremely underdeveloped municipalities that have higher 
concentration of potential target households. A verified list of these geographical pockets will be 
developed and profiles of these geographical pockets will be developed in terms of: (1) crop 
production experiences of target households and recommendations of potential crops suitable to the 
conditions and capacities of the target households; (2) current marketing arrangements followed for 
agricultural produce from these pockets along availability and access to crop production inputs and 
services by the target households; (3) identification of opportunities and constraints against women 
and youth involvement in project supported activities; (4) identification of FOs with higher 
concentration of the target households; (5) recommendations of the areas/pockets specially in the 
underdeveloped municipalities where the business plan implementation should commence and (6) 
listing of interested enterprises and potential rural sector jobs they can potentially offer that can 
engage the youth apprentice.  
  The main outcome of the targeting survey will be list of the geographical pockets and FOs with 
56.
higher concentration of target households from which service provider and BP applicants will start 
process of identification households that will be included in value chains and beneficiaries of starter 
packages. 
It is expected that the selection of a poor beneficiaries is in the interest of local communities 
57.
because they thus solve problems of their social aide depended categories of population on a 
sustainable way (creating longer-term conditions for social assisted beneficiaries to generate income 
from their own work). 
58.
  Stakeholder awareness and sensitisation (A3:SC1:C1). This will provide clarification of the 
process of preparation business proposals and make applicants more sensitive to project objectives 
and target groups. In will increase the response of PCUs and service providers. These will be 
organised by regions (clusters) in FBiH and RS. In these workshops the results of the targeting survey 
will be presented to participants and the process of business planning and templates for pro-poor 
business proposal preparation will be explained. Sample proposals and the templates for submitting 
BP proposals will be shared, as well as criteria against which the business proposals will be 
evaluated. Attendants of that workshops will be representatives from target municipalities, 
agribusinesses, financial institutions, input suppliers, farmers’ organisations and target households.  
  The animation and selection of the poor for participation. The key to the success of the 
59.
project in terms of its pro-poor orientation is a timely reach for the poorer categories of rural 
population, or the poorer rural households. To achieve that the READP must: (1) successfully 
sensitize and orient the target households about project details and mobilise applicants for 
participation; (2) fairly rank the interested households according to poverty criteria and (3) 
professionally and independently select and verify eligible households.  
  Business planning process. The steps in preparing and implementing a business plan is 
60.
shown on the following diagram. 
188 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Selection of service 
provider 
Conducting targeting 
survey 
Stakeholders senistition 
workshops 
Call for expresion of 
interest 
Business proposals 
Business proposal 
selection 
Short list of selected 
business proposals 
Business plans 
preparation 
Business plan evaluation 
Short list of approved 
business plans 
Business plan 
implementation 
Monitoring of busines 
plan implementation 
Diagram 1. Process of preparation and implementation business proposals and business plans 
  Two-stage business planning process. The main drivers of subcomponent 1 (Development 
61.
and implementation of pro-poor business plans) are business plans as the main mechanism how the 
189 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
objectives to support project target groups will be implemented in practice. The process of business 
plan preparation has a two stages – initial and further elaboration.  
  Cal for expression of interest (A4:SC1:C1). PCUs will prepare template for business 
62.
proposals content (business idea concept) (draft outline is attached as annex 2) and advertise calls 
for expression of interest, e.g. submission of business proposals. The call will be advertised in the 
newspapers and on the websites associated ministries and other suitable ways, with the aim of 
making it available to a larger part of the public. The call will contain eligibility criteria annex 3 of those 
who are eligible to submit business proposals. There are agribusiness entrepreneurs in different legal 
forms (joint-stock company, limited liability company, cooperative, NGO, etc.). The multiple criteria 
against which the business proposals will be evaluated are already set and communicated during 
sanitation workshops.  
  The process of business proposals preparation. Potential applicants will prepare business 
63.
proposals independently, without use project technical assistance (consultants) in this stage of 
formulation their business ideas, but they have possibility to attend stakeholder sensitisation 
workshop. The stage of preparation and submission of project proposals is an chance for different 
stakeholders to link with other partners and to as much as better explain their common business idea, 
because of that will depend whether they will have the opportunity to transform it into a business plan 
and receive financial support for its implementation from the project. 
  Business proposals submission. The business proposals will be submitted in hard and 
64.
electronic copy to respective PCU until the deadline. Deadline for submission the business proposals 
will be minimum on months to live their proposers enough time for connecting and proposal 
preparation. Call for submission business proposals lunched in the first year will be repeated in the 
next two years of project lifetime, living enough time for their implementation in the remaining period. 
  Business proposals selection process. eligibility of applicant and proposal quality 
65.
Received business proposals in the unified format (following recommended template) will be reviewed 
and selected by Business Plan Evaluation Committees (BPEC), the same that will later evaluate 
business plans. The committee includes representatives from the A/PCUs, SP/EA and development 
partners to ensure harmonisation with similar initiatives. Committees will appoint PCU directors in 
consultation with IFAD CPM. The business proposal selection process consists from (1) screening 
eligible proposals, followed by (2) validation visits to applicants, and (3) final selection of proposals. 
Draft outline of the business proposals selection criteria are attached as annex 4, but their final list 
and scoring system will be established in according to business proposal template defined by 
contracted service provider. Through the validation process will be confirmed readiness and ability of 
all partners mentioned in business proposal to seriously participate in proposed business venture. The 
PCUs in consultation with the selection committee will develop the validation checklist for each 
screened proposal. Proposals by proposers who are in business or family relations with committee 
members are not eligible and will be excluded from the selection process. The evaluation of the 
proposal ends with the making of a short list of proposals whose applicants will be invited to prepare 
more detailed business plans based on previously evaluated proposals. BPEC will prepare separate 
business proposal appraisal report for each of submitted business proposals. Before announcing the 
results of the selection, a short list of selected proposals will be considered and approved by the 
respective PSC. In addition to the fact that each applicant will be informed by letter about the result of 
the selection of its proposal, a short list of approved proposals will be published on the PCU website 
or website the ministry to which it belongs. 
66.
  Business plan preparation (A5:SC1:C1). Simultaneously with the publication of the list of 
selected business proposals, a call for submission of business plans will be announced. This invitation 
contains information on how to submit proposal of business plan, the deadline and the form/content 
that they need to satisfy. Only those business proposals that have successfully passed the preliminary 
selection phase are acceptable to be converted into a business plans. Suggestions and scores of the 
evaluators in the previous stage can be useful inputs for improving business idea into a viable 
inclusive pro-poor business plan. All business plan applicants will be familiarize with its main elements 
190 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
(suggested template of business plan content is in annex 5) that will be finalize by PCUs and service 
providers. The BP template have to be followed during business plan preparation process to allow 
their comparison and evaluation. For the purpose of better understanding methodology of business 
plan preparation also can be used Annex III – How to develop a business plan (from IFAD toolkit on 
Engaging with farmers’ organizations for more effective smallholder development 
https://www.ifad.org/topic/fo_resources). 
  Pre-identified business plans will be developed in the period of 3-6 months after approval 
67.
business proposals. In that period service provider for business plan preparation will continuously and 
actively cooperate with business plan originators. At the same time, biweekly meetings of PCU team 
and service provider team will be held to discuss the progress made and the problems faced in order 
to quickly and effectively find a mutually acceptable solutions. From each of these meetings a will be 
made minutes with key statements about the stage in which is the preparation of each individual pre-
identified business plan (strong, moderate and borderline). The main organizer and facilitator of these 
meetings will be PCU business development officer. 
  Beside of sensitisation workshops the service providers for BP preparation will do further 
68.
consultations and site visits to the agribusiness enterprises (potential business leader), target 
households, FOs and municipalities. They will assist the agribusinesses with: (1) data collection and 
analysis; (2) marketing and profitability assessment; (3) selection of target households (this will 
receive critical importance); (4) identification of other business partners; (5) outreach and financial 
target setting; (6) financial planning, identification of financial sources; (7) implementation agreement 
with other stakeholders. The hired service providers will also be responsible for writing the BP in 
coordination and consultation with the business leader. Bearing in mind the continuous presence of 
the service provider, there is no need to create a specific manual as a guide during the preparation of 
business plans. 
  Business plan submission and approval. When the business plan applicant and service 
69.
provider consider that the business plan is completed, BP originator will handed over it to the 
respective PCU in written and electronic form, but no later than the deadline set for BPs submission. 
The Business Plan Evaluation Committee (the same as did business proposal selection) will evaluate 
submitted business plans, following evaluation criteria annex 6. BPEC will prepare separate business 
plan appraisal report for each evaluated business plan. The BPEC will make a rating list of evaluated 
business plans (based on the total number of awarded points), and the final selection of plans to be 
co-financed by the project will be made by the PSC at the PCU proposal based on the financial 
resources available and planned for co-financing. Within the approved business plan, all partners who 
participate in its implementation will sign a memorandum of understanding (MoU) which defines their 
roles, financial contributions, deadlines and other important details. This draft of MoU will prepare 
PCU and approve IFAD CPM. Memorandums of understanding alignment and signing will facilitate 
contracted service provider. These agreements will be accompanied by action plans indicating 
implementation responsibilities and time schedules. 
  Business plan supportive activates. The main activities of business plan implementation 
70.
which will be supported by the READP are: (1) procurement and co-financing fixed and working 
capital needs of agricultural producers (called "starter packages") and seed capital financing to FOs 
(called "matching grants"); (2) procurement and co-financing market development investments 
including study tours, trade fair participation, certification; (3) procurement and co-financing training 
and advisory needs and (4) procurement and co-financing infrastructure needs. Each of these group 
activities have their own specific modalities of implementation, but common is that they arise from the 
approved business plan. 
  Business plan co-financing scheme. Some of the project activities identified in the business 
71.
plan will be co-financed from the READP under the cost sharing system. There are indicated ceilings 
for co-financing from READP as a percentage and maximal amount for different categorise of 
activities (table below). 
191 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Table 1. Scheme of co-financing from the READP  
Categories 
max. in EUR  
READP ceiling 
Training and advisory 
Market development 
Study tours (abroad) 
Trade fair participation 
Certification 
Other marketing support 
Starter package 
Standard 
Youth and women 
Assets for FOs 
8,000  
4,000 
4,000 
4,000 
500 
800 
17,500 
in % 
100% 
70% 
40% 
40% 
50% 
< 40% 
< 60% 
< 70% 
Others99 
% 
- 
30% 
60% 
60% 
50% 
 60% 
 40% 
 30% 
In the case when applied percentage of co-financing from the READP exceeds the ceiling in 
72.
absolute amount of co-financing, the absolutely defined ceiling is remaining and rest of cost should be 
financed from other sources. 
73.
  Payment of co-financing for certain types of support from the project are as follows: 
a)  Training and advisory services – payment (100%) from the project accounts if project contracted 
that service; 
b)  Study  tours  –  payment  (up  to  70%  with  upper  ceiling)  from  the  project  account  if  project 
contracted that service and rest from account of beneficiaries cash contribution or direct from co-
financiers' bank accounts; 
c)  Trade fair participation - payment (up to 40% with upper ceiling) from the project account if project 
contracted that service and the rest from account of beneficiaries cash contribution or direct from 
co-financiers' bank accounts; 
d)  Certification - payment (40% with upper ceiling) from the project account to account of certification 
service provider based on decision of PCU director; 
e)  Other  marketing  support  -  payment  (50%  with  upper  ceiling)  from  the  project  account  if  project 
contracted that service and the rest from account of beneficiaries cash contribution or direct from 
co-financiers' bank accounts; 
f)  Starter packages - payment (between 40% and 60% with upper ceiling) from the project account if 
project contracted those goods and rest from account of beneficiaries cash contribution or direct 
from co-financiers' bank accounts; 
Infrastructure  works  -  payment  (up  to  ceiling  per  infrastructure  project  in  EUR)  from  the  project 
account if project contracted those works and rest from account of beneficiaries cash contribution 
or direct from co-financiers' bank accounts; 
g) 
h)  Assets  for  FOs  -  payment  (<50%)  from  the  project  account  if  project  contracted  that  goods  and 
rest from account of beneficiaries cash contribution or direct from co-financiers' bank accounts. 
  Business plans implementation (A5:SC1:C1). The approved business plans are implemented 
74.
following agreed action plan and timeline that accompany signed MoUs. Its implementation involves 
the practical implementation of previously agreed activities by each partner. These agreements will 
define: (1) financing commitments of the partners in different categories for implementing the business 
plans guided by the allocations presented in the co-financing table; (2) ownership, management and 
revenue sharing (if any) roles; (3) targeting roles and responsibilities and (4) monitoring and review 
responsibilities. In addition to business leader that is crucial for establishing and maintaining a value 
chain, an important role in business plan implementation has the service provider, who should 
permanently monitor the implementation of the business plan in which it preparation participated. The 
role and task of project units in the implementation of the business plans is to timely contract and pay 
goods, works and services whose implementation has been allocated to them by memoranda.  
  Starter packages implementation modalities. Starter packages are one of activities of 
75.
business plan implementation that emphasizes its pro-poor dimension, because eligible beneficiaries 
of these packages are from the category of poorer households and other vulnerable groups. The 
99 Other cofinanciers include municipalities, business leaders, FOs and beneficiaries. 
192 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
starter package will be co-financed (subsidize) from the READP up to 40% of their total cost (with a 
selling of EUR 500 per package), if their end users are belong project target group. If final 
beneficiaries are youth or women category starter packages will be co-financed from the project up to 
60% (with a selling of EUR 800 per package). Both the standard and the youth/women starter 
packages will be implemented in the same way and will be strictly linked to the BPs. In the case that 
households don't have enough money to finance their part of the starter package value, they will 
borrow from financial institutions (bank or MFI) and project can facilitate in finding the best opportunity 
for the lending. 
Identification  
of beneficiaries  
Data collection 
in context of the poverty 
List of strater package 
beneficiaries 
Procurement of starter 
packages 
Delivery of starter 
pacages 
Post delivery  
follow-up 
Diagram 2. Process of starter packages approval and delivery 
76.
  The service provider, in cooperation with the business leader from the agribusiness sector 
(value chain leader), will prepare the final list of beneficiaries of the starter packages. Since in the 
meantime, from the moment of preparation and submission of the business plan, until the moment of 
its realization, some pre-identified beneficiaries can give up, the final list will be checked and 
confirmed just before the entering in the procedure of procurement the starter packages, which also 
includes the distribution list (location and timetable) of their delivery.  
  Service provider, in cooperation with field coordinators/officers, will collect necessary data 
77.
(income per household member, size of agriculture land, value of asset, etc.) using unified form of 
data sheet and cross those data with other data sources. The data about potential beneficiaries will be 
filtered through the poverty prism based of the fulfilment eligibility criteria for starter packages 
beneficiaries annex 7 and classified into three sub categories - extremely poor, very poor and poor. 
The applications in the three categories will be screened and shortlisted by the SP/EA in consultation 
with the business leaders, FOs and municipality representatives according to READP poverty 
targeting criteria. The quota for youth starter packages and starter packages for women will be 
respected during the selection process. Based on that assessment, they will propose a list of 
beneficiaries who will receive starter packages in kind, procured by PCUs. Eligible goods related 
investments supply and cover by the grant include: planting materials, agrochemicals, fertilizers and 
small equipment. The final list of starter packages' beneficiary will be assessed and approved by 
PCUs. Only one member per household will be eligible for direct project support in the areas of 
standard starter package, youth starter package and youth apprentice support (refer SC 1 and 2 for 
details about starter packages). 
193 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
  Based on agreed number of beneficiaries and structure of starter packages, PCUs will prepare 
78.
technical specifications and packed starter packages in cooperation with value chain leaders, service 
provider and representatives of final beneficiaries. In that process, if it will be needed, PCUs will be 
able to use the assistance of external experts in order to request the goods that are accurately 
defined and provide an optimal relationship between the quality and the price. A/PCU will invite 
potential bidders to submit their bids and select the best bid in according to price and other 
qualification criteria.  
79.
  There are two possibilities of payment starter packages procured and contracted by PCU in 
cooperation with other parties (co-financiers). One is that each co-financier pays his share directly to 
the supplier, and the other is that all co-financiers pay their contribution to the PCU and than PCU pay 
to the supplier the total contracted amount. In both cases, a contract with a selected supplier 
(selected based on procurement procedure executed by PCU on behalf of all other co-financiers) 
should sign all co-financiers to have a basis for payment their financial contribution.  
  External co-financing. If the final beneficiary households need to finance part of the expenses 
80.
for which they do not have enough own money, they will borrow part of the necessary participation in 
the starter packages etc. from MFIs under commercial conditions. The PCUs will facilitate in linking 
borrowers and potential creditors by dissemination information on available credits an other types of 
financing sources, organizing PFI's presentations and assisting in the process of preparation credit 
applications. The service providers will organise cluster level planning workshops on which will be 
invited interested financial institutions and starter package beneficiary to exchange information about 
financing opportunities. The project promote market-based interest rate that will be compensated to 
poor farmers due to granting scheme developed as a deducted assistance to vulnerable categories of 
beneficiaries, sensitive to high interest rate. There are also possibility of partial pre-financing 
beneficiary households by the buyer of agricultural products, which is a desirable option that will be 
further evaluated in process of selection business plans supported from the READP.  
  Monitoring of starter packages delivery and usage. Delivery of starter packages will be 
81.
complex tasks given the number of different suppliers and a large number of recipients of goods. 
Operatively, this process will be assisted and supervised by service providers and cluster/filed 
coordinators. It is important to ensure clear and proven evidence for quantitative and qualitative 
control during the handover of the starter packages and archive all supporting documentation as part 
of contract execution process. The second phase of the monitoring of the starter package is after their 
delivery, from monitoring their dedicated use, through monitoring the production results that 
beneficiaries are achieving, to the assessment of their impact on generated income and self-
employment. That monitoring will be carried out by the PCUs following the M&E plans. 
  Market development support (A.6:SC1:C1). PCUs will organize and contract services of visits 
82.
to agricultural and similar fairs and study tours for representatives of farmer groups. Other market 
development activities such as protection of product identity, certification and brand development 
initiatives will be also supported. Those activities will be demand driven and subsequently organized, 
preferably for business leaders and FGs involved in implementation of approved business plans. 
Those activates will be implemented on the cost-sharing model based on percentage of co-financing 
shown in the table 1. The business leaders that achieve more than 60% of their linkage outreach to 
target households in the underdeveloped municipalities will be eligible for project support in the areas 
of product certification, trade fair participation and other marketing assistance such as branding and 
product identification.  
83.
  Quality assurance and certification support. The quality assurance and certification support 
is special type of support within the market development. The PCUs, together with service providers, 
will guide the business leaders on importance, mechanisms and process for obtaining different kinds 
of certification and will also link them to relevant certification bodies where required. READP will co-
finance eligible agribusinesses for the introduction of international standards such as HACCP, ISO, 
Global GAP and HALAL. The eligibility criteria for utilize that opportunity are in the annex 8, and ratio 
and threshold of co-financing are in the table 1. 
  Advisory services (A.7:SC1:C1). READP will provide production related advisory services and 
84.
practical guidance to the farmers according to the successful BP agreements. Advisory services will 
be concentrated mainly on the targeted households. Training of farmers and other type of advisory 
services, clearly pre-identified in approved business plans will be delivered in according to annual 
farmers' training plan which will be a part of AWPB. Training will involve on-farm inputs and exposure 
194 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
trips to demonstration farms in the country. The training and advisory services will be partly delivered 
by service provider hired to implement component one or by public advisory service network (in the 
RS), and partly will be contracted with specialized individual or institutional consultants by PCUs. The 
both PCUs will also look for possibilities to cooperate and combine some training needs with other 
internationally funded projects implemented in B&H in the same time. 
  Training topics. Target households will be trained on: (1) quality standards (GAP, hygiene, EU 
85.
quality standards); (2) production of fruit and vegetables, MAPS/NTFP, dairy as identified in the BPs; 
(3) environment training e.g. climate change and pest management; (4) investment related trainings; 
(5) understanding and evaluating the prices and other conditions of different sources of financing, 
including agricultural insurance opportunities (6) understanding benefits of organising into FOs. Those 
areas will be workaround in the annual farmers' training plans prepared by PCU with identification of 
training executor. 
  Youth apprentice support (A.8:SC1:C1). Youth apprentice support is not obligatory part of 
86.
approved business plan. For the apprentice support will be eligible youth under 30 years, with 
restriction that 50% of them should be female (see annex 9). The project limit for financing the 
expenditure of one year employment is EUR 2,100 and eligible expenditure will be net salary plus 
taxes, health and pension insurance and other mandatory government contributions that accompany 
the payment of net salary. The apprentice support will be implemented in partnership between the 
project, the employment bureau at the canton/municipality level and an employer. The employer can 
be a project value chain partner including private sector and FOs as well as other enterprises and 
institutions active in job creation in the rural sector. The employer will engage the apprentice, selected 
jointly with the PCU and employer bureau. 
  The youth apprentice employment modality. The process of youth apprentice full-time 
87.
employment starts with call of expression of interest, in the same time youth without previous working 
experience and employers who are ready to employ apprentices. The call of the scheme will be 
advertise by the project at the cluster level in coordination with the employment bureaus.  
Call for 
expresion of 
interest 
Preparing lists 
Selection of 
applicants for 
employment  
Employment 
contracting 
Monitoring of 
performances 
Diagram 3. Process of starter packages approval and delivery 
195 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
  The paring lists. An of criteria for youth applicants is that they are from the cluster, belonging 
88.
to a target group household and their job should pertain to delivery or procurement of goods and 
services in the rural areas. The employer can be a project value chain partner including private sector 
and FOs as well as other enterprises and institutions active in job creation in the rural sector. The 
project will, together with responsible project bureaus, consider all applications and make their paring 
in according to expressed wishes and needs of both parties (unemployed and employers). 
  Selection procedure. Where there are several applicants for a single position the apprentice 
89.
will be selected competitively and transparently through competitive selection process conducted by 
panel including the employer, employment bureau and the project. 
  Young apprentices employment in FOs. A special type of apprentices employment will be 
90.
their employment in FOs as their managers of coordinators of some other activates. As a pilot will be 
employed minimum 25 apprentices in cooperation with universities which will proposed their best just 
gradated students for that type engagement. Those students will be mentored by their professors in 
the process of solving problems that they will encounter. 
  Employment contracts. The contract of employment sign employer and employees from 
91.
apprentice category. The employer who employs apprentices from the prior selected list of applicants 
and the respective employment bureaus sign contract for one or for group of apprentices which 
defines project obligation to reimburse employer's expenditure based on paid gross salary for 
employed youth apprentices. The administration of these payments will be done through the 
employment bureaus.  
  Monitoring (ongoing appraisal) of business plan implementation (A.9:SC1:C1). PCUs will 
92.
monitor and appraise business plans implementation by: (1) developing BP implementation 
monitoring system; (2) establishing BP implementation oversight committees, and (3) organising BP 
implementation review and planning workshops.  
  PCUs will monitor and appraise business plans implementation to ensure that target 
93.
households are actually reached during BP implementation process. The M&E specialist in 
cooperation with cluster coordinators, the extension officers and service provider's staff will be 
responsible for data collection and incorporation achievements in BP implementation into regular M&E 
report and progress reports and prepare ad-hock cluster/value chain based analysis. PCUs will define 
the reporting needs of the business partners and ensure their regular reporting to the project and the 
municipalities and inform all partners about that obligation in advance. The check lists for assessment 
success in business plans implementation will be prepared and followed through years of project 
implementation.  
  Business plan oversight committees. For the need of implementation and monitoring 
94.
progress of each business plan it will be established business plan oversight committee. This 
committee will be established by nomination one representative of each parties involved in BP 
implementation: PAs, buyers, processors, farmers, municipalities and the project. The PCUs will 
determine the composition of the committee for each BP and invite all parties to nominate their 
representatives. The committees will be responsible for facilitation of planning and implementation 
review of the BPs. The committees will be headed by selected municipality.  
  BP implementation review and planning workshops. The project will organise regular 
95.
cluster level BP implementation review and planning workshops attended by the implementation 
oversight committee and other relevant stakeholders. These workshops will be held annually for each 
cluster separately. 
A.2. Modalities of implementation farmers’ organisations development  
96.
  This subcomponent will strengthen FOs (cooperatives, producer associations and similar types 
of NGOs) to increase their outreach to target households and to develop into viable inclusive farmers’ 
institution. The project will also support the transformation of PAs to cooperatives as well as the 
transformation of owner centric cooperatives into inclusive institutions. The project direct support to 
FOs will be in two ways: (1) seed capital financing to FOs and (2) institutional development training 
and advisory support.  
196 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
  Seed capital financing to FOs (A1:SC2:C1). Eligible for seed capital financing (maximum 
97.
17,500 EUR per FO) are only those FOs which are involved in implementation of approved business 
plans (either as business leaders or as business partners of a business leader). READP will finance 
purchase of business assets identified in a profitable BP linked to project target households. Support 
to FOs outside BPs is not eligible for funding from the project, without prior noticed and justification. 
Eligibility criteria for seed capital financing for FOs are specified in annex 10. The seed capital 
financing will be directed mainly to the FOs not yet supported by RCDP (or PBDP) to ensure a greater 
outreach of IFAD supported interventions. 
  The seed capital financing support can be used for purchase assets as machinery, cooling or 
98.
draying facility, equipment etc. Procurement of subject of seed capital financing will be done by PCUs, 
based on technical specification of procured goods agreed between PCU and FOs, with a facilitation 
of service provider. Contract with supplier will be signed by all parties which co-finance that 
procurement (PCU, FO, etc.). 
In addition to fulfilling formal eligibility criteria, the selection of applications for support by seed 
99.
capital financing will be done based on an assessment of FOs contribution to the achievement of 
project objectives and their incorporation into broader business plans at the level of the cluster/value 
chain. Also, the financial plans for these investments must realistically show that the income earned 
by the partnering FOs will be sufficient to meet the maintenance and replacement costs of purchased 
assets after their productive life as well as can generate surplus towards capital formation and 
increasing the returns to the target group farmers. 
Institutional development, training and advisory support for FOs (A2:SC2:C1). The 
100.
assistance to FOs in terms of capacity building and training will be demand driven. The project will 
hire experienced consultants and trainers in cooperative movement and the defined technical areas. 
These activities will be targeted at FOs applying for BP support. Potential areas for training of PGs' 
management are: (1) organizational structure; (2) governance and management; (3) tailored women 
FOs leadership programmes; (4) market intelligence and marketing, standards e.g. GAP, GHP, 
HACCP, Global GAP, ISO, organic, SPS, EU standards and negotiation skills; (5) accounting, finance 
and bookkeeping; (6) BP development, costing and financing, contract development with other chain 
stakeholders, collective/bulk marketing and procurement of inputs, management of common storage 
facilities and equipment; (7) technology development for agricultural intensification and productivity 
enhancement; (8) financial literacy and linkages with banks; (9) savings mobilization and approaches 
to implement internal savings schemes for addressing social needs, business expansion and 
collateral requirements of the banks; and (10) sustainable adoption of climate resilient crop 
development that will be accompanied with approaches for sustainable use of natural resources. The 
training plan for FOs will be also part of regular AWPB, as well as training plan for farmers. The needs 
for training for all FOs' management will be collected and consolidated, to be contracted at once. The 
part of capacity building should be will exchange and learning visits, within the country and in Europe. 
A.3. Modalities of implementation infrastructure investment support  
101.
Infrastructure investment support. This subcomponent improves the profitability of the target 
households, connect business leaders to the target households and improves the market participation 
of the beneficiaries. READP support for infrastructure schemes will be demand-driven, as identified in 
BPs using a cluster-based approach. The BPs will identify the full range of infrastructure requirements 
for their successful implementation including privately owned and publicly owned or co-owned 
investments. Under this subcomponent the project will support publicly owned or co-owned 
investments. Public ownership will be considered when a municipality has majority ownership of the 
infrastructure. READP will support two categories of infrastructure activities: (1) publically owned and 
managed infrastructure such as public water supply, which benefits multiple farmers in a defined area, 
or the establishment and rehabilitation of feeder roads, culverts and small bridges which connect 
business leaders and target households or (2) publically owned infrastructure, such as irrigation 
structure, cooling and packing facilities, which is co-managed in partnership between the 
municipalities, FOs and private sector. More details on the types of infrastructure supported is 
provided below: 
197 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Table 2. Types of infrastructure investments 
Types of infrastructure 
Explanation 
Publically managed infrastructure 
Rural roads 
Small bridges 
Domestic water supply 
READ  will  consider  improving  rural  road  infrastructure  as  poor  road  conditions, 
especially  for  the  commercially  active  rural  households/smallholders,  is  another 
key  barrier  to  accessing  markets,  as  well  as  working  together  with  other 
smallholders.  
Improved rural roads are expected to: 
-  Reduce post-harvest losses caused by damage to produce as a result of long 
period of transport and shaking and vibration of the vehicle transporting 
produce on poor roads. The reduction in losses depends on the susceptibility 
of product to damage during transport as well as the length of road but an 
average reduction in losses in BiH could be from 12% (prior to road 
rehabilitation) to 2% (after road rehabilitation). Products such as tomatoes 
and raspberries are especially vulnerable to damage during transport.  
-  Reduce post-harvest losses caused by damage to produce as a result of long 
period of transport and shaking and vibration of the vehicle transporting 
produce on poor roads. If farmers can deliver high quality produce (extra 
class or first class) they can obtain a higher price from the buyers than if 
product delivered is damaged and of second class quality.  
Encourage commercial production in areas dominated by subsistence 
farming thus increasing the quantity of produced in a particular locality.  
- 
-  Reduce transport time thus generating savings in fuel costs.  
-  Generate other community/social benefits such as faster access to schools 
and other community services.  
Lack  of  adequate  bridges  can  impact  accessibility  and  may  be  a  barrier  to 
accessing  markets  as  well  as  working  together  with  other  smallholders.  Small 
bridges  can  reduce  the  travel  route  with  similar  benefits  accrued  as  those 
described under rural roads.  
READ  will  consider  applications  for  water  supply  infrastructure  on  a  pragmatic 
basis based on demand and supporting BPs. Lack of water is a significant factor 
in  social  livelihoods  and  productivity.  READP  investments  should  focus  on 
multiple use facilities providing households with domestic water supply as well as 
water to cater for livestock or storage/packing facilities.  
Infrastructure co-managed in partnership between the public and the private sector 
Cold 
storage 
packing facilities 
and 
READ will consider improving cold storage facilities (such as cooling and IQF) as 
a lack of adequate post-harvest handling facilities impact product quality as well 
as market opportunities for small landholders. These cold storage facilities will be 
linked  with  small  storage  and  packing  facilities,  as  relevant,  and  connected  to 
domestic or international buyers. The benefits of such infrastructure include: 
-  Guaranteed market for producers, which encourages commercial production 
(i.e. in the past, farmers may have grown small quantities of the product part 
of which they sold on the green market and the rest consumed at home e.g. 
making jams etc OR they may have sold to a cooling facility which is far away 
resulting in post-harvest losses and reduced product quality and therefore 
lower price paid to the farmer. With a cooling facility, farmers would have the 
incentive to expand their production, become commercial producers where 
most of the product produced is supplied to the local cooling facility. 
Additional people would also be interested to enter the production.  
- 
Improved post-harvest handling at the local level resulting in higher product 
quality (therefore higher price paid to farmer) and reduced post-harvest 
losses (we can assume 20% higher return to farmer). This is especially 
important for highly perishable produce such as raspberries, tomatoes etc.  
- 
Employment generation at the facility. A cold storage facility is expected to 
198 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Small 
storage 
packing facilities 
and 
Rural market 
Irrigation  for  agricultural 
production 
Small 
infrastructure 
marketing 
require 2 FT staff and at least 5 seasonal employees.  
- 
Improved access to international market - increased exports. Some produce, 
such as raspberries, are export oriented crops - it is not possible to sell or 
locally produced berries domestically.  
READ  will  consider  supporting  small  storage  and  packing  facilities  (which  may 
include  small  cooling  units  and/or  drying  and  packing  facilities).  These  facilities 
will  be  linked  with  larger  cold  storage  and  packing  facilities  described  above, 
wherever  relevant,  using  a  cluster/value  chain  approach.  The  benefits  of  such 
infrastructure  are  similar  to  those  described  above  as  a  lack  of  adequate  post-
harvest  handling  facilities impact  product  quality  as  well  as  market  opportunities 
for small landholders. 
READ  will  consider  supporting  infrastructure  for  rural  markets  as  rural  markets 
can  help  target  households  improve  their  access  to  the  domestic  market  and 
generate off-farm employment, including rural tourism.  
READ will supporting irrigation infrastructure development projects in areas where 
there is  a  possibility  to leverage  and  build on investments by  other  donors  or to 
establish  new  irrigation  infrastructure.  For  example,  construction  of  secondary 
infrastructure  may  be  possible  by  building  upon  primary  irrigation  infrastructure 
that has been built or is in the process of being built with the support of the World 
Bank.  It  is  therefore  important  for  READ  to  ensure  that  agricultural  producers 
have  an  interest  and  finance  to  install  tertiary/on-farm  irrigation  system,  and  a 
READ target group, prior to investing in secondary irrigation system.  
Additionally  READ  may  support  development  of  irrigation  infrastructure  in  new 
areas, including small scale irrigation projects such as water retention dams with 
accompanying  infrastructure,  which  benefits  multiple  farmers  in  a  defined  area. 
Such examples of infrastructure exist in several part of BiH - these projects were 
implemented in 2011 by Tuzla-based CRP with USAID support.  
Irrigation can substantially improve yields and product quality and is an important 
measure to mitigate against draught, contributing to climate resilience.  
READ will also consider additional smaller market infrastructure needs based on 
the needs of key value chain actors and municipalities - provided it meets project 
objectives i.e. there are clear social and economic benefits. Such  eligible smaller 
infrastructure  projects  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  small  mobile  cold 
storage/pre-cooling  facilities  (0/+2  oC),  nursery  greenhouses,  livestock  water 
points, lacto-freezers, solar panels to power water pumps or cold storage facilities 
(for  example),  drying  facilities  (for  fruits  or  NTFPs),  distillation  units  for  Non-
Timber  Forest  Products  (NTFPs).  Ineligible  infrastructure  projects  include  all 
activities that have limited or no impact on the READ target group and cluster, for 
example street lighting and town roads. 
102.
  The scope and type of infrastructure investment. READP will support infrastructure 
schemes, which have been identified in BPs as pertinent for their successful implementation, and 
therefore will primarily benefit the READP-target group (direct beneficiaries). Additional farmers 
(indirect beneficiaries) may also benefit from such infrastructure. For example roads would be 
expected to be utilized by indirect beneficiaries in addition to direct beneficiaries when constructed.  
  Since post-harvest handling facilities have been identified as a critical bottleneck in value chain 
103.
integration and market access, READP will ensure that adequate cold storage and packing facilities 
are developed so they benefit all of the READP target producers (refer to table below). Based on 
READP model, at least 81 percent of READP direct beneficiaries (approx. 6,100 farmers) will have 
access to READP-supper cold storage facilities. In this case it is assumed that the remaining farmers 
will be involved in agricultural production where cold storage is not required (e.g. marigold production 
on dairy farming) and these will have access to other types of storage and packing facilities. It is also 
important to note that some of the pertinent infrastructure already exists in targeted municipalities and 
that READP will aim to develop infrastructure that is currently lacking i.e. identified in BPs as 
necessary to benefit the value chain, cluster and the target group. 
199 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Table 3. Estimated number of households targeted by infrastructure support 
Infrastructure type 
Number of units 
expected to be 
supported 
Number of expected 
direct beneficiary 
HH per unit* 
Total number of 
expected direct 
beneficiary HH 
Percent of target 
group benefiting 
(i.e. out of 7,500**) 
43% 
16% 
16% 
10 
16 
5 
4 
200 
200 
300 
3,200 
1,000 
1,200 
Rural roads 
Small bridges 
Domestic water supply 
Cold storage and 
packing facilities 
Small storage and 
packing facilities 
Rural market 
Irrigation for agricultural 
production 
Small marketing 
infrastructure 
TOTAL 
* The estimates are based on previous experience with similar infrastructure developments under IFAD-funded projects in BiH. 
** 7,500 refers to the number of READP direct beneficiaries for starter packages.  
3,600 
3,000 
200 
1,000 
18 
3 
4 
78 
2,420 
6,100 
610 
220 
200 
11 
50 
81% 
48% 
40% 
32% 
3% 
  For budgeting purposes, unit price was based on the review of recently completely construction 
104.
works for similar projects. Costs per unit can vary dramatically depending on the condition of any 
existing facilities (as in the case of cold chambers and storage and packing facilities) or the status and 
local topography as in the case of local roads. An average unit price was used for budgeting 
purposes.  
  Also, it is important to note that the total allocated budget for different infrastructure types is 
105.
indicative only - the actual allocation of funds will be subject to identified needs. Considering READP 
cluster approach and PCUs may spend less or more on different infrastructure items, within 
subcomponent 1.3. Furthermore, if there is insufficient demand for rural roads, the PCU may re-
allocate funds allocated to rural roads to other project sub-components.  
Infrastructure investment process. The process of implementation infrastructure support 
106.
goes trough subsequent activities: (1) stakeholder sensitisation about infrastructure investments; (2) 
identification of eligible proposals; (3) selection and prioritisation of infrastructure investments; (4) 
design, procurement and implementation and (5) monitoring, supervision and training. The PCU will 
implement the infrastructure related activities through the selected SP while APCU will implement 
these directly through the in-house infrastructure engineer. 
Stakeholder 
sensitisation 
Selection and 
prioritisation 
Design, procurement 
and implementation 
Monitoring and 
supervision 
Financing 
Diagram 4. Process of implementation infrastructure investment support  
200 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
  More detailed process of infrastructure proposal identification, selection, implementation and 
107.
monitoring is shown on workflow attached as annex 11. 
  Stakeholder sensitisation about infrastructure investments (A1:SC3:C1). This will be done 
108.
during the orientation workshops organised before the call for business proposals. The service 
provider (in case of PCU) and the infrastructure engineer (in the case of APCU) will be responsible to 
ensure that the business plans include (1) infrastructure requirements from the geographical locations 
with higher concentration of target households or locations which can increase in outreach to target 
households from these investments and (2) that these infrastructure have impact on the profitability of 
the agribusinesses. Proposing climate resilience of the infrastructure investments are welcome. 
  Selection and prioritisation of infrastructure investments (A2:SC3:C3). Identification of 
109.
infrastructure investments will be undertaken in a participatory and demand-driven manner. Proposals 
can be submitted by representatives of the business leaders or municipalities. Proposals for 
infrastructure investment support must be based on the enabling infrastructure development areas 
already identified in the business plans.  
  Process of identification and selection infrastructural needs will be assisted and guided by 
110.
service provider/infrastructure engineer. The A/PCU will orient the SP and infrastructure engineer on 
the above aspects who will then orient the other stakeholders. The main tasks of the SP and the 
infrastructure engineer will be technical and financial analysis of screened proposals, review and 
approval of engineering designs, procurement of civil works and submission of evaluation reports and 
supervision of civil works. The A/PCU and the SPs will also support stakeholders to identify important 
social, environmental and climate issues early in the BP process, with adaption and mitigation 
measures factored in the BP process from the outset. 
  Rural infrastructure proposals selection will start with their identification, by municipalities or by 
111.
agribusiness companies in submitted business plans (long list of proposals). The short listing of the 
proposals will be done based on their compatibility with the business plans approved to be 
implemented. The criteria for short listing infrastructure projects are attached in annex 14. Further final 
selection of shortlisted proposals are made based on professional assessment of their technical and 
financial feasibility and selection criteria listed in annex 15. The final decision about approval co-
financing of infrastructure projects is done by the PSCs. 
  Design, procurement and implementation infrastructure projects (A3:SC3:C3). The 
112.
municipalities are responsible for construction design of the selected infrastructure. The PCUs are 
responsible for procurement infrastructure works (directly or by hired service provider). 
Representatives of the municipality and other partners financing the part of the contract may also be 
represented in the evaluation committee. Depending of the financing model, contract with selected 
constructor signs only PCU (if co-financiers pay its contribution on bank contribution account) or PCU 
and all co-financiers (if they pay their part of contribution direct on the account of constructor). 
Responsibility for the provision of urbanistic-technical conditions (approvals for the commencement of 
works) is on the municipalities on which territory the works are carried out. The works are carried out 
in accordance with the technical design and the bill of quantities, which is an integral part of the 
contract, and payments are made periodically on the basis of interim invoices and the final invoicing 
at the end. Infrastructure engineers will also facilitate the development of management agreements 
between different actors for operating the infrastructure. 
113.
  Monitoring, supervision and training (A4:SC3:C3). Process of constriction works will 
periodically monitor service provider or APCU infrastructure engineer. Continuous supervision of 
construction site and scope and quality of works performs supervisor officially appointed by 
municipality on which territory infrastructure is located. The handover of carried out works has done 
by expert commission appointed by the municipality and in the presence of service provider/ APCU 
engineer. They will also facilitate the development of management agreements between different 
actors for operating the infrastructure. Following the technical acceptance of the works the SP and the 
infrastructure engineer will train the actors engaged for the management of the infrastructure where 
relevant (e.g. in case of management of irrigation infrastructure). 
  Financing arrangements (A4:SC3:C3). They are several arrangement of financing (ratio of co-
114.
financing) investments in infrastructure, depending on type of infrastructure indicated in the table 
below. The approved infrastructure investments will be co-financed by READP in partnership with 
201 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
municipalities and, whenever applicable, other entities such as agribusinesses, FOs, individual 
farmers. The expected average investment by municipalities and others shall be 25%, however, the 
eligibility and co-financing proportions expected from municipalities and other entities will vary 
according to their economic development category. The developed and the semi developed 
municipalities will not be eligible for project financing for roads, bridges, village water supply and rural 
markets. Their cost contribution for other infrastructure projects will be higher (50-70%) compared to 
the less developed municipalities (5-15%) as presented in the table below. However, the actual co-
financing commitment to an infrastructure project will be one of the key criteria for the selection of an 
infrastructure for financing. The expected average investment through IFAD financing is 75% (may 
vary between 95% and 30% depending on the development category of the municipality) but in all 
cases IFAD financing in different infrastructure categories will be subject to ceilings (in EURO) as 
defined in the table below. These ceilings are only applicable to IFAD financing. There is no ceiling on 
the total size of infrastructure investment as long as the infrastructure development meet READP 
objectives.  
Table 4. Scheme of municipalities variation in co-financing investments in infrastructure 
Minimum contribution from municipality and other entities*  
Extremely 
underdeveloped 
Under- 
developed 
Semi- 
developed  Developed 
Type of infrastructure 
Publically managed infrastructure 
Rural roads 
Small bridges 
Domestic water supply 
Infrastructure co-managed in partnership between the public and the private sector 
Cold storage and packing facilities 
Small storage and packing 
facilities 
Rural market 
Irrigation for agricultural production 
Small marketing infrastructure 
X 
50% 
X 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
15% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
50% 
50% 
15% 
15% 
5% 
5% 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
70% 
70% 
X 
70% 
X 
IFAD  
ceiling  
in EUR 
75,000 
75,000 
40,000 
100,000 
50,000 
75,000 
 85,000 
10,000 
*other entities include SMEs, FOs, individual farmers 
B.  Environmental and Social Management Framework 
115.
  Background. READP's objective is for full mainstreaming of environmental, social and climate 
issues throughout the project cycle. Clear procedures on risk assessment are one important element 
of this endeavour, to: (1) provide information and analysis that strengthen the social, environmental, 
and climate dimensions of projects and programmes; (2) maximize social, environmental, and climate 
change adaptation benefits, and avoid or minimize negative impacts; and (3) increase the 
consistency, transparency and accountability in decision-making. 
  Potential program’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and risks. 
116.
READP's Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedure (SECAP) Note provides an 
overview of program's social, environmental, and climate change impacts and risks. In according to 
that note, this project is classified as category “B” (social and environmental category). It will invest in 
(small) market and social (rural) infrastructure through municipalities but also according to the 
business plans prepared (and implemented) by the borrowers. It is envisaged that these will include, 
inter alia, secondary and tertiary irrigation infrastructure, cool storage facilities and processing 
facilities, and feeder roads. These activities will have site-specific environmental and social impacts. 
The social impacts are expected to be positive, while the environmental impacts – while not major – 
can be mitigated through different means, including provision of technical advice and capacity 
building.  
  To avoid impacts, an Environmental and Social Management Framework will be prepared for 
117.
the project, in accordance with the revised IFAD social and environmental impact assessment 
guidelines, prior to project start-up. The ESMF will describe how environmental assessment/related 
licenses and compliance with national legislation will be built into the project’s formal operational 
procedures governing investment decision-making.  
202 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
  The project is expected to reduce pressure on natural resources by providing financial (e.g. 
118.
credit) and social (e.g. infrastructure or pesticide safety equipment) incentives for primary producers 
for enforcing more environmentally sound natural resource management practices. 
  While climate change is an issue for BiH, an analysis of climate risk in the context of this project 
119.
categorizes it at moderate. Populations depended on agriculture are particularly exposed to negative 
climate-related effects. Projected heavy rainfall, storms, hail, floods, drought, heat weaves and frost, 
and pronounced water scarcity during the summer are predominantly likely to compound poverty 
challenges, as they result in more frequent and severe climate related disasters. The project will seek 
to mitigate this by improving climate adaptation knowledge(training, capacity building) and climate-
resilient infrastructure. Also, by contributing to the diversification of enterprises of rural populations, 
the project will increase the resilience of communities to the effects of climate change.  
120.
  Environmental or climate change impacts are, however, negligible due to in part to the small-
scale nature of interventions. They can be improved to result in positive impacts or avoided through 
technical advice and capacity building on, and implementation of, inter alia: sustainable agricultural 
practices, efficient water use, responsible social infrastructure construction, and support to product 
certification which will promote the adoption of higher environmental standards in production and 
processing activities carried out by partner enterprises, cooperatives and associated Producer 
Associations. 
Table 5. Potential Negative Impacts of READP supported programmes by sub-component 
Sub-component 
Potential negative impacts 
Mitigation strategy 
Development and 
implementation of 
pro-poor business 
plans 
Transforming non-commercial 
households to commercial households 
may result in increased soil and water 
pollution due to inappropriate fertilizer 
and excessive pesticide application, soil 
erosion, and health and safety issues 
due to lack of health and safety 
procedures during spraying.  
Reduced biodiversity is possible due to 
unsustainable harvesting of plants. 
BPs may ignore environmental and 
climate risks. 
Starter packages may include non-
environmentally friendly inputs. 
Farmers’ 
organization 
development 
FO seed capital financing and 
institutional development training and 
advisory support may not consider 
environmental and climate risks. 
Mainstream environmental and climate proofing measures 
during stakeholder sensitization events and BP development 
process. 
Include environmental and climate risk assessment as part of 
the BP assessment process.  
Promote, through technical advice and capacity building, Good 
Agricultural Practices (GAPs) and climate-resilient agriculture to 
minimize adverse environmental impacts as a result of 
commercial agricultural production.  
Promote, through technical advice and capacity building, 
sustainable collection practices in the Non Timber Forest 
Product (NTFP) sector. 
Promote, through technical advice and capacity building, IPM, 
pesticides suitable for use under IPM, and safe pesticide use 
practices.  
Provide support for production certification (such as organic and 
Global GAP), which will promote the adoption of higher 
environmental standards in production and processing.  
Include environmental and climate risk assessment as part of 
the FO seed capital financing assessment process.  
Promote, through technical advice and capacity building, Good 
Agricultural Practices (GAPs) and climate-resilient agriculture to 
minimize adverse environmental impacts as a result of 
commercial agricultural production and processing.  
Enabling 
infrastructure 
development 
Infrastructure proposals in BPs may 
ignore. environmental and climate risks. 
Poorly designed infrastructure may have 
adverse environmental impacts and/or 
may not be climate-resilient.  
Mainstream environmental and climate proofing measures 
during stakeholder sensitization events and BP development 
process. 
Include environmental and climate risk assessment as part of 
the BP assessment process for proposed infrastructure.  
Promote, through technical advice and capacity building, 
environmentally sustainable infrastructure design and operation.  
203 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
  Recommended mitigation measures. Below are suggested environmental mitigation and 
121.
climate change mitigation and adaption measures, by project sub-component, which will help to 
mainstream environmentally sustainable strategies. Annexes provide additional details. 
  Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans. Transforming non-
122.
commercial households to commercial households as a result of READP activities, namely through 
development and implementation of pro-business plans, including provision of starter packages, may 
result in increased soil and water pollution to inappropriate fertilizer and excessive pesticide 
application, soil erosion, and health and safety issues due to lack of health and safety procedures 
during spraying. Furthermore, reduced biodiversity is possible due to unsustainable harvesting of 
plants.  
123.
  The following measures are recommended to mitigate these risks: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
A/PCUs shall orient the service providers to the project objectives, target group, approach 
and implementation methodologies; including the social, environmental and climate issues 
and importance of mainstreaming environmental and climate proofing measures in project 
activities.  
The service providers in close coordination with cluster officers and extension service shall 
be responsible for providing technical guidance to the business leaders during the detailed 
business plan development process, which includes identifying important social, 
environmental and climate issues to ensure that adaptation and mitigation measures are 
factored in the BP process from the outset. This includes dissemination of climate 
information to target farmers to guide their choices and timely decision making and 
providing advise on the selection of suitable crops for the target area, Good Agricultural 
Practices (GAPs) as well as adoption of climate resilient infrastructure such as drip 
irrigation will be encouraged. The BPs shall include a section on Environmental, Social 
and Climate Aspects which shall include a summary of the potential environmental impacts 
of the proposed activities, climate risks, as well as measures that will enhance the 
resilience and sustainability of smallholder farming through adaptation and mitigation 
measures. The applicants shall include the relevant environmental self screening form 
(annex 16).  
A/PCU shall incorporate environmental risk assessment as part of the BP assessment 
process. The reviewers of BPs shall consider the following: How well are environmental 
aspects reflected in the business idea regarding climate resilience, sustainable 
management of natural resources, use of chemicals. Potential, un-mitigatable negative 
impacts shall be scored negatively (i.e. to reduce the actual final score of the BPs during 
the assessment).  
A/PCU shall complete the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
checklist for short-listed proposals (annex 17). 
Procurement of agricultural inputs for starter packages shall comply with the mitigation 
plan in annex 18.  
A/PCU/Service Providers shall promote, through technical advice and capacity building, 
sustainable collection practices in the Non Timber Forest Product (NTFP) sector. 
READP, through service providers/extension agents, shall promote Integrated Pest 
Management and safe pesticide use practices (annex 19).  
READP shall provide support for production certification (such as organic and Global 
GAP), which will promote the adoption of higher environmental standards in production 
and processing.  
204 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
As  defined  by  the  UN  FAO1,  Good  Agricultural  Practices  are  practices  that  address 
environmental, economic and social sustainability for  on-farm processes, and results in safe 
and  quality  food  and  non-food  agricultural  products.  The  implementation  of  GAPs  should 
therefore contribute to sustainable agriculture and rural development. Furthermore, producers 
wishing  to  access  European  retail  chains  can  implement  and  obtain  certification  in 
GlobalG.A.P.  standard1  (world's  leading  farm  assurance  program),  to  help  comply  with 
Europe-wide  accepted  criteria  for  food  safety,  sustainable  production  methods,  worker  and 
animal welfare, and responsible use of water, and plant propagation materials 
124.
  Farmers’ organization development mitigation measures: 
- 
- 
- 
The applicants shall include the environmental screening form (annex 16). 
Include ESMF review as part of the FO seed capital financing assessment process (annex 
17). 
A/PCU/Service Providers shall promote, through technical advice and capacity building, 
Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) and climate-resilient agriculture to minimize adverse 
environmental impacts as a result of commercial agricultural production.  
125.
  Enabling infrastructure development mitigation measures: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
A/PCUs shall orient the service providers to the project objectives, target group, approach 
and implementation methodologies; including the social, environmental and climate issues 
and importance of mainstreaming environmental and climate proofing measures in project 
activities.  
The service providers in close coordination with cluster officers and extension service shall 
be responsible for providing technical guidance to the business leaders during the detailed 
business plan development process, which includes identifying important social, 
environmental and climate issues to ensure that adaptation and mitigation measures are 
factored in the BP process from the outset to incorporate relevant environmental and 
climate proofing measures to safeguard the infrastructure from natural hazards (such as 
flooding and landslides) through designs that take into account the climate risks. The BPs 
shall include a section on Environmental, Social and Climate Aspects which shall include a 
summary of the potential environmental impacts of the proposed activities, climate risks, 
as well as measures that will enhance the resilience and sustainability of enabling 
infrastructure through adaptation and mitigation measures. The applicants shall include the 
environmental screening form (annex 16). 
A/PCU shall incorporate environmental risk assessment as part of the BP assessment 
process. The reviewers of BPs shall consider the following: How well are environmental 
aspects reflected in the business idea regarding climate resilience, sustainable 
management of natural resources, use of chemicals. Potential, un-mitigatable negative 
impacts shall be scored negatively (i.e. to reduce the actual final score of the BPs during 
the assessment).  
A/PCU shall complete the ESMF checklist for short-listed proposals (annex 17). 
A/PCU / SP shall promote, through technical advice and capacity building, environmentally 
sustainable infrastructure design and operation. For example, A/PCU / SP shall 
incorporate relevant environmental and climate proofing measures to safeguard the 
infrastructure from natural hazards (such as flooding and landslides) through designs that 
take into account the climate risks. The aim of the measures is to avoid damages to 
property and forgone economic activity as a result of damages (e.g. failed bridges, 
damaged buildings), effects on health and human life, and impacts on environmental 
services (e.g. erosion, loss of natural capacity to protect from future climate change). In 
addition READP will promote measures that reduce the adverse environmental impact of 
205 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
these investments by supporting energy and water efficiencies. Suggested measures for 
different infrastructure projects are described in annex 17.  
126.
  Laws on Environmental Protection. FBiH and RS each have a Law on Environmental 
Protection, which regulates their respective Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) procedures, 
together with their by-laws which determine the scope/size of projects, and the subsequent 
procedures these would follow, to obtain the relevant licenses. 
206 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
III.  The arrangements and modalities of implementation component Project organization & 
management  
A. 
Institutional and implementation arrangements 
  Responsibilities. The respective Ministry of Finance is designated authorized representative of 
127.
the analogous entity for the purpose of section 15.03 IFAD General Condition, but the two ministries 
of agriculture in the two BiH entities will be responsible for the operational implementation of the 
READP in the territory for which they are responsible. The Federation’s Ministry of Agriculture, Water 
Management and Forestry (FMAWMF) will be lead project agency for the project implementation on 
the territory of Federation of BiH and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management of 
the Republika Srpska (MAFWM RS) for the project implementation on the territory of the Republika 
Srpska. Both ministries transfer the coordination of project implementation to the two existing project 
units which are headed by project unit directors. The PCU/APCU director coordinate project activates 
with IFAD and responsible ministry of agriculture and facilitate communication between IFAD and 
ministries in the country. 
  PCU subordination. In the Federation of BiH the READP implementation will coordinate the 
128.
Project Coordination Unit (PCU) which has been responsible for the implementing all earlier IFAD 
funded projects. As well in the Republika Srpska the project implementation will coordinate Agriculture 
Projects Coordination Unit (APCU) which is, beside of IFAD projects, responsible also for 
implementation the World bank funded projects. 
129.
  PCUs responsibility. PCUs will be responsible for: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Preparation of annual work plans and budgets (including procurement plans) which 
reflecting the needs, aspirations and priorities of project target groups and beneficiaries; 
Effective and cost-efficient coordination of direct or indirect execution of all project 
activities;  
Ensuring synergies and complementarities between project activities across project 
components and subcomponents; 
Contracting implementing agencies, their guiding and monitoring and evaluation their 
performances; 
-  Maintenance of frequent information exchange with external partners within the project to 
ensure efficient project coordination; 
-  Maintenance of project accounts in accordance with IFAD requirements and allocation of 
funds in according with contracts and other commitments; 
Timely preparation and submission of loan withdrawal applications; 
Procurement of goods, works and services required for the PCUs and final beneficiaries; 
Field level monitoring of the project progress and performances of implementing agencies; 
Preparation of periodic progress and financial reports required by IFAD and entity 
governments; 
Assume M&E responsibilities and functions; 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-  Organizing annual and ad hock workshops for different project stakeholders in function of 
improvement project design and performance; 
- 
Preparation of an in-depth review of project performance and achievements prior to the 
mid-term review, providing an analysis of successes, problems, constraints and the 
effective participation of women and youth in the project. 
  PCUs are also empowered to determine the optimal execution modalities for each project 
130.
activity and a way of their implementation. 
  Staffing. Project units consist of a sufficient number of qualified experts who are in charge of 
131.
the implementation of one or more IFAD or other projects whose coordination is assigned to that unit. 
207 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Staff already work for IFAD funded RBDP and RCDP will be inherit for the purpose of implementation 
READ project.  
132.
  The PCU and the APCU each will be headed by a project director who will also be the 
secretaries of the PSCs. The READP staffing plan for other positions takes into consideration the 
parallel implementation of RCDP for two cycles, from 2017-2021 and 2022-2026. In general, all the 
RCDP staff members will also be involved in the implementation of READP. In addition, READP will 
finance two additional staff positions in PCU and in APCU to assist them to cope with the additional 
responsibilities of implementing two projects simultaneously. The detailed staff structure in PCU and 
APCU will be as follows: 
a)  PCU: In PCU the staffing for the RCDP already includes the director, two business 
development officers, M&E/targeting officer, procurement officer, finance officer and translator 
and driver. For the first two years of READP the salaries of these staff will be financed under 
RCDP. For the remaining three years of READP these salaries will be financed in 1:2 ratio 
between READP and RCDP. READP will finance two additional staff positions specifically 
hired for READP implementation. These two positions will be of READP project manager and 
accountant to enable the PCU cope with the additional responsibilities of implementing two 
projects simultaneously.  
b)  APCU: in APCU the staff for RCDP includes two business development officers, 
M&E/targeting officer, procurement officer, finance officer accountant, translator, secretary 
and driver. For the first two years of READP the salaries of these staff will be financed under 
RCDP. For the remaining three years of READP these salaries will be financed in 1:2 ratio 
between READP and RCDP. READP will finance two additional staff positions specifically 
hired for READP implementation. These two positions will be of project manager and an 
infrastructure civil engineer to enable the APCU cope with the additional responsibilities of 
implementing two projects simultaneously. 
  Terms of references for the additionally engaged staff in PCU and APCU are attached in annex 
133.
20 of this manual.  
  Knowledge management workshops. PCUs will conduct bi-annual inter-entity knowledge 
134.
management workshops as a forum for PCU's field coordinators and A/PCU's extension officers to 
exchange experiences, identify implementation constraints and document lessons learned with other 
stakeholders involve in project implementation.  
  Office and equipment. For the accomplishment of the tasks assigned to the units, the units 
135.
should have at their disposal sufficient office space and equipment in accordance with the number, 
scope and duration of the assigned projects. 
  Establishment of PSCs. The Project Steering Committees will be establish by the respective 
136.
government decision. The PSC is chaired the entity Ministry of Agriculture represented by the Minister 
personally or by another designated representative. The established PSC is one of preconditions for 
execution of first withdrawal application. The PSCs will meet at least three times a year and more 
frequently if it is needed.  
  Responsibilities of PSCs. The READP implementation will oversee and channel by READP 
137.
Project Steering Committees established in each of two BiH entities. Two PSCs are in charge of: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Providing conceptual, strategic and policy guidance for the implementation or redesign of 
the project activities and conformity with overall IFAD and national and sub-national 
development strategies; 
Approve the annual project work plan and budget; 
Approve annual and semi-annual progress report; 
Review project progress and performance; 
Approve implementation of selected business plans; 
208 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
- 
- 
Ensure effective cooperation between the PCUs and the entity/canton/municipality 
administrations; 
Resolve any implementation problems. 
  Composition of PSCs. PSCs consist from 7 to 10 members representatives of relevant 
138.
ministries and government departments, as well as representatives from the private, PAs and 
cooperative sectors. Chairman of PSC is the Minister of Agriculture or his/her delegate. Other PSC 
members may be representatives of respective the Ministry of Finance and other relevant ministries 
(e.g. Ministry of Industry, Ministry of Family and Youth or Ministry of Local Self-government), 
representative of Chamber of Commerce, Gender Centre and some professional organizations (union 
of cooperatives, organizations representing youth, women or some agriculture subsectors). The 
A/PCUs project directors will be the secretaries of the PSCs. 
  Annual work plans and budgets (AWPB) and corresponding procurement plans is the 
139.
project’s key guiding documents. The AWPB presents guidelines for project teams and their partners 
what and how they should work in the planning period. The scope and type of planned activities and 
ways of their implementation have implications for the necessary financial resources (budget), inputs 
that must be provided and the timetable of their execution. AWPBs are formulated taking into account 
the Project Design Report (PDR), supervision report recommendations and legal agreements, 
contract and management agreements of service providers and participating partners, the overall 
project's targets, procurement plans and development priorities of target communities. It is important 
to recognize moments when the original project design is not more appropriate and timely suggest 
certain changes through the plans for the respective year, with prior approval by the national and the 
IFAD authorities. 
  AWPB timing. The first project AWPB would be prepared, together with the procurement plan 
140.
for the first 18 months, and be presented for discussion during the start-up workshop and after that 
submitted to IFAD for no objection. Each AWPB has to be review, approved and validated by the 
Project Steering Committees and IFAD (review, approval and no objection) not later than 60 days 
before the beginning of the fiscal year. That means that AWPBs would be prepared, discussed and 
approved several months before the beginning of the financial year covering in the AWPB.  
141.
  Participatory approach in AWPB preparation process. The process for designing AWPB will 
be participatory, reflecting a bottom-up prioritisation process from the business units at cluster levels, 
as per READ's demand-driven nature. A wide range of partners and stakeholders should be involved 
in process of identifying needs and their transforming in project responses and interventions. During 
the preparation of the AWPB, the beneficiaries from the project's target group should not be forgotten 
and ignored. They will have a chance to articulate their needs and opinions during Annual Stakeholder 
Review and Planning Workshops and preparation of next AWPB should be demand-driven, based on 
experience and results of implementation previous plans.  
142.
  Start-up workshop. The start-up workshop will be organised just after the project become 
effective. On the workshop will be discussed in more detailed project design and tailored the first 
AWPB. During start-up workshop will also be considered project's monitoring and evaluation system. 
It is important that project teams and other service providers are form the beginning familiar with IFAD 
targeting approach, performance based contracting system and key performance indicators regarding 
targeting effectiveness, backward linkages and the impact pathways to foster the development of 
more inclusive value chains and increase the competiveness of rural enterprises.  
  Content of AWPB. The AWP will contain the main goals, quantified in the form of certain target 
143.
quantities and values, activates that will be undertaken in the planning period, their holders of their 
implementation, systematized by project's components and subcomponents. The AWP will follow 
annual financial and procurement plans. The outline of AWP is presented in annex 22. All planned 
activities should have clear financial allocation and be incorporated into financial plan (budget), as 
much as more precisely. Also AWP and budget links to procurement plan in which will be indentified 
expected scope and timetable of procurement.  
209 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
  Progress reports. The progress reporting process will follow timetable of regular reporting 
144.
deadlines. MIS database will be constantly supplied with data from different sources and stakeholders 
and they will be periodically transferred into progress reports with additional analysis and evaluations. 
The set of yearly reports constituting the minimum reporting requirements include: (1) (semi) annual 
progress report, (2) financial report; (3) procurement report, (4) monitoring report; and (5) audit report. 
The overall template for (semi)annual project progress report is in annex 23. The project closing ends 
with a completion report. The progress reports follow the structure of AWP and on quantitative and 
qualitative way shows what was achieved compare to planed with a explanations way that happened, 
coincidentally indicates what follows.  
B.  Project implementation modalities 
145.
  Project management model. The READP is implemented on the project management 
principles. Project implements directly two project coordination units (PCU based in Sarajevo and 
APCU based in Banja Luka) with additional support by field officers and service providers. The 
difference between the two project units is that the APCU in the project implementation relies more on 
the Agricultural Advisory Service, which is part of the same ministry, and which has regional offices 
throughout entire the RS. 
  Field officers. The both project units will provisionally hire additional individual consultants to 
146.
coordinate project activates at the cluster level (cluster coordinators). The PCU will contract 5 field 
officers as cluster coordinators, one for each cluster, to ensure field presence of the PCU and assist 
quality implementation process. In the RS the APCU will ensure field presence through extension 
officers deployed in the seven regional extension offices of the Agency of Extension Services 
147.
  Service providers. For the implementation of some project activities, in according with a 
project design, project units engage external service providers. Outscore service providers can be 
individuals, NGOs, SMEs, public institutions (e.g. public extension service, regional or local 
development agencies), consulting companies and other type organisation. Those arrangements can 
be based on contractual or some other type of agreements (e.g. memorandum of cooperation). The 
main role of service provider (preferably one for as many activities as possible) is support 
implementation of majority activates under component 1, e.g. preparation and implementation 
business plans. Because Agriculture Advisory Service does not have experience with the business 
plan methodology, outsourcing support is needed and in the RS (APCU), but to a less extent than in 
the FBiH. The service providers will be engaged based on performance-based contractual 
arrangement and payment with a possibility of termination contract in the earlier stage, if performance 
are unsatisfactory. 
C.  Asset management 
  Premises and assets. Assumptions and preconditions for efficient implementation of the 
148.
READ project are: 
- 
- 
- 
The availability of sufficient assets, aligned with the needs of the project.  
Project premises, and all assets are kept safe and in good working order at all times. 
Regularly maintaining the assets in accordance with the manufacturer's warranty and 
recommendations. 
-  Office supplies are always available and a good stock level is maintained. 
- 
Avoiding the procurement of unnecessary and spare equipment and intermediate goods. 
  At the beginning of the project, it will be provided adequate premises and procure the 
149.
necessary planned assets in order to be able to implement the project without any restrictions from 
that side. 
210 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
150.
  Project vehicles. The project’s vehicles are well managed including: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
The types of vehicle are selected according to the highest value of money.  
Vehicles meet safety standards. 
Insurance policies are contracted and renewed in a timely manner. 
Vehicles are driven only by authorized personnel. 
Vehicles are used to provide economical fuel consumption. 
Vehicles are properly maintained and repaired. 
Vehicles are adequately garaged and protected against burglary. 
  Utilities. All utilities direct connected with project operations as office rent, telephone, 
151.
electricity, internet etc. should be secured on time and paid at the expense of the project. By nature, 
most of these services have only one supplier and therefore are supplied with a single source 
procurement method. If a project unit uses some of these services for free and for which there are no 
invoice, such a type of government contribution that can not be replacement for cash contribution, but 
will be assessed and recorded as an additional contribution. 
  Communication organization. Mail should be properly disposed of (regularly sent and 
152.
received and effectively distributed to the concerned staff). Electronic correspondence (e-mails) is 
being protected by antivirus software and regularly backup. It is desirable that the project units also 
have their own website where they will share with public the planed and realized project activities, 
publish procurement calls and invitations, and promote successful stories and examples. 
D. 
Internal rules for personnel 
  Personal and human rights of the project team members. Interpersonal relations on the basis 
153.
of respect of their personality and human rights, while achieving efficiency and synergy of teamwork, 
in particular: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
The staff has the same access to information without any discrimination. 
That staff and consultant contracts are drawn up accurately. 
That staff are paid monthly on time and without delay. 
That staff are aware of working conditions and procedures. 
The each staff member has a file with relevant personnel data.  
The professional staff performance assessment are made annually. 
  Working hours and conditions. The following stipulations will apply on working hours and 
154.
conditions: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
All staff will work a 40 hours a week.  
Field staff will adjust their workload, on the basis of a 40 hour week, at the least. Their 
work includes field work and visits, as well as office work.  
Additional working time, over 40 hours a week, is expected without overtime payment for 
all staff. Exceeding work will be compensated by using free hours and days in the period 
when the work process permits. 
Normally office staff working hours are from 08.00 to 16.00, with a half hour break for 
lunch, from Monday to Friday inclusive.  
Each office shall keep clear records of attendance of its staff. 
155.
  Leave regulations. The following stipulations will apply in case of leave:  
- 
- 
Staff are entitled to a number of days paid leave which are defined in their respective 
contracts in accordance with national norms.  
Prior to taking part or complete annual leave, staff are required to get clearance for their 
leave from the PCU/APCU director.  
211 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
- 
- 
- 
In addition to their paid leave, all staff are entitled to leave on holidays defined as such by 
the BiH and RS/FBiH. 
Staff may also take exceptional leave upon written authorisation from the PCU/APCU 
director. This will normally be granted in cases of urgent and demonstrated emergency 
regardless of the staff availability. The director will have full discretion to decide whether 
such leave is paid or unpaid. In other exceptional cases, the director may, approve unpaid 
leave if staff request it. 
Any absence or illness needs to be supported by an adequate medical certificate if the 
staff member prefer to be paid. The length and manner of payment of illness leave is in 
accordance with national legislation.  
  Salary, insurance & pensions. The following stipulations will apply in case of health and 
156.
pension staff insurance: 
- 
- 
- 
The project staff receives the net salary contracted for the period for which the contract of 
employment has been concluded. As a rule, salary is paid on a monthly basis. 
Apart the net salary, the project will pay the national health insurance, pension contribution 
and other accompanying fees for employees in accordance with the national rules and 
regulations in force in BiH/entities.  
Driver and passengers in the project vehicles, are covered by passenger insurance in 
accordance with the insurance regulations in BiH.  
157.
  Travel regulations. The following stipulations will apply: 
-  Most technical project staff and consultants are expected to travel on frequent and regular 
visits to different parts of the project area and for project business outside the project area.  
- 
- 
During travel periods staff shall as far as possible adjust to the local conditions and adapt 
to the programmes of the field staff.  
During field visits, staff are to be paid a travel allowance according to the following rates: 
travel within BiH and outside BiH in accordance with the decision of the Entity 
Government. 
E.  Human resource management 
158.
  Staff selection. The following stipulations will apply in case of staff selection: 
- 
As far as possible, the project will retain staff involved in the implementation of RBD and 
RCD projects for the implementation of READ project, because they are staff that have 
proved qualifications and experience.  
-  Whenever will be need for recruiting new staff, recruitment will be done in a competitive 
and transparent manner, which implies advertising free position in the press and other 
appropriate media and enable the project to select people by open competition process.  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Employment is done on the basis of clear conditions and criteria and evidence of their 
fulfillment. 
Employment shall be done only if suitable candidate are found, or position shall be re-
advertised.  
The employment of all new staff is subject to “no objection” by IFAD. 
Any staff employed from the civil service, other public or private institutions, must take 
long-term leave without extra pay. 
In the APCU case the sharing staff costs with other projects will be permitted whenever 
possible.  
Consultants will be selected according to IFAD guidelines for selection and employment of 
consultants. Once a consultant has been selected, if his/her work is considered 
212 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
satisfactorily, he/she will be asked to continue working as required for further periods of 
consultancy. 
159.
  Staff contracts. The following stipulations will apply on staff contracting: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Employment with the project is full-time but fixed term, with no expectation of continuation 
beyond the term stated. All staff work on the basis of their contract of employment.  
The project does not have any permanent staff and all staff are expected to make 
appropriate arrangements for their future once employment with the project is completed, 
either due to completion or suspension of the project, or of the termination of their post. 
Contracts are initially for one year, renewable on the basis of satisfactory performance 
review.  
All first concluded contracts shall include an initial 3-month trial period during which 
management and the staff member may terminate contract.  
All staff are liable to termination if the services are considered inadequate. Termination of 
contracts prior to completion or non-renewal shall be based on performance review and 
assessment by two senior staff. In the case of senior staff and consultants, termination or 
non-renewal can take place by decision by the project director and it is subject of 
confirmation by IFAD. 
  Staff training. All project team members have the right and obligation to be trained and to 
160.
participate in other forms of their capability building. The training plan for employees is part of the 
project annual work plan and financial plan. Employees can use paid leave in case of attendance 
training, on own expenses or paid by another party, with the prior approval of the A/PCU director. 
  Terms of reference for the project staff. Framework terms of reference for the permanent 
161.
READ project staff are in the annex 1. These terms of reference are for all staff and those staff who 
were recruited and implementing the on-going projects (RBDP and RCDP) will continue work in the 
PCU and APCU under their original terms of reference. For hiring new staff who will be employed in 
PCU/APCU for need of READP this ToRs are compulsory. 
213 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
III.  Financial and Disbursement Procedures 
A.  Financial arrangements  
162.
  Financing conditions for the IFAD loan. The IFAD loan is given on ordinary terms, and 
denominated in EURO. The currency of the designated accounts and repayments is in EURO. The 
IFAD reference rate applicable to loans on ordinary terms is based on an SDR weighted, EURIBOR 
(for EUR loans) 6-month composite rate of the four currencies which constitute the SDR basket 
(United States Dollar, Japanese Yen, Euro and Great Britain Pound), available on first business day of 
January and first business day of July, plus a variable spread. The IFAD reference rate is published 
on the IFAD website. 
  The loan closing date. As soon as either of the IFAD loan is declared effective, loan funds will 
163.
be disbursed over a six and half year period. The Project Completion Date is the sixth anniversary of 
the date of the entry into force the Financial Agreement. The Loan Closing Date is six months after the 
Project Completion Date and is the date after which IFAD and will terminate the right of BiH to make 
withdrawals from the Loan Account. 
  Responsibilities of ministries. The the Ministry of Finance and Treasury of Bosnia and 
164.
Herzegovinasign the Project Financing Agreement with IFAD on behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina as 
a borrower. After that the state Ministry signs two subsidiary loan agreements with the entities (the 
Federation of Bosnia Herzegovina and Republika Srpska) concerning distribution of IFAD loan and 
debt between the entities. The Federation of BiH and the Republika Srpska sign a project agreements 
with IFAD in terms of taking over responsibility for the implementation of project (or respective part of 
the project). The Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry (MAWMF) of the Federation 
of BiH is responsible for the project implementation within the FBiH, and the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) within the RS. These ministries hand over the 
implementation of the project two project units (PCU and APCU respectively) that operatively work on 
the implementation of the project and are responsible for it, including responsibility for implementation 
issues from the domain of financial management. 
IFAD 
Project agreements 
Financing 
agreement 
MFT BiH 
Subsidiary agrreements 
MoAWMF FBiH 
MoF FBiH 
MoF RS 
MoAFWM RS 
Part A of the project (FBiH) - PCU 
Part B of the project (RS) - APCU 
Borower (Bosna and Herzegovina) 
Diagram 4. Responsibilities for disbursement and implementation of REDP 
214 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
  Project Coordination Units. For the implementation of the REDP project, the already 
165.
established existing organizational structure of the project units are used, Project Coordination Unit 
(PCU) in FBiH and Agricultural Project Coordination Unit (APCU) in RS. Both the units are endowed 
with capacitated financial staff with long year of experience with IFAD projects implementation and 
coordination (READP will be eight IFAD project for Bosnia and Herzegovina). Both units have already 
established system and have previous experiences in project coordination and monitoring, 
accounting, managing, disbursement and reporting on IFAD financed projects and moreover the 
APCU has also experience in managing the World Bank financed projects.  
  Financial staff. The both PCUs has systemized positions of financial manager who executes 
166.
financial and accounting operations and is responsible to the PCU director for all financial and 
accounting aspects of the project implementation. Due to a grater number of active IFAD (an other) 
financed projects intention is to have also accountant (already present in APCU), which allows 
segregation of responsibilities and reduced operational risks. Responsibilities and working tasks 
division between financial manager and accountant is delimited and described in Financial and 
Administrative Manual. That applies also on working time division of financial staff between IFAD and 
WB funded project in case of the APCU.  
  Financial manager will carry out periodical field visits to be able to better understand the project 
167.
operations and performances at the field level (possible together with a procurement officer). 
B. 
IFAD Disbursement Procedures and Flow of Funds 
IFAD Disbursement Procedures. Three standard disbursement procedures may be used for 
168.
withdrawal of financing: Advance payment to the Designated Account (DA); Reimbursement and 
Direct payment.  
  System of the Bank Accounts. The Bank accounts that allow flow of many from IFAD to 
169.
borrower consists from designated and project accounts. 
IFAD Loan Account 
Designated account for the FBiH (1) 
Designated account for the RS 
(1) 
Project acounts for the FBiH (3 or 
2)  
Project accounts for the RS (3) 
Diagram 5. System of loan, designated and project accounts 
  Authorization of signatories. The appropriate governments will nominate authorized 
170.
representatives (signatories) to manage the project finances, including the operation of the 
Designated Accounts (DA) and the Project Accounts (PA). To avoid delays in payment process each 
authorized representative has alternative signatory. 
  Designated Accounts. The Borrower will open two IFAD Designated Accounts, each for one of 
171.
entities, which will be operated by respective PCU (PCU/APCU). Disbursements from the Designated 
Accounts towards project expenditures will be made against certified Statements of Expenditures. 
Disbursement from the IFAD loan into the respective Designated Account or for direct payment to 
suppliers for eligible expenditures will be authorized by the State Ministry of the Treasury. The Direct 
215 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
payment procedure should be used only for payment of above EUR 100,000. Project payments below 
that threshold will be paid from Designated or Project Accounts. More detailed conditions for the first 
withdrawal and its later replenishment of DA are defined in the LTB. 
  Operation of the Designated Accounts. Immediately after loan effectiveness, FBiH and RS 
172.
will send withdrawal applications to IFAD (and other co-financiers applicable) for payment of the initial 
deposits to the DA. Maximal authorized allocation to designated Account amounting to EURO 
800,000 for FBiH and 800,000 EURO for the RS. No documentation is required in support of the 
application for the authorized allocation; however, the application shall be accompanied with: a copy 
of the agreement between the FBiH/RS and the bank holding the DA, confirming the establishment of 
the DA, providing the account number and the agreed procedures for operation of the account; and 
list of the persons (names and functions) authorized to operate the DA with authenticated specimen of 
signatures.  
  Replenishment to the Designated Accounts. Periodic replenishment of the Designated 
173.
Accounts is done through the submission of withdrawal applications with summary Statements of 
Expenditures demonstrating the use of funds towards eligible expenditures, in accordance with the 
procedures of IFAD. WA for replenishment of the DA is denominated in the currency of the DA. The 
Withdrawal Applications (WA) for replenishment submits on a regular basis, not before of 90 days 
before submission previous WA or if requested withdrawal amount exceeds 30% of advance payment, 
regardless of the time elapsed since the submission of the previous WA. Each application for 
replenishment to the DA are supported by a statement issued by the commercial bank where the DA 
is held for the relevant reporting period, showing all transactions under the account. At any given time, 
the balance held in the DA at the bank, plus the amount of the WA that have been submitted to IFAD 
but not yet deposited in the DA, plus the expenditures that have not yet been claimed for 
replenishment, shall always equal the authorized allocation.  
  Statement of Expenditure. The Statement of Expenditure is used to justify reimbursement. 
174.
Exact format of SoE will be defined and attached to the Letter to Borrower. No supporting document 
will be required to submit SOE and WA (except for Direct Payments). But the project units will keep 
the all relevant documents supporting to submitted SoEs and make them readily available for 
inspection and review by IFAD supervision missions and the auditors. The SOE thresholds shall be 
determined in the light of the associated risk for each expenditure category and will be duly 
documented in the Letter to the Borrower.  
  Recovery of the Authorized Allocation to the Designated Account. The Authorized 
175.
Allocation also referred to as the Initial Deposit to the DA is an advance which has to be recovered 
before the Loan Closing Date. Any amounts remaining in the DA at the closing date of the Loan must 
be promptly refunded to IFAD, to be credited to the Loan in the currency used by IFAD for the purpose 
of withdrawal from the Loan Account. 
176.
  Project Accounts (PA). Project Accounts denominated in BAM, are opened in each entity in a 
bank acceptable to IFAD, to finance project local expenditures. All Project Accounts are operated by 
the PCUs (PCU and APCU). Funds will be transferred from the DA to the PA only when needed to 
execute payments and in accordance with the approved AWPB. Both PCUs will open two project 
accounts each. One project account will be for the IFAD loan funds and others will be for government 
counterpart funding and for beneficiary contribution. In addition, in the RS opens one additional 
project account for the beneficiary financial contribution. For withdrawals from the all Project Accounts 
for eligible expenditures will be authorized the project directors and one other authorized signatory. 
  Government Contribution and Counterpart Funds. In according to negotiated and in the 
177.
Loan Agreement stipulated sources of project eligible financing by expenditure categories and 
payment taxis, entity governments will co-finance project with a certain amount of money. FBiH/RS 
provide contribution of the project from their own sources sufficient to cover their share of the project 
costs in accordance with the AWPB. These funds will be paid into the Project Account assigned for 
government counterpart funds and used in accordance with sound accounting procedures. Local 
authorities and other project partners or beneficiaries can also co-finance some project activities and 
216 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
pay their contribution on project account for counterpart funds. If local communities and other partners 
pay their participation in financing project activates in some other way (by direct payment to 
constructor or supplier) or contribute in kind, that contribution will be captured and registered trough 
project M&E system, incorporated in the accounting system of both Entities and included in 
performance reported. 
  Taxation. In accordance to IFAD policy, none of the IFAD funds can be utilized for the payment 
178.
of customs of taxes during the project implementation. 
  Financial and Administrative Manual. The project financing is carried out and managed in 
179.
accordance to a Financial and Administrative Manual which will define the financial arrangements in 
details, including the organization and staffing, internal controls, flow of funds, budgeting, accounting, 
financial monitoring, financial reporting, and audit procedures. A distinct section of the manual is 
dedicated to the measuring, capturing and monitoring of the beneficiary contributions in the 
accounting system. The READP FAM adopted by IFAD CPM is precondition for disbursement. 
Completed FAM (with a defined the financial arrangements in details, including the organization and 
staffing, internal controls, flow of funds, budgeting, accounting, financial monitoring, financial 
reporting, and audit procedures) and approved is one of the pre-conditions for first withdrawal from 
the loan account. 
  Payment execution. Initially, the request for payment prepares accountant, certify procurement 
180.
officer, control and certify financial officer and approve PCU/APCU director. The procurement officer 
certifies the execution of the activity in compliance with contracts, the financial officer verifies of 
budget availability and classification of the expenditure. The last signatory, in case of payment from 
the project account, is the second signatory from the respective ministry. That procedure differs, 
depending of the entity. In the Federation of BiH payment request are sent to the Ministry of Finance 
for checking and signing by the second authorized signature who is from that ministry. They are 
alternative signatures for the first and the second signatory. In the Republika Srpska the second and 
final signatory is representative of MAFWM RS. After collecting all signatories, the corresponding 
project unit executes payment in cooperation with the commercial bank. 
C.  Accounting system and audit 
  Accounting. The accounting will be done on cash basis following the IPSAS standards. PCUs 
181.
will maintain accounting system in accordance with IFAD’s requirements and internationally accepted 
accounting standards. Both the units will continue to use the system already in place, wherein APCU 
may consider an upgrade of the system or a shifting to an accounting software customized to IFAD 
project requirements.  
  Accounting records of implementation agencies. Where project funds are left to an 
182.
implementing agency for use on behalf of the project and to be spent on purchase goods, works or 
services, the implementing agency will be obligated to open separate bank accounts for that funds or 
maintain separate accounting evidences for expenditures financed from project funds. That 
implementing agencies are obligate to prepare and deliver PCUs financial reports for those 
expenditure at least each six months. 
  Staffing. Both PCUs will recruit qualified personnel to implement FMS coming from the existing 
183.
experienced staff. In case of need of their replacement, qualified personnel will be selected through a 
transparent procedure and by choosing the best candidate who satisfies the requirements stated in 
the ToR for a financial officer in this PIM. 
  Financial reports. At the beginning of each fiscal year, and upon AWPB approval, the FM 
184.
inserts planned expenditure into financial software to ensure that the approved budget provisions are 
available. Later, the FM extracts financial reports from the system on a monthly basis to ensure an 
overall control over the budget availabilities, and on a semi-annual basis for the preparation of the 
financial and physical report. The report will provide analysis by components and activities, categories 
217 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
and sources of funds. The aim is to upgrade accounting software so that it can automatically handle 
up to date financial reports without needs for manual intervention. 
  A formal process of monthly bank reconciliation will have to be prepared for all bank accounts 
185.
managed by the accountant of the PCU/ APCU. Each reconciliation will be verified by the financial 
officer and approved by the project manager. Formats of the financial reports will be agreed with IFAD 
at start-up and incorporated in the final version of PIM. 
  FM also prepares the financial statements of the project in compliance with the IPSAS- cash 
186.
and IFAD requirements, which A/PCU should submit to IFAD no later than four months after the 
closing of the concerning fiscal year. 
  Fixed asset register. All fixed assets are maintained safely and recorded in a register. Each 
187.
asset is tagged for easy identification and controls. The register are updated and verified on an annual 
basis. At the end of the year, the inventory of the asset is carried out by a commission appointed by 
the A/PCU director. The procedures of fix assets registration are described in the Financial Manual.  
Internal auditor. In the PCUs there are no separate internal auditor position. In both entities 
188.
they are the Supreme Audit Institutions which audit the spending of public funds. The Supreme Audit 
Office in the RS, during audit MAFWM RS operations, audits also APCU accounts, while this is not 
the case in the Federation of BiH. Although additional control by the relevant project institutions can 
not be questionable, during the revision of the IFAD project by the public audit in the RS, there were 
misunderstandings due to problems with regulatory boundaries through which prism the control will be 
enforced. In such cases, it is undisputed that dominance have the financial regulations and 
procedures of the IFAD, as it is stipulated in the general conditions and in the financial agreement. 
  External audit. The selection of an external auditor for projects based on international lending, 
189.
in accordance with the current procedure, carried out the state Ministry of finance and Treasury, in 
cooperation with the entity's ministries of finance. The auditor are contracted on three years period 
selected by competitive procurement procedure. The TORs of the auditor will have to be submitted to 
IFAD for no-objection. The audit report will be submitted to IFAD annually no later than 6 months after 
the end of the concerning fiscal year. The audit report will include the following elements: (1) an 
opinion on the Project’s financial statements; (2) a separate opinion on the eligibility of expenditures 
included in the WA/Statement of Expenditure procedure; and (3) a separate opinion on the 
compliance of the use of the Designated Account with the financing agreement. The TORs of the 
auditor will have to ensure that all three opinions will be included in the audit. In addition to the audit 
report, the independent auditor will prepare a management letter which will include comments and 
recommendations on the adequacy of the financial management system, and on the system of 
internal controls. The APCU and PCU will prepare their respective annual financial statements in a 
timely manner which will be audited by the selected auditor in accordance with the procedures and 
criteria set forth in IFAD's Guidelines on Project Audits (for Borrower's Use). The consolidated audit 
report covering the whole project, together with the separate audit reports for APCU in RS and PCU in 
FBiH including the management letters covering the audit observations on internal controls will be 
submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of the fiscal year. 
D.  Planning, budgeting and reporting 
  Dedicated expenditure. The PCU Director and subordinated Financial Manager are 
190.
responsible for ensuring that the IFAD loan and counterpart financing are used for the right purpose, 
and on efficient and economical way. This approach starts from the planning of the utilization of 
available financial resources. BiH as a borrower is required to provide to IFAD and other co-financiers 
accurate and timely financial information to ensure that expenditures within the project were done for 
the purposes stated in the Loan Agreement and the Project Design Report.  
191.
  Budgeting. The Annual Budget as a integral part of Annual Work Plana and Budget (AWPB) 
will be prepared by the Project manager in a fully participatory approach and based on the inputs from 
the stakeholders, with the collaboration of the Financial Manager, the M&E Officer, the Procurement 
218 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Officer and the various specialists. The budget will be prepared in a format acceptable to IFAD. The 
format of the AWPB will indicate at least the expenditure items by activity, components, expenditure 
categories, implementing entities as well as sources of financing and divided on a quarterly basis. In 
addition the detailed cost tables should indicate the unit cost and quantity for each item and physical 
targets/indicators for each activity. The AWPB must be in line with the project description and 
objectives. 
192.
  Budget approval. The project AWP followed by budget will be submitted to the PSC for 
approval and IFAD for no-objection by the Director of the PCU/APCU at least two months before the 
beginning of the concerning fiscal year. Before submitting the AWPB to the IFAD for approval, the 
same should be considered and approved by the PSC. 
  Financial Reporting. PCUs prepare and submit IFAD and respective ministry annual and 
193.
interim semi-annual financial report and annual certified audits report, together or separately. 
Extraordinary financial reports will also be prepared for special purposes. All financial reports and 
statements shall be a signed by the Project Director and Financial Manager that confirms their 
accuracy and credibility. Existing financial software in project units should be upgraded and adapted 
to be able automatically obtain standard reports, in order to facilitate their production and reduce the 
time needed for their preparation. The financial report will provide analysis by components and 
activities, categories and sources of funds. The financial reports shall be prepared and presented in 
local currency and the currency of the DA (EUR).  
  Reconciliation per expenditure categories. Special attention in financial planning and 
194.
reporting should be paid to the compliance of available loan and other funds per expenditure 
categories and with planed or actual project costs. Therefore, each financial plan or report will contain 
information on the total planned/spent funds in relation to the total available funds for each 
expenditure category. 
195.
  Counterpart contribution. Some project expenditures are financed from multiple sources. Co-
financing relations are determined and agreed in advance and verified through appropriate contracts 
and agreements. Co-financing can be realized through a special, for this purpose open, project 
account or by direct payment from the account of co-financier. In both cases, the financial contribution 
of the beneficiaries must be proven and recorded in the project accounting system (as off-balance 
records). The same apply on in-kind contribution. The project M&E system will be adapted to the new 
model of co-financing (cost sharing) project activities and will provide data and evidence necessary to 
record the financial contribution of partners that is paid out of project accounts. 
196.
  Financial Statements. The FM is also responsible for the preparation of the financial 
statements of the project, which will be in compliance with the IPSAS and IFAD requirements. The 
A/PCU submit the financial statements to IFAD no later than four months after the closing of the 
concerning fiscal year. The project financial statements include inter-alia: (1) statement of project 
management responsibilities including a management statement that the project funds have been 
utilized for the intended purposes as specified in the relevant financing agreements; (2) statement of 
cash receipts and payments (by category and by financier); (3) statement of cash receipts and 
payments (by component); (4) statement of comparative budget and actual amount; (5) statement of 
Designated Account movements; (6) Statement of Designated Account Reconciliations; (7) SOE-
Withdrawal Application Statement; (8) cumulative use of funds by category of expenditure for each of 
the IFAD financing sources, and (9) Notes to the Financial Statements. 
197.
  Financial Supervision. The project is directly supervised by IFAD in accordance with IFAD 
guidelines which includes and financial supervision. The supervision process will be complemented by 
desk review of withdrawal applications, progress and financial reports, the annual financial 
statements, and annual audits. From a financial management perspective, a financial management 
specialist participates in missions annually to supervise and provide implementation support to the 
project and follow up the fiduciary risks.  
219 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
IV.  Procurement Procedures  
A.  Procurement arrangements 
  Lading procurement regulations. Based on preliminarily country assessment, it was 
198.
concluded that procurement for READP will be performed in according to the IFAD procurement 
procedures defined and elaborated in the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines and the IFAD 
Procurement Handbook following thresholds stipulated in the Letter to the Borrower. 
  Responsibility. The practical responsibility for the execution of procurement is delegated by 
199.
borrowers to existing PCUs in two entities. The procurement officers in both project unites 
(PCU/APCU) are responsible for all project procurement. It is necessary that they cooperate during 
execution of their tasks with the other project team members. For their work they are responsible to 
PCU/APCU director. 
B. 
IFAD procurement procedures 
200.
IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. The procurement of goods, works and services 
financed by IFAD and co-finance from other counterpart funds will be carried out in accordance with 
IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines valid at the time of initiating procurement procedure. The valid 
version of guidelines is always available on the IFAD web site. 
201.
IFAD Procurement Handbook. A useful guide which is supplementing the IFAD Project 
Procurement Guidelines is IFAD Procurement Handbook that provides project staff with templates and 
facilitates the preparation of tender documents, conducting of procurement procedures, evaluation of 
bids, contracting and managing contract execution. This up to date handbook is always available on 
the IFAD web site. 
  Methods of procurement. Method of procurement depends of the subject of procurement 
202.
(goods, works or services). 
  For procurement of goods and works the following methods will be used: International 
203.
competitive biding (ICB), Limited international biding (LIB), National competitive biding (NCB), 
International shopping (IS), National shopping (NS) or Direct contracting (DC). 
  For procurement of non-consultancy services will be used request for quotations (international 
204.
or national) or shopping method (international or national). 
  For procurement of consultancy services will be used method of selection based o request of 
205.
proposal (international or national). 
  The principle of favoring competition. Competition procedures will be p to referred during all 
206.
procurement procedures. In principle, in every single procurement opportunity the promotion of 
competition should be pursued to achieve the best value of the money. Only in exceptional 
circumstances, single source selection and direct contracting can be considered as a option with 
mandatory prior approval of IFAD. 
  Procurement thresholds. The final procurement thresholds will be determined in the Letter to 
207.
the Borrower received from IFAD after project loan agreement ratification. In the project design they 
are proposed following thresholds for some procurement methods (which are expected to be 
confirmed in LTB): 
a)  for goods: threshold for applying LCB or LIB method is estimated contract value of EUR 
200,000 or more; threshold for applying NCB method is estimated contract value between EUR 
50,000 and 200,000; and threshold for applying IS or NS method is estimated contract value 
less than EUR 50,000. 
b)  for works: threshold for applying LCB or LIB method is estimated contract value of EUR 
1,000,000 or more; threshold for applying NCB method is estimated contract value between 
220 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
EUR 100,000 and 1,000,000; and threshold for applying IS or NS method is estimated contract 
value less than EUR 100,000. 
c)  non-consultancy services: threshold for applying internationally advertised request for quotation 
is estimated contract value of EUR 100,000 or more; for nationally advertised request for 
quotation is estimated contract value between EUR 20,000 and 100,000; and for shopping 
method estimated contract value less than EUR 20,000. 
d)  consultancy services: threshold for applying internationally advertised request for proposal is 
estimated contract value of EUR 100,000 or more; and threshold for nationally advertised 
request for proposal is estimated contract value less than EUR 100,000. 
  Methods of consultants selection. For selection of consultants can be used several 
208.
procurement methods whose choice should be tailored to the specifics of the particular procurement: 
quality and cost-based selection (QCBS), quality-based selection (QBS), fix budget selection (FBS), 
selection based on consultants' qualifications (CQS) or single source selection (SSS). 
  Direct contracting or single source selection. Direct contracting goods or works or single 
209.
source selection of consultants is not a priori unacceptable bat it can be use in exceptional 
circumstances with rational clarification and mandatory prior approval by IFAD CPM (an according to 
paragraph 27 of IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines). 
  Favouring competitiveness. Although IFAD's procedure for shopping method envisages that 
210.
in certain cases it can be carried out with less than three bids ("usually not less than three") sent by 
mail, electronic mail or facsimile, it should be attempted that, having in mind the threshold for this 
method, for higher value purchases within this value class, procurement should be implemented on 
the basis of at least three bids/proposals and using a closed envelope procedure. 
  Selection of procurement method. Estimated contract value is base for the selection of the 
211.
procurement method. In the case that the payment of contract is financed from more than one source, 
the estimated value of contract is determined on the basis of the financial contribution of all co-
financiers. Although the national thresholds can be lower, goods, works and services under READP 
will be procured following thresholds agreed during negotiations and verified in the Letter to the 
Borrower. Estimated amount of contract is dominant but not sole factor that affect decision of selection 
of procurement method. Should be also taken into account other issues as nature of procured goods 
or works, interest of international bidders, number of potential national suppliers and critical time of 
delivery. To the extent possible, goods and civil works to be procured will be bulked into sizeable bid 
packages to allow for competitive bidding and cost saving. 
  Tax exemption. Taxes, customs and other duties on all goods, works and services procured for 
212.
the needs of the READP will not be paid from the IFAD loan and will be exempt from payment or paid 
by the governments.  
  Prior review thresholds. Draft of biding documentation, minutes from bid opening, evaluation 
213.
reports, minutes from negotiation and draft of contracts for the first five contracts for procurement 
goods, works and non-consultancy or consultancy services will be subject of prior review by CPM. 
After that, subject of prior review will be only contracts for procurement of goods with estimated value 
more than EUR 50,000; works more than EUR 100,000; non-consultancy services more than 50,000 
EUR and consultancy services more than EUR 20,000. Other contracts that were not the subject of a 
prior review will be (on the sample basis) subject of post review during the project supervision and 
audit. All contracts concluded on the basis of direct contracting are subject of prior review and 
approval, regardless of value. 
  Biding documents. Both project units will use the already developed and used forms of 
214.
bidding documents, which will be necessarily improved and upgraded for the READP. In the case of 
unrepeated procurements from previous projects, new formats of tender documents will be prepared. 
There are available some biding document templates developed by international donors or national 
institutions in BiH. In the IFAD Procurement Handbook they are some indications of content and 
221 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
elements of biding documents for specific types of procurement which can guiding procurement staff 
in their preparation. A particular challenge will be the preparation of sole specifications and 
descriptions of requirements for goods, works and services as special but real respond on the specific 
needs of project beneficiaries. In the case of a lack of knowledge and experience "in-house", external 
consultants may be used to develop quality bases for initiating procurement procedures and evaluate 
received bids. In case of applying ICB procurement method will be used the World bank biding 
document templates. 
  Result based type of contracts. For procurement the some services will be applied result 
215.
based type of contract. Payment of services will be in according to achieved performances what 
requires clear identification of expected results in specifications of services or terms of reference and 
their monitoring or measuring during providing of services. With a service provider should be agreed 
scheme of payment in advance, based of achieved results. The service providers have to establish 
and maintained clear evidences of performances of their services, separated of their other activities 
which will allow insight to project and other supervisions. 
  Community based procurement activities. For some project activities procurement can be 
216.
shift to the community or left to intermediaries selected by transparent competitive process and 
supervised by PCUs and IFAD. 
C.  Procurement system and audit 
217.
  PCU role. All procurement under the READ project will be managed by the respective PCUs. 
  Staffing. Existing staff currently working in the PCUs responsible for the procurement is 
218.
qualified and experienced and implies that they meet the required qualifications for these positions. In 
the case of the need to recruit new staff instead of the existing that person should follow a competitive 
selection and must satisfy minimal qualifications and requirements in the term of reference for READP 
procurement officer in annex of this PIM and his/her appointment will be the subject of IFAD no 
objection.  
  Capacity building. All procurement staff who execute READP are qualified and experienced, 
219.
but it will be necessary build their capacities through attendance on specialized training and events 
organized for IFAD funded projects staff or national procurement system application. It is expected 
that procurement staff will occasionally visit the project area to get a better understanding of situation 
in the filed and beneficiaries' needs for which they are procure goods, works or services. This 
particularly applies to procurements from the domain of infrastructure and grants for farmers and FOs. 
  Team work. Procurement officers are part of the project teams and their activities and the 
220.
results are conditioned by the good cooperation with other team members in terms of preparation 
quality and accurate specifications, ToRs, bills of quantities, and job descriptions that are the subject 
of contracting. All relevant members of the project team should be involved in the planning, 
preparation and execution of the procurements and monitoring and evaluation of their results. 
  Procurement supervision. Supervision of the procurement under the READP will be a part of 
221.
project supervision by IFAD trough supervision missions. Addition to supervision and follow-up 
missions, project procurement will be continuously supervised by IFAD CPM, primarily through 
confirmation of certain steps in the procurement procedures and giving approval for signing contracts. 
  Procurement audit. Procurement audit will be carried out as a part of project audit 
222.
subsequently by an external auditor selected by Ministry of treasury and finance of BiH and approved 
by IFAD. 
  Double audit. Project expenditure and procurement and other procedures may be subject of 
223.
additional audit (e.g. by internal auditor and/or by the public national audit authorities) Regardless of 
who will execute the audit, the IFAD procurement regulation have advantage and prevail over national 
or other regulation. 
222 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
  Anticorruption and Good Governance Framework. The IFAD’s applies a zero-tolerance 
224.
policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in projects financed through its loans 
and grants. 'Zero tolerance' means that IFAD will pursue all allegations falling under the scope of this 
policy and that appropriate sanctions will be applied where the allegations are substantiated. It is 
important that the all project staff, project parties and stakeholders of the project are familiar with 
IFAD’s as well as the national anticorruption policies and whistle blowing procedures which are. 
available on the IFAD website (www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/index.htm). The primary 
responsibility of detecting fraud and corruption lies with the borrower. This means that during the 
implementation of the project, it must be taken serious care of preventing fraudulent and corruption. 
D.  Planning and reporting 
225.
  Procurement plan. The READP first 18-monts procurement plan is a part of READP PDR 
appendix 8. If the period between the project design and the start of the project implementation will be 
prolonged, the first procurement plan will be updated at the READP start-up workshop. PCUs are 
obligated to prepare 12 months procurement plan for each year which will be a part of AWPB for 
respective year. AWPB have to be submitted IFAD for approval two months before start a year to 
which it refers, so preparation of procurement plan have to follow same dynamics. In the process of 
preparation procurement plan procurement officer have to closely cooperate with respective project 
team members. Procurement plan will content minimum data such as: items of procurement, its 
affiliation to project component and subcomponent, quantity and estimated value of procurement, type 
and method of procurement, type of review, starting and ending date of procurement.  
  Register of contracts. Each PCU will establish and maintain up-to-date register of contract 
226.
with relevant procurement data (number of contract, subject of procurement, contractor, type and 
method of procurement, biding data, bid evaluation data, dates of IFAD approval, good/work/service 
delivery data, percentage of contract performing, etc.). Updated register of contracts project officers 
will submit electronically to CPM every three (3) months. 
  Procurement records. PCUs will collect, maintain and file complete original documentation for 
227.
each subject of procurement in paper and electronic format (where it is possible). Procurement 
records and documentation will be available to IFAD for supervision and other purposes and for 
project audit. In according to the IFAD General Conditions the borrower is obligate to keep original 
records and documents for at least ten (10) years thereafter. This means that before the end of the 
project, it is necessary to define who will and where keep this records and documentation until the 
expiry of that deadline. 
228.
  Procurement progress report. Based on procurement plan, data from the register of contract 
and other data sources, procurement officer prepares procurement progress report. This report will be 
base for or will be a integral part of regular project progress report. The procurement progress report 
may be also prepared separately in particular cases (e.g. for a needs of follow-up or supervision 
missions). Beside of ordinary procurement data, this report should emphasize conditions and 
problems in procurement in reporting period, as well as attitude to auditor's opinion and 
recommendations toward procurement issues. 
229.
  Contracting service providers. The project will engage a number of service providers 
(individual and institutional) from the private or public sector to deliver a variety of organizational, 
business, technical or advisory services to final beneficiaries. Depending of complexity of service, 
service provider can be selected by one or two stage procurement procedure. In the process of 
selection service providers, beside of the offered price, their qualifications, references and other 
quality determinants will be taken into account by use in advance known quantitative ratio between 
quality and cost evaluation criteria. Some contacts with a service providers can be based on a 
performance based payment system. With the service providers should be contracted and in advance 
clearly agreed planning and reporting obligations as important source of information for project MIS 
and M&E system. The activities of the service providers related to the project will be monitored by the 
PCUs staff. 
223 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
V.  Monitoring & Evaluation and Knowledge Management 
A.  M&E arrangements 
  Project M&E system. The project M&E system would be established and managed in 
230.
accordance with IFAD common approach and procedures. In the process of planning, monitoring, 
evaluation and reporting project activities and results will be involve the mostly all PCUs' staff, related 
service providers and stakeholders from beneficiary side. 
Table 6. READP Monitoring and Evaluation Organisational Framework 
Level 
M&E Stakeholders 
Responsibilities 
Outputs 
PCU & A/PCU M&E 
specialists  
A/PCU  
Business development 
officer (BDO) 
Rural infrastructure 
engineer 
Define reporting needs and 
requirements from business 
partners & clusters level 
aggregators 
Entity wide consolidation 
Data aggregation from 
business partners & clusters 
level aggregators 
Baseline report/ 
Mid-Term/End line; 
Evaluation/impact 
assessment  
Monthly/Quarterly/Bi-Annual 
and Annual progress report 
Results measurements 
against KPIs 
Service providers (SPs)  Developing data collection 
Knowledge-sharing products 
tools; formats/questionnaires 
MIS maintenance/updating 
Service providers (SPs)  Data collection 
Cluster 
Fields/Cluster 
coordinators (FBiH; 
PCU; 5x) 
Extension officers (RS; 
REOs) 
Municipality 
Cluster wise consolidation of 
business partners' reports 
Primary data collection  
Private agribusiness 
Data provision 
Business 
Units  
Farmers organisations 
Agriculture cooperatives 
BP implementation 
oversight committees 
Planning and implementation 
review of the BPs; and  
Cluster 
Ensure regular reporting to the 
project and the municipalities 
Cluster level consolidated 
Business plan progress 
reports  
Monitoring & Progress 
reports 
  Responsibilities for M&E. The M&E officers would be responsible for establishing and 
231.
maintaining the internal M&E system and organizing the baseline, mid-term, completion and other 
impact assessment surveys. They would develop formats, questionnaire and other data collection 
tools that would be used to identify baseline status and progress achieved during the lifetime of the 
project. 
  M&E as management tool. Intention is to strengthen linkages between project M&E and 
232.
project results reporting. In accordance with a now mainstreamed into project management, the 
project log-frame must contain a number of RIMS core indicators, complemented by project-specific 
indicators (PSIs), designed to measure specific results that may not be adequately captured by the 
core indicators. Project teams will additionally complement the list of indicators beyond those 
identified in LogFrame, primarily for the purpose of successful project management. During 
implementation, M&E system will provide useful information for the project management on the 
project performances and progress, including identifying the most successful and non successful 
project interventions and factors influencing on that.  
224 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
  Evidence-based decision making process. The READP M&E system follows the IFAD's 
233.
Development Effectiveness Framework which aims to facilitate evidence-based decision making and 
emphasize the following objectives in the design and implementation of project level M&E and KM 
functions: 
 a) Strengthening the focus on results through the project cycle;  
 b) Enhancing self-evaluation and learning for results; 
 c) Fostering the use of evidence in project management; 
 d) Linking project M&E to corporate result reporting. 
  Harmonization of M&E approaches. Regardless of the specific differences in the way of 
234.
implementation parts A and B of the READP the approaches of APCU and the PCU toward its M&E 
should be harmonised, by establishing same or close to same list of M&E indicators, and timetable of 
their collection. This will enable unique monitoring and evaluation of the same project beyond the 
perspective of one of the PCUs.  
B. 
IFAD M&E procedures 
  M&E regulations. The READP M&E system will be establish and maintained respecting: 
235.
IFAD's Development Effectiveness Framework; new IFAD's corporate Result and Impact Management 
System (RIMS); IFAD's Knowledge Management (KM) Strategy; and IFAD Result-Based Country 
Result Management Framework..  
  The results of the project will be monitored by the result chain of identifying and interpreting its 
236.
results at different levels of action. 
Inputs 
Activities 
Outputs 
Outcomes 
Impact 
Scheme 1. The result chain 
C.  M&E system  
  M&E and KM system. For the purpose of monitoring and evaluation the Rural Enterprise 
237.
Agricultural Development Project Planning, Monitoring & Evaluation and Knowledge Management 
system will be established and maintained. For its effectiveness and operability primarily are 
responsible two project units (PCU and APCU) in cooperation with some intermediaries.  
  Participatory M&E process. M&E system are oriented to two overarching key functions: 
238.
output monitoring & outcomes/impacts result monitoring. They will be collected based on participatory 
process. The obligation to data collection and reporting on the achieved results and impact will be 
transferred to different categories of users and service providers and included in their contractual 
obligations or agreed on the basis of voluntary involvement. 
  Output level indicators. During the first six months of project implementation, a set of 
239.
performance indicators will be developed to measure components' progress at outputs level (what 
project delivers?). To this end, the PCUs will develop monitoring instruments and associated tools in 
the form of harmonised templates to track progress during the period of its implementation, ensuring 
the collection of disaggregated data. The PCUs and delegated intermediaries will systematically and 
timely collect data on the output level in accordance with agreed list of indicators agreed. With the aim 
of ensuring continuity of collection and monitoring of cumulative data, these data and indicators 
should not be changed later, except extraordinary cases. For the each indicator will be establish 
yearly benchmark and at the level of the entire project.  
  Outcome level indicators. Outcome assessment are concentrated on assessing the 
240.
intermediate results of the project's combined outputs on targeted households and other project 
beneficiaries (what are the consequences of project deliverables?). Progress and likelihood to 
achieve expected outcomes should be measure at mid-term stage or earlier, and reported to IFAD on 
annual or biannual basis, depending on the type of indicator and the measurement methodology. 
225 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Measuring outcome indicators, will be undertaken with the project M&E budgets and capacities, 
complemented with small-N quantitative surveys and other qualitative methodologies such as focus 
groups, in-depth interviews, participatory assessments to triangulate findings and enrich overall 
assessment of project performance. 
241.
Impacts assessment will focus on the higher level of result defined in the logical framework 
and include the limited set of development objectives the project intends to achieve. The impact of 
READP will be reported in the project completion report (PCR). Reporting on the rural poverty impact 
will require to undertake a household survey, complemented with a market assessment survey 
quantifying READP induced impact in the various sub-sectors and the wider market system. The final 
evaluation should identify follow-up activities and generate actionable lessons learnt for IFAD and 
government counterparts. 
242.
  The Impact of READP will be reported in the project completion reports (PCR). PCUs will 
determine in consultation with IFAD the project's most appropriate impact assessment need, drawing 
on combined quantitative, qualitative or mixed method approach that credibly and reliably measure 
the project performance to satisfy the five standard impact evaluation criteria defined in the PCR, 
including impact and sustainability of results, contribution to capacity development and the 
achievement of global environmental goals.  
  M&E indicators. In the project logical framework are identified the set of indicators which are 
243.
revised and extended during start-up workshop and systematically monitored and collected during 
project lifetime. Data collection and reporting of some data will be transfer to project service providers, 
because their activities are integral part of entire project implementation activities. The selected M&E 
indicators for monitoring project progress by PCU and APCU should be harmonized due to the need 
to report on the progress of the entire project at the borrower (B&H) level on the in a unique way.  
D.  M&E planning and reporting 
  M&E plan. The M&E the plan should follow the annual work plan, the financial allocation 
244.
(budget) and the procurement plan. What will be done in the next year should be timely and 
adequately addressed with responsive data collection that serve as evidence that these activities 
have been made and as a basis for assessing their performance. Already with the preparation of the 
annual work plan, the planning of the methods and dynamics of monitoring its realization begins. 
  How much the M&E plan lags behind the work plan (first it needs to decide what will be done, 
245.
and then how will it be monitored), so much M&E report goes ahead of the annual progress report, as 
there is no data on how something was done (what impact it had) the annual progress report is limited 
to the list of realized inputs and outputs.  
246.
  M&E reports. The wrong approach is to equalize project M&E report(s) and project progress 
report because they need and must be separate documents. The M&E system produces different type 
of data, focused on some issues, at different times, which do not necessarily coincide with the regular 
reporting periods about project progress. Therefore, M&E reports do not provide all the information 
necessary for writing the progress reports, which the project manager compile in collaboration with all 
other team members, but M&E report provide valuable information for a deeper project impact 
assessment summarized in (semi)annual progress reports. 
  Start-up workshop. The start-up workshop is important for finalization some project 
247.
implementation arrangement, and consequently, the elaboration and finalization of indicators through 
which the progress of the project will be monitored. At project start-up, the M&E officer will be 
supported to identify additional reporting requirement providing relevant information for cluster wide 
steering, trends in business units performance along geographical clusters/sub-sector and joint 
assessment performance of service providers and field coordinator for stronger accountability.  
  Baseline study. Both project units will undertake baseline surveys as a way to establish 
248.
baseline data and project targets. The baseline study will be conducted in a selected samples of 
geographical clusters across representative sub-sectors comprising READP's direct and indirect 
individual and institutional beneficiaries.  
  Management information system (MIS). The M&E system important subsystem of whole 
249.
project MIS system, mentioned earlier. The MIS will be designed largely based on M&E system 
226 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
requirements. Associated database will contain all relevant data (project inputs, outputs and 
outcomes) collected within the PCUs and by project stakeholders and consolidated by the 
PCU/APCU. The system will have to provide gender and age disaggregated data on all key indicators. 
This overall responsibility to maintain and continuously update the MIS will be the respective M&E 
officers with mandatory assistance of all project team members and project implementation partners. 
  Mid-term review. The mid-term review will be carried at mid-year of the project’s third year. 
250.
The review would cover, among other things: (1) physical and financial progress as measured against 
AWPBs; (2) performance and financial management of contracted implementing partners; (3) an 
assessment of the efficacy of technical assistance and capacity building activities; (4) and strategic 
recommendations to ensure achievement of the development objectives. 
  Project completion review. The project completion review team will undertake a final 
251.
evaluation of the project within the last six months before the project completion date. A completion 
rural households survey shall be done prior to the PCR mission. The assessment of project 
achievements would be in line with IFAD's project completion guidelines and the IOE Evaluation 
Manual. The PCR will have to be submitted to IFAD within 6 months of the completion date. IFAD 
itself may also undertake a formal evaluation of the project through its Independent office of 
evaluation (OE). 
E.  Knowledge Management 
  Knowledge management process. A knowledge-sharing and learning culture will be 
252.
promoted at all level, from the A/PCU to the business units, through the clusters and other subsector 
stakeholders. KM processes within READP would be to ensure that knowledge generated is 
systematically identified, analysed, documented, used to improve programme performance; 
communicated to policy makers to inform government’s policy making process; and shared with key 
stakeholders. All activities related to KM should also be aligned with IFAD's Knowledge Management 
Strategy.  
  Scaling up. READ focus on increasing competiveness, strengthening farmers organization and 
253.
generating youth employment is aligned with national development priorities. Success with any of 
these elements would have a significant potential for scaling up, as significant EU resources will be 
made available to the rural sector.  
  Lessons learned. Knowledge management and communication responsibilities will be shared 
254.
among all project staff, with the overall responsibility to prove and improve impact through effective 
KM process belonging to the project manager and the M&E officer. Service providers will have a key 
responsibility for sharing lessons learnt during the project through preparation of special case studies 
and learning notes. Provision would be made in the budget for preparation of case studies of success 
and failure and for technical and learning notes on key aspects of the programme. 
227 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 1 
Draft Outline of TOR for  
Service Providers for READP Business Plan Development (A/PCUs) 
Background. The main component of the IFAD funded READP project is a technical component 
titled Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value 
chains. This Component 1 comprises of three sub-components: (1) Business plan development 
and implementation; (2) Farmer development support and (3) Enabling infrastructure support. The 
project will be implemented in close partnership with business leader (farmer organisations and 
private agribusiness enterprises); business plans will be the key mechanism for the participation 
of target group households in the project. Further relevant partners in the business plan 
implementation process are project area municipalities, providers of technical and business 
services, financial institutions and relevant private sector market intermediaries. 
Entry point and mechanism for Component 1 is through the promotion of public-private-producer 
partnerships (4P) outlined in business plans (BPs) between business leaders and target group 
smallholder farmers. The project will engage service providers to support the business plan 
development process (sub-component 1 and 2 of the project). 
Modalities. Service providers will play a key role in implementation and will be selected through a 
competitive process. Two modalities of service providers can be selected, according to the 
specific services required: (1) single private or public service provider (consulting companies, 
regional development agencies, NGOs, universities); or (2) a consortia of service providers, the 
latter being needed because the broad range of training and advisory needs (organizational 
development, technical and business-related aspects), or a wide geographical coverage may 
require different service providers. 
In FBiH, the PCU will hire a service provider (company) competitively to support the business plan 
development and implementation process. Depending on performance, the company will be 
retained for assisting the implementation of the other sub-component on FO seed capital 
financing. The PCU will also contract 5 field officers as cluster coordinators, one for each selected 
cluster, to ensure field presence of the PCU and assist quality implementation process.  
In the RS, the APCU will also contract a service provider competitively for implementation of the 
relevant sub-components. Field coordination in the RS will be undertaken by the 7 regional 
extension officers located in the 5 project clusters in RS. The TORs for service providers in RS will 
include training and capacity building of the extension agency to support the implementation of the 
business plans.  
After contracting, the A/PCUs will orient the service providers to the project objectives, target 
group, approach and implementation methodologies. The coordination units will mandatorily 
include the cluster coordinators and the extension officers in these orientation activities. The 
orientation process will be handled through (1) detailed information sessions and workshops for 
discussion between the service provider/extension agency, the project staff and the business 
development service (BDS) providers developed through RCDP and (2) field visits to farmers’ 
organisations and municipalities. 
Scope of Work  
The Service Provider will be responsible for supporting the A/PCUs in the process of Business 
proposal selection, Business plan development and implementation in the frame of the READP 
Project. The service provider will closely liaise with A/PCUs READP team, in particular with the 
Project Manager, READP Business Development Officer as well as with A/PCU M&E Officer.  
228 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
The service providers in close coordination with A/PCUs READP team, cluster officers and 
extension service will be responsible for:  
i. 
Implementing a targeting survey;  
ii.  Conducting sensitisation and consultation workshops prior to launching the business planning 
initiative;  
iii.  Providing technical guidance to the business leaders during the detailed business plan 
development process;  
iv.  Ensuring the quality of the final business plans;  
v.  Facilitating negotiations the implementation agreements between different BP implementation 
partners,  
vi.  Assisting in BP implementation process including training and advisory services; 
vii.  Assist and support the M&E data collection in READP. 
The tasks in detail: 
  The targeting survey implemented by the service providers, will assist in identifying the 
target groups present in the clusters. The main tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Elaboration of the methodology for the targeting survey such as questionnaires and 
checklists for guiding focus group and stakeholder discussions.  
o 
Implementation of the survey together with the extension agency in coordination with 
the cluster level field coordinators in FBiH and the extension officers in RS. The 
targeting study will be implemented in close partner. 
o  Ship with project area municipalities. Key sources in the targeting process are local 
authorities at municipal level such as extension workers, social service centres, 
employment bureau, heads of the local communities.  
  Business proposal appraisal and development process. The main tasks for the SP under 
this activity are: 
o  Organisation of cluster level stakeholder awareness and sensitisation workshops, at 
least 5 in each entity. These workshops will be co-facilitated by the cluster 
coordinators and the extension officers in FBiH and RS respectively.  
o  To assist full understanding of the BP concepts, the project will distribute informative 
literature, organise resource person discussions and audiovisual sessions during the 
workshops. The collection of relevant informative literature (e.g. production manuals, 
market studies, export information etc) will be in the responsibility of the service 
providers; if required the A/PCUs will initiate compilation and printing of additional 
information.  
  Call for BP proposals. The PCUs will launch a call for proposals (expression of interest) 
inviting business ideas from interested business leaders. The call for proposal will be 
announced through newspapers and the internet. The main tasks for the SP under this activity 
are: 
o  Follow up with cluster level business leaders and help assist them to submit their 
proposals to the A/PCUs. 
  Business proposal appraisal and BP development. The A/PCUs expect some 150 
business plans to be approved over 4-5 years of project implementation. With these 150 BPs 
it is expected to reach out to some 7,500 target group households including youth. The main 
tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Support development of criteria and scoring method for ranking the proposals.  
o  Validation visits of the selected BPs in coordination with cluster coordinators and 
extension officers with oversight from the A/PCUs. 
229 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
o  After selection of BPs, technical assistance to the business leaders to develop the 
selected proposals into detailed business plans. The process will involve 
consultations, site visits and stakeholder workshops involving the business leaders, 
target households, farmers’ organisations and municipalities. The business plans will 
be developed over a period of 3-6 months.  
o  Monthly business plan preparation progress review meetings with A/PCUs, and the 
extension agency. The service provider will be responsible for follow-up and 
implementation measures. 
o  Development of templates for MoU agreements in coordination with the A/PCUs to 
prepare implementation of the business plans  
o  Facilitation of agreements/MoUs between the different implementation partners 
identified in the business plans (municipalities, farmers’ organisations, financial 
institutions and the project).  
o  Responsible for organising meetings, facilitating negotiations and ensuring written 
agreements between the partners. 
o  Provision of support to FO in applying for seed capital financing: Up to 40 FOs will 
be supported in seed capital financing based on BPs in line with the overall BP 
eligibility criteria. The main tasks under this activity are:  
  The selected business proposals will be developed into detailed business 
plans with technical assistance support delivered through service providers  
  The service providers will assure that the business plans are focused on 
increasing the outreach and income of the target households.  
  Market development activities. The main tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Guidance of business partners in the process of introducing international quality 
standards and certifications.  
o  Linkages to relevant certification bodies where required.  
o  Preparation and implementation of participation in local, regional and international 
trade fairs (e.g. Biofach, Fruit Logistica, ANUGA) in close coordination with A/PCUs. 
o  Preparation and implementation of local and international study tours in coordination, 
guidance and oversight from the A/PCUs.  
  Farmers’ training, advisory and capacity building services. The main tasks for the SP 
under this activity are: 
o  Drafting the annual work plan including an annual training plan. The training plan will 
be reviewed and finalised by the A/PCUs.  
o  The service provider and the extension agency along with the cluster coordinators 
and the extension officers will also be responsible of delivering the trainings. Where 
relevant additional technical specialists will be hired to support training and advice in 
specific areas.  
o  The service provider will be responsible of the provision of the advisory services. A 
semi-annual work plan for the implementation of the advisory services will be 
prepared and approved by A/PCUs 
o  Costs for training and advisory services will be included in the tendered packages of 
the service provider. 
 
Institutional development training and advisory support. In the context FO seed capital 
financing the selected FOs will be supported with training and advisory services. The main 
tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Developing a training calendar.  
230 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
o  Organising the institutional development training and advisory activities and for 
implementing these according to schedule.  
o  Preparation and organisation of exchange and learning visits, within the country and 
in Europe in close coordination with A/PCUs. 
  Delivery of starter packages. The main tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Organisation and implementation of cluster level implementation planning workshops 
for the partners to re-affirm their commitments for financing the starter packages and 
to discuss implementation arrangements.  
  Facilitate the negotiation process between the partners in the workshop and 
secure written co-financing and other implementation related commitments by 
the end of the workshop.  
o  Assistance to the business leaders to secure contracts with the target households and 
to compile the list producers eligible for READP starter package financing.  
o  Assistance in delivery and verification of the delivery of the starter package inputs to 
the target groups and preparation of reports based on which the project will disburse 
the starter package contribution. 
o  Organisation of regular cluster level business plan implementation, review and 
planning workshops. 
  Monitoring of READP implementation. The main tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Assistance to the A/PCUs M&E Officer in data collection and coordinating the 
involvement of BP agribusiness partners in data provision, 
o  Preparation of Knowledge-sharing products (guidelines, manuals, case studies, 
lessons learnt) to document the results of the component 1. 
  Reporting. The main tasks for the SP under this activity are: 
o  Contribution to the AWPB. 
o  Preparation of reports according to the reporting schemes and cycles of the A/PCUs 
(still to be defined). 
Required Skills and Experience 
  Profound knowledge of business plan development;  
  Profound knowledge of targeting, gender and youth issues; 
  Experiences in implementing targeting studies; 
  Experiences in rural area development projects, stakeholder facilitation and coordination, 
procurement, technical and financial reporting and donor interaction; 
  Experience in fruit & vegetable, MAPs/NTFP, dairy and honey sub-sectors; 
  Significant in-house expertise in the above mentioned areas are required; 
  Proven organization knowledge; 
  Fluent spoken and written English. 
231 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Draft outline of 
Business Proposal content 
Annex 2 
Business proposal should contain: 
1)  Background details and rationale;  
2)  Description of the business model/concept;  
3)  The selected produce(s)/value chain;  
4)  Raw material supply, production/processing and marketing approach;  
5)  Mechanisms for benefitting and potential outreach to target households (including youth);  
6) 
7)  Estimation of investments required (technology gaps, capacity building, infrastructure) and 
Implementation arrangements; 
expected returns and  
8)  Measures to address environmental and climate change concerns.  
The produce selected will be demand driven based on consultations between the agribusinesses/ 
business leaders, target households and other stakeholders and would not necessarily be limited 
to one item or commodity. 
232 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Annex 3 
Eligibility criteria for business proposal applicants 
Enterprises (business leaders):  
1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
they are registered in the territory of BiH in accordance with BiH/entity regulations (proof - 
decision from the court register); 
they are exist at least two years (proof - decision from the court register); 
they have a positive financial report of their business for the last two years (proof - income 
statement); 
they are specialized in agriculture, processing of agricultural products, supplying agriculture 
with equipment or raw-materials or for delivery agribusinesses related services (proof - 
decision from the court register); 
they already have proven experience or formal commitment in establishing business 
linkages with small producers (proof – list of implemented projects with a short description); 
they already select or demonstrate willingness to select crop/produce suitable for 
production by target households and involving engagement of mainly women and youth as 
wage labour in the production cycle (proof – list of potential beneficiaries with whom they 
will cooperate). 
Fulfilling  the  first  four  conditions  (criteria)  is  obligatory  for  submitting  a  business  proposal,  and 
meeting other is preferably.  
Cooperatives an other FOs (business leaders): 
1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
they are registered in the territory of BiH in accordance with BiH/entity regulations (proof - 
decision from the court register); 
they are exist at least two years (proof - decision from the court register); 
they have a positive financial report of their business for the last two years (proof - income 
statement); 
they have at least 25 members, which includes at least 20 members from the READP target 
group households with income less than KM 817 per month, in majority from the 
underdeveloped municipalities (proof – list of cooperants registered in cooperants' book or 
list of PA members, certified by director/president signature and stamp);  
they demonstrate intention to further increase membership particularly from the READP 
target group (proof – progress report for previous and business plan of cooperative/PA for 
the next year);  
they have a outreach to a wide base of co-operant and rural poor (proof – list of cooperants 
with a short description of their link with a cooperative). 
Fulfilling the first three conditions (criteria) is obligatory for submitting a business proposal, and 
meeting other is preferably.  
233 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 4 
Business proposals selection criteria 
In  process  of  selection  business  proposals  Business  Plan  Evaluation  Committee  (BPEC)  will 
follow  the  following  criteria  and  assign  total  number  of  points  to  each  proposal  based  on  the 
following weight of a particular criteria. 
Selection criteria 
Wight (points) 
1.  The reality of the whole concept 
2.  General compatibility of proposal with the project objectives 
3.  Presence of value chain approach  
4.  Pro-poor  orientation  of  business  proposal  (outreach  to  target 
groups) 
5.  Scope of the partnerships 
6.  Market prospect (national/export market coverage) 
7.  Reality of financial projections 
8.  Environmental and climate change sensitivity 
9.  Project management capacities 
10.  Experience in implementation similar projects 
11.  Readiness and capacity to provide pre-financing 
The final score of each proposal is the arithmetic mean of the number of points assigned to each 
proposal by each member of the BPEC. 
Total (max. 100 points) 
234 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Annex 5 
Suggested template of  
Business Plan  
The business plan will content following chapters/subchapters: 
Introduction 
1. 
2.  Cluster description 
1.1.  Geographical coverage 
1.2.  Cluster composition 
3.  Value chain identifiaction 
3.1.  The main product – focus of value chain 
3.2.  Forward and backward linkages 
4.  Business proposal description 
4.1.  Description of business idea 
4.2.  Contribution to strategic and specific project objectives 
5.  Beneficiaries' target groups inclusuion 
5.1.  Inclusion of the poor 
5.2.  Incluusion of women 
5.3.  Inclusion of youtn 
5.4.  Five year targets  
6.  Market analysis 
6.1.  Analysis of sale market (domestic and foreign) 
6.2.  Analysis of supply market 
7.  Analysis of technical and technologial feasibility  
7.1.  Infrastructure requirements 
7.2.  Technical preconditions 
7.3.  Applied tecnological solutions 
8.  Financial evaluation 
8.1.  Necessary investments 
8.2.  Sourcies of financing – financial flow 
8.3.  Revenues and costs 
8.4.  Cash flow 
8.5.  Evaluation of financal feaisibility 
9.  Environmental and climate change imapct analysis 
9.1.  Direct impact on environment and climate change 
9.2.  Indirect impact on environment and climate change 
9.3.  Good agricultural practices presence 
9.4.  Mitigation measures 
10.  Social impact analysis 
10.1. Contribution to socila development 
11.  Timeline of implementation 
12.  Management structure and partnership requirements 
13.  Monitoring and evaluation plan 
14.  Analysis of sensytivity 
14.1.  Sensitivity to change in inputs parameters 
14.2.  Sensitivity to change in outputs parameters 
15.   Summery 
235 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Business plan evaluation criteria 
In  process  of  evaluation  business  plans  the  Business  Plan  Evaluation  Committee  (BPEC)  will 
follow the criteria same as used for selection business proposals and will assign total  number of 
points to business plan following weight allocated a particular criteria. 
Selection criteria 
Wight (points) 
Annex 6 
1.  The reality of the whole concept 
2.  General compatibility of proposal with the project objectives 
3.  Presence of value chain approach  
4.  Pro-poor orientation of business proposal (outreach to target groups) 
5.  Scope of the partnerships 
6.  Market prospect (national/export market coverage) 
7.  Reality of financial projections 
8.  Environmental and climate change sensitivity 
9.  Project management capacities 
10.  Experience in implementation similar projects 
11.  Readiness and capacity to provide pre-financing 
Total (max. 100) 
236 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Eligibility criteria for starter packages beneficiaries  
Annex 7 
1) 
The rural households eligible to be starter package beneficiary have to fulfilled following criteria: 
they have 0.1-0.5 ha (1-5 donums) land available for cultivation (either through direct 
ownership or rented/leased);100 
they have monthly household income less than 817 KM;  
they are unemployed rural youth (below 30 years) and  
they are poor women headed households in rural areas.  
2) 
3) 
4) 
Only one member per household will be eligible for direct project support in the areas of standard 
starter package, youth starter package and youth apprentice support. 
Check list for selection starter packages beneficiaries 
Criteria  
Answer 
1.  Own agriculture land (dunums) 
2.1  Yearly gross income (in BAM) 
2.2  Monthly gross income (in BAM) 
2.3  Number of family members 
2.4  Monthly income per family member (BAM) 
Less than 5 dunums  
YES of NO 
3.  Age of unemployed youth (years) 
4.  Women headed household 
2.2 less than 817 BAM  
YES of NO 
Less than 30 
YES of NO 
YES of NO 
Number of YES answers (from 1 to 4) 
100 Some exceptions have to be made with regard to the land criteria. 
237 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Eligibility criteria for certification support 
Eligible for financial support for certification are companies and cooperatives that: 
1)  have clear assessment that certification will be an advantage for their production and 
marketing;  
2)  have signed contract between the business leader and a certification company on 
standards’ implementation  
3)  have higher partnering outreach to target households.  
Annex 8 
238 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
For apprentice financial support from the project are eligible: 
Eligibility criteria for youth apprentice support 
1) 
2) 
3) 
youth under 30 years; 
without previous working experience records; 
registered on employment bureau as unemployed.  
Annex 9 
239 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 10 
Eligibility criteria for seed capital financing to FOs 
In order to be eligible for seed capital financing the FOs (cooperatives or producers’ associations) 
can satisfy following eligibility criteria:  
1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
they are registered in the territory of BiH in accordance with BiH/entity regulations (proof - 
decision from the court register); 
have at least 25 members, which includes at least 15 members from the READP target 
group (proof – list of cooperants registered in cooperants' book or list of PA members, 
certified by director/president signature and stamp);  
demonstrate intention to further increase membership particularly from the READP target 
group (proof – progress report for previous and business plan of cooperative/PA for the 
next year); 
perform regularly cooperative audit (for cooperatives only) or organize yearly meetings of 
association assembly (proof – the latest cooperative audit report or minutes form assembly 
meeting).  
240 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Annex 11 
Draft outline of the process for identifying and implementing infrastructure investments 
Phase 
Steps 
Responsibility 
(1) Stakeholder sensitisation about infrastructure investments 
1 
  Conduct orientation workshops, prior to the call for business 
proposals, to present project objectives, selection criteria, 
ownership, management arrangements and project support 
available to the stakeholders. Clearly communicate the requirement 
for infrastructure investments to focus on BP needs, benefit to 
target households and to be environmentally sound and climate 
resilient.  
A/PCU/SP  in  full 
coordination with 
the municipality 
  Clearly communicate the need for BPs clearly present (i) the 
enabling infrastructure requirements in the geographical locations 
with higher concentration of target households including potential 
increase in outreach to target households from these investments 
(ii) the impact of these infrastructure on the profitability of the 
agribusinesses. 
  The A/PCU and the SPs will advise stakeholders to incorporate into 
the business plans the relevant environmental and climate proofing 
measures. The mitigation and adaptation measures will be 
promoted at two levels: (i) at the producer level it will involve the 
identification of infrastructure types such as irrigation structure, 
shade nets, hail protection equipment that increase adaptation to 
climate change. (ii) At the municipal level it will involve measures 
that safeguard the infrastructure from natural hazards through 
designs that take into account the climate risks as well as measures 
that reduce the adverse environmental impact of these investments 
by supporting energy and water efficiencies and 
(2) Identification of eligible proposals 
I
I
I
I
N
O
T
A
S
T
R
O
R
P
D
N
A
N
O
T
C
E
L
E
S
I
,
I
N
O
T
A
R
A
P
E
R
P
2 
3 
  Coordinate the identification of eligible infrastructure investments. 
Identification should be undertaken in a participatory and demand-
driven manner to ensure the investments improve the market 
access of smallholders and off-farm entrepreneurs through 
upgraded infrastructure that benefits the rural poor smallholder 
farmers, women and youth, and strengthen the value chain. 
A/PCU  or  SP 
led, 
involving 
other 
stakeholders 
  Agribusinesses will, in coordination with municipalities, submit 
infrastructure proposal based on the enabling infrastructure 
development needs to successfully implement their business plans 
that are aligned with READP development objectives.  
Agribusinesses/ 
PAs 
(3) Selection and prioritization of infrastructure investments 
4 
 The infrastructure selection process shall involve (i) long-listing all 
potential infrastructure items (ii) shortlisting the more important 
infrastructure items (iii) final selection based on feasibility study of 
the shortlisted infrastructure items. 
A/PCU  or  SP 
led, 
involving 
other 
stakeholders 
 The long list will be prepared from the presentation in the BPs and 
from municipality recommendations.  
241 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
5 
 Screening and shortlisting will be based on information already 
available in the BPs and actual discussions about them between the 
SP/infrastructure engineer and the relevant stakeholders. Screening 
criteria will include (i) contribution to increasing the outreach of the 
BP to the target households (ii) contribution to the profitability of the 
target households (ii) performance of the agribusiness in the 
implementation of the BP (iv) link between infrastructure and value 
chain development for municipality identified proposals. Clearly 
non-eligible activities (such as street lights etc) shall be immediately 
excluded from further consideration and such activities include: 
-  Retrospective financing of activities already undertaken; 
- 
Infrastructure projects that do not meet READP objectives, 
such as town street lights; 
Infrastructure activities that do not comply with READP 
environmental and social safeguard policies as described in 
READP Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF). 
- 
A/PCU  or  SP 
led, 
involving 
other 
stakeholders 
 Representatives from the municipality, private sector and the project 
shall examine if submitted, high quality, proposals can be linked to 
the ones submitted by other agribusinesses or if new business 
ideas and BPs can be developed as a result of these infrastructure 
investments. 
6 
  A/PCU or SP will be responsible for preparing feasibility studies, 
which shall provide sufficient quantitative and qualitative information 
for final evaluation and selection of the shortlisted infrastructure 
items, based on factors outlined in annex 12. The feasibility study 
shall consider environmental issues and climate-related risks.  
A/PCU or SP 
7 
  Final infrastructure evaluation will be based on criteria outlined in 
annex12, utilising feasibility studies as the basis for the evaluation. 
The selected infrastructure will be ranked based on this assessment 
and finalised for design and implementation according to the 
priority.  
A/PCU  or  SP 
led, 
involving 
other 
stakeholders 
8 
9 
  Evaluated proposals that score above 50 are considered eligible 
activities and form a "pre-final list" of proposals, which is then 
submitted to IFAD for no objection. 
A/PCU 
  Following no objection, the municipality/the originator of the 
infrastructure proposal is informed of no-objection. The municipality 
may then proceed with additional prioritizing from eligible activities, 
if required, or proceed with final design. 
Municipality/origi
nator 
T
C
E
J
O
R
P
F
O
(4) Design, procurement and implementation 
10 
Design  
  Municipality, with input from the private sector, as relevant, are 
responsible for developing the designs for the selected 
infrastructure. The final design shall include the full 
project/engineering design with relevant permits.  
11 
  The SP /infrastructure engineer will review the proposal for 
engineering soundness for the target site.  
  The SP /infrastructure engineer will incorporate relevant 
environmental and climate proofing measures (if not incorporated 
already in the design) to safeguard the infrastructure from natural 
hazards (such as flooding and landslides) through designs that take 
into account the climate risks (see section II.B. Environmental 
and Social Management Framework of the PIM for details). 
The aim of the measures is to avoid damages to property and 
Municipality  or 
the 
private 
sector 
/ 
SP 
infrastructure 
engineer 
242 
I
I
N
O
T
A
S
L
A
M
R
O
F
&
N
G
S
E
D
I
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
forgone economic activity as a result of damages (e.g. failed 
bridges, damaged buildings), effects on health and human life, and 
impacts on environmental services (e.g. erosion, loss of natural 
capacity to protect from future climate change). In addition READP 
will promote measures that reduce the adverse environmental 
impact of these investments by supporting energy and water 
efficiencies.  
12 
Procurement  
  The SP / infrastructure engineer will assist with technical 
specification of works, preparation of tender documents and 
tendering for implementation of the works. 
  The SP / infrastructure engineer will coordinate the evaluation of 
submitted proposals. 
  The SP / infrastructure engineer will prepare a contract for 
execution of works with the selected bidder. 
/ 
SP 
infrastructure 
engineer 
13 
14 
  Selected contractor is responsible for construction as per contract.  
Contractor 
Implementation 
  The municipality along with the SP and the infrastructure engineer 
will be responsible for monitoring the implementation process.  
  The supervisory board established by the municipality will be 
responsible for overall project implementation on a daily basis.  
  On a regular basis (approx 2-4 times during construction), and prior 
payment to the contractor, a committee comprising of SP / 
infrastructure engineer, supervisory board and contractor, will 
review completed works for quality and completeness.  
SP 
infrastructure 
engineer 
municipality 
/ 
and 
I
I
I
G
N
N
O
S
S
M
M
O
C
&
N
O
T
C
U
R
T
S
N
O
C
I
15 
Final acceptance of works and issuance of use permit 
All 
  Final acceptance of works will be conducted by the supervisory 
board, contractor, municipality officer, A/PCU / SP / infrastructure 
engineer 
  Municipality will name a committee, comprising of relevant 
engineers, for technical acceptance of works prior to permitting 
use/issuing a use permit 
(5) Monitoring, supervision and training 
16 
  Following the technical acceptance of the works the SP and the 
infrastructure engineer will facilitate the development of 
management agreements between different actors for operating the 
infrastructure. Such agreements will be based on best practices and 
experiences in Bosnia and elsewhere (see annex 13). 
A/PCU, 
municipality 
SP, 
I
D
N
A
N
O
T
A
R
E
P
O
E
C
N
A
N
E
T
N
A
M
I
  The SP and the infrastructure engineer will conduct periodic 
monitoring and follow-up visits to the infrastructure sites to assess 
the quality of implementation and the generation of benefits 
according to the projections in the BPs and feasibility studies.  
  SP will provide technical assistance to overcome any issues and 
bottlenecks observed during the follow up visits, and train the actors 
engaged for the management of the infrastructure where relevant. 
In particular, it is expected that READP will provide tailored training 
to WUAs on organizational aspects of managing WUAs as well as 
technical aspects of operating irrigation systems to ensure optimum 
water use, optimum yields and minimum adverse impact on the 
environment. 
243 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Draft READP Evaluation table for enabling infrastructure proposals 
Annex 12 
Number of individuals assisted per EUR 1,000 of investment 
Referee Points  Score 
Contribution by applicants 
Less than 1 
Between 1 and 5 people 
Between 5 and 10 people  
More than 10 people 
20% of investment cost or less 
20-30% of investment cost  
More than 30% of investment cost 
Operation and maintenance capacity and experience 
Poor 
Good 
Very good 
0 
5 
10 
15 
5 
10 
15 
0 
5 
10 
Expected Increase in the value and volume of products sold by beneficiaries using better 
infrastructure 
0-14% improvement 
15-24% improvements 
25% or higher improvement 
0 
5 
10 
Link between infrastructure and value chain development (i.e. business plans submitted by 
enterprises and farmer organisations) 
Technical and financial viability of the project 
Expected engagement of women and youth 
Weak 
Strong 
Very strong 
Poor 
Good 
Very good 
Less than 10% 
10 to 29% 
30% and over 
0 
5 
10 
0 
5 
10 
0 
5 
10 
Consistency with nationally applicable regulations on environmental impact and IFAD environmental 
and social safeguard policies, including climate resilience 
The extent poor farmers benefit from the infrastructure 
TOTAL (max 100) 
Poor 
Good 
Very good 
Low 
Medium 
High 
0 
5 
10 
0 
5 
10 
244 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Annex 13 
READP will support two categories of infrastructure activities: 
Infrastructure ownership and management 
1.  Publically  owned  and  managed  infrastructure  such  as  public  water  supply,  which  benefits 
multiple  farmers  in  a  defined  area,  or  the  establishment  and  rehabilitation  of  feeder  roads, 
culverts and small bridges which connect business leaders and target households. 
These facilities will be publically owned and publically managed. 
2.  Publically owned infrastructure, such as irrigation structure, cooling and packing facilities, which 
is co-managed in partnership between the municipalities, FOs and private sector, as shown 
below.  
Types of infrastructure 
Irrigation 
infrastructure 
Cold storage 
facilities or other 
storage and packing 
facilities 
Rural market 
Examples of Public-Private Partnerships –  
ownership and management of infrastructure 
The municipality will establish a mechanism for the collection of fees for 
irrigation water use, which will be used to cover maintenance and repair costs of 
irrigation systems. The municipality, in consultation with the project and POs, will 
determine which entity will be responsible for the management or irrigation 
systems, including the collection of water use fees. A Water User Association 
(WUA) may be formed for this purpose or an existing will be used in case of 
READP activities that build on the existing the World bank Irrigation 
Development Project, which has introduced participatory approach to water 
management and created WUAs. The fees collected will be paid into a 
municipality bank account established solely for the purpose of accruing funds 
collected from irrigation water users and will be paid to the municipal utility 
company, which will be responsible for the maintenance and repairs of irrigation 
systems.  
Determination of water use fee (cost per m3) should equate the price of water 
consumed for irrigation in agriculture with the marginal cost of making it 
available for use. The marginal cost of an additional unit includes delivery costs 
(in BiH, the main cost is electricity cost for pumping the water from the water 
source to the reservoir), costs of building, maintaining and operating the 
infrastructure to make the unit available (this includes the labour cost at the 
Water User Association, which is responsible for managing the irrigation system 
i.e. recording water use per farmer). 
Municipality could provide fixed assets such a land and, potentially a building, 
IFAD funding could be used to purchase a cooling chamber, while the private 
sector could provide ancillary equipment (sorting equipment, packing line etc). In 
his case, the facility is co-owned by the municipality (i.e. fixed assets) and the 
private sector (movable assets) with management of the facility given from the 
municipality to the private sector under a lease arrangements over a set period 
of time.  
In instances where multiple private businesses have indicated in their business 
plans an interest in establishing a rural market in this case, the municipality may 
establish partnerships will all interested private businesses. Similarly to the 
above example, the municipality and IFAD funding can be used to finance fixed 
assets, while the private sector may fund movable assets. Management of the 
facility may be transferred in part to the private sector while the ownership will 
remain public.  
245 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 14 
Criteria for short listing infrastructure investments proposals 
The  criteria  on  which  will  be  evaluated  and  selected  proposal  for  co-financing  infrastructure 
investments are:  
1) 
their contribution to increasing the outreach of the BP to the target households;  
2) 
their contribution to the profitability of the target households;  
3) 
4) 
their contribution to performances of the business leaders in the implementation of the BP 
and  
link  between  infrastructure  and  value  chain  development  for  municipality  identified 
proposals. 
246 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Annex 15 
Criteria for final selection short listed infrastructure proposals 
Pre-selected  (short  listed)  project  proposals  of  the  market  infrastructure  will  be  finally  selected 
using following selection criteria: 
1)  number of individuals assisted per EUR 1,000 of investment;  
2)  share of co-financing by other stakeholders;  
3)  expected increase in the value and volume of products sold by target households using 
better infrastructure and  
4) 
technical and financial viability of the project. 
247 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Environmental Self-Screening Form for Applicants 
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL CLIMATE ISSUES  
Explanation 
Annex 16 
What  is  the  expected  impact  of  the  proposed 
activity on the environment? 
Water quantity and quality 
Air quality  
Noise pollution  
Natural habitat 
Social-cultural impacts  
Human health and safety 
Have  this  or  nearby 
affected by floods or landslides?  
locations  been  recently 
PERMITS AND INSPECTION  
Do  you  have  the  following  permits 
for your activities/facilities?  
A valid Environmental permit  
Planning permission  
Construction permit  
Use permit  
Has  your  production 
inspected 
and worker safety issues?  
facility  been 
regarding  environmental 
Answer 
Explanation  
□Yes □ No 
□Yes □ No 
□Yes □ No 
□Yes □ No 
□Yes □ No 
248 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Do  you  have  any  of 
following certifications? 
the 
Answer  
Explanation  
CERTIFICATIONS 
Global GAP 
Organic  
HACCP  
□Yes □ No 
□Yes □ No 
□Yes □ No 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION  
249 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) Checklist 
Annex 17.  
ESMF Checklist for READP Activities Related to Business Plan Implementation  
(including infrastructure) and FO seed capital financing 
General Guidelines for use of ESMF checklist: 
The checklist-type format has been developed to provide “example good practices” and designed 
to be user friendly and compatible with safeguard requirements.  
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) checklist-type format attempts to 
cover typical core mitigation approaches for activities related to business plan (BP) 
implementation, which may involve procurement of equipment and construction activities. This 
format provides the key elements of an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF)101. The checklist provides guidelines for the small works contractors and should be 
utilized by A/PCU infrastructure engineer or SP when evaluating BP proposals and influence the 
design of bidding documents, which contractors need to respond to during the tendering process 
and implementation. 
The checklist has three sections: 
Part 1 
Part 2 
Part 3 
includes a descriptive part that characterizes the project and specifies in terms the 
institutional and legislative aspects, the technical project content, the potential need for 
capacity building program and description of the public consultation process. This section 
could be up to two pages long. Attachments for additional information can be 
supplemented when needed.  
includes an environmental and social screening checklist, where activities and potential 
environmental issues can be checked in a simple Yes/No format. If any given 
activity/issue is triggered by checking “yes”, a reference is made to the appropriate 
section in the following table - the Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (EMMP) - 
which contains clearly formulated management/mitigation and monitoring measures. 
is the Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (EMMP), which is generic but 
adapted to the context of READP in Bosnia and Herzegovina. A/PCU infrastructure 
engineer or SP shall review and update the EMMPs for specific site conditions of the 
proposed BP to ensure suitability, adequacy, and comprehensive inclusion of necessary 
environmental, social and climate-resilience safeguards. Following this, the A/PCU 
infrastructure engineer or SP shall proceed as follows: 
1.  For any planned construction activities, it is A/PCU / SP's responsibility to review 
measures identified under B1 and B2 and take appropriate action, as identified therein. 
2.  If step 1 is passed, the relevant EMMPs shall be included into the tender documents 
for contractors, priced during the bidding process, diligently implemented, and 
supervised during works execution. 
3.  The implementation of measures identified for operation and use of construction 
infrastructure shall be the responsibility of the operator, which is identified in an 
agreement between the A/PCU and relevant stakeholder(s) (namely municipality and 
relevant agricultural organization).  
101 This framework is closely aligned with World Bank Environmental Assessment requirements.  
250 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Contents 
1. 
2. 
3. 
General Project and Site Information 
Safeguards Information 
Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan 
251 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
PART 1: GENERAL PROJECT AND SITE INFORMATION 
INSTITUTIONAL & ADMINISTRATIVE  
Country 
Project title    
Scope of project and 
activity 
Institutional  
arrangements 
(Name and contacts) 
IFAD  
A/PCU 
Business Plan originator 
(Country Project 
Manager) 
Implementation  
arrangements 
Safeguard 
Supervision 
Municipality 
Contractor 
Attachment 1: Site Map [ ]Y [ ] N 
(Name and contacts)  
SITE DESCRIPTION 
Name of site 
Describe site 
location 
Who owns the land? 
Description of 
geographic, physical, 
biological, 
geological, 
hydrographic and 
socio-economic 
context 
Locations and 
distance for material 
sourcing, especially 
aggregates, water, 
stones? 
LEGISLATION 
Identify national & 
local legislation & 
permits that apply to 
project activity 
PUBLIC CONSULTATION 
Identify when / where 
the public 
consultation process 
took place 
INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY BUILDING 
Will there be any 
capacity building? 
[ ] N or [ ]Y if Yes, Attachment 2 includes the capacity building program 
252 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
PART 2: SAFEGUARDS INFORMATION 
ENVIRONMENTAL /SOCIAL / CLIMATE SCREENING 
the  site 
Will 
activity 
include/involve 
the 
of 
any 
following? 
Activity 
A. 
 Procurement of equipment 
B. 
 Construction activities 
Status 
[ ] Yes [ ] No 
[ ] Yes [ ] No 
C.   Cold storage, storage and packing facilities 
[ ] Yes [ ] No 
D.  Construction and use of irrigation systems 
E.  Water supply rehabilitation/construction 
F.  Construction of public water supply 
G.  Construction of rural roads and bridges 
H.  Construction of rural markets 
[ ] Yes [ ] No 
[ ] Yes [ ] No 
[ ] Yes [ ] No 
[ ] Yes [ ] No 
[ ] Yes [ ] No 
Triggered Actions 
See Section A below 
See Section B below 
See Section C below 
See Section D below 
See Section E below 
See Section F below 
See Section G below 
See Section H below 
253 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
PART 3: ENVIRONMENTAL MITIGATION AND MONITORING PLAN 
ACTIVITY 
A.  Procurement 
of equipment e.g. 
small  marketing 
infrastructure 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
AND CLIMATE 
ISSUES 
Equipment  and  new 
production 
and 
processing  methods 
may  have  a  potential 
impacts on land, water, 
and human health.  
B. Construction activities 
B.1. Site Selection  Poor site selection can 
have 
adverse 
environmental  impacts 
the 
expose 
or 
constructed  facility  to 
hazards. 
Climate 
change factors need to 
be  taken  into  account 
to  avoid  damage  as  a 
result 
floods, 
of 
landslides and erosion. 
MITIGATION MEASURES CHECKLIST 
MONITORING INDICATORS 
RESPONSIBLE 
PARTY 
a)  Equipment procurement plans include environmental considerations. 
Proper equipment and appropriate technology should be used to 
minimize the environmental impact such as:  
- 
Energy/Water/thermal efficient and cost effective food 
processing equipment including homogenizers, evaporators, 
heat exchangers, stainless steel tanks and refrigerators with 
less Global Warming Potential (GWP) and Ozone Depletion 
Potential (ODP) etc.  
Sound enclosures & noise barriers, equipment with low noise 
ratings.  
Pollution Control Applications: Heat Exchanger, Oil Mist 
Eliminator, Drain Water Cleanup and Starch Recovery Systems, 
Heat Recovery, Oil/Water Separator etc.  
Installation of procured equipment to be conducted by an 
authorized company. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-  Consider climate change scenarios at the locality (forecasts for 
temperature and precipitation and extreme weather, as well as 
projections for soil stability). 
Avoid sitting outside of an area that has known flooding potential. 
Locate more than 30 meters from a water body to minimize risk of 
contaminated storm water and/or construct infrastructure above a 
100-year flood plain mark. 
Avoid areas prone to landslide or in known fault areas.  
Avoid sitting in critical habitat areas or wetlands. 
Avoid sating in areas with shallow groundwater table or porous 
soils.  
Avoid areas that have known hazardous waste contamination or 
ensure plan for remediating waste.  
Avoid sating processing facilities too close to occupied residential 
areas.  
Area with buildings should be located at least 9 m from overhead 
power lines.  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
254 
A/PCU tendering procedures  A/PCU 
A/PCU or SP 
Documented site visit memo, 
as  part  of  project  feasibility 
study  or  project  appraisal, 
documenting  any  potential 
concerns 
environmental 
of 
such 
as 
potential 
erosion 
landslides, 
or 
flooding. 
In  case  of  any 
sign/evidence  of  flooding  or 
geological 
found 
during  the  visual  inspection, 
seek 
hydro-
additional 
geological  expertise  and 
conduct  additional  research. 
Inspection 
planning 
of 
documents,  construction  or 
any other permits. 
instability 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
B.2.  Planning  and 
design 
B.3.  Construction 
activities 
Poor  design  can  have 
adverse  environmental 
impacts. 
and  social 
Climate change factors 
need  to  be  taken  into 
account 
avoid 
damage  as  a  result  of 
floods,  landslides  and 
erosion.  
a) Air Quality  
to 
b) Noise 
c) Water Quality 
d) Waste management 
If  site  is  not  suitable  for 
construction,  do  not  proceed 
process 
with 
tendering 
alternative, 
an 
unless 
suitable, site is identified.  
-  Documented design 
standards; 
-  Conformance with the 
design; 
-  Relevant permits. 
If  inadequate,  A/PCU  or  SP 
shall  request  from  originator 
to modify the design.  
periodic 
Conduct 
independent 
inspection  of 
work  to  see  that  it  conforms 
to  original  plan  and  design 
specifications. 
Provide 
incentives  and  disincentives 
to ensure conformance. 
Municipality,  with 
input 
the 
from 
private  sector  as 
relevant. 
Contractor 
responsible 
implementation 
is 
for 
Municipality 
responsible 
day 
supervision 
to 
is 
for 
day 
A/PCU 
infrastructure 
engineer  /  SP  is 
responsible 
for 
oversight 
- 
- 
- 
Avoid disturbing or damaging cultural resources. Obtain appropriate 
permit.  
Identify underground and overhead utility structures and avoid 
interference with them.  
Ensure nearby residents do not have any objections to construction 
(collect written concurrences/no objections from relevant residents). 
a)  Construction  and/or  rehabilitation  plans  shall  include  environmental 
considerations including:  
-  Consider recent experience in floods, landslides, drought and 
incorporate projected changes in precipitation, temperature, soil 
stability and flooding into designs for erosion control, steep slopes, 
storm water control and waste disposal. 
-  Documented safety plan.  
- 
- 
Keep the surrounding environment (side walks, roads) free of 
debris to minimize dust. 
Avoid open burning of construction / waste material at the site. 
Avoid excessive idling of construction vehicles at sites.  
Limit construction noise to restricted times agreed to in the permit. 
- 
- 
- 
-  During operations the engine covers of generators, air compressors 
and other powered mechanical equipment shall be closed, and 
equipment placed as far away from residential areas as possible. 
The site will establish appropriate erosion and sediment control 
measures such as e.g. hay bales and / or silt fences to prevent 
sediment from moving off site and causing excessive turbidity in 
nearby streams and rivers. 
Identify waste collection and disposal pathways and sites for all 
major waste types expected from demolition and construction 
activities. 
Separate mineral construction and demolition wastes from general 
refuse, organic, liquid and chemical wastes by on-site sorting and 
stored in appropriate containers. 
- 
- 
-  Construction waste shall be collected and disposed properly by 
licensed collectors. 
-  Maintain the records of waste disposal as proof for proper 
management as designed. 
-  Whenever feasible the contractor shall reuse and recycle 
appropriate and viable materials (except asbestos). 
255 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
e) Health and Safety 
-  Notify local communities of upcoming activities through appropriate 
- 
- 
- 
notification in the media and/or at publicly accessible sites 
(including the site of the works) 
 Acquire all legally required permits for construction and/or 
rehabilitation. 
 The Contractor formally agrees that all work will be carried out in a 
safe and disciplined manner designed to minimize impacts on 
neighboring residents and environment. 
 Workers’ PPE will comply with international good practice (always 
wear hardhats, as needed masks and safety glasses, harnesses 
and safety boots). Appropriate signposting of the sites will inform 
workers of key rules and regulations to follow. 
C.  Cold  storage, 
and 
storage 
packing facilities 
C.1. 
Prior 
construction 
to 
C.1. 
construction 
C.3. 
operation/use 
facilities 
During 
During 
of 
Poor site selection and 
have 
can 
design 
adverse  environmental 
and  social 
impacts. 
Climate change factors 
need  to  be  taken  into 
avoid 
account 
damage  as  a  result  of 
floods,  landslides  and 
erosion. 
See B.3. 
to 
Cold  storages  may 
have  potential  impacts 
on  land,  water,  air  and 
human health:  
a.  Soil, Surface and 
ground Water;  
b.  Air Pollution 
Impacts;  
c.  Noise, Odour & 
Visual Quality 
Impacts;  
d.  Non efficient Use 
of Energy and 
Water Resources;  
Impacts on 
Human Health.  
e. 
Apply  measures  identified  under  B.1.  and  B.2.  in  addition  to  the 
Refer to B.1. and B.2. 
following: 
Building design shall include installation of water, heating, 
ventilation, sewage system, and restrooms.  
Agricultural storage/packing/processing facilities shall aligned with 
HACCP principles. 
Ensure relevant permits are obtained. 
- 
- 
- 
Refer  to  B.1.  and 
B.2. 
Apply relevant measures identified under B.3. 
Refer to B.3. 
Refer to B.3. 
a) Soil and water pollution prevention  
- 
- 
- 
Implement good management practices. 
Ensure adequate storage of damaged fruits and their safe 
reutilization or transportation. 
Establish and maintain and effective waste management, 
disposal, and waste reduction system.  
b) Air pollution prevention  
-  Use environmentally acceptable fuels for dryers & heating 
equipment. Replace fuels with high greenhouse gas emissions 
(e.g. coal) with clean fuels like natural gas if possible.  
-  Use Freon R404A as refrigerant or other environment friendly 
and freon-free options. 
-  Use efficient low emission production equipment with high 
- 
energy efficient ratings.  
Limit use of hot water, reduce energy demand of lighting & 
production equipment.  
- 
Environmental and use 
permits; 
-  Certifications. 
the 
and 
Operator, which is 
identified 
in  an 
agreement 
between 
A/PCU 
relevant 
stakeholder(s) 
(namely 
municipality  and 
relevant 
agricultural 
organization). 
256 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
c) Noise, odour prevention.  
-  During operations, the engine covers of generators, air 
compressors and other powered mechanical equipment should 
be closed, and equipment placed as far away from residential 
areas as possible. 
-  Use sound enclosures & noise barriers, equipment with low 
noise ratings.  
Provide ventilation to reduce smoke, vapour & odour in the 
workplace.  
Tightly close doors of the facility. 
- 
- 
d) Ensure resource efficiency  
- 
Perform regular maintenance to optimize performance on 
heating, cooling, & lighting systems to maximize efficiency.  
-  Optimize process line operations to avoid spills of raw 
materials and water, reducing the need to wastewater 
treatment and associated energy consumption. 
Select appropriate insulation panels and doors in order to 
decrease heat penetration in the cold room. 
- 
e) Worker Safety Measures  
-  Conduct regular instructing of personnel on health and 
- 
- 
- 
- 
occupational safety requirements.  
An Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) for Refrigerant/Freon 
Management should be displayed in a proper place and the 
staff must be trained in handling of refrigerants leakage should 
it occur.  
Installation of the forced air cooling equipment is conducted by 
an authorized company in accordance with producer's 
installation and operation manual. Access restricted to 
authorized personnel only.  
Avoid air pollution and worker poisoning, special indicators of 
the potential refrigerant/Freon spillage should be installed near 
the freezing equipment.  
Ensure gas masks and protective gear to comply with safety 
rules for ammonia/Freon refrigerating systems. 
e) Minimize impact to sensitive ecologies  
- 
- 
Trainings on protection of endangered species, native plants & 
wildlife (i.e. during collection of non timber forest products, 
berries & mushrooms).  
Training on organic certification standards and/or Global GAP 
certification standards for agriculture production and 
processing.  
257 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
D.  Construction 
and 
of 
use 
irrigation 
systems 
D.1. 
Prior 
construction 
to 
D.2.During 
construction 
in 
See  B1  and  B2 
addition to below: 
Consider 
potential 
local  or  transboundary 
issues  with  respect  to 
water 
extraction 
upstream  and  impact 
on 
levels 
water 
e.g. 
downstream 
environmental  flows  or 
drawdown 
on 
groundwater tables.  
a) Water quality 
increased 
Potentially 
in 
loads 
sediment 
or 
streams 
contamination 
of 
surface  and  ground 
waters  by  fuel  and  oil 
leak. 
b) Soil impacts  
localized 
Temporary 
impact 
immediate 
in 
vicinity  of  pipelines: 
loss  of  top  coil,  soil 
compaction; 
soil 
contamination. 
c) Solid waste 
-  Construction  wastes 
may  reduce  terrestrial 
and aquatic quality.; 
-  Air  pollution 
open burning. 
from 
Apply relevant measures identified under B.1. and B.2. in addition to the 
following: 
- 
Select sustainable solution with minimal impacts on environmental 
flows (i.e. ensure environmental flows can be maintained) or 
groundwater levels (e.g. choose rechargeable aquifers or build 
water retention dams). 
Ensure relevant water use permits are obtained prior to investment. 
As a rule, financing for water infrastructure improvements should 
not be provided unless appropriate operations and maintenance 
provisions are in place. Operations and Maintenance Agreement 
should be prepared before water system operations begin.  
- 
- 
a) Water quality 
-  Minimize disturbance to river banks and stream beds  
-  Revegetate after construction. 
- 
Store fuels and lubricants in safe place, provide spill protection, 
emergency response procedures.  
b) Soil impacts 
-  Conserve topsoil layer and replace after interventions. 
- 
Install storm water control barriers (hay bales, filters) to prevent 
erosion. 
Schedule interventions so as to minimize vehicle/equipment 
passage. 
Infill trenches after interventions. 
Schedule interventions to ensure trenches are open for short 
periods only.  
- 
- 
- 
Set protocols for storage of materials and wastes. 
Set protocols for equipment storage and maintenance. 
c) Solid waste 
- 
- 
-  Use of excavated materials to refill trenches.  
- 
Post-construction cultivation will mitigate impacts – in areas of no 
cultivation pipeline traces should be revegetated. 
-  Recycle/reuse inert demolition wastes as fill. 
- 
-  Open burning of waste prohibited. 
Industrial wastes need to be disposed of in recognized landfill.  
258 
-  Documented design 
standards; 
-  Conformance with the 
design; 
-  Relevant permits. 
Municipality,  with 
input 
the 
from 
private  sector  as 
with 
relevant; 
A/PCU support. 
If  inadequate,  A/PCU  or  SP 
shall  request  from  originator 
the  design  or 
to  modify 
identify 
suitable 
location.  
another 
periodic 
Conduct 
independent 
inspection  of 
work  to  see  that  it  conforms 
to  original  plan  and  design 
specifications. 
Provide 
incentives  and  disincentives 
to ensure conformance. 
Contractor 
responsible 
implementation 
is 
for 
Municipality 
responsible 
day 
supervision 
to 
is 
for 
day 
A/PCU 
infrastructure 
engineer  /  SP  is 
responsible 
for 
oversight 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
d) Air quality 
-  Dust 
generation 
during  pipe  laying  and 
transport; 
- 
equipment emissions. 
Vehicle/heavy 
Impact  to  Flora 
e) 
and Fauna 
-  Potential  impact  on 
local  flora  and  fauna 
(including aquatic). 
f)  Potential  impacts 
on human health 
a) Water quantity 
Potentially 
reduce 
groundwater or surface 
water levels.  
Surface 
b) Water quality 
and 
- 
groundwater  pollution 
by 
pesticides/herbicides 
and fertilizers; 
-  Increased  sediment 
loads due to erosion. 
D.3. 
construction  
Following 
Implement dust control measures if required. 
d) Air quality 
- 
-  Cover haul trucks. 
- 
Provide dust control during extraction and disposal of spoil and 
sediment. 
e) Impact to flora and flora 
-  Minimize disturbed area.  
f) Potential impacts on human health 
- 
refer to B.3.e. 
a) Water quantity 
- 
Encourage water efficient irrigation equipment e.g. drip irrigation or 
efficient sprinkler irrigation systems when drip irrigation is not 
appropriate. 
Avoid over-irrigation and manage extraction to ensure sufficient 
water is available downstream. 
- 
-  Regulate use through adequate water pricing/energy pricing.  
-  Water metering to monitor water use. 
- 
Full evaluation of basin wide water resource availability for all future 
interventions. Be cognizant of transboundary issues.  
Support the development of water management plans.  
- 
-  Water level and water 
- 
- 
quality data 
Soil quality tests 
Sustainable 
management 
arrangements 
the 
and 
Operator, which is 
identified 
in  an 
agreement 
between 
A/PCU 
relevant 
stakeholder(s) 
(namely 
municipality  and 
Water 
User 
Association) 
c) Soil impacts  
- Stalinization; 
- Waterlogging; 
- Compaction.  
- 
- 
- 
Impact  to  Flora 
d) 
and Fauna 
- Mass growth of pests 
resistant to pesticides; 
b) Water quality 
- 
Soil testing to determine nutrient / fertilizer needs for target crop / 
site.  
Limit use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides.  
Ensure correct storage, handling, use and disposal of 
agrochemicals.  
Implement integrated pest management (IPM) (see annex 19)- and 
good agricultural practice (GAP). 
Implement EU Nitrates Directive. 
- 
-  Minimize intensive cultivation of row crops on slopes and on light 
textured soils.  
Ensure suitable sprinkler pressures. 
Plant field and riparian buffers. 
- 
- 
259 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
of 
to 
Impacts 
-  Establishment 
persistent weeds; 
- 
Threatened, 
Endangered 
Protected 
(TES). 
& 
Species 
in 
e)  Potential  impacts 
on  
human health 
-  Lack  of  control  of 
residual 
nitrate  and 
pesticide 
concentrations 
agricultural products. 
-  Tropic  migration  of 
hazardous  substances 
via the food chain. 
-  Eolian  transport  of 
during 
pesticides 
application. 
-  Lack  of  adequate 
spraying 
equipment 
and protective clothing. 
Groundwater 
- 
pollution 
affecting 
potable  water  wells  in 
nearby villages. 
Poor site selection and 
design 
have 
can 
adverse  environmental 
impacts. 
and  social 
Climate change factors 
need  to  be  taken  into 
avoid 
account 
to 
E.  Construction 
of  public  water 
supply 
E.1. 
Prior 
construction 
to 
c) Soil impacts 
- 
Soil testing to assess soil characteristics (nutrients, permeability) 
and determine appropriate soil management practices for target 
crop / site.  
-  Good irrigation practices. 
- 
Better matching of water demand to farm location. 
-  Use of drip irrigation and other improved methods. 
- 
- 
- 
Ensure sufficient application of leaching fraction during irrigation. 
Ensue clean and adequate drainage. 
Avoid repeated use of heavy equipment. 
d) Impact to flora and flora 
- 
Implemented Good Agricultural Practice (GAP) and Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) (see annex 19). 
Limit use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides.  
Ensure correct storage, handling, use and disposal of 
agrochemicals. 
e) Health and safety measures 
- 
Implemented Good Agricultural Practice (GAP) and Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) (see annex 19). 
Limit use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides.  
Promote adequate spraying equipment and safety clothing. 
Protect children and local communities from accidental drowning 
through use of signs, factsheets. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Apply relevant measures identified under B.1. and B.2. in addition to the 
following: 
- 
Site water supply facilities in a way that minimizes the potential for 
contamination, taking into account existing and likely future land 
use patterns in the water supply—i.e., wellhead protection, or upper 
watershed—area. 
In general, design water supply facilities to protect water quality, 
- 
Refer to B.1. and B.2. 
Refer  to  B.1.  and 
B.2. 
260 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
damage  as  a  result  of 
floods,  landslides  and 
erosion. 
- 
minimize the potential for contamination, and minimize operation 
and maintenance costs.  
As a rule, financing for water infrastructure improvements should 
not be provided unless appropriate operations and maintenance 
provisions are in place. Operations and Maintenance Agreement 
should be prepared before water system operations begin.  
E.2.During 
construction 
See B.3 
E.3. 
operation/use 
During 
Water quality 
F.  Construction 
of 
roads 
rural 
and bridges 
Prior 
F.1. 
construction 
to 
Poor site selection and 
design 
have 
can 
adverse  environmental 
and  social 
impacts. 
Climate change factors 
need  to  be  taken  into 
account 
avoid 
damage  as  a  result  of 
floods,  landslides  and 
erosion. 
to 
Refer to B.3. 
Refer to B.3. 
Municipality 
or 
local  public  health 
authority 
Refer  to  B.1.  and 
B.2. 
Apply relevant measures identified under B.3.in addition to those below: 
-  Monitor and repair leaks from cracked containment structures, 
broken pipes, faulty valves and similar structures. 
-  Do not use piping containing asbestos. 
- 
- 
Provide proper wellhead protection against contaminant sources. 
Keep livestock from grazing immediately up-gradient of water 
supplies. 
-  Do not allow animals to drink directly from water sources, unless 
those sources are subsequently treated. 
-  Monitor drains and soakways and keep clear of debris.  
- 
As practicable, landscape construction sites in a way that is 
appropriate to local conditions. 
Water quality 
Apply relevant measures identified under B.1.and B.2., in addition to the 
Refer to B.1. and B.2. 
following: 
-  Design for climate-resilience i.e. expected increased frequency of 1 
in 100 year flood therefore the need to design bridges higher above 
flood plain and strengthening erosion/drainage control measures 
(e.g. by increasing the size of culverts, adding wider paved 
shoulders and improving slope management; building bridges that 
are stronger and higher than currently required).  
-  Apply design standards for each facet of construction and related 
activities, e.g., road bed, road surface, drainage, erosion control, 
re-vegetation, stream crossing, sensitive areas, steep slopes, 
material extraction, transport and storage, construction camps, 
decommissioning, etc.  
-  Minimize use of vertical road cuts even though they are easier to 
construct, and require less space than flatter slopes. The majority 
of road cuts should have no more than a ¾:1 to 1:1 slope to 
promote plant growth. Vertical cuts are acceptable in rocky material 
and in well-cemented soils, if such cuts are stable according to 
established slope stability criteria. 
Identify and avoid areas in the project impact zone that may 
contain important ecological, archaeological, paleontological, 
historic, religious or cultural resources, including forests, wetlands 
and areas of high biological diversity or threatened species habitat.  
- 
261 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
F.2.During 
construction 
See B.3 
Apply measures identified under B.3. in addition to the following: 
-  Water the road prior to compaction to strengthen the road surface. 
-  Reshape eroded or culled surfaces so that water will no longer 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
follow the course of the roadway.  
Install drainage structures during, instead of after construction. 
Most erosion associated with roads occurs in the first year after 
construction. Delaying installation of the drainage features greatly 
increases the extent of erosion and damage during that time.  
Install frequent diversion structures, such as water bars, to move 
water off the road and minimize concentration of water. 
Install drainage crossings to pass water from the uphill to the 
downhill side of the road. If using culvert pipes, follow accepted 
sizing and design standards. Where flows are difficult to determine, 
use structures such as fords, rolling dips, and overflow dips that can 
accommodate any flow volume and are not susceptible to plugging. 
Stabilize outlet ditches (inside and outside) with small-stone riprap, 
and/ or vegetative barriers placed on contour to dissipate energy 
and to prevent the creation or enlargement of gullies. 
Install drainage ditches or berms on up-hill slopes to divert water 
away from the road.  
Install temporary erosion control features when permanent ones will 
be delayed. Use erosion control measures such as hay bales, 
berms, and straw or fabric barriers.  
Stabilize slopes by planting vegetation.  
Break up old road surface material. Remove and dispose of surface 
material (e.g. asphalt) if necessary, and loosen soil of previous 
track to accelerate regeneration of vegetation. 
Refer to B.3. 
Refer  to  B.3.in  addition  to 
below: 
-  Drive roads after 
moderate rains to 
identify areas that 
collect or gully water. 
Mark and 
redesign/rehabilitate as 
necessary. 
Visually spot check for 
drainage problems, 
including accumulation 
of water on road 
surfaces, especially 
after the first heavy rains 
following rehabilitation 
and at the end of the 
rainy season. 
- 
F.3. 
operation/use 
During 
Water  management 
issues 
-  Monitor and maintain drainage structures and ditches including 
Visual inspection 
Municipality 
culverts. Clean out culverts and side channels/runouts when they 
begin to fill with sediment. 
G.  Construction 
of rural markets 
See B. 
Apply relevant measures identified under B. 
Refer to B. 
Refer to B. 
262 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (EMMP) for Starter Packages 
Annex 18. 
ACTIVITY 
A. 
Procurement 
of agricultural 
inputs for 
starter 
packages 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
AND CLIMATE 
ISSUES 
Inappropriately 
selected 
agricultural inputs, 
such as fertilizers 
and pesticides, can 
have adverse 
impacts on the 
environment and 
human health 
MITIGATION MEASURES 
1)  Any seedlings provided are certified as disease and virus 
free. 
2)  Identify most suitable fertilizers for starter packages, 
taking into consideration the existing soil quality, 
intended crop, and current practices on the use of 
manure by small holders.  
3)  If pesticides form part of the procurement package, 
ensure the following: 
a)  pesticides are registered in BiH and suitable for use 
on the target crop; 
b)  selected pesticides are least toxic pesticides, which 
are suitable for IPM; 
c)  relevant safety clothing is provided as part of the 
starter package; 
d)  all recipients receive training in IPM and safe 
pesticide use practices. 
Refer to Annex 4. for pesticide use practices for 
additional information. 
4)  Whenever possible, promote climate resilient 
technologies such as drought tolerant varieties, drip 
irrigation, shade nets, hail nets etc.  
MONITORING 
INDICATORS 
1) Plant health certificate 
RESPONSIBLE 
PARTY 
A/PCU / SP 
indicating that 
seedlings are virus 
and disease free; 
2) Fertilization 
recommendations 
based on soil tests 
and target crops; 
3) List of registered 
pesticides in BiH;  
List of suitable 
pesticides developed 
by local expert(s); 
GlobalGAP 
certification in 
instances where 
producers are export 
oriented. 
263 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 19.  
Pesticide use practices on READP 
Since pesticides are used in most agricultural production systems, attention to pesticide use is 
important to marketing, crop and livestock management, business plan development, and other 
activities with which READP is involved. Pesticides may be misused or mishandled. Farmers need to 
be constantly reminded of the acute and chronic effects of pesticide use both on human health and 
the environment and the importance of properly using personal protection equipment to minimize 
adverse health effects. READP has an opportunity to promote safer use of pesticides and non-
chemical pest management techniques through Integrated Pest Management (IPM) by providing 
training and technical assistance to those involved.  
There are two key areas where READP should mitigate risks associated with pesticide use: 
1.  Procurement of pesticides for starter packages; 
2.  Training and advisory assistance to farmers; 
3.  Promote certification according to Global GAP or organic standards. 
This is described in further detail below: 
1.  Procurement of pesticides for starter packages 
Any starter packages that include pesticides, shall comply with the following: 
a)  pesticides must be registered in BiH and suitable for use on the target crop; 
b)  selected pesticides needs to be least toxic pesticides available for the control of pests in target 
crops, which are suitable for use under IPM; 
c) 
relevant safety clothing is provided as part of the starter package; 
d)  all recipients receive training in IPM and safe pesticide use practices; 
To comply with points a and b above, READP should engage 
a reputable pest management/IPM specialist(s), to identify 
suitable pesticides for the starter package and training and 
advisory assistance.  
2.  Training and advisory assistance to farmers  
READP should provide training and technical assistance to 
farmers on Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and safer use 
of pesticides when their application is warranted. Pesticides 
should only be recommended in conjunction with the use of 
appropriate protective gear. Only pesticides identified in step 
1 above, shall be promoted during training. Practical advice 
for safety clothing, equipment, and precautions go a long way, 
and with appropriate recommendations, READP assistance 
for the use of approved pesticides is not expected to have 
adverse impacts on human health.  
The following is a summary of pesticide safer use training 
topics that should be addressed:  
 
Chemical knowledge: registration, correct use, 
application procedures and label specifications. This 
should include an in-depth review of label information as 
well as a discussion of dosage rates, application rates, 
equipment calibration and maintenance, application 
intervals, re-entry and pre-harvest intervals, Maximum 
Residue Limits (MRLs), and demonstrations of proper 
Reducing pesticide exposure 
There are numerous ways to reduce 
exposure to humans. Among these are 
the following: 
 Read labels carefully and follow 
instructions with regard to product 
use and protective clothing or 
equipment; 
 Do not re-enter a treated area until 
the pesticide has dried or the 
prescribed re-entry interval has 
passed; 
 Never eat, drink or smoke while 
working with any pesticide; 
 Wash thoroughly with soap and 
water after working with pesticides; 
 Do not expose food, beverages, 
drinking vessels or cigarettes to 
pesticides; 
 Wear gloves, face masks, long 
sleeved shirt and trousers, shoes, 
socks and hat and other prescribed 
protective gear (e.g. rubber aprons 
and goggles) when working with 
pesticides; and 
 Stay up-wind during application 
process. 
264 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
equipment use.  
 
 
 
Storage: proper storage of chemicals in relation to other structures on the property. The need for 
a separate, clearly marked and locked facility for exclusive storage of farm chemicals should be 
emphasized. Pesticides should be kept away from food for human or animal consumption or 
sources of drinking water. Pesticides should always be stored in their original containers.  
Safety practices: proper mixing techniques, the importance of using clean water for mixing, and 
the importance of not contaminating water sources. The types of containers used in chemical 
preparation, their proper use, cleaning and storage need to be addressed. Applicators need to be 
taught not to eat, drink or smoke while applying pesticides.  
First aid and medical facilities: Participants need to be taught to identify the primary symptoms 
of chemical exposure and what do to in an emergency.  
  Waste Management: how to clean up and safely dispose of any chemical not used. For liquids, 
empty containers should be rinsed 3 times, and emptied into the spray tank as part of the 
application mixture. When the product is used completely, chemical containers should be triple 
rinsed and punctured before being buried. Containers should NEVER be reused. If possible, 
procurement of pesticides should include a clause whereby pesticide vendors will collect empty 
pesticide containers.  
 
 
Protection of drinking water: Training should emphasizes the importance of protecting potable 
water sources and avoiding contamination of ground and surface waters. Participants should be 
trained to identify their drinking water source and to keep all pesticides away from that source. 
Characteristics of the water source and mitigation measures to avoid contamination will be 
addressed. 
Environmental safety: the importance of protecting natural resources and the proper use of 
pesticides to avoid environmental contamination and impacts on non-target organisms should be 
addressed. For pesticides toxic to birds, bees, and other wildlife, trainers should give training on 
the protection of habitat, including preventing drift. 
  Worker protection: Types of personal protective equipment (PPE), when they should be worn 
and why, and how it should be cared for. The basic PPE recommended for all pesticide 
applications includes long-sleeved shirts, long pants and boots. Participants need to be 
encouraged to wash PPE separate from everyday clothing and to keep their PPE in good 
condition. 
Only agronomists with a pest management background and IPM training will be utilized for training 
activities within the project. READP shall present all of its relevant training topics in the holistic 
framework of Good Agriculture Practices (GAP) and IPM as they pertain to specific crops . This 
training program needs to highlight preventative measures and cultural practices as a first-line of 
defense. It should also highlight ways pesticides can be integrated into the overall IPM program and 
used only as a last resort. It is best to incorporate this IPM training into the overall technical training 
program for producers and should incorporate training on safe pesticide use and selection and use of 
appropriate equipment as noted above. IPM and safe pesticide use recommendations shall also be 
incorporated in any READP extension materials on production or presented in stand-alone extension 
material 
3.  Promote certification according to Global GAP or organic standards 
Producers that are certified according to Global GAP or organic standards, undergo regular audits to 
check compliance on pest management practices, include use of permitted pesticides. Producers 
should obtain certification that are required by the desired market.  
265 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Term of Reference 
PROJECT MANAGER 
(one position for each PCU) 
Annex 20 
The READP Project Manager is a employee of the A/PCU, and the main person in charge of READP 
planning, implementation and reporting. He/She is directly subordinated to the A/PCU director. The 
READP Project Manager leads READ project team and is responsible for READP overall 
implementation.  
Job description:  
-  Prepare the final version of Project Implementation Manual (PIM). 
-  Organize and play active role in the start-up workshop and the project promotion/awareness 
campaign. 
-  Support preparation of the TOR and the documentation to hire service provider(s), cluster 
coordinators and extension field officers for implementation of component 1 and its sub-
components. 
- 
Initiate in close coordination with service provider the development of a methodology for the 
targeting study and supervise implementation and reporting. 
-  Organize in coordination with service provider, stakeholder sensitization workshops in each 
cluster of the project areas.  
-  Develop background information and procedure for "Call for business proposals".  
-  Coordinate the follow up field visits of service provider and cluster coordinators/extension officers 
to assist stakeholders in preparation business proposals.  
-  Facilitate establishing business plan appraisal committee and furthermore contribute to 
development of business plan screening criteria.  
-  Follow-up on the process of identification and preparation of business plans through periodic 
reporting and field visits. 
-  Supervise the further development of selected business plans.  
-  Participate in the business plan approval sessions. 
-  Update information about sub-sectors and value chains relevant for business plan development. 
-  Coordinate in close cooperation with service provider the identification and specification of 
required starter packages and launch after A/PCUs approval the tender process.  
-  Supervise the procurement process and distribution of starter packages to the determined target 
households. 
-  Coordinate the development and implementation of training plans to be prepared by service 
provider/agriculture extension service. 
-  Monitor the functioning of the voucher scheme in RCDP and contribute to the decision making 
process on advisory services. 
-  Supervise training and advisory services and ensure close communication with all stakeholders 
including municipalities and private sector partners. 
- 
Initiate, support approval and follow up/participate in market development activities implemented 
by service provider such as quality assurance/certification processes, trade fair participation and 
study tours.  
-  Organize in cooperation service provider business plan implementation review and planning 
workshops in the selected clusters. 
-  Coordinate training and advisory services for institutional strengthening.  
266 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
-  Coordinate seed capital financing measures such as specification, selection, approval of required 
investments, coordination with municipalities on co-financing means, establishment of linkages to 
the finance sector, launching tender processes and support procurement and distribution. 
- 
Liaise with the A/PCU M&E officer to set up an appropriate M&E system for systematic data 
collection and reporting related to all key project activities. 
-  Coordination closely with the M&E officer for the implementation of the M&E system and timely 
implementation of baseline study and impact study.  
-  Monitor the performance of approved business plans and progress made against baseline 
indicators through periodic reporting and field visits. 
-  Monitor the effective application of measures to mainstream inclusion of poor farmers, women 
and youth men and women in supported business plans. 
-  Coordinate with service provider and M&E officer the preparation of knowledge-sharing products 
(guidelines, manuals, case studies, lessons learnt) to document and share the results of the 
project. 
-  Preparation of the annual work plan and budget (AWPB). 
-  Participation in PSC meetings. 
- 
Logistics and implementation support to IFAD supervision, MTR and completion missions.  
-  Preparation of the project progress and closing report. 
-  Coordination with other development projects related to READP. 
-  Coordination among the READP team and defining clear responsibilities and tasks. 
-  Capacity building of APCU READP team members to further develop the required skills and 
capacities for READP implementation. 
Required Education, Experience and Skills:  
Education:   
-  Master degree in business administration, economics, agriculture, management or related areas. 
Experience:  
-  A minimum of ten (10) years working experience in coordination of development projects. 
Skills:  
-  Proven management and organization skills. 
-  Knowledge of gender and targeting issues. 
-  Preference for teamwork. 
-  Proven communication skills. 
Language:  
-  Fluent spoken and written English. 
267 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Term of Reference 
INFRASTRUCTURE CIVIL ENGINEER 
 (position only in APCU) 
The infrastructure civil engineer is a member of APCU and the main executive of implementation sub-
component Enabling infrastructure support. He/She is responsible for overall guidance and 
management of the infrastructure investment related activities and their linking with other sub-
component of READP. He/She is directly subordinated to the READP project manager.  
Job description:  
- 
In cooperation with the APCU relevant staff participate in orientation workshops and sensitize 
stakeholders about the sub-component, application and selection procedure, ownership, 
management arrangements and project support available to the stakeholders.  
-  Clearly communicate the requirement for infrastructure investments to focus on BP needs, benefit 
to target households and to be environmentally sound and climate resilient.  
-  Coordinate the identification of eligible infrastructure investments in a way that infrastructure 
needs are undertaken in a participatory and demand-driven manner to ensure the investments 
improve the market access of smallholders and off-farm entrepreneurs through upgraded 
infrastructure that benefits the rural poor smallholder farmers, women and youth, and strengthen 
the value chain. 
-  Prepare feasibility studies, which shall provide sufficient quantitative and qualitative information 
for final evaluation and selection of the shortlisted infrastructure items, based on factors outlined 
in the PIM. The feasibility study shall consider environmental issues and climate-related risks. 
-  Advise stakeholders to incorporate into the business plans the relevant environmental and climate 
proofing measures.  
-  Review and assess proposals for infrastructure investment with regard to their technical feasibility 
and preliminary cost estimation. 
-  Assess whether the proposed infrastructure works are required and linked to the selected VCs in 
the business plans with clear synergy with other sub-components. 
-  Assess the environmental, social and climate-related issues using the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) checklist. 
-  Review proposed works in relation to other possible alternatives. 
-  Participate and contribute in discussions with applicant, design company and other interested 
parties in decision making during the construction stage. 
-  Review detailed engineering design solutions in terms of sound technical solutions, quality and 
identified scope and volumes of works. 
-  Assist the procurement manager with technical specification of works, preparation of tender 
documents and tendering for implementation of the works. 
-  Participate in bid opening and evaluation committee in evaluation of bids for infrastructure woks 
implementation. 
-  Facilitate in collecting sources of financing of contracted infrastructure works. 
-  Manage contracts for works procured by the APCU for the implementation of the infrastructure 
sub-component, including approvals of contractors’ submittals (payment certificates, variation 
orders, completion certificates, etc.) and notifications to the contractors (defects, penalties, etc.) 
and any other issues as specified in the general and special conditions of contract.  
-  Conduct periodic monitoring and follow-up visits to the infrastructure sites to assess the quality of 
implementation according to technical requirements. 
-  Coordinate activities of construction site daily supervisors in accordance with agreed procedure 
and standard formats and in the purpose of ensuring quality and actual quantity of work done. 
268 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
-  Facilitate the development of management agreements between different actors for operating the 
infrastructure.  
-  Provide technical assistance to overcome any issues and bottlenecks observed during the follow 
up visits, and train the actors engaged in the management of the infrastructure where relevant.  
-  Supervise and personally participate in the activities of technical acceptance and physical 
handover of performed works. 
-  As a member of the APCU project team, provide reports and information on infrastructure 
investment operations as necessary to the APCU Director and contribute to progress reports.  
Required education, experience and skills:  
Education:   
-  High degree in civil engineering. 
Experience:  
-  A minimum of (5) five years working experience with projects for infrastructure rehabilitation, 
including design and construction supervision, with proven ability to work in a multi-disciplinary 
team and with the rural population. 
-  Experience in the area of civil works, water supply preparation of tender documents, supervision 
of construction works, project supervision and implementation; 
-  Experience of working with donor-supported projects will be an advantage; 
-  Familiarity with engineering design requirements and construction supervision procedures of the 
Republika Srpska, as well as with the procurement procedures applicable under foreign donors’ 
funded projects. 
Skills:  
-  Computer literacy, MS Office (Windows, Word, Auto CAD, Arci CAD, Excel),  
-  Driving license: B category. 
Language:  
-  Fluent English, both spoken and written is preferable. 
269 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Term of Reference 
ACCOUNTANT 
(one position only for PCU) 
The Accountant is a member of the PCU and executive of accounting and financial tasks in the 
project unit. The aforementioned activities carried out for the needs of all active IFAD projects. He/She 
is directly subordinated to the Financial Manager.  
Job description:  
 -
 -
 -
Assist the FM in the implementation of a sound financial management system. 
Prepare financial reports, including monthly funds reconciliation, and monthly, quarterly, semi-
annual and annual expenditure statements. 
Prepare transaction vouchers, and input all transactions into the project accounting system before 
submission to the FM for approval. 
 - Opening and closing of the project accounts. 
 -
 -
Timely payment of project liabilities upon verification of the invoices received and ensuring that 
the project procedures are strictly adhered to. 
Process monthly payroll, salary payment to staff and all project contributions related to salary 
payments; Ensure registration and deregistration of employees. 
 - Manage and report on the use of Petty Cash in accordance with the approved procedures. 
 -
 -
 -
 -
Prepare cash flow forecasts as required.  
Carry out the accounting of the documents in the various project books and journals and/or the 
accounting software. 
Verify all accounting entries. 
Assist in the preparation and monitoring of annual operational budgets. 
 - Maintenance of a well organized and up-to-date filing system for accounting and financial records 
as well as an fixed asset tagging system. 
Perform physical inventory of project assets each year.  
Prepare the annual financial statements. 
Assist the FM in the closing of the financial year and the preparatory work for the annual audit and 
provide assistance to the external auditors as required. 
Prepare monthly bank reconciliation statements of all bank accounts maintained by project.  
Assist the FM in the preparation of direct payment requests and withdrawal applications, including 
statement of expenditures (SOE) in line with IFAD guidelines of expenditures. 
Undertake any other duties as they may be requested by the supervising authorities. 
 -
 -
 -
 -
 -
 -
Required education, experience and skills:  
Education:   
 -
High (bachelor) degree in the business administration or accounting.  
Experience:  
 - Minimum five (5) years of working experience in accounting of which three (3) in an equivalent 
position with an information flow equal to that of a project.  
Skills:  
Certified accountant license.  
 -
 - Good computer skills and use of accounting software.  
Language:  
 - Good knowledge of the English language. 
270 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Results Hierarchy 
Name 
Baseline  Mid-term 
End 
Target 
Source 
Frequency  Responsibility 
Output, outcome and impact indicators 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Annex 21 
1.  Percentage % increase in 
0 
15% 
25% 
assets ownership*  
Goal 
To contribute to sustainable 
rural 
economic 
development in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina (BiH)  
Project Outreach 
2.  Number of persons 
0 
15 000 
25,000102 
receiving services 
promoted or supported by 
the project*  
3.  Percentage of supported 
households reporting 
increase in income of at 
least 30%  
4.  Number of new jobs 
created*  
0 
0 
Development Objective 
40% 
80% 
3,000 
4,500103 
5.  Percentage of supported 
0 
50% 
75% 
rural enterprises reporting 
an increase in sales 
through 4P agreements  
To  Increase  the  income  of 
youth  and  poor 
rural 
fostering 
households  by 
their 
in 
profitable  agribusiness  and 
employment options  
engagement 
Outcome 1:  
Production,  productivity, 
marketing  of  produces 
and  profitability  of  target 
National 
statistics,  
Human 
development 
reports 
Progress  
report 
Years 1, 3 
et 5 
PCU/APCU 
Annually  
PCU/APCU 
Progress 
report, 
Service 
providers 
Outcome 
survey, 
Progress  
report 
Outcome 
survey, 
Progress 
report,  
Annually  
PCU/APCU 
Annually 
PCU/APCU  
-  Conducive macro-
economic and 
deterioration of the 
political 
environment; 
-  The demand for 
specialised Bosnian 
products on the 
export market 
increase; 
Annually 
PCU/APCU  
-  Timely and quality 
access to 
specialised service 
providers; 
* RIMS core indicators; disaggregated by the sex of beneficiary (S: male or female) and the age status of the beneficiary (Y: “young” or “not young” as per the national definition for youth). 
102 Given that the support will be reaching 8,650 household and given an average household size of 2.9 members in BiH, READP will reach around 25 000 people at project completion. 
103 Includes 350 young apprentices and 50% of the 8,300 beneficiaries of starter packages and FO seed capital financing. Their cash returns from the adoption of the project supported activities is 
expected to equal at least the minimum net salary earned (BAM 425) from a full time job.  
271 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
group 
households 
improved  based  on  4Ps 
models 
Service 
providers  
6.  Percentage of 
0% 
40% 
beneficiaries reporting an 
increase in production*  
Output 1.1: 
Development 
and 
implementation of Business 
Plans  
7.  Number of pro-poor BPs 
approved and 
implemented by Business 
Leaders  
Output 1.2 :  
Provision 
packages  
of 
start-up 
Apprentice 
Output 1.3 :  
Youth 
Programme  
Outcome 2 :  
Enhanced 
for 
increased  integration  of 
farmers in markets  
FOs 
8.  Number of targeted 
farming households 
engaged in 4Ps *  
9.  Number of rural producers 
accessing production 
inputs and/or technological 
packages*  
10. Number of youth 
supported by the Youth 
Apprentice Programme*  
11. Percentage of FOs 
engaged in formal 
partnerships/ agreements 
or contracts with public or 
private entities  
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
100 
5,000 
5,000  
(25% 
women) 
250  
(50% 
women) 
60% 
150 
80% 
Outcome 
survey, 
Progress 
report,  
Service 
providers 
M&E system 
of READP, 
Service 
providers  
8,000104  M&E system 
of READP, 
Service 
providers  
M&E system 
of READP  
8,300 
(25% 
women)  
350  
(50% 
women) 
80% 
12. Percentage of FOs’ 
0 
60% 
80% 
members reporting new or 
improved services 
provided by their 
104 Includes 7,500 direct beneficiaries of starter packages plus 50% of the 800 beneficiaries of FO seed capital financing.  
272 
-  Continued interest 
of rural producers 
and farmers 
organisations to 
establish stronger 
linkages with lead 
enterprises. 
-  Timely, quality and 
continuous access 
to business 
development 
services. 
Annually 
PCU/APCU  
Semi-
annual  
Semi-
annual  
Semi-
annual 
PCU/APCU  
PCU/APCU 
PCU/APCU 
M&E system 
of READP  
Semi-
annual 
PCU/APCU 
Annually  
PCU/APCU  
-  FOs governance 
and management 
capacities 
increased. 
Annually  
PCU/APCU  
Outcome 
survey, 
Progress 
report,  
Service 
providers 
Outcome 
survey, 
Progress 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
organization 
Output 1.4:  
FOs seed capital financing  
13. Number of FOs provided 
0 
30 
40 
with seed capital financing  
Output 1.5  
FOs capacity development  
14. Number of persons trained 
0 
1,500 
3,000 
in FOs capacity 
development *  
15. Number of 
0 
3,000 
5,000 
Outcome 3:  
Market  access  of  target 
households 
group 
through 
enhanced 
improved 
market 
infrastructure 
persons/households 
reporting improved 
physical access to 
markets, processing and 
storage facilities 
Output 1.6:  
Production  and  marketing 
support  
16. Number of market and 
storage facilities 
constructed or rehabilitated  
17. Km of roads (linked to the 
selected value chains) 
constructed, rehabilitated 
or upgraded  
0 
0 
18 
28105  
10 
16 
report,  
Service 
providers  
M&E system 
of READP, 
Service 
providers  
M&E system 
of READP, 
Service 
providers  
Outcome 
survey, 
Progress 
report,  
Service 
providers 
Progress 
report,  
Service 
providers  
Progress 
report,  
Service 
providers 
Semi-
annual 
Semi-
annual  
PCU/APCU 
PCU/APCU  
Annually  
PCU/APCU 
-  Willingness of 
municipalities, 
farmers 
organisations and 
local communities 
to manage 
marketing 
infrastructure. 
Semi-
annual 
Semi-
annual 
PCU/APCU  
-  Effective 
PCU/APCU 
coordination from 
the municipalities; 
-  Target households’ 
access to timely 
irrigation facilities 
and crop; 
-  Recruitment of 
locally experienced 
contractors. 
105 Includes both cold storage facilities and packing/mini warehouses and rural markets 
273 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Outline of the 
READP Annual Work Plan for the PY X 
Annex 22 
1. 
Introduction 
2.  Brief project description 
3.  Annual plan for PY X 
3.1.  Component  -  Enhancement  of  economic  opportunities  and  smallholders 
integration in value chains 
3.1.1.  Sub-component Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans 
3.1.1.1.  The progress achieved so far 
3.1.1.2.  Planed activities in the PY X 
3.1.1.3.  Quantitative targets in the PY X and cumulative 
3.1.2.  Sub-component Farmers’ organisations development 
3.2.2.1.  The progress achieved so far 
3.2.2.2.  Planed activities in the PY X 
3.2.2.3.  Quantitative targets in the PY X and cumulative 
3.1.3.  Sub-component Enabling infrastructure support 
3.1.3.1.  The progress achieved so far 
3.1.3.2.  Planed activities in the PY X 
3.1.3.3.  Quantitative targets in the PY X and cumulative 
3.2.  Component - Project management and coordination 
3.2.1.  Project team 
3.2.2.  Project steering committee 
3.2.3.  Organizational issues 
3.2.4.  Coordination with partners 
3.2.5.  Project cost and financing (link to attached the budget!) 
3.2.6.  Procurement (link to attached the procurement plan!)  
3.2.7.  M&E issues (link to attached the M&E plan!) 
4.  Challenges and implementation risks 
5.  Conclusion 
6.  Attachments 
6.1.  READP budget for the PY X 
6.2.  READP procurement plan for the PY X 
6.3.  Project M&E plan for the PY X 
6.4.  Dynamic plan of READP implementation for the PY X 
274 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Component  
sub-component  
activity 
Total 
available 
Ref. 
READP financial plan for the PY X (per activity – from IFAD loan) 
BAM 
% of total in BAM 
EUR 
% of total in EUR 
PY X  Cumulative  PY X  Cumulat. 
PY X  Cumulat. 
PY X  Cumulat. 
Exp. 
category 
Reference 
to proc. 
plan 
1.  Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains 
1.1.  Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans  
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total sub-component 1: 
1.2.  Farmers’ Organisations Development 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total sub-component 2: 
1.3.  Enabling Infrastructure Support 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total sub-component 3: 
Total component 1: 
2.  Project management and coordination 
Item 1 
Item 2 
Item 3 
... 
Total component 2: 
TOTAL 
275 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Component  
sub-component activity 
Total 
available 
BAM 
PY X 
Cumulative 
% of total in BAM 
Cumulat. 
PY X 
EUR 
PY X 
Cumulat. 
% of total in EUR 
Cumulat. 
PY X 
READP financial plan for the PY X (per expenditure category) 
Equipment, Materials & Vehicles 
Technical Assistance 
Trainings Workshops 
A 
B 
C 
D  Grants 
E 
G 
Recurrent costs 
Salaries 
  TOTAL 
276 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
READP financial plan for the PY X (per source of financing) 
Component  
sub-component  
activity 
Total 
IFAD loan 
BAM 
EUR 
BAM 
EUR 
Government 
EUR 
BAM 
Beneficiaries  
(cash) 
Beneficiaries 
(in-kind) 
BAM 
EUR 
PY X 
Cumulat. 
1.  Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains 
1.1.  Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans  
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total sub-component 1: 
1.2.  Farmers’ organisations development 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total sub-component 2: 
1.3.  Enabling infrastructure support 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total sub-component 3: 
Total component 1: 
2.  Project management and coordination 
Item 1 
Item 2 
Item 3 
... 
Total component 2: 
TOTAL 
277 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Reference 
Description of works, 
goods, services 
Estimated 
cost 
(BAM) 
Percentage 
of loan 
financing 
Expenditure 
category 
Type 
of 
procurement 
Procurement 
method 
Prior or 
post 
review? 
Biding 
document 
preparation 
Publication  
of call 
Bid  
opening 
Contract 
award 
Contract 
completion 
Note 
READP procurement plan for the PY X 
Time frame 
  TOTAL 
278 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation Manual 
Outline of the 
READP (semi)annual progress report for the PY X 
Annex 23 
1. 
Introduction 
2.  Brief project description 
3. 
(Semi)annual progress for PY X 
3.1.  Component  -  Enhancement  of  economic  opportunities  and  smallholders 
integration in value chains 
3.1.1.  Sub-component Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans 
3.1.1.1.  The progress achieved so far 
3.1.1.2.  Realized activities in the PY X 
3.1.1.3.  Quantitative targets achieved in the PY X and cumulative 
3.1.2.  Sub-component Farmers’ organisations development 
3.2.2.1.  The progress achieved so far 
3.2.2.2.  Realized activities in the PY X 
3.2.2.3.  Quantitative targets achieved in the PY X and cumulative 
3.1.3.  Sub-component Enabling infrastructure support 
3.1.3.1.  The progress achieved so far 
3.1.3.2.  Realized activities in the PY X 
3.1.3.3.  Quantitative targets achieved in the PY X and cumulative 
3.2.  Component - Project management and coordination 
3.2.1.  Project team 
3.2.2.  Project steering committee (evidence of meetings) 
3.2.3.  Organizational issues 
3.2.4.  Coordination with partners (evidence) 
3.2.5.  Project cost and financing (link to the financial report in attachment!) 
3.2.6.  Procurement (link to the register of contacts in attachment!)  
3.2.7.  M&E issues (link to the M&E reports in attachment!) 
4.  Lessons learned 
5.  Conclusion 
6.  Attachments 
6.1.  READP financial report for the PY X 
6.2.  READP register of contracts for the PY X 
6.3.  Project M&E report for the PY X 
6.4.  Dynamic plan of READP implementation for the PY X 
279 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Design completion report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
  Componen
READP (semi)annual financial report for the PY X (per activity – from IFAD loan) 
% of plan 
in EUR 
Disbursed 
EUR 
Disbursed 
BAM 
% of plan 
in BAM 
Plan BAM 
Plan EUR 
PY 
X 
Cum
ulat. 
PY 
X 
Cum
ulat. 
PY 
X 
Cum
ulat. 
PY 
X 
Cum
ulat. 
PY 
X 
Cum
ulat. 
PY 
X 
Cum
ulat. 
Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains 
Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans  
t  
sub-
component  
activity 
1
. 
1
.
1
. 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
Ref
er. 
to 
proc
. 
plan 
Exp.  
cate
gory 
... 
Farmers’ organisations development 
Total 
sub-
component 1: 
1
.
2
. 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Enabling infrastructure support 
Total 
sub-
component 2: 
1
.
3
. 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total 
sub-
component 3: 
Total 
component 1: 
2
. 
Project management and coordination 
Item 1 
Item 2 
Item 3 
... 
Total 
component 2: 
TOTAL 
281 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Design completion report 
Appendix 11: Project implementation manual 
READP (semi)annual financial report for the PY X (per expenditure category) 
Plan in BAM 
BAM 
% of plan in BAM 
Plan in EUR 
EUR 
% of plan in EUR 
PY X  Cumulat.  PY X  Cumulat.  PY X  Cumulat. 
PY X  Cumulat. 
PY X  Cumulat.  PY X  Cumulat. 
Component  
sub-component  
activity 
A  Equipment, Materials & Vehicles 
B  Technical Assistance 
C  Trainings Workshops 
D  Grants 
E  Recurrent costs 
G  Salaries 
  TOTAL 
282 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Design completion report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
READP (semi)annual financial report for the PY X (per source of financing) in BAM 
Component  
sub-component  
activity 
Total 
IFAD loan 
Government 
Beneficiaries  
(cash) 
Beneficiaries 
(in-kind) 
Plan 
Disbursed 
Plan 
Disbursed 
Plan 
Disbursed 
Plan 
Disbursed 
Plan 
Disbursed 
1.  Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains 
1.1.  Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans  
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total sub-component 1: 
1.2.  Farmers’ Organisations Development 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total sub-component 2: 
1.3.  Enabling Infrastructure Support 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total sub-component 3: 
Total component 1: 
2.  Project management and coordination 
Item 1 
Item 2 
Item 3 
... 
Total component 2: 
TOTAL 
283 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Design completion report 
Appendix 11: Project implementation manual 
READP (semi) annual financial report for the PY X (per source of financing) in EUR 
Component  
sub-component  
activity 
Total 
IFAD loan 
Government 
Beneficiaries  
(cash) 
Beneficiaries 
(in-kind) 
Plan 
Disbursed 
Plan 
Disbursed 
Plan 
Disbursed 
Plan 
Disbursed 
Plan 
Disbursed 
1.  Enhancement of economic opportunities and smallholders integration in value chains 
1.1.  Development and implementation of pro-poor business plans  
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total sub-component 1: 
1.2.  Farmers’ Organisations Development 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total sub-component 2: 
1.3.  Enabling Infrastructure Support 
  Activity 1 
  Activity 2 
  Activity 3 
... 
Total sub-component 3: 
Total component 1: 
2.  Project management and coordination 
Item 1 
Item 2 
Item 3 
... 
Total component 2: 
TOTAL 
284 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Design completion report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Contract 
serial 
No. 
1 
Financier 
2 
Contract 
No. 
3 
Percentage 
of 
financing 
4 
Type  
of 
procurement 
5 
Method 
of 
procurement 
6 
Description 
of works, 
goods, 
services 
7 
Name and 
address of 
contractor/ 
supplier 
8 
Contract  
coordinator 
9 
Date of 
contract 
signing 
10 
Performance, 
contract 
duration and 
delivery 
period 
11 
Contract 
amount  
(in 
BAM) 
12 
Category 
of 
financing 
13 
Reference 
to the 
approved 
procurement 
plan/AWPB 
14 
Prior 
or 
post 
review 
15 
Remarks 
and date 
of IFAD 
no 
objection 
16 
READP register of contracts for the PY X (cumulative data) 
285 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 12: Compliance with IFAD policies 
The READP is fully aligned with all relevant IFAD strategies and policies including the Strategic 
1.
Framework 2016-2025, especially by way of promoting investment in productive capacities and 
market participation of beneficiaries through the vehicle of 4Ps; Targeting Policy; Gender Strategy; 
Rural Finance Policy, Climate Change Strategy; Policy on Supervision & Implementation Support. The 
environmental and social category is considered to be B namely that it does not present any 
irreversible impacts on the short or long term or during construction and /or operations. The climate 
risk classification is deemed to be Moderate. 
287 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP 
Appendix 13: Social, environmental and climate assessment 
procedures (SECAP) 
A.  Major landscape characteristics and Issues (Social, natural resources, 
and climate) 
A.1.  Socio-cultural context 
Located in Southeastern Europe, in the Western Balkans, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) covers 
51,209 km2of land and 12.2 km2 of sea, bordering Croatia, Serbia, Montenegro and the Adriatic Sea. 
Its population is 3,861,912 million (July 2016 est.) 106 , of which about 60% is rural107 , making it one 
of the most rural countries in Europe. Following a significant rise in GDP from US$ 5.51 billion (2000) 
to US$ 17.16 billion (2010), the country’s GDP decreased slightly in 2016 to US$ 16.56 billion, of 
which 8% is accounted for by agriculture (2016) 108 . Poverty is an issue, with an unemployment rate 
of 44.5% and around 18% of people living below the poverty line. According to the Agency for 
Statistics of BiH, the rate of unemployment for women in 2016 was 30%, and 60% for youth.  
The inter-ethnic war of 1992-1995 had a severe and still-felt impact on the country, in terms of the 
social fabric, economy, infrastructure and livelihoods. Following the signing of the Dayton Peace 
Agreement at the end of 1995, a new governance structure was established, consisting of a State-
level Government and two Entities - the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) (which has ten 
cantons and a total of 79 municipalities) and the Republika Srpska (SR) (which has no cantons but 62 
municipalities) - plus the self- governing Brcko District (BD).  
The structure of the agriculture is sector is characterized by small sized family farms, which to large 
extent produce for home consumption – over 50% of agriculture holdings are estimated to be less 
than 2 ha. Agriculture is dominated by crop production, with livestock production representing less 
than one third of the total output. Economically, the most important sub-sectors are vegetables, fresh 
cow milk, maize and potatoes. About 80% of Bosnian farmers are smallholders constrained by the 
small and fragmented nature of production, lack of access to markets, financial and insurance 
services, and infrastructure in rural areas. Their situation is increasingly difficult as the country is 
moving towards a market-based economy that needs to meet EU accession requirements and 
compete globally109.  
The EU is the main trading partner of the country – in 2016, BiH imported Euro 5.3 billion (of which 
14.8 were agricultural products) and exported Euro 3.8 billion (of which 4.6% were agricultural 
products) 110. In June 2008, the EU and BiH signed the Stabilization and Association Agreement111 
(SAA), which was then ratified and entered into force on 1 June 2015. In February 2016, BiH 
submitted its application for EU-membership. BiH is however not reaping the full benefits of these 
agreements as, as progress is still at an early stage with regards to EU-compliant food safety 
institutions and compliance to EU regulatory frameworks (e.g. food safety, veterinary and 
phytosanitary issues).  
106 CIA Fact Book (last updated June 21, 2017) https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/bk.html 
107 WB Data. http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS?locations=BA(Accessed in July 2017) 
108 WB Data. 
http://databank.worldbank.org/data/Views/Reports/ReportWidgetCustom.aspx?Report_Name=CountryProfile&Id=b450fd57&tba
r=y&dd=y&inf=n&zm=n&country=BIH(Accessed in July 2017) 
109IFAD. 2010. Environment and Climate Change Assessment. Prepared for IFAD’s Country Strategic Opportunities 
Programme 2013-2015 
110EU Data. http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2006/september/tradoc_113358.pdf(Accessed in July 2017) 
111The SAA is signed with countries that have made sufficient progress in terms of political and economic reform and 
administrative capacity. 
289 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP 
A.2  Natural resources and NRM 
BiH is primarily a mountainous country covered in forests, with an average altitude of 500 meters. Of 
the total land area, 5% are lowlands, 24% hills, 42% mountains and 29% Karst area; forests cover 
about 50% of the total land area112. Agricultural land accounts for 42.2% of land, of which 19.7% is 
arable, 2% is permanent crops and 20.5% is permanent pasture113.  
BiH has significant water resources. There are seven river basins - Una, Vrbas, Bosna, Drina, Sava, 
Neretva with Trebišnjica and Cetina - of which 75.7% belong to the Black Sea catchment and 24.3% 
to the Adriatic Sea catchment. The country has plenty of underground water collection, which occurs 
in lose depositions, around large riverbeds, karst fissures, trenches and caves.  
BiH is also rich in biodiversity and is home to 1,800 endemic species of Balkan flora and numerous 
threatened species. Forests, abundant in BiH, are home to over one hundred tree species, including 
fruit trees (cherry, apple and pear). Only about 1% of BiH is protected, which is low considering the 
biodiversity richness found here. In terms of forest ownership, around 80% are public forests, and 
around 20% are privately owned114. Given its vast expanse of total land area, forests in BiH have a 
major role in sustaining high levels of biodiversity, prevention of erosion, mitigation of climate change 
effects and have otherwise important functions for the local and general community (e.g. collection of 
Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFPs)).In total, there are 119 fish species in BiH; the highest diversity 
is recognized within the Cyprinidae (26 genera and 51 species) and Salmonidae (5 genera and 8 
species) families. Bird diversity numbers 326 species belonging to 60 families. Most of them are 
stationary, while migratory ones are found mainly in wetlands such as Buško Blato, Hutovo Blato, 
Bardača, and the Drina and Sava rivers.  
The persistence of extensive agriculture and the relative isolation of most of the territory have 
favoured the conservation of a high diversity of local breeds of domestic animals, including horses, 
cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, dogs and pigeons, as well as many local cultivars of fruit trees, especially 
cherries, plums, apples and pears. 
In BiH, there is no State-level strategy for agriculture and rural development, although one is in the 
process of being developed (the “Strategic Plan for Rural Development of Bosnia and Herzegovina”). 
In FBiH, there is the “Mid-Term Strategy of Agricultural Sector in FBiH (2014-2018)” and in the RS, 
the “RS Strategic Plan for Agriculture and Rural Development (2015-2020)”. 
A.3  Climate 
There are three climate types in Bosnia and Herzegovina: temperate continental (northern and central 
parts), sub-mountainous and mountainous, and Adriatic and modified Adriatic. The climate is 
characterized by hot summers and cold winters; areas of high elevation have short, cool summers 
and long, severe winters, and mild, rainy winters along coast. Recorded mean annual temperatures in 
the period 1981-2010 were in the range of 1.6°C (Bjelašnica) to 15.2°C (Mostar). Temperatures 
during winter are in the range of -6.0°C to 6.2°C and during the summer from 9.8°C to 24.7°C. 
Temperature increase on annual level is evident in the entire area and even exceeds 1.5°C in the 
northwestern part (Banja Luka). Annual precipitation in the country is unevenly distributed, ranging 
from 792 mm in the northeastern part (Semberija–Bijeljina) to 1,707 mm (Herzegovina-Trebinje). 
Snow occurs regularly in winter, covering mountain peaks up to 6 months a year.  
Climate changes have already begun to impact BiH. This can be seen in rising average annual 
temperatures and shifts in precipitation rates. Annual precipitation levels have not significantly 
changed, however the number of days per year with rainfall has decreased while the number of days 
with intense rainfall has increased. When combined with rising temperatures, this represents a 
112With regards to forest area, figures differ somewhat – estimates by the FAO 2015 “Forest Sector in Bosnia and Herzegovina” 
placed forest and other wooded land at 63% of the total territory of BiH. 
113WB CIA Fact Book 2017. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/bk.html. 
114Agency for Statistics Bosnia and Herzegovina www.bhas.ba, Taken from FAO. 2015. The Forest Sector in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. FAO Regional Office for Europe and Central Asia.  
290 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP 
significant change to the rainfall regime. According to climate models, the mean seasonal temperature 
changes for the period 2001- 2030 are expected to range from +0.8°C to +1.0°C above previous 
average temperatures. Winters are predicted to become warmer (from 0.5°C to 0.8°C), while the 
biggest changes will be experienced during the months of June - August, with predicted changes of 
+1.4°C in the north and +1.1°C in southern areas of the country115.  
A.4  Key Issues 
Major recorded environmental issues for the agriculture sector in BiH are related to climate change 
and water (due to climate change but also as a consequence of infrastructure destruction following 
the inter-ethnic strife) and, to a certain extent, soil degradation and forestry.  
Although soil degradation has not been systematically studied in BiH, it has been noted that 
inadequate and uncontrolled application of inorganic fertilizers and other chemical inputs decreases 
soil fertility, contributes to erosion, change in soil pH values as well as other types of soil damage. 
Inadequate technical equipment and machinery for land cultivation also contributes to erosion and 
other types of soil damage. In addition to overall effects on agriculture, degradation, at least to some 
extent, also affects some agricultural processes and activities; changes in agriculture since 1992 have 
influenced the decrease in mineral fertilizers use, while the effect of reduction in livestock contributed 
to a decline in the application of organic fertilizer116.  
Forested areas have been shrinking rapidly due to illegal logging and mining, forest fires, and land 
conversion. Approximately 10% of the forest cover has been declared as mined. Factors likely to 
impact on forest ecosystems include changes in soil structure, changes in temperatures causing frost 
and heat stress as well as changes in distribution and intensity of rainfall. Another significant threat to 
forests is an increase in forest fires. Having said that, climate change may also have some positive 
impacts on forests and forestry in that tree productivity may increase in areas with adequate water 
availability117. 
According to the Third National Communication of BiH under the UN Framework Convention on 
Climate Change, agriculture is one of the sectors mostly affected by climate change in BiH. The 
consequences are predominantly but not exclusively negative - a positive effect on the yield and 
quality of winter crops due to the extended growing period can be expected, however areas of 
cultivation such as for fruits could be expanded due to the disappearance of very cold winters and 
late spring frosts. Spring crops though, would be negatively impacted due to higher temperatures and 
water shortages during the summer months. Heavy rains and strong winds can also affect pastures, 
and thermal stress can impact the yield and the quality of animals. The extension of the growing 
period due to the increase in winter and early spring temperatures can leads to greater incidence of 
pests, diseases and weeds. A more arid climate will require extended and improved irrigation 
schemes. Land erosion may also be expected as a consequence of different factors including land 
use change and increased rainfall intensity coupled with prolonged dry periods. Changes in the 
amount of rainfall are more seasonally, rather than annually, pronounced118.  
B.  Potential project’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and 
risks 
B.1  Key potential impacts 
The project is not expected to generate significant negative social impacts. Through a value chain 
approach, READ is expected to work in the following sub-sectors: fruits and vegetables, medicinal 
115Climate Change Adaptation And Low-Emission Development Strategy For Bosnia And Herzegovina. 2013. 
116Action Programme to Combat Land Degradation and Mitigate the Effects of Drought in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 2014. (In 
compliance with the UNCCD 10-Year Strategy and Reporting Process under UNCCD) 
117FAO 2015 “Forest Sector in Bosnia and Herzegovina”  
118Third National Communication and Second Biennial Update Report on Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change was adopted by Council of Ministers of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina on 23 May 2017. 
291 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP 
and aromatic plants, non-timber forest products and to a limited extent dairy. READ will also enhance 
beneficiaries’ access to agriculture production and social infrastructure, such as feeder roads, small 
irrigation structures, and storage, processing and cooling facilities. In this context, some key potential 
Project-related impacts could include soil and water pollution due to inappropriate fertilizer or 
excessive pesticide application, soil erosion during construction and farming (if using unsustainable 
agricultural practices), worker health and safety issues due to lack of safety procedures during 
construction or pesticide spraying without safety clothing, and reduced biodiversity from unsustainable 
harvesting of wild plants. Environmental or climate change impacts are, however, negligible due to in 
part to the small-scale nature of interventions. They can be improved to result in positive impacts or 
avoided through technical advice and capacity building on, and implementation of, inter alia: 
sustainable agricultural practices, efficient water use, responsible social infrastructure construction, 
and support to product certification which will promote the adoption of higher environmental standards 
in production and processing activities carried out by partner enterprises, cooperatives and associated 
Producer Associations. 
B.2  Climate change and adaptation 
In particular since the 1990s, BIH has been experiencing increased variability and intensity of extreme 
weather conditions (heat waves, intensive rainfall, windstorms, days with hail, etc.). In the last five 
years, Bosnia and Herzegovina has faced several significant extreme climate and weather-related 
episodes that caused substantial material and financial deficits, as well as casualties. The two most 
important events were the drought of 2012 and the floods of 2014.  
According to the Climate Change Adaptation And Low-Emission Development Strategy For Bosnia 
And Herzegovina (2013), adaptation approaches will need to focus on improved water management 
and irrigation, farming systems appropriate for hotter and more arid environments, and varietal 
improvements of local crops to maximize agricultural production under more arid conditions.  
There is significant scope of READ to provide climate adaptation benefits that also contribute to BiH’s 
Climate Change Adaptation And Low-Emission Development Strategy For Bosnia And Herzegovina 
(2013). Mitigation actions for READ activities should include provision of technical advice and capacity 
building on sustainable agricultural practices including Integrated Pest Management and management 
of ecosystem services (e.g. pollination, soil fertility); cropping patterns advice/crop-variety selection; 
food, veterinary and phytosanitary standards; pesticide use and safety/handling best practice; 
irrigation water management; market standards (especially in light of improved international market 
access and compliance with international (including EU) standards and certification; organic 
agriculture and certification; increased use of hail nets; and use of solar panels (e.g. in the poultry 
sector) where appropriate. The capacity of stakeholders dealing with the provision of advisory 
services to reflect climate-adaptation actions could also be strengthened.  
Mitigation of climate-related events will be positively affected by adaptation practices as per above, as 
well as through water efficient small-scale irrigation infrastructure and related training on best practice 
on irrigation system use, e.g. determining optimal irrigation and soil moisture. 
The collection of Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFP - such as mushrooms, wild berries and medicinal 
and aromatic plants) can be an issue for forest biodiversity as this is largely unregulated and un-
monitored. Cultivation of such products can be encouraged by including information on this issue 
when providing assistance to borrowers in the preparation of their Business Plans, to support the 
production and marketing chain of NWFPs. 
C.  Environmental and social category (A, B, C) 
This project is classified as category “B”. It will invest in (small) market and social (rural) infrastructure 
through Municipalities but also according to the business plans prepared (and implemented) by the 
borrowers. It is envisaged that these will include, inter alia, secondary and tertiary irrigation 
infrastructure, cool storage facilities and processing facilities, and feeder roads. These activities will 
have site-specific environmental and social impacts. The social impacts are expected to be positive, 
292 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP 
while the environmental impacts – while not major – can be mitigated through different means, 
including provision of technical advice and capacity building. To avoid impacts, an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework will be prepared for the Project, in accordance with the revised IFAD 
social and environmental impact assessment guidelines, prior to project start-up. The ESMF will 
describe how environmental assessment/related licenses and compliance with national legislation will 
be built into the project’s formal operational procedures governing investment decision-making.     
The project is expected to reduce pressure on natural resources by providing financial (e.g. credit) 
and social (e.g. infrastructure or pesticide safety equipment) incentives for primary producers for 
enforcing more environmentally sound natural resource management practices. 
Environmental regulation in BiH is not covered by State law, but rests with entities – both FBiH and 
RS each have a Law on Environmental Protection, which regulates their respective Environmental 
Impact Assessment (EIA) procedures, together with their by-laws which determine the scope/size of 
projects, and the subsequent procedures these would follow, to obtain the relevant licenses. 
Environmental issues in Brčko District (BD) fall under the Department for Communal Works. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is party to the three major Multilateral Environmental Agreements (the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) and the Convention to Combat Desertification (CCD).  
D.  Climate risk category (High, Moderate, Low) 
While climate change is an issue for BiH, an analysis of climate risk in the context of this project 
categorizes it at moderate. Populations depended on agriculture are particularly exposed to negative 
climate-related effects. Projected heavy rainfall, storms, hail, floods, drought, heat weaves and frost, 
and pronounced water scarcity during the summer are predominantly likely to compound poverty 
challenges, as they result in more frequent and severe climate related disasters. The project will seek 
to mitigate this by improving climate adaptation knowledge(training, capacity building) and climate-
resilient infrastructure. Also, by contributing to the diversification of enterprises of rural populations, 
the project will increase the resilience of communities to the effects of climate change.  
E.  Recommended features of project design and implementation 
E.1  Mitigation measures 
Activities under READ are small-scale in nature and will not have significant negative environmental 
impacts. Having said that, and especially in light of the recent EU-membership application (EU 
integration) and approximation of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) but also of climate change, a 
variety of measures can be taken to mitigate potential negative impacts that will also have substantial 
social impacts and benefits to beneficiaries. These include training and capacity building throughout 
the Project Components, starting with the preparation of Business Plans through to building the 
capacity of A/PCU. These include issues on adaptation (agricultural management practices, pesticide 
use and safety, irrigation management, etc.), and the construction of climate-resilient infrastructure 
such as water efficient secondary and tertiary irrigation systems. 
There are also opportunities to diversify income generation such as through the cultivation of NWFPs 
and developing agro-tourism. 
With regards to pesticide use, safety clothing/equipment should be included in the input packages 
delivered to primary producers. 
It is recommended that A/PCU retain a copy of all environmental-related licenses for works 
conducted, as requested (and as per entity sub-laws) by the responsible infrastructure owner, 
obtained from Municipalities.  
It is also recommended that the Environmental Impact forms prepared for works, under the RBDP, if 
to be similarly used in READ, be improved to become more meaningful in order to appropriately 
293 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP 
identify and consider potential environmental impacts and develop and monitor environmental 
mitigation measures.  
E.2  Multi-benefit approaches 
READ will build upon previous IFAD projects in BiH (especially RBDP) and the recent RCDP119. In 
particular, READ will benefit from experiences in value chain development for specific sub-sectors 
(horticulture, wild and medicinal and aromatic plants and some dairy), and linkages/cooperation 
established with relevant stakeholders. Furthermore READ will build upon World Bank projects which 
established primary irrigation facilities but which require secondary and tertiary infrastructure to 
become operative and used by beneficiaries (farmers, Water Unions). READ could also link with the 
on-going UNDP project “Technology Transfer for Climate Resilient Flood Risk Management in Vrbas 
River Basin”, which, among other issues, addresses technical preconditions for flood risk 
management (e.g. hydro-meteorological stations, hazard and flood risk maps) and works directly with 
local communities on non-structural measures (e.g. reforestation, or training to agricultural producers 
on soil maintenance, for reducing erosion). Through this project, index-based insurance schemes (not 
only floods – also drought) for the agriculture sector and poor farmers are being developed. 
E.3 
Incentives for good practices 
In addition to the direct benefits obtained through READ (such as social infrastructure or better access 
to water resources), a major incentive for good practices is the approximation to EU standards, for 
improved market access. Improved market access will result in increased income generation 
opportunities but also improved environmental benefits from more stringent standards for production, 
processing and packaging. In addition, human health will not suffer as a result of improper handling of 
pesticides, when appropriate safety gear is used. 
E.4  Participatory processes 
Training and building capacity for business plan preparation and implementation is an integral part of 
READ. Participatory processes will involve stakeholders including, among others, lead entities, SMEs, 
identified service providers, cooperatives, Water Unions, PAs, and with a focus on the involvement of 
women and youth - for example in identifying areas for the construction of small infrastructure works 
but also for promoting environmental sustainability and social cohesion through exchanges of 
knowledge amongst these groups. Participatory processes will follow the experiences and structures 
developed in the on-going IFAD projects (RBDP and RCDP). 
F.  Analysis of alternatives 
Not applicable. 
G. 
Institutional analysis 
G.1 
Institutional framework 
READ implementation in each of the two Entities will be carried out by the existing A/PCU120 who are 
well-versed with the systems and procedures for IFAD projects implementing. Dedicated project 
managers, additional staff and technical service providers will be deployed for the core project 
activities. PCU/APCU will implement the project in accordance with annual work plans and budgets 
prepared in consultation with target group representatives, municipalities and service providers.  
Key institutions in BiH, which are relevant for environmental mainstreaming in BiH within teh context 
of READP, are presented in the following table: 
119Rural Business Development Project; Rural Competitiveness Development Project 
120
Agriculture Projects Coordination Unit/Project Coordination Unit 
294 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP 
Key institutions in BiH 
BiH Ministry of Foreign Trade 
and Economic Relations 
(MoFTER). Sector for Natural 
Resources 
BiH Plant Health Administration •  Regulates and administrates matters dealing with plant health, pesticides, 
•  Defining policies and coordinating activities between the Entity authorities 
and institutions at the international level, in the field of environmental 
protection, agriculture, energy and natural resources. 
Administering enforcement of the law and other regulations. 
Role 
• 
plant seeds and seedling materials, and phytosanitary issues 
FBiH Ministry of Environment 
and Tourism 
•  Responsible for preparation of the environmental policy and strategy-related 
documents, quality standards for air, water, and soil, environmental 
monitoring as well as supervision of relevant institutions from the 
Environment sector. 
FBiH, RS and DB Ministry of 
Agriculture, Water Management 
and Forestry 
• 
• 
• 
• 
RS Ministry of Spatial Planning, 
Civil Engineering and Ecology 
•  Responsible for water strategy and policy, the issue of approvals and 
permits, setting of standards and regulations; and the maintaining of 
compliance with laws and regulations through licensing and inspections; and 
overall control of Public Companies for Watershed Areas. 
Preparing the Environmental Strategy, laws and other regulations and acts. 
Establishing and managing environmental information systems. 
Issuing environmental permits. 
Supervising the work of the local administrative units dealing with 
environmental protection. 
Keeping records of installations and devices and a register of major 
accidents reported. 
Setting up the environmental quality standards. 
Performing inspectional supervision. 
• 
• 
•  Responsible for assessing infrastructure proposals and issuance of relevant 
• 
Cantonal and municipal 
authorities 
G.2  Capacity building 
permits 
Capacity building is mainstreamed into all Components of READ, and will be undertaken through 
targeted training, demonstrations and study tours. Capacity building activities will be delivered to a 
range of stakeholders including lead financial institutions, small-and medium enterprises, Producer 
Organizations and Women’s Organizations. More specifically, capacity building activities will take 
place during Business Plan development; Business Plan implementation and financing; institutional 
strengthening of Producer Organizations and in climate-resilient infrastructure development. Capacity 
of the Project Management Unit (Component 2) will also be built on environmental and social issues, 
to ensure that these are specifically considered (monitoring and oversight functions) in project 
implementation.  
G.3  Additional funding 
Not applicable. 
H.  Monitoring and Evaluation 
The implementation of READ will be guided by the project’s logical framework. The M&E system 
already in place in the A/PCU will be fine-tuned to meet the progress and impact monitoring 
requirements of READ, which will consist of output monitoring, outcome monitoring and impact 
evaluation. Progress monitoring will focus on measuring physical and financial progress with special 
emphasis on achievements against poorest household, gender and youth inclusion. The final 
indicators will be defined in the start-up workshop using the logframe as point of departure. This will 
include relevant first second and third level indicators of IFAD’s Results and Impact Management 
System (RIMS). The A/PCU M&E staff will have lead responsibility for the coordination of all M&E 
activities of the project. The project will document and organize knowledge sharing events to 
capitalize on experiences and good practices emerging during implementation. Knowledge 
dissemination will be an integral part of PCU/APCU prerogatives. 
295 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP 
I. 
Further information required to complete screening, if any 
A draft Environmental and Social Management Framework has been prepared for the Project, in 
accordance with the revised IFAD social and environmental impact assessment guidelines. This will 
be reviewed and finalized prior to project start-up.  
J.  Budgetary resources and schedule 
Funding has been allocated for mainstreaming and assessment related to climate change.  
K.  Record of consultations with beneficiaries, civil society, general public 
etc. 
A range of persons, groups, institutions, Ministries and other development agencies in both FBiH and 
RS were consulted. These included IFAD RBDP technical staff, on-going IFAD Project stakeholders 
such as members of Financial Institutions, SMEs, Cooperatives, Producer Associations, Women’s 
Group, the Service Provider SERDA and University of Sarajevo. Ministries consulted were the 
Ministry of Tourism and Environment (FBiH), the Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management 
and Forestry (BiH), the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water (RS) and the Ministry of Spatial 
Planning, Civil Engineering and Ecology (RS). Discussions were also held with the European Union 
(FBiH) and UNDP offices in both FBiH and RS. 
296 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Rural Enterprises and Agricultural Development Project (READP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 14:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Appendix 14: Contents of the Project Life File 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
BiH RB-COSOP 
READ - Concept Note  
READ - OSC Issue Paper 
READ - OSC Minutes 
RCDP - Detailed Design (main report and appendices) RCDP - QE memo 
RCDP - CPMT minutes 
Bosnia and Herzegovina Country Portfolio Summary 
297 
