Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
3R
AC
ADB
ADP
AfD
AIMS
ARDB
ASDP
ASMP
Recovery, Reform and Resilience
Agricultural Cooperative
Asian Development Bank
Agriculture Development Policy 2030
Agence Française du Développement
Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders
Agriculture and Rural Development Bank
Agricultural Strategic Development Plan
Agriculture Sector Master Plan 2030
ASPIRE
Agriculture Services Programme for Innovation, Resilience and Extension
AWPB
Annual Work Plan and Budget
BC
Business Clusters
CamGAP
Cambodian Good Agriculture Practice
CARD
CCGC
CoE
CF
CFAP
COE
Council for Agriculture and Rural Development
Cambodia Credit Guarantee Corporation
Centre of Excellence
Cooperative Facilitators
Cambodia Farmer Federation Association of Agriculture Producers
Center of Excellence
COSOP
Cambodia Strategic Opportunities Programme
COVID-19
Corona Virus Disease 2019
CSPE
DAF
DACP
Country Strategic Programme Evaluation
Department for Accounting and Finance
Department of Agricultural Cooperatives Promotion
DPPSP
Department for Plant Protection, Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary (DPPSP)
EFA
EIB
EIRR
ENPV
Economic and Financial Analysis
European Investment Bank
Economic Internal Rate of Return
Economic Net Present Value
ESCMF
Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework
EU
FA
FM
European Union
Financing Agreement
Financial Management
FMFCL
Financial Management and Financial Control Arrangements Letter
FMM
FMU
FNN
FPIC
GAP
GDA
GDP
GIZ
Financial Management Manual
Financial Management Unit
Farmer and Nature Net
Free, Prior, Informed Consent
Good Agricultural Practices
MAFF’s General Directorate of Agriculture
Gross Domestic Product
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GoKC
Government of the Kingdom of Cambodia
HDI
ICP
ICT
Human Development Index
IFAD Client Portal
Information and Communication Technology
ID-Poor
Identification of Poor Households
IFAD
IFPRI
IFR
IP
IPP
IRR
KfW
M&E
MAFF
MEF
MIH
MIS
MoC
MoI
International Fund for Agriculture Development
International Food Policy Research Institute
Interim Financial Report
Indigenous People
Indigenous People’s Plan
Internal Rate of Return
Kreditanstalt für Wideraufbau
Monitoring and Evaluation
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Ministry of Economy and Finance
Ministry of Industry and Handicrafts
Management Information System
Ministry of Commerce
Ministry of Interior
MoWA
The Ministry of Women Affairs
MoWRAM
Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology
MRD
Ministry of Rural Development
NCDD-S
National Committee for Sub-National Democratic Development - Secretariat
NDC
NIS
PBAS
PDAFF
PFI
PFM
PIM
PO
RET
RoI
RS
Nationally Determined Contribution
National Institute of Statistics
Performance Based Allocation System
Provincial Departments of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Partner Financial Institution
Public Financial Management
Programme Implementation Manual
Producer Organisation
Renewable Energy Technology
Return on Investment
Rectangular Strategy
SAMBAAT
Sustainable Assets for Agriculture Markets, Business and Trade Project
SDC
SDG
SME
SO
SOE
SOP
SPS
TOR
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
Sustainable Development Goal
Small and Medium Enterprises
Strategic Objective
Statement of Expenditure
Standard Operating Procedures
Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary
Terms of Reference
TWG-AW
Technical Working Group on Agriculture and Water
UAC
USAID
VC
Union of Agriculture Cooperatives
United States Agency for International Development
Value Chain
In line with IFAD mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☑ Gender Transformative ☐ Youth Sensitive ☐ Nutrition Sensitive ☐ Persons with Disabilities ☐ Indigenous Peoples ☑
Climate Finance ☑ Adaptive Capacity
1/39
Executive Summary
Background and Rationale
After a long period of sustained economic growth and poverty reduction, Cambodia has suffered significant economic impacts from
the COVID-19 pandemic. Poverty headcount increased from around 10% to 17.8%. Cambodia faces new challenges from increasing
prices of food, fuel and fertilisers and reduced global economic activity as consequences of the Ukraine conflict. Rural Cambodians
remain at risk of being left behind by structural transformation of the economy, vulnerable to falling back into poverty and at severe
from climate change.
Agriculture contributed 22% of national GDP and 35% of employment in 2020. Productivity of land is low and labour productivity lags
behind the non-farm sectors. Only about 10% of crop land is fully irrigated
Cambodia has 1.7 million farm households, of whom about 75% are defined as smallholders. Most of these live on less than 150% of
the national poverty line. Most farmers supplement farm income with wage labour. About 23% of rural households are landless.
Cambodia produces a substantial surplus of rice for export. Other important export commodities include rubber, cassava and various
tree crops. However, exports are primarily of raw materials. Cambodia imports large amounts of fruit and vegetables.
Barriers to increasing productivity of smallholder farming include access to credit, technique, market intelligence and key inputs.
Access to water is another key constraint. The best Agriculture Cooperatives (ACs) are increasingly successful at assisting farmers to
overcome these challenges, but the majority of producer organisations (POs) are not yet at this level. Value chain processors face
high costs in areas such as logistics, energy and cost of credit compared to neighbouring countries.
The Government of the Kingdom of Cambodia (GoKC) has prepared its Agriculture Development Policy 2030 (ADP) in the context of
its post-COVID recovery strategy. The ADP prioritises a more commercial and export-orientated agriculture sector contributing to
inclusive growth and seeks to take advantage of recent success in negotiating trade access for Cambodian produce to China and
other markets.
Women face obstacles to their economic empowerment, including (i) the amount of time and responsibility for unpaid domestic and
care work, (ii) low levels of literacy and education, and (iii) a lack of access to resources necessary for economic empowerment[1].
Rural youth face difficulties in accessing land, which also limits access to credit, as financial institutions generally require land as
collateral and a high proportion migrate to urban areas in search of work. Indigenous People (IP) make up about 1.5% of
Cambodia’s population and suffer disadvantages in access to health, education and other services. Eleven percent of women and
nine percent of men in Cambodia live with disabilities; as a result, they are more likely to be poor, have low educational attainment
and experience discrimination and exclusion[2].
The proposed ASPIRE-AT builds on IFAD’s successful models of support to pro-poor agriculture development in Cambodia and
elsewhere, including the ASPIRE programme which ends in 2022. The proposal also builds on established partnerships including with
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) for implementation and with European Investment Bank (EIB) as a financing
partner.
Project Results
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is Inclusive and sustainable agriculture sector growth based on exports and domestic
markets has increased incomes of rural producers and workers. This will be achieved through three Outcomes: (1) Smallholders’ and
PO’s Investments in productive assets have increased their productivity and competitiveness in domestic and exports-based value
chains; (2) PO’s partnerships with agribusinesses have been enhanced and their market access improved; and (3) Smallholders have
been organised and coordinated in ACs and other POs, and have been enabled to produce in response to market requirements for
type, volume and quality standards.
Target Areas and Beneficiaries
The target beneficiaries of ASPIRE-AT will be (i) 100,000 smallholder farm households who are either poor or near-poor and
vulnerable to falling into poverty due to climate, market or other shocks but who have productive potential and can take advantage of
market opportunities; and (ii) 25,000 landless or land-poor households ready to take advantage of employment opportunities. Both
groups will be reached through support to about 500 POs and to small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises. About 50% of
beneficiaries will be women and 20% will be youth. In line with Cambodia’s population, 1.5% will be IPs.
Targeting strategy will be based on selection of pro-poor value chains that are prioritised in the ADP and are suitable for smallholder
production, with potential to increase productivity through modest capital investment and involving intensive, unskilled labour inputs;
or value chains involving large numbers of women, youth and IPs as producers or processors. The initial target value chains will be
native chicken, cassava, cashew, fresh fruits and processed fruits.
ASPIRE-AT will be national in scope but will focus on selected Pro-Poor Value Chain areas selected according to (1) potential for
development of the pro-poor value chains; (2) access to markets; (3) presence of Business Clusters (BCs[3]) supported by ASPIRE
and the AIMS project with relevant production activities; (4) Economic Poles targeted by SAAMBAT; (5) density and intensity of rural
poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition; (6) presence of IPs; (7) incidence of environmental degradation and climate vulnerability; and
(8) complementarity with the intervention areas of other development partners. Five Pro-Poor Value Chain areas will be selected in
Year 1, with an additional 11 areas to be selected in Years 2 and 3.
2/39
Components
Component 1: Productive and Resilient Assets for Producer Organisations will finance investments that are identified in the
business plans of POs that have achieved a required level of capacity. Under sub-component 1.1, GoKC’s Agriculture and Rural
Development Bank (ARDB) will provide financing packages combining loans and grants to POs and to individual farmer members of
POs. Grants will be held in escrow accounts and will be released once loans are repaid. Therefore, the grant will act as a partial
guarantee to ARDB and will reduce the need for other collateral.
Existing POs and POs newly formed with ASPIRE-AT support will be eligible for investment financing once they achieve a “graduated
PO” status based on scorecard criteria including: (i) measures of business and administrative capacity, (ii) strong partnership with
private sector, and (iii) strong governance and social inclusivity and social and environmental risk management.
Eligible investments by smallholders must be (1) type identified in the PO Business Plan; (2) related to production of a targeted
value chain commodity; (3) physical assets with useful life longer than 1 year; (4) not in a social and environmental negative list; and
(5) not for land purchase. Smallholder farmer members of graduated POs will be eligible for grant finance up to 25% of the financing
package, or 35% for farmers who are women, IPs, youth or persons with disabilities. In any case, the maximum grant amount for one
farmer over the project life will be USD 1,000.
Eligible Investments by graduated POs must be (1) identified in the PO Business Plan; (2) related to enterprises or cash-generating
activities in a target value chain; (3) contributing to a partnership with identified private sector partners; (4) physical assets with useful
life longer than 1 year; (5) not included in social and environmental negative list; and (6) not be for land purchases. The maximum
grant element will be 40% of the financing package subject to a maximum of USD 150 per benefitting smallholder farmer over the
project life.
Under sub-component 1.2, the project will finance physical infrastructure assets that will be owned, operated and maintained by the
PO that are important for achieving competitiveness and sustainability but which cannot easily generate revenue. These investments
will only be available for POs that have not received similar project support in the past. Examples of eligible investments include: (1)
access roads; (2) loading areas; (3) collection and handling facilities; (4) water distribution infrastructure (e.g. linking public irrigation
canals to farms) and (5) multi-purpose buildings for the PO.
Component 2: Business Partnership and Market Access will support public and private investment to increase the number and
competitiveness of agri-businesses operating in priority value chains and the associated enabling public goods and services to
support competitive export growth.
Sub-Component 2.1 will provide investment-oriented technical support to about 40 agri-businesses to plan and deliver successful
upgrading investments in the target value chains. Technical support will include market exposure and trade promotion, bespoke
technical investment advice and facilitation of links to centres of industry-leading international knowledge. Participating businesses will
be facilitated to establish trading links with farmers and POs supported by the project.
About 15 agri-businesses will receive financing for investments in the range of USD 0.5 million – USD 5 million from a line of credit
through the government’s SME Bank, supported by credit guarantees from the Cambodia Credit Guarantee Corporation (CCGC).
Sub-component 2.2 will upgrade critical public services and associated infrastructure to enable competitive export growth, with a
focus on export-oriented plant health and quarantine services. Investments will include upgrading of physical infrastructure and
equipment as well as capacity strengthening of the institutions and staff. Approval of investments will be subject to feasibility studies
demonstrating compliance with criteria for effectiveness, viability and sustainability. Provisionally, the project will finance a Post
Harvest Reference Centre; Export Quarantine Inspection Offices (up to 5); a Plant Health Reference Laboratory and Plant Health
Research Stations (up to 3).
The sub-component will also support a review of policies and regulations affecting the priority sectors and proposals for adjustment to
strengthen competitiveness.
Component 3: Aggregating Farmers and Integrating them in Value Chains will support existing POs to achieve the scale and
institutional capacity required to provide effective services to their members, be attractive partners for agri-business and to qualify for
investment financing under Component 1. Candidate POs will be active in the target value chains in the Pro-Poor Value Chain areas
and will include existing ACs as well as the BCs supported by AIMS and ASPIRE and other informal POs. Provincial Departments of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (PDAFFs) will identify the POs and conduct the formal registration process. By the end of the
project it is anticipated that there will be approximately 500 participating “graduated POs” of which about 300 will be newly registered.
There will also be about 35 Unions of Agriculture Cooperatives (UAC).
Qualified service providers will be recruited to build the capacity of POs. Capacity development will include governance, women’s
representation, recruitment and training of staff, adoption of a suitable Management Information System (MIS), business model
development and planning, digital literacy and adoption of digital services and environmental, social and climate risk management.
Service Providers will assist the PO to develop a Business Plan which will be endorsed by PDAFF and by the project. Service
Providers will then assist the PO to prepare financing proposals for PO and individual farmer investments to ARDB under Component
1.
Newly registered POs will receive capacity building and business planning support in the first year of engagement followed by support
to implementation of the investment plan in the second year and coaching support for two further years, so the length of engagement
with the PO will be four years in total, after which it is expected that the PO will be fully self-sustaining. Existing registered POs will
receive service provider support for two years.
3/39
Sub-Component 3.2 will finance the establishment of Centres of Excellence for development, promotion and demonstration of
improved production and post-harvest techniques with an emphasis on climate-smart agriculture. Centres of Excellence will be
implemented in partnership with private sector suppliers of technology. The Centres of Excellence will be linked to the POs and
farmers through a network of Lead Farmers.
Alignment, ownership and partnerships
ASPIRE-AT will contribute to achievement of Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) including SDG-1 (no poverty), SDG-2 (zero
hunger), SDG-5 (gender equality), SDG-8 (inclusive and sustainable growth and decent employment) and SDG-13 (climate action).
ASPIRE-AT is strongly aligned with GoKC’s policy agenda for the agriculture sector, particularly through the ADP. ASPIRE-AT is
aligned with IFAD’s policies and corporate priorities. In particular, ASPIRE-AT is designed as gender transformative and climate-
focused.
ASPIRE-AT will build on IFAD’s existing strong partnerships with agencies of GoKC including MAFF and SME Bank and will initiate a
new partnership with ARDB. ASPIRE-AT will continue the financing partnership with EIB and potentially with EU that is initiated by
SAAMBAT. ASPIRE-AT will work in partnership with sector agencies, agri-businesses and with Cambodian farmer organisations,
notably the longstanding IFAD programme partners Farmer and Nature Net (FNN) and Cambodia Farmer Federation Association of
Agricultural Producers (CFAP).
Costs, benefits and financing
The total project cost inclusive of taxes, duties and 15% price and physical contingencies amounts to USD 194.0 million over a seven-
year implementation period.
The IFAD loan funds from PBAS will finance USD 33.9 million (17% of the total budget) and IFAD BRAM will finance USD 14.0 million
(7.2%); GoKC will provide USD 19.2 million (10%); EIB will contribute USD 60.6 million (31%); SSTC Grant will provide USD 0.3
million (0.2%); Partner Financial Institutions, USD 42.9 million (22%); beneficiary contribution, USD 1.1 million (0.5%); and SME
contribution, USD 2.2 million (1%); and there is a funding gap of USD 20.0 million (10%).
The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of the project is estimated as 32% (base case). Sensitivity analysis shows that this
could fall to 17% in a most-severe-case scenario, still above the opportunity cost of capital in Cambodia.
Risks
ASPIRE-AT is considered a low-risk project overall while some moderate risks are identified in the Integrated Risk Framework based
on the operating environment and past experience in Cambodia. Country context risks are generally low, subject to some
uncertainties about the global economic impact of the Ukraine conflict and other events. The project scope entails some risks that
are mitigated by design features; these relate to the potential for smallholders to compete in the market, risks associated with the
design of financing instruments for farmers, POs and agri-businesses, and the risk that public sector investments may be proposed
without adequate assurance of viability and sustainability. Country inherent financial management risk is high but mitigated by use
of well-established financial management procedures and capacity. Procurement risk is moderate.
Environment, Social and Climate Change
The proposed environmental and social risk category for ASPIRE-AT is moderate. An Environmental, Social and Climate
Management Framework (ESCMF) has bee prepared with an Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plan (ESCMP),
Cultural Heritage Plan, Indigenous People's Plan and Free, Prior and Informed Consent Implementation Plan. The project will not
require involuntary land acquisition. The project will enforce a zero deforestation policy.
The climate risk category of ASPIRE-AT is substantial. An in-depth climate risk analysis has been prepared. The screening checklist
provided in ESCMF will guide project to include adequate adaptation and mitigation measures while working in climate vulnerable
areas.
Implementation Arrangements
MAFF will be the Project Executing Agency and will assign project management responsibilities to the existing ASPIRE Secretariat,
thus making use of established capacity, ensuring continuity and facilitating implementation of the project readiness action plan.
ASPIRE Secretariat will be assisted by a core team of technical advisers.
MAFF-General Directorate of Agriculture (MAFF-GDA) will be responsible for technical guidance in key areas including (1) formation
and capacity building of ACs and UACs; (2) registration of UACs; (3) selection, design and implementation of public service
investments; (4) development and approval of technical protocols for crop production; (5) development of relevant policy and
regulation, particularly to expand trade and market access in target value chains; (6) coordination of the project ICT strategy; and (7)
management of Centres of Excellence.
PDAFFs will (1) conduct mapping of pro-poor value chains and producer organisations; (2) conduct formation and registration of
Agriculture Cooperatives; (3) manage and coordinate networks of Lead Farmers including identifying training needs; (4) cooperate
with regional service providers for business development services to graduated POs; (5) project planning, monitoring and reporting at
Provincial level.
ARDB and SME Bank will be project implementing agencies and will manage the lines of credit and (for ARDB) matching grant
finance, screen and conduct due diligence on investment proposals, finance investments and report on results to the project. Loan re-
payments will be used to re-finance the credit schemes.
4/39
ASPIRE Secretariat will be responsible for Financial Management of the project using systems and procedures established under
ASPIRE and consistent with GoKC’s Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for externally financed projects/programmes. ASPIRE
Secretariat will operate one project account for IFAD loan proceeds and one project account for IFAD grant proceeds. ARDB and
SME Bank will also operate project accounts.
ASPIRE Secretariat will be responsible for project procurement using IFAD funds and will follow the SOP to the extent such are
consistent with the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. PO’s will conduct a simple community procurement process to identify
preferred suppliers for investments financed through ARDB. Agri-businesses will be responsible for procurement of items financed by
credit through SME Bank.
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Communications
M&E of ASPIRE-AT will be based on (1) an Outcome Survey conducted at household level, with baseline, mid-term and endline
measurement; and (2) a Management Information System (MIS) based on a upgrade of the existing ASPIRE MIS which can capture
information on production and sales at farm level.
All implementing agencies will be responsible to provide data to update the ASPIRE-AT MIS which will track data at the following
levels: (1) individual farmers; (2) POs; (3) agri-businesses; (4) PDAFFs; and (5) other agencies with implementing responsibilities.
A Communications Plan for the project will be developed and implemented by ASPIRE Secretariat in coordination with IFAD
communications specialists. Knowledge sharing will be primarily through digital means. The project will establish and regularly update
a web-site and will develop a range of web-based knowledge products including blogs, policy and technical briefs and video
segments. ASPIRE Secretariat will also reach out to stakeholders through mobile applications.
Implementation Plan
The planned implementation period of ASPIRE-AT is seven years from January 2023 to December 2029.
A Project Readiness Action Plan has been prepared and be implemented in the period July to December 2022 by ASPIRE Secretariat
with available resources of the ASPIRE Programme and with technical support from IFAD. The purpose of the Project Readiness
Action Plan is to ensure that all conditions are in place so that key activities of ASPIRE-AT can be initiated during Year 1 of project
implementation.
A Project Implementation Manual (PIM) has been prepared and includes Terms of Reference (TORs) for key service providers. GoKC
will be encouraged to initiate the procurement process for these service providers in advance of project effectiveness, thus avoiding
the long delays that have affected ongoing projects (e.g. SAAMBAT) due to the time required to agree TORs and contract service
providers. Some resources of ongoing ASPIRE may be used to support this readiness activity for ASPIRE-AT.
ASPIRE-AT implementation will be supervised jointly by GoKC, IFAD and EIB. There will be one supervision mission and one
implementation support mission per year, with a Mid-Term Review planned for early 2026.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
Political, social and economic: Cambodia has achieved rapid economic growth and poverty reduction during the 21st century
based on political stability, investment in infrastructure and openness to trade underpinning economic growth. Real GDP growth
averaged around 7.5% per annum from 2001 to 2019 while the proportion of households living below the national poverty line fell
from over 60% to below 10%. In 2015 Cambodia graduated to Lower Middle Income Country status. Cambodia's HDI value for
2019 is 0.594— which puts the country in the medium human development category—positioning it at 144 out of 189 countries
and territories[4].
Despite the impressive reduction in the poverty headcount, a high proportion of rural Cambodians live only somewhat above the
poverty line and are vulnerable to falling back into poverty. While the poverty rate is only 4.2% in Phnom Penh and 12.6% in
other urban areas, it reaches 22.8% in rural areas[5].
Cambodia managed the COVID-19 pandemic well, with around 3,000 deaths reported. About 81% of the population is
vaccinated. The Government of the Kingdom of Cambodia (GoKC) has lifted most restrictions on travel and activities. However,
the pandemic led to a near halt in international tourism arrivals and heavily impacted domestic retail services. Many migrant
workers lost employment and returned to Cambodia during 2020, resulting in increased unemployment and reduced incomes
from remittances. GDP growth was 2.2% in 2021 and is projected at 4.5% in 2022[6]. Poverty headcount increased to 17.8% and
to 22.8% in rural areas[7] as a result of the pandemic. The government released social transfers, as support for ID-Poor
households through the national COVID-19 cash transfer emergency programmes for the most-affected families.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
5/39
As it emerges from the COVID crisis, Cambodia faces new macro-economic challenges due to the interrelated risks of global
trade recession and the impact on commodity prices of the war in Ukraine. As an open, trading economy with total exports equal
to 61% of GDP in 2020, Cambodia is vulnerable to a slowdown in global demand. Cambodia’s energy use depends mainly on
imports (the main exceptions are hydro-electricity and solar electricity) and is already experiencing inflationary pressures, for
example in the price of transport fuels. The agriculture sector is likely to experience significant impacts from increasing fuel costs
and also from rising fertiliser costs, leading potentially to decreased fertilizer use and productivity. The Ukraine crisis has also led
to increasing costs of foodstuffs, including grains and cooking oil. It is possible that as a rice exporter Cambodia could indirectly
benefit from increased grain prices; conversely, costs of imported food will rise and demand for some export crops might be
reduced. Recent economic analysis from IFPRI[8] foresees an increase in inequality in Cambodia and greater poverty,
particularly in rural areas. Finally, the cost of a healthy diet increases for Cambodian households, thereby affecting food security
and nutrition.
Cambodia’s population was estimated at 16.7 million in 2020, with 76% living in rural areas. The population is relatively young,
with a median age of 25. Education and skills levels in the workforce remain low but Cambodia has achieved almost universal
primary school enrollment and increasing attendance at secondary level, with female and male enrollment rates similar.
Cambodia’s agriculture sector has declined in importance compared to manufacturing and services, with agriculture share of
GDP falling from 34% in 2000 to 22% in 2020. The resulting structural transformation has seen large numbers of workers moving
from farm to non-farm jobs, but agriculture still provides about 35% of employment. Rice, the staple crop, accounts for about 79%
of arable land and about 50% of agricultural GDP. Productivity of land is low compared to neighbouring Thailand and Vietnam,
while agriculture labour productivity, though rising rapidly, still lags behind the non-farm sectors. Only about 10% of crop land is
fully irrigated, with most crops being rain-fed and typically limited to one crop cycle per year.
Cambodia has 1.7 million farm households (6.8 million people) and 75% of these are defined[9] by the National Institute of
Statistics (NIS) as smallholders, with holdings typically around one to two hectares (though typical farm sizes are larger in less
densely populated provinces). Almost all (98%) of farmers have ownership rights under the Land Law of 2001. Despite ongoing
efforts to issue formal land titles, most agricultural land is held under informally issued “soft” titles which are traded and used as
collateral for loans. Most smallholders supplement agriculture with nonfarm income sources such as wage labour, often on larger
commercial farms. About 23% of rural households are landless and a further 15% own less than 0.5ha; these households
depend mainly on wage labour.
Cambodia produces a substantial surplus of rice for export. Other important export commodities include rubber, cassava and
various tree crops. However, exports are primarily of raw materials, with Vietnam in particular importing large amounts of
Cambodian produce for processing and onward sales.
About 30% of fruit and vegetables are imported from neighbouring countries. Cambodian horticulture is underdeveloped with
insufficient investment in irrigation, greenhouses, cold chains etc., and finds it difficult to compete with imports on price. There is
a growing urban market for safe vegetables with low chemical residues, so strengthening of certification and traceability systems
is important for growth in this sector. However, the Cambodian Good Agriculture Practice (CamGAP) certification scheme needs
increased capacity and a decentralized implementation structure to make it accessible for small farmers.
Cambodia’s agriculture sector has proved resilient during the COVID pandemic. Agriculture sector growth, particularly based on
increasing exports through formal channels and taking advantage of recent trade agreements, is a key element of GoKC’s
strategy for post-pandemic recovery. However, there are still significant barriers to overcome, particularly in value chains (VCs)
based on smallholder production, to achieve the scale and consistent quality of produce meeting the needs of export and
domestic markets.
Leading smallholder farmers achieve good results using modern technology, but the majority of farmers lag behind. Barriers
include access to credit on appropriate terms as well as technique, market intelligence and key inputs such as improved planting
materials. Access to water is another key constraint. In some value chains there are specific issues to overcome, for example,
the need for disease-free planting material for cassava.
Cambodia has an increasing number of Agriculture Cooperatives (AC), some of which are aggregating as Unions (UAC). The
best of these function well, providing effective services to their members, aggregating and coordinating production and helping
agribusinesses communicate with farmers and negotiate purchasing contracts at scale. These ACs have benefited from quality
capacity building assistance provided through a number of (non-IFAD funded) projects – such assistance is thus demonstrated
as a highly cost-effective investment. There is however a large gap between the best and the rest, with most producer
organisations not yet at this level. There is also a need for investment in enterprises at the cooperative level for enhancement of
productivity as well as in logistics, transport, storage, that are key to reduce post-harvest losses.
Cambodian processors face high costs in areas such as logistics, energy and cost of credit compared to neighbouring countries.
Lack of working capital is a recurrent problem. Exporters need improved access to markets, for example transit agreements
allowing produce to be exported via ports in Vietnam or Thailand. Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary (SPS) certification needed for
some value chains are lacking. The most successful processors for export markets are overcoming these challenges, but others
are operating well below capacity and potential new investors are cautious. Many of local agri-SME lack experience in exporting
procedures and / or do not yet fully understand their target markets and customer requirements. Firms also need stronger skills
for choice of technology and business set-up in order to become internationally competitive.
14.
Cambodia produces some high quality products (e.g. fragrant rice, cashews) and exporters report a positive perception of
Cambodian produce[10]. Given the high quality of Cambodian produce but also the relatively high costs of production, Cambodia
may be better placed to compete for premium markets rather than in bulk commodity markets where price is the main
consideration, but this implies that quality requirements will be more stringent.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
Cambodia’s rural infrastructure was very under-developed after decades of poverty and war in the late 20th century.
Accordingly, GoKC has placed a high priority on investment in this area and this is showing results. Nevertheless, of Cambodia’s
approximately 45,000 km of rural roads, only about 31,000 km is in good condition[11]. Effective financing and implementation of
operation and maintenance remains an issue. Partly for this reason, farm-to-market transport costs are significantly higher than
in neighbouring countries[12].
6/39
GoKC has high ambitions to develop a modern digital technology sector. Cambodia has strengths in this area with one of the
highest mobile and 4G coverage rates in the world and an emerging software sector. IFAD has successfully supported
development of one mobile application for smallholders (Chamka) and is supporting development of an ambitious Khmer
Agriculture Suite through the SAAMBAT project[13]. Scaling-up and integrating digital solutions developed/supported under the
other IFAD supported projects have potential to improve agriculture input and product markets and access to credit and is also
strongly aligned with IFAD’s priority on youth.
Policy Framework: The overarching strategy of GoKC is defined in its Rectangular Strategy (RS) for Growth, Employment,
Equity and Efficiency, currently in its fourth phase for 2019-2023 (RS-IV). The RS-IV places promotion of the agriculture sector
and rural development within its Inclusive and Sustainable Development pillar. The National Strategic Development Plan
(NSDP) 2019-23 and the Agriculture Sector Development Plan (ASDP) 2019-23 add detail and monitoring targets to the goals set
by the RS-IV for the current government mandate.
GoKC has recently finalized two key strategic policy documents for the agriculture sector, the Agriculture Development Policy
(ADP) and the Agriculture Sector Master Plan 2030. The ADP reflects the concerns of the GoKC’s post-COVID strategy for
Recovery, Reform and Resilience (3R) to develop a more commercial and export-oriented sector as a contribution to inclusive
growth. The ADP defines four key themes: (i) Modernizing and commercializing the agricultural value chains; (ii) Public and
private investments in the agriculture sector; (iii) Growing sustainably and increasing resilience to climate change; and (iv)
Institutional reforms and cross-cutting issues.
The Policy on Agriculture Extension in Cambodia was recently updated with support from IFAD through the ASPIRE
programme and commits Cambodia to developing a pluralistic extension service that engages both public, private sector and
cooperatives in providing extension advisory services.
A Roadmap for Food Systems for Sustainable Development 2030[14] was adopted by Council for Agriculture and Rural
Development (CARD) and the TWG-AW in 2021 with four specific priorities: (i) Healthy diets for all; (ii) Empowerment of youth,
women and the vulnerable; (iii) resilient livelihoods and resilient food systems; and (iv) governance for a more inclusive food
system. The Roadmap is aimed at improving the access to healthy diets and safe food, with an initial focus on women and
children, to break the intergenerational cycle of malnutrition and address the nutrition transition.
Digital Technology Policy: The Cambodia Digital Economy and Society Policy Framework 2021 – 2035 emphasizes the use of
digital platforms in production and value chains of agriculture.[15] MAFF developed a Digitalisation Strategy Paper, focused on
increasing institutional capacity for digital technology, in 2022, and is currently preparing a sector-wide Cambodia e-Agriculture
Strategy which aligns with the ADP.
Cambodia’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the UNFCCC[16] and Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-23
defines the framework for Cambodia’s climate change response and describes the following adaptation actions for the agriculture
sector: (i) scaling-up of climate-resilient agriculture systems including the introduction of climate resilient and ecologically
appropriate crop varieties, (ii) community based actions to restore and maintain critical environmental services affected by
climate change, (iii) strengthening of early warning and climate information systems and dissemination, and (iv) strengthening of
capability to undertake climate risks and vulnerability assessments and cross-sectoral planning.
The Ministry of Women Affairs (MoWA) is implementing its five-year strategic plan for strengthening gender mainstreaming and
women’s empowerment (Neary Rattanak V, 2019-2023) and is finalising a national Gender Equality Policy. In 2011, the
Cambodian Government developed the National Policy on Youth Development. The Government’s commitment to ensuring
food and nutrition security is expressed in RS-IV. Cambodia’s Roadmap for Food Systems for Sustainable Development by 2030
are adopted by the Council for Agricultural and Rural Development (CARD) in late 2021. In 2019, the GoKC approved the
National Policy on the Development of Indigenous Peoples. The Government has enacted several laws and strategies to
improve the lives of persons with disabilities.
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) is the key institution responsible for regulation and promotion of agriculture
production. Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology (MoWRAM) oversees irrigation development and coordinates with
MAFF through the Technical Working Group on Agriculture and Water (TWG-AW). Other Ministries with important roles related to
agriculture and rural development include Ministry of Rural Development (MRD), which amongst other mandates is responsible
for rural road infrastructure; Ministry of Commerce (MoC) responsible for business and trade promotion, Ministry of Industry and
Handicrafts (MIH) with agro-industry responsibilities and MoWA promoting gender equity and women’s economic empowerment.
25.
Cross-Ministerial coordination is provided through the Council for Agriculture and Rural Development (CARD) and through the
TWG-AW.
26.
Ministries are represented at national level and through Provincial Departments. Under the decentralisation programme overseen
by Ministry of Interior (MoI) and the National Committee for Sub-National Democratic Development Secretariat (NCDD‑S),
technical service delivery functions at District / Municipality and Commune / Sangkat levels have been grouped under the local
governments, though capacity remains very limited as yet.
27.
AC and other types of producer organisation (PO) are increasingly important at the grassroots level. ACs are regulated by MAFF
under the Law on Agriculture Cooperatives of 2013. Higher level bodies include UAC and national farmer representative bodies
including Farmer and Nature Net (FNN) and Cambodia Farmer Federation Association of Agriculture Producers (CFAP).
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
7/39
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
With a Gender Inequality Index of 0.474, Cambodia was ranked 117 over 162 countries in 2019[17]. There are a number of
obstacles to women’s economic empowerment in Cambodia, including (i) the amount of time and responsibility for unpaid
domestic and care work, (ii) low levels of literacy and education, and (iii) a lack of access to resources necessary for economic
empowerment[18]. Women have higher participation in agriculture than men but receive lower benefits and have lower access to
land, extension services, financial services, markets, and technology. In principle, land is held jointly by husband and wife, while
women often take responsibility for household cash management and predominate in small enterprises including agricultural
trading and marketing. In 2018, 9.1% of women aged 15-49 years reported that they had been subject to physical and/or sexual
violence by a current or former intimate partner in the previous 12 months[19].
Youth are defined in Cambodia as people aged 15–30[20]. Despite only 6.4% of youth neither in employment nor in education or
training in 2014, the quality and stability of employment remain concerns[21]. Rural youth face difficulties in accessing land,
which also limits access to credit, as financial institutions generally require land as collateral and a high proportion migrate to
urban areas in search of work.
Indigenous Peoples (IPs) make up about 1.5% of Cambodia’s population, or 250,000 people, mainly in the upland northeast of
the country[22]. While poverty incidence among ethnic minorities is not significantly higher than among the ethnic majority, they
suffer disadvantages in access to health, education and other services. IP communities engage in cassava, cashew and coffee
value chains.
Eleven percent of women and nine percent of men in Cambodia live with disabilities; as a result, they are more likely to be
poor, have low educational attainment and experience discrimination and exclusion[23]. Women living with disabilities also face
considerable domestic violence and limited access to services[24]. Persons with disabilities are among the most vulnerable
groups in Cambodian society. They lack equal access to education, training and employment. This constant lack of opportunity
alienates them from fully participating in their communities. While many persons with disabilities have considerable skills, many
have not had the opportunity to develop their potential. The vast majority of them are self-employed or unpaid family workers.
Nutrition: In line with economic growth and increasing food production, the proportion of Cambodians who are undernourished
fell from about 40% in 1990 to about 15% in 2012. Total Dietary Energy Supply (DES) increased 31% in the same period[25].
However, Cambodia continues to face nutrition challenges, with high rates of stunting in under five-year-old children and anemia
in women of reproductive age. Key micronutrient deficiencies include iron-deficiency anemia, which affects 56% of children, and
anemia not specific to iron-deficiency, which affects 44% of women of reproductive age[26]. Severe food insecurity affects 13.4%
of the population and moderate food insecurity 44.8%; these figures may worsen with increased food and energy prices[27].
While a number of activities will contribute to improving the nutrition situation, ASPIRE-AT does not aim to be nutrition-sensitive.
IFAD is taking part of the policy dialogue on Food Systems through the IFAD supported projects and 50x2030 initiative. Under
track 3 of this policy dialogue, the technology adaptation and extension under ASPIRE AT and commercialization efforts
contribute substantially and at scale through efforts to diversify production, reduce exposure to risk and adapt to climate change.
Agro-ecological transitions are a game changer for this track. ASPIRE AT reflects the efforts to empower the youth, women and
the vulnerable provide greater access to markets and livelihood support across the agricultural sector. These include the effort to
diversify production making a strong contribution to healthy diets for all Cambodians. It also includes consumption of own produce
and the availability of diverse produce in markets. The 2nd NSFSN 2019-2023, ASPIRE AT will help develop production
capabilities, diversifying production, providing resilience to climate change, developing value chains and value adding
opportunities and improving access to markets across all provinces and at the national level. These actions provide the
foundations for food security through increased availability and quality of more diverse produce, greater access to food improved
livelihoods for smallholders, more stable access to food and a more sustainable production system.  ASPIRE AT investments will
help drive improvements in food security and income for the agricultural sector and along the value chain supporting the Joint
Priority Actions under the NSFSN 2019-2023 for Value chain development, food safety and fortification and Disaster resilience
and climate change.
33.
Cambodia is highly vulnerable to climate change and disaster risks. It is ranked 151st out of 181 countries in the 2020 ND-
GAIN Index and is the 12th most disaster-prone country among 172 countries for 1999–2018. Annual economic losses resulting
from natural disasters in the country were estimated at 0.7% of GDP. The World Risk Index of 15.8% indicates very high risk of
disaster in consequence of extreme natural events, with an exposure index of 27% and a vulnerability index of 59%.
Approximately 80% of the country is within the Mekong River and Tonle Sap basins, making it especially vulnerable to floods,
storms, and droughts. Identified hazards are assessed as high across the whole country for river floods and coastal floods,
cyclone, extreme heat, and wildfire. Climate change will result in more frequent and intense heavy precipitation days and an
increase in the number of extreme rainfall events (medium confidence), leading to increased flooding. Temperatures will rise by
0.7°C–2.7°C by 2060.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
34.
Agriculture based on smallholder production is the basis of Cambodia’s rural economy and remains essential for employment and
household incomes for the rural people. Agriculture can make an important contribution to the growth and modernisation of
Cambodia’s economy and to diversifying Cambodia’s exports, which are currently over-dependent on manufacturing and tourism.
However, productivity of small farms remains low and constrained by inefficient scale, lack of modern techniques, lack of
productive infrastructure and inadequate adaptation to climate risks, while smallholders and landless households depend on
income from highly insecure casual labour. These households risk being “left behind” and failing to benefit from Cambodia’s
increasing national prosperity.
35.
36.
37.
8/39
There are important barriers to overcome so that smallholders can increase their share of market value and produce efficiently
for well-developed value chains serving export and domestic markets. Strong POs are needed to aggregate small farmers to
produce at scale, access services, create value addition, and become attractive partners for agri-businesses. To realize this
potential, strengthening of PO must be complemented by investments at both farm level and in PO-owned enterprises and
facilities. Productive and climate-smart investments can be financed by farmers and the private sector, but access to investment
credit on suitable terms (price, collateral requirements, delivery and tenor) is a barrier at present. Existing successful POs have
benefited from investment in productive infrastructure but new POs will need investment to reach the same level. There are also
technical challenges to overcome, for example, introduction of climate-smart techniques, and the need to create a disease-free
supply chain for cassava planting material[28]. Agribusinesses need support including improved business skills, market
intelligence and access to finance. New export markets are opening as a result of GoKC’s negotiation of trade agreements, but
technical knowledge and facilitating public services are needed to exploit these opportunities.
POs are not automatically pro-poor; inevitably, farmers with more land and resources will have a significant voice in their
governance. IFAD engagement can assist in ensuring that POs become more inclusive. This may include arrangements to
ensure that poorer farmers, women, indigenous minorities and persons with disabilities have a voice in governance of POs and
are able to access the benefits of IFAD support.
IFAD, through its partnership with GoKC, has developed acknowledged expertise in supporting small farmers to form inclusive
POs, access improved sustainable and resilient technology and form partnerships with private businesses. Under ASPIRE and
the AIMS project, this has resulted in about 4,400 Business Clusters (BC)[29]with 165,000 smallholders. About half the BC have
written contracts with agri-business partners. Accumulated sales of these BC are estimated at USD 223 million to date. The
estimated return on every USD 1 invested through ASPIRE is USD 23. In addition, these projects have identified sustainable and
resilient agricultural practices and built capacities of community extension workers and entrepreneurs to support farmers’ access
to inputs and markets and adopt improved practices. Partnership with European Investment Bank (EIB) opens the opportunity to
build on this approach by aggregating the BC into formal AC and UAC, developing sustainable models of financing for the
necessary investments (including infrastructure) and strengthening the value chains and investment in the enabling environment.
Pursuing this opportunity contributes to GoKC’s objective of inclusive growth in the agriculture sector and increasing sustainable
incomes for IFAD’s core target group of smallholder farmers and rural workers. Financing through GoKC’s public sector banks
brings IFAD’s global expertise in inclusive financial services for smallholders and Agri-SMEs to complement the strengths of the
existing country programme. The programmatic approach developed within the IFAD Cambodia portfolio will assist in
coordinating and maximising synergies between projects as well as leveraging complementary financing.
B. Lessons learned
38.
The ASPIRE AT design is built on the following key country programme lessons:
39.
40.
Structural transformation of the economy has been accompanied by increasingly market-oriented agriculture. The COSOP 2022-
27 highlights lessons learned from IFAD’s country programme including the potential for smallholders to successfully compete in
the market given appropriate support which includes market-led “extension plus” services, increasing use of mobile applications
and a programmatic approach to integrate capacity building with “hard” investments. The Country Strategic Programme
Evaluation (CSPE) of 2018 highlighted the need for tailored strategies to support agricultural commercialisation of relatively
advanced smallholders and to support the coping strategies of poor households. Accordingly, ASPIRE-AT has a strong focus on
strengthening capacities of POs.
IFAD’s experience helping smallholders transition to farming as a business highlights the importance of smallholder POs
particularly in linking farmers with buyers. More than 1,400 POs mobilised by ASPIRE and AIMS have active contracts with
buyers. Lessons from IFAD’s Independent Office of Evaluation on value chain programs show that sufficient duration of training of
PO is key for them to reach required maturity and sustainability levels. Figure 1 illustrates this graduation process in stages, each
typically needing 1-2 years with appropriate support. Only a few POs have completed this transition after receiving sustained
technical and financial support.
Figure 1: Graduation of POs/ACs to be reliable market actors
9/39
41.
42.
43.
44.
This shows that tailored capacity building support involving PO’s apex bodies is required. Systemic change requires use of a
holistic approach focusing on: (i) social capital and inclusive governance; (ii) production and productivity; and (iii) PO’s access to
sustainable markets (domestic urban and export) and (iv) viable business model (revenue streams vs costs) and quality financial
management. It implies a blend of tailor-made interventions to improve the technical, management and entrepreneurship skills of
the smallholders and their apex POs/ACs so that they can borrow, invest in value addition, engage actively with key off-takers,
and become recognized business entities within selected pro-poor value chains[30]. As suggested in PMI toolkit on producer
organizations and lessons from several projects, developing and monitoring adapted score cards during the project
implementation can help track progress and target required support.
Devolved planning and delivery of key agriculture sectors public services has proved effective and responsive. A recent Grow
Asia study shows that successful inclusive value chain models rely on quality investment in profitable farming practices[31]. In
addition, fostering alignment between government advisory services and Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) or standards
emerging from value chain platforms can help sustain and scale good practices[32]. Lead farmers, commune extension workers
and business skills facilitators have all been important agents of change in communities and have started developing various
entrepreneurial revenue streams including fee based advisory services but also embedding extension in production and sales of
input (chicks, compost, bio inputs etc.) or remuneration from public and private actors (Chamkadigital services, local government
etc.). However, government agencies have taken time to acquire the skills, working modalities and responsiveness to effectively
enable inclusive market-driven growth, supporting farmers to navigate this transition and brokering new successful relationships
with buyers and service providers in the market.
Growing prevalence of smartphones in all communities has triggered a range of new digital services being offered – from
agricultural advisory and market services to digital financial services and many more. Many digital services are relatively new but
indicate the growing opportunity for digital services to transform services delivery to the sector and the way supply chains
operate. Chamka app that was developed through the Korean Supplementary Funds under ASPIRE (Phase 1) has been
successfully rolled out to more than 50,000 farmer households who access both the extension advisory and the input services
through the app. The business clusters and community extension workers, tie-up with input suppliers as well as extensive
awareness has been useful for rollout of the app to support the farmers. Similar models will be used for technology solutions that
are piloted under SAAMBAT
To support scalable value chain investment, it is key to develop partnerships with financial institutions and adapt solutions to
value chain economic needs[33]. The Cambodian agricultural finance market is at a relatively early stage of development. Other
than short term collateral-based loans, the range and accessibility of suitable products in the market remains limited and
collateral requirements restrict ability to invest, especially for higher value products and higher productivity production systems
that require longer term investment on-farm and among the POs and agribusinesses along the supply chain, likely to exceed the
available collateral. POs participating in secure markets, ideally with written contracts, by nature present a lower risk to creditors
and will be able to take advantage of financial products, which have a more nuanced approach to risk. The ongoing strengthening
of the Agriculture and Rural Development Bank (ARDB) and launch of the SME Bank and Credit Guarantee Corporation of
Cambodia are positive developments to be leveraged.
45.
Geographical targeting strategies typically focus on less-developed or food insecure regions or districts. This can be problematic
for value chain projects, as value chains are not bound by administrative borders. The 2019 Independent Evaluation of IFAD’s
engagement in pro-poor value chain development found that it is a sensible strategy to use a cluster approach, grouping poor
areas with wealthier ones offering comparative advantages in markets, in combination with strategies to identify poor producers.
Pro-poor inclusion depends on i) selection of value chain and agricultural practices more conducive for specific targets (e.g.
cassava with resource poor farmers, poultry with women participants, value chains with fewer capital intensive agricultural
innovations etc.); ii) providing pro-poor incentives while also enforcing pro-poor requirements along financial and value chain
partnership and screening of underlying business proposals and farming practices; iii) mobilization of farmers in inclusive PO that
can negotiate effectively with other actors and create value for members through functional upgrading (e.g. through processing,
and reducing the role of intermediaries); iv) investments in enabling environment.
10/39
46.
Many of the poorest in rural areas depend on non-farm wage labour. Structural transformation will lead to much of this IFAD
target group gradually transitioning from agriculture-based to non-agricultural livelihoods. Project design should recognise this
and place greater weight on creation of decent rural employment as an objective alongside improvements to farm-based
livelihoods.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
a.   Goal and Objectives
47.
48.
The Project Goal is Rural poverty and vulnerability has decreased and climate resilience of Cambodian rural households has
increased through inclusive and environmentally sustainable growth in the agriculture sector. The Project Development
Objective (PDO) is Inclusive and sustainable agriculture sector growth based on exports and domestic markets has increased
incomes of rural producers and workers.
The Project addresses the three Strategic Objectives (SO) of the COSOP 2022-27 which themselves are closely aligned with
IFAD’s global Strategic Framework. By supporting productive investments of smallholders and producer organisations and by
stimulating private investment in production, post-harvest and processing, the project will increase the productive capacity of poor
Cambodian rural households (SO 1). By strengthening pro-poor value chains and assisting small farmers to organize in formal
producer organisations to partner with value chain businesses, the project will assist poor rural households to increase their
incomes through participation in remunerative agriculture value chains (SO 2). By supporting the development and adoption of
climate-smart and environmentally sustainable agriculture techniques, the project will strengthen the environmental sustainability
and climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities (SO 3).
49.
Progress towards the Project Goal will be measured by national indicators on poverty headcount (targeting reduction from 17% to
10%), and achievement of the ADP target of 3% annual growth in value added in the agriculture sector. Key indicators for the
PDO will be the number of rural households with income increased by at least 20% (target, 50,000 households) and the
mandatory indicators Number of households satisfied with project supported services (target 75%) and Number of households
reporting that they can influence decision-making of local authorities and project-supported service providers (25% increase over
baseline). All indicators including mandatory multipliers are presented in Annex 1.
b.   Targeting
50.
The targeting strategy builds on ASPIRE and AIMS experience creating inclusive POs benefitting from market growth
opportunities as well as the Operational guidelines on IFAD’s engagement in pro-poor value chain development.
51.
52.
53.
54.
The basis of targeting will be selection of pro-poor value chains to form a portfolio of high market potential products favouring
priority target groups (e.g. Women: chicken; land-poor: chicken, vegetables; indigenous communities: cassava, tree fruits).
Overall, commodities suitable for smallholder production, with potential to increase productivity through modest capital
investment and involving intensive, unskilled labour inputs; or value chains involving large numbers of women, youth and IPs as
producers or processors will be prioritised.
The project will use graduation processes to harness market forces to grow PO membership to be inclusive of motivated poor
individuals in each community – helping POs achieve scale to attract more buyers and better terms of trade. These will be
enabled through promoting affordable and accessible investment pathways so many smallholders can make affordable initial
investments and, with reinvestment of profits, generate increasingly higher net incomes.
Direct targeting measures will be specifically used to increase women’s leadership in POs and promote women and youth into
higher status opportunities created by the project e.g. as business skill facilitators, local service provider and entrepreneurs
serving their community. Participatory monitoring of targeting effectiveness will be conducted regularly building on successful
management information system (MIS) developed for ASPIRE and AIMS, with beneficiary-led data collection capturing gender,
age, ethnic/social groups[34].
ASPIRE-AT will reach out to about 125,000 rural households (corresponding to 500,000 people) who are within the target group
of the COSOP 2022-27, that is, poor and vulnerable rural Cambodians whose income is less than 150% of the national poverty
line. It will target two direct beneficiary groups: (i) smallholder farmers who are either poor or near-poor and vulnerable to falling
into poverty due to climate, market or other shocks but who have productive potential and can take advantage of market
opportunities; (ii) landless or land-poor households ready to take advantage of employment opportunities. Both groups will be
reached through support to POs which will include ACs, UACs and other types of PO such as Farmer Associations and farmer-
55.
56.
owned enterprises; and to small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises. Targeted benefits (e.g. loans and grants to farmers
and POs) will be subject to eligibility screening criteria to ensure their pro-poor effects, with disadvantaged groups benefiting
from priority access and conditions. About 50% of beneficiaries will be women and 20% will be youth. In line with Cambodia’s
population, 1.5% will be IPs.
11/39
ASPIRE-AT will focus on smallholders who are already members of POs including existing ACs as well as approximately 2,000 of
the BCs established by ASPIRE, AIMS and other projects. Combining support to existing ACs, aggregation and formalisation of
the BCs and recruitment of new members through a graduation process as indicated in the figure 1 is expected to result in a total
of about 500 high-capacity ACs, some of which will be further aggregated in about 35 UACs. The project will support them to
make their membership more inclusive, for example in terms of women, youth, ID-poor, IPs and persons with disabilities.
The project will mainstream gender equality and women’s empowerment and aims to achieve gender transformative outcomes.
Women will be enabled to participate in and benefit from profitable economic activities, as PO members and as entrepreneurs.
Elements of the Gender Action Learning System (“GALS-lite”) will be integrated in the business skills training foreseen for POs.
Women’s voices will be strengthened (e.g. in POs) and efforts will be made to reduce their workload (e.g. through the promotion
of labour- and time-saving technologies). ASPIRE-AT will build on the positive experiences of previous projects[35] to address
deep-rooted social and gender norms and attitudes by engaging men and exploring close collaboration with the Ministry of
Women’s Affairs. Through working with POs and rural enterprises, the project will create opportunities for rural youth, including
by supporting adoption of ICT to improve efficiency in farm work, and facilitate access to markets, information and business
opportunities. To ensure the inclusion of IPs, their engagement in specific value chains (e.g. cassava and cashew) will be one of
the selection criteria. The principles of Free, Prior, Informed Consent (FPIC) will be applied and their organisations will be
strengthened. Successful female, young and IP producers and entrepreneurs will be promoted as role models. While persons
with disabilities are not a specific target group of ASPIRE-AT, specific efforts will be made to also reach out to them (e.g.
collaborating with organisations of persons with disabilities, promoting their inclusion in POs and raising awareness on disability
inclusion). An initial project-specific social inclusion strategy is included in the PIM and will be updated at start-up.
57.
All households in the ASPIRE AT target group are potentially vulnerable to the effects of climate change. The criteria for area
selection includes the climate impact considerations (see session D. "Geographical Scope" below). The project will contribute to
Cambodia’s climate change response by supporting efficient, climate smart and resilient production techniques including low-
carbon technologies and building adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers through training.
58.
By supporting good agriculture practices, quality assurance and origin tracing, the project will increase the supply of safe and
nutritious food, build the resilience of smallholder famers and reduce environmentally unsustainable practices such as misuse of
agriculture chemicals and illegal deforestation.
c.  Selection of Pro-Poor Value Chains
59.
60.
Value chain selection is based on the GoKC priorities set out in the ADP and the prioritization criteria defined in the new
operational guidelines on IFAD’s engagement in pro-poor value chain development[36], that focus on: (i) growth potential, (ii)
inclusive and sustainable development potential and (iii) enabling environment responsiveness.
Based on these criteria and building on the achievement of ASPIRE and AIMS projects, selected value chains are: (i) vegetables,
both leafy and non-leafy species including chilli, (ii) native chicken (ii) cassava, both for multiplication of clean, disease-free
planting material and cassava root tuber production, (iii) cashew nuts, (iv) fresh fruits including longan, mango, etc; and (v)
processed fruits (e.g. dried mango etc.). Developing these value chains will contribute directly to the double objective of import
substitution and export of quality products to the EU and other remunerative markets.
Table 2: Priority Value Chains and Typical Investments
Value Chain
Economic impact
Typical investments
Vegetable
Import substitution
Greenhouse, water management, post-harvest handling.
Backyard chicken
Import substitution
Production facilities, slaughter and packing
Cassava
Export
Organic cassava
Disease free planting material
Cashew
Fresh fruit
Export
Export
Improved soil management
Post-harvest and processing
Post-harvest, treatment, packing etc
Processed fruit
Export
12/39
Processing
61.
Further studies of these value chains will be conducted under the Project Readiness Action Plan and early implementation to
confirm: (i) demand in export and/or domestic markets for these specific products, (ii) interest from traders to increase their
sourcing from smallholders’ POs (iii) genuine willingness of smallholders (including women and youth) to join formally registered
POs and to expand and improve their production to a commercial basis; (iv) Opportunities for competitive, profitable and
sustainable small-scale production via affordable investment pathways accessible to target groups, (v) Commodities and
smallholder-based production systems can be inclusive, viable, sustainable and competitive under current and future agro-
climatic conditions, by investing in climate smart practices, sustainable intensification and conservation agriculture models. In the
context of the post COVID-19 pandemic economic recovery, climate change and international markets volatility due to the on-
going conflict in Ukraine, further analysis of the opportunities and risks for interventions in each of these commodities is a
prerequisite.
62.
Additional value chains may be selected based on the following criteria: (1) strong potential for exports or import substitution; (2)
selected from amongst the 15 priority crops identified in the ADP; (3) high proportion of smallholder producers; (4) strong
potential to generate employment, particularly for women and youth; (4) zero deforestation. In order to align with institutional
priorities of EIB and EU, and because the rice value chain is very heavily supported by other development assistance projects,
ASPIRE-AT will not directly target the rice value chain.
d.    Geographical Scope
63.
ASPIRE-AT will be national in scope, meaning that in principle, eligible beneficiaries organised in producer organisations in the
targeted pro-poor value chains can qualify for support. Geographic targeting will be required primarily for intensive support to
capacity development of POs under Component 3 and will be based on the areas where production of the target commodities is
located. This geographic targeting of activities will follow IFAD best practice guidelines for pro-poor value chain development i.e.
to use a cluster approach, potentially grouping poorer areas with wealthier ones; to select value chains on the basis of the likely
benefits to poorer producers; and to allow for inclusion of rural populations with different levels of poverty[37]. Within this
approach, support will specifically target and prioritise poorer households as described under Component 1. To maximise
efficiency and impact, areas representing clusters of production activities in the target value chains will be prioritised for capacity
building support for producer organisations. In selecting these Pro-Poor Value Chain Areas, the following criteria will be
considered: (1) Potential for development of the pro-poor value chains; (2) access to markets; (3) presence of ASPIRE and AIMS
Business Clusters with relevant production activities; (4) Economic Poles targeted by SAAMBAT; (5) density and intensity of rural
poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition; (6) presence of IPs; (7) incidence of environmental degradation and climate vulnerability;
and (8) complementarity with the intervention areas of other development partners (identifying under-served areas as priority for
ASPIRE-AT).
64.
In the first year of project implementation, five Pro-Poor Value Chain Areas will be targeted and will include a substantial number
of existing POs that can move to investment-ready status quickly. Initial assessment is that these Pro-Poor Value Chain Areas
are likely to be in the following provinces: Battambang (all value chains except cashew); Kandal (vegetable and native chicken);
Preah Vihear (cashew and cassava); Siem Reap (vegetable and native chicken) and Takeo (vegetable and native chicken). Pro-
Poor Value Chain Areas may include parts of more than one Province. This selection will be confirmed through the mapping study
to be conducted under the Readiness Action Plan (see above). A further 11 Pro-Poor Value Chain Areas will be added in Year 2
and Year 3 of the project. Selection of a Pro-Poor Value Chain Area will be subject to a plan demonstrating potential to achieve
outreach to a minimum of 5,000 smallholders within two years. PDAFFs may propose Pro-Poor Value Chain Areas individually
or through cooperation with a neighbouring Province.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
a.   Overview
65.
ASPIRE-AT has three interlinked components: Component 1 will support investments in productive assets for the ACs and other
POs to improve their production/post-harvest/logistics capacities to meet both export and domestic market demand.
Component 2 will support the enabling environment to incentivize the private sector to access markets and catalyse their
business investments. Component 3 will support technical assistance to nurture, aggregate/graduate existing groups, including
the BCs supported by ASPIRE and AIMS, into registered ACs to engage with the private sector in remunerative market
opportunities facilitated under component 1 and 2. The assignment of activities and outputs to components is provisional and may
be revised at final design.
b.   Component 1: Productive and Resilient Assets for Producer Organisations
66.
The outcome of Component 1 will be Smallholders’ and PO’s Investments in productive assets have increased their productivity
and competitiveness in domestic and exports-based value chains.
67.
Rationale: To compete and profit from the growing number of market opportunities in high value and export markets,
smallholders need to collaborate with other like-minded smallholders in POs to be efficient and reliable partners to agri-
businesses along the supply chains.  They must be able to competitively produce the products required by their business
customers in the quantities and quality demanded and do so reliably and on time.  This requires coordination and business
planning (as supported under Component 3). It also requires investments in technologies, equipment and facilities on-farm and in
the POs that create the foundation for competitiveness against international competitors - whether against imports in the
domestic market or in export markets. Therefore, Component 1 will finance investments by POs and their members in durable
assets related to production, handling, processing and marketing of commodities in the targeted value chains.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
Most Component 1 investments will be in income-generating assets suitable for loan financing for which POs and their members
experience difficulty in accessing suitable financial products. Project interventions in sub-component 1.1 are designed to provide
suitable financial products in the short term but also contribute to increasing access of the beneficiaries to commercial loan
financing in the long term. Example of eligible investments include: i) for POs: collection centres, packing/grading facilities and
equipment, logistics and cold storage equipment, private irrigation/water management systems, digital-based precision
technologies, renewable energy technologies (RET), and ii) for smallholders: net houses, machinery, in-field water management
structure and equipment, RETs, chick hatchery incubators and facilities, farm drainage, and orchard development. Such
investments will also better enable smallholders and POs to meet products standards, including food safety, required by the
market. Investments by POs in joint ventures with agri-business partners will also be eligible.
13/39
Selection of all investments will be informed by a climate risk and vulnerability analysis, integration of adaptation measures into
their design specifications and promotion of climate resilient practices and technologies. Accessibility issues for persons with
disabilities will also be taken into consideration. Proposals from women, youth and IPs, and investments in time and labour-
saving technologies will be prioritised.
In addition to income generating investments, many POs lack access to public or community infrastructure of types that do not
readily generate cash income – needs include access roads to their sites, hard standings and loading areas for large trucks. This
is especially important for those POs dealing with large volumes of produce.  Well-established POs have existing infrastructure
for administrative offices, meeting premises and basic logistical functions – often as a result of previous grant funding – but newly
established POs lack these necessary facilities. These needs will be addressed under sub-component 1.2.
To be eligible for investment support under Component 1, ACs and other types of PO will have to achieve a set of graduation
criteria including: (i) measures of business and administrative capacity, (ii) strong partnership with private sector, and (iii) strong
governance and social inclusivity and social and environmental risk management. ACs and other types of PO achieving these
criteria are referred to as “graduated PO” below. A scorecard system will be used to track progress to achievement of graduated
PO status.
Each graduated PO, in consultation with its members will develop a Business Plan identifying the eligible investments to be
financed, including investments by PO members, by the PO and investments in enabling market infrastructure. Business Plans
will be subject to project approval according to pass/fail and prioritisation criteria including (1) commercial, financial and technical
viability; (2) investment readiness and management capacity of the POs; (3) strength of partnership arrangements including
technical support from agri-business partners to farmers and POs; (4) social inclusiveness (benefits to poor households,
opportunities for women and for youth etc.); and (5) environmental, climate and social risks (including accessibility).
Some existing POs already meet the eligibility criteria and have adequate Business Plans. These are likely to be the first POs
eligible for Component 1 financing in Year 1 of the project. Additional POs will be formed and / or strengthened to the required
level and assisted to prepare Business Plans under Component 3 (see below).
Sub-component 1.1: Investment in productive and resilient assets of POs and smallholders. The project will work with
ARDB to provide financial support to qualifying POs and smallholders with eligible investment proposals through the integration of
credit line and results-based grants.
The financing instrument will be a blend of loan and grant finance. The grant element will be implemented through a
‘compensating balance’ mechanism in which the grant will be deposited in a unique escrow account by ARDB and released to
the graduated PO or smallholder once the primary loan is fully repaid. If the borrower defaults on its loan, this deposit will be
retained by ARDB to offset its losses. In this arrangement the “blocked grant” acts as a partial guarantee to ARDB, reduces
collateral requirements, offers an additional incentive for client repayment, potentially leverages additional non-project financing
and encourages the accumulation of additional financial resources by the borrower that, in turn, help facilitate future investment
and loans. This arrangement reduces the possibility of moral hazard often seen in state sponsored guarantee systems, will be
simpler and more cost-effective to administer than a conventional matching grants scheme, may act as a bridge to non-
subsidised financing and does not require a separate grant appraisal. There is a strong synergy with the Non-Sovereign
Operations (NSO) loan to AMK which, as a commercial financial institution, for which farmers and POs completing the scheme
will become more attractive clients.
ARDB have indicated that the blocked grant could be accepted as collateral for loan finance up to two times the grant amount
(USD  1 of blocked grant collateralises USD 2 of loan). In addition, assets purchased with the loan are accepted as collateral up
to 50% of the asset book value. Therefore, a blocked grant of 25% of the loan amount, together with the asset, would be sufficient
collateral for 100% of the asset cost. A blocked grant of 35% would be adequate to collateralise up to 120% of the asset cost,
allowing the possibility to finance a working capital loan from ARDB resources in addition (see below).
Eligible investments by smallholders must be (1) of a type identified in the graduated PO’s Business Plan; (2) related to
production of the targeted value chain commodity or to value chain enterprises of individual farmers; (3) financing for investment
cost of physical assets with useful life longer than 1 year; (4) not included in a negative list based on social and environmental
safeguards and (5) not for land purchase. Loans for working capital will not be financed from the project line of credit but may be
financed from ARDB resources using the blocked grant and asset as collateral. Alternatively, farmers requiring working capital
may be assisted to apply for loan financing from other financial institutions.
Eligible farmers will be members of the graduated PO, engaged or intending to engage in a target value chain, and will be
smallholder farmers within the definition applied by the Agriculture Census of Cambodia. These farmers will be eligible for a
blended loan and grant financing package (see above) with maximum 25% grant element. For farmers meeting specific project
priority criteria (women and young farmers, farmers with ID-Poor card, farmers with disabilities, IPs) the maximum grant element
will be 35% of the financing package. Specific types of “green” investment, for example the RET technologies promoted by
CREA, will also be eligible for 35% grant financing based on a “green list” to be included in the PIM and therefore approved by
IFAD and EIB. In all cases, the maximum grant amount available to an individual farmer over the project life will be USD
1,000.00[38].
14/39
Members of graduated POs who do not qualify (because they are not smallholders) or who want to borrow amounts in excess of
the amount that can be financed from ASPIRE-AT funds, may nevertheless be assisted by the service provider hired under
Component 3 to prepare loan applications for non-ASPIRE-AT financed loans from ARDB and / or loans from other financial
institutions, thus integrating ASPIRE-AT smallholders into the commercial finance system.
Eligible Investments by graduated POs must be(1) identified in the graduated PO’s Business Plan; (2) related to enterprises or
cash-generating activities of the graduated POs in the targeted value chains; (3) contribute to a partnership with one or more
identified private sector partners of the graduated PO; (4) physical assets with useful life longer than 1 year; (5) not included in a
negative list based on social and environmental safeguards and (6) not be for land purchases. POs may include items such as
computers and software for PO administrative and management purposes in the investment package, provided that overall
financial viability is maintained. Loans for working capital will not be financed from the project line of credit but may be financed
from ARDB resources using the blocked grant and asset as collateral. Alternatively, graduated POs requiring working capital may
be assisted to apply for loan financing from other financial institutions.
ASPIRE-AT financing for investment by graduated POs will be through a blend of loans and grants (see above). The maximum
available grant element will be determined by the number of smallholder farmers (within the definition applied by the Agriculture
Census of Cambodia) members of the graduated PO who are expected to benefit from the investment, based on a maximum
grant amount of USD 150 per benefiting smallholder over the project life and maximum 40% of the loan plus grant package[39].
ARDB will conduct screening and due diligence  of loan applications by checking and, where necessary, verifying information
submitted on the loan application form. Screening criteria will include (1) economic and financial viability of the investment; (2)
eligibility of the investment based on project criteria; (3) eligibility of the borrower based on project criteria; and (4) compliance
with environmental and social safeguards. The necessity to screen against project criteria will result in additional costs to ARDB
above the cost of normal due diligence procedures. These additional costs will initially be supported by the project, with the
option to move to a system in which the screening costs are recovered from the borrower once project systems are well
established (e.g. at MTR).
Graduated POs will be responsible to conduct a simple community procurement process, to be defined in the PIM, to identify
preferred suppliers for goods and works for PO investments and for individual farmer investments. Graduated POs and farmers
will submit purchase orders to ARDB which will transfer the funds directly to the supplier in most instances. Individual farmers will
have the option to identify an alternative supplier based on at least equivalent value for money.
One technical adviser will be recruited by ARDB and paid from project funds for the duration of the project. The roles of the
technical adviser will be to (1) coordinate and support ARDB implementation, monitoring and reporting of project activities with a
particular focus on loan portfolio M&E; and (2) to assist ARDB to strengthen its understanding of the target value chains.
Additional resources for short-term technical assistance will be available if needed. Ultimately this may lead to development of
value-chain financing products collateralised by cash-flows rather than assets.
Sub-component 1.2: Enabling market infrastructure for Producer Organisations will finance physical infrastructure assets
that will be owned, operated and maintained by the POs that are important for achieving competitiveness and sustainability but
which cannot easily generate revenue and the costs of which cannot otherwise be met by the PO.
Financing under sub-component 1.2 will only be available to POs that have not benefited from grant-financed infrastructure
investments previously. Therefore, the beneficiary POs will primarily be POs formed by aggregation and graduation of Business
Clusters under Component 3.
Eligible investments must be (1) identified in the graduated PO’s Business Plan; (2) related to production, handling, processing,
storage or marketing of commodities in the targeted value chains; (3) buildings and / or fixed physical infrastructure only (not
electrical or mechanical equipment except as part of a building); not cash-generating (although buildings to house cash-
generating enterprises financed under Sub-Component 1.1 can qualify); (4) not included in a negative list based on social and
environmental safeguards; (5) not for land purchases; and (6) supported by a clear commitment of funds for operation and
maintenance by the graduated PO. Land required for the infrastructure will be considered as a contribution-in-kind by the
graduated POs. Examples of eligible investments include: (1) access roads; (2) loading areas; (3) collection and handling
facilities; (4) water distribution infrastructure (e.g. linking public irrigation canals to farms) and (5) multi-purpose buildings for the
PO. For some investments, the PO will be required to finance complementary expenditures (e.g. mechanical equipment) using
loans under Sub-Component 1.1.
The maximum amount of financing to each graduated PO will be calculated based on the number of smallholder farmers (within
the definition applied by the Agriculture Census of Cambodia) members of the graduated PO who are expected to benefit from
the investment, with a maximum amount of USD 400[40] per benefiting smallholder.
Graduated POs will submit applications to ASPIRE Secretariat through PDAFF. ASPIRE Secretariat will conduct a feasibility
assessment, prepare design, cost estimate and tender documents, and will tender for construction of the infrastructure through
the project procurement plan.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
Expected Results: Component 1 is expected to benefit around 100,000 distinct smallholder households, including:
Sub-Component 1.1. will finance loans and grants to around 300 POs with 60,000 members, plus direct investments by
around 10,000 smallholders. It is assumed that about 60% of the smallholder borrowers will also be beneficiaries of PO
investments.
Sub-Component 1.2 will finance around 300 infrastructure installations linked to POs/ACs or UACs with around 60,000
members, of which 40% are assumed to also have PO-level financing under Component 1.1 and 60% (36,000 households)
are additional to Component 1.1.
Key performance indicators will include increased returns to farm labour, creation of wage employment and profitability of
POs.
15/39
c.    Component 2: Business Partnership and Market Access
91.
92.
93.
94.
The outcome of Component 2 will be Business Partnerships and investments in trade infrastructure have increased market
access and rural employment. The component will support public and private investment to increase the number and
competitiveness of agri-businesses operating in priority value chains and the associated enabling public goods and services to
support competitive export growth.
Rationale: Cambodia has a small but growing number of successful agri-businesses serving both domestic and export markets
but growth of the sector (beyond the rice value chain) needs more capable, experienced and well-capitalized firms and an
associated enabling environment of public infrastructure and services critical to support the development of internationally
competitive Cambodian supply chains in priority sectors.
Sub-Component 2.1 Strengthening private investment for agricultural market and trade development will facilitate private
investment in modern agribusinesses to increase export trade and import substitution in priority products as well as investment in
associated service businesses. The sub-component has two major elements: i) Investment-oriented technical support to agri-
businesses to plan and deliver successful upgrading investments for their businesses, ii) Agri-business investment financing via a
wholesale line of credit to SME Bank to provide access to affordable investment finance in collaboration with the existing credit
guarantee schemes of Cambodia Credit Guarantee Corporation (CCGC) to reduce collateral requirements for investors. It is
noted that it is not currently envisaged to provide investment grants to businesses.
Supported businesses must meet eligibility criteria including: i) actively seeking to expand their business activities in one of the
priority value chains, ii) have a proven business track record in the priority VC or a comparable business, iii) committed to
increase sourcing of products from smallholders and POs in the provinces in which the programme is supporting such VCs, iv)
willing to share costs of technical support (if such support required from the programme), v) legally registered to conduct the
planned business activities. Priority will be given to those businesses in each priority value chain that can credibly demonstrate i)
the greatest potential impact, measured as the greatest increase in revenue to smallholders and / or increase in employment
opportunities for rural people resulting from their planned investments per USD 1 of project support required ii) greatest impact
on priority groups including women, youth, ethnic minorities and the disabled, and iii) those introducing innovative technologies or
business practices, especially addressing climate change related mitigation or adaptation issues. During the implementation,
there will be a mapping exercise and awareness raising to mobilize the SME to participate in the project.
95.
Investment-oriented technical support to agri-businesses is expected to work with around 40 growth-oriented agri-businesses
and will be provided on a cost sharing basis with the participating agri-businesses. Within priority value chains, such technical
support will include:
Market exposure and trade promotion to meet potential customers in target international markets and understand the specific
market requirements, dynamics and competition.
Bespoke technical investment advice to businesses on issues including specific modern technologies and equipment,
operational processes, supplier management systems, business planning and cash flow management, product standards and
certification requirements and compliance for market access (including. sanitary and phyto-sanitary, MRL, food safety).
Facilitation of links to centres of industry-leading international knowledge and expertise, including through knowledge
exchange visits, training and technical support for groups of agri-businesses in each priority value chain. The objective is to
establish systematic linkages at the industry level to recognized leading centres of expertise that can support industry
competitiveness now and into the future.
96.
97.
98.
99.
Participating businesses will also be actively supported to establish improved trading relationships with networks of producers
and POs, including those supported by ASPIRE-AT and other similar collaborating programmes (e.g. AIMS) in coordination with
Component 3.
Agribusiness investment financing will be provided via a wholesale line of credit to SME Bank for on-lending to partner financial
institutions. The line of credit will focus on medium term capital investment loans, equipment leasing and other financing for
investments in the range of USD 0.5 million – USD 5 million for expansion or upgrading of existing businesses and start-ups of
the SME who met the criteria indicated in the para 139.  The line of credit will complement SME Bank’s existing SME loan co-
financing which has up to USD 1.0 million loan size (including a 50% co-finance by SME Bank). Individual loan appraisal shall be
by the retail partner financial institutions of SME Bank, as is currently practiced. Execution of the business investments, including
procurement, will be by the agri-business themselves. 
Collateral requirements for supported agribusinesses are anticipated to be substantially reduced through access of the PFIs to
the existing CCGC Co-financing Guarantee Scheme (SME bank Model) and Women Entrepreneurs Guarantee Scheme which
provide up to 80% loan guarantees and hence substantially reduce any remaining guarantee requirements on the investors. As
such, the programme does not envisage additional measures to further reduce guarantee requirements on investors.
Implementation of investment-oriented technical support will be led by a small team of experienced agri-business investment and
trade development specialists contracted by the Secretariat. Bespoke technical investment advice will require specialist industry
specific expertise for each value chain and will be contracted in as required to compliment the expertise of the team in the
Secretariat.  This agri-business investment team will collaborate with other institutions active in similar areas including Khmer
Enterprise, EuroCham and others to identify potential participating business and delivery complementary support.
100.
Implementation of the line of credit will be by SME Bank, supervised on behalf of the programme by ASPIRE Secretariat who will
recruit one finance and investment specialist. The investment specialist will coordinate the relationship with SME Bank, CCGC
and other collaborating financial institutions under the SME Bank wholesale scheme. This specialist will also coordinate the
relationship with ARDB under the arrangements in Component 1.
16/39
101.
Project will provide the support to build the capacity of the SME bank and its PFI partners on the screening process of
environmental, social and climate following IFAD SECAP guideline for subprojects.
102.
Sub-Component 2.2 Strengthening the enabling environment for competitive agricultural value chains and trade will
upgrade critical public services and associated infrastructure to enable competitive export growth, with a focus on export-oriented
plant health and quarantine services. Investments will include upgrading of physical infrastructure and equipment as well as
capacity strengthening of the institutions and staff required to operate the upgraded services. The sub-component will also
support a review of policies and regulations affecting the priority sectors and proposals for adjustment to strengthen
competitiveness. This policy review will include a clear gender focus.
103.
Supported public services and infrastructure will meet the following criteria which will be assessed in a feasibility study conducted
by expert consultants. Compliance with these criteria will be required for approval of EIB financing which will be required for each
investment (sub-project) under EIB’s framework loan operating modality:
Demonstrable link to enabling inclusive export growth in priority value chains, in one of the following aspects: i) establishing or
maintaining market access, ii) delivery efficient export sanitary/phyo-sanitary and quarantine service, iii) sustaining
competitiveness within agreed market access frameworks via identification/promotion of current best practice for plant health
and post-harvest management. This will include demonstrating high levels of confirmed interest from farmers and/or firms for
the planned upgraded service.
Institutional management plan in place covering, a) financing plan, showing expected costs and sources of financing for the
ongoing operation and maintenance or all related infrastructure and services, b) human resource plan for the ongoing delivery
of the planned service in response to industry needs; and c) operational plan, setting out setting out main required systems
and process that will be used in the operation of the planned infrastructure or services.
Economic viability. Sub-projects need to demonstrate they are economically sound and viable.
104.
Based on an initial assessment against the above criteria, priority public services and infrastructure to be supported with
investment in infrastructure and capacity strengthening include:
Post-Harvest Reference Centre (x1) to support export protocol negotiation for priority products and to conduct scientific trials
for optimal post-harvest handling and treatment. Project support is expected to also cover technical assistance in negotiation
of competitive export protocols and agreements with partner countries to create opportunities. Funding for such TA may
include support from the China-IFAD South-South and Triangular Cooperation Facility for negotiation of trade protocols for
priority commodities for the China market and elsewhere; Post-Harvest Reference Centre is a single national facility that will
provide the technical and scientific evidence to support negotiation of improved SPS protocols for market access into various
markets, for example China, EU, USA, Japan, Korea, Australia etc. The Centre will cover all priority export products at any
given point in time. These include the priority products already identified for initial ASPIRE-AT support. The equipment and
facilities required are common across many products, including for the identification of pest lists and conducting the necessary
treatments trials to provide evidence of the efficacy of proposed treatments or control measures for the identified pests of
concern.
Export Quarantine Inspection Offices(up to 5) to deliver mandatory pre-export quarantine inspection and related services
to exporters. Support to include development of suitable ICT tools to enable efficient operation of such services, including
development of an “e-pyhto” system for issuance of secure digital phytosanitary certificates inline with the guidelines of the
International Plant Protection Convention. The implementation of the digital solution will be directly managed by MAFF’s
General Directorate of Agriculture (GDA). Export Quarantine Inspection Offices are a network of five small offices distributed
around the country to provide national coverage for the national quarantine inspection service. Inspectors from the service
predominantly conduct inspection visits on-site in the export businesses in the regions they cover. They serve all exporters
requiring pre-export quarantine inspection/certificates, including those commodities supported by ASPIRE-AT as well as other
products. The new Inspection Offices will provide a stronger regional basis for the Inspection Service to operate from so they
can provide more responsive and efficient service to all exporters. The location of the five offices is expected to reflect the
location of various production centres around the country, enabling inspectors to be within 2-3 hours travel of almost all
exporters. The production zones for various export crops and locations of a majority of current exporters is already well
documented and hence the location of the Offices can be readily determined and not subject to ASPIRE-AT selection of
specific cluster that it will support as all supported clusters and businesses will be within the service area of one of the new
Offices.
Plant Health Reference Laboratory (x1) to support producers and exporters in the priority VC to maintain competitiveness
while complying with SPS/market access requirements. The Reference Lab specifically provides rapid and accurate diagnosis
of pests and diseases, recording and maintaining data on pest occurrences, and detecting and tracking new and invasive
pests. It will also be primary point of connection to identify relevant “best in class” international knowledge of suitable pest and
disease management approaches for priority products and work with research stations to guide the testing and adaption of
these to Cambodia industry needs such as bio-control of pests in fruit/nut orchards. Plant Health Reference Laboratory is a
single national-level facility that will serve all priority export crops, including those supported by ASPIRE-AT. It will be a sister
institution for the Post-Harvest Centre above, focusing on plant heath.  It will provide rapid and accurate diagnosis of pests and
diseases, recording and maintaining data on pest occurrences, and detecting and tracking new and invasive pests as well as
pest management and control practices for pests of concern. The equipment and facilities required in the lab are common
across many products. As such establishment of the lab is not dependent on ASPIRE-AT’s selection of specific cluster, as the
value chains they are part of have already been identified and will be served by the lab.
Plant Health Research Stations (up to 3) will work closely with the Plant Health Reference Lab focusing on specific priority
17/39
value chains (e.g. fruit, nuts) to support industry competitiveness of priority crops. They will be regional and focus on priority
commodities relevant to their region not already served by other plant health research. Initial focus includes fruit/nut tree crops
and horticulture where there are known gaps, such as low-chemical pest control in cashew/fruit orchards using biological
agents. Plant Heath Research Station. The intention of MAFF is that each of the three stations is located in a different agro-
ecological zone and focuses on the crops of greatest relevance to that zone. For example, one would be located in an upland
are covering upland field crops as well as tree crops suited to those conditions (e.g. cashew). As priority export crops, all
products priorities by ASPIRE-AT will be covered by one or more of the research stations. The stations will then identify and
document emerging plant health issues and good management practices that will be disseminated to growers through multiple
channels – including via PDAFs and on to public and pluralistic extension services in each province as well as national
extension centre of MAFF. As such, the establishment of the stations does not appear to be dependent on the selection of
specific production clusters.
105.
For financial sustainability, it is noted that service fee income generated by current related services such as export inspection
service reached USD 1.8 million in 2021 (vs 2020: USD 1.1 million) of which 68% can be retained by MAFF under Inter-
Ministerial Proclamation No. 836 SHV (2019) and the Law on Plant Protection and Quarantine. Such fee income increases with
export growth, which should enable to sustain the operation of the facility in the para 148 and the upgraded services to be further
expanded to meet demand without increasing cost to public sector budgets.
106.
Implementation arrangements will include technical leadership of the sub-component by the Department for Plant Protection,
Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary (DPPSP) of GDA with procurement managed by the ASPIRE-AT Secretariat. 
107.
Expected Results: Investment oriented technical support is expected to benefit around 40 agri-businesses across at least five
value chains.
108.
Financing for investment by agri-business is expected to benefit around 15 businesses with around 30,000 smallholders in their
supply networks ultimately benefiting from greater demand and access to premium and high value markets.
109.
The investments in upgrading the public services for export and trade facilitation will benefit all current and future smallholders
and agri-businesses serving export markets.
110.
Key performance indicators will be: i) increased value of products purchased by supported agri-businesses from POs in the focus
locations of the project ii) increased value and range of exports, iii) successful repayment of investment loans iv) client
satisfaction level with supported public services v) number and quality of market access agreements supported and successfully
concluded.
d.   Component 3: Aggregating Farmers and integrate them into Value Chains
111.
The Outcome of Component 3 will be Increased capacity of producer organisations has enabled smallholders to meet market
requirements for quality and scale”. Component 3 will support POs to organise themselves to improve their business relationships
with value chains actors.
112.
Rationale: Farming remains a highly risky activity, impacted by extreme weather events in a changing climate (drought, floods,
heat waves), pest and disease outbreaks (cassava, banana, livestock), rural migration, and fluctuating market prices. Resilient
farming businesses need support to mitigate risks through diversifying away from low value commodities and transition towards
premium products. Value addition through post-harvest and processing operation also provide more diversified income, generate
revenue and contribute to sustainable economic growth in the agricultural sector.
113.
By organizing in POs, smallholders are able to achieve scale, share some risks, access services suitable for their needs and
strengthen their voice in negotiation of contracts and terms of trade with agri-business partners. Well designed POs can ensure
social inclusion and may especially benefit to poorer households that are not able to produce effectively for the market alone.
ASPIRE-AT will build on the achievements of AIMS and ASPIRE to assist the BC to graduate to the next level by formalising as
ACs or other types of PO with legal entity status and larger scale, able to provide a wider range of services and to become
attractive partners to larger agri-businesses.
114.
Component 3 will support the aggregation role of POs, either formal or informal economic entities. In the case of vegetables for
example, POs can organise a large number of farmers to produce in a coordinated manner through synchronised cropping
calendars to ensure a regular supply of the produce needed by buyers throughout the year. The POs at the aggregation level can
also help ensure consistent quality of produce by providing advice to farmers and ensure that produces meet with the level of
quality and safety expected by the market, either through formal certification (e.g. GAP) or through a trust-based relation
between buyers and the PO. Component 3 will build the capacity of smallholders and their POs to be take full benefit of
Components 1 and 2.
115.
Building on existing formal and informal POs, such as the 4,400 business clusters (BC) with total 165,000 members supported by
ASPIRE and AIMS, interventions under component 3 are expected to result in around 500 formally registered POs able to fulfil
critical functions such as sustainable production and aggregation of safe, quality agricultural products, post-harvest, and/or
processing. Total membership of these POs will be about 100,000. About 300 of these POs will be newly registered ACs based
on the BCs. This component also aims at strengthening POs capacity to deliver services to their members including technical
advice for improved production, certification, financial and business literacy, as well as access to finance and reliable and
remunerative markets.
116.
ACs will have the option to combine as UAC based on specific commodities. UAC formation and strengthening will be supported,
conditional on clear needs, rationale and sustainability pathway that emerge from the ACs themselves. The 12 existing UAC can
receive support from Component 3 where this is expected to lead to a significant investment under Component 1. It is envisaged
that there could be 35 functional UAC at the end of ASPIRE-AT, with on average 25 AC per UAC. These UAC, supported by the
entrepreneur advisers, will have a role in brokering business support services to ACs and their members.
18/39
117.
Sub-Component 3.1Structure and Capacity of Producer Organisations will assist POs to structure themselves in formal
organisations and to increase their capacity in the following key functions: 
Business management and planning (including preparing business plans for support under Component 1), commercial
negotiations and relationship management, investment and financial planning, operational management, contract fulfilment
and brand development;
Engage in business relationships with agri-businesses (buyers, traders, processors, exporters) that will be supported under
component 2;
Aggregation of agricultural products that are: safe (including traceability in key value chains such as vegetables and others
based on agribusiness partner needs), and fulfil market demand in quality and quantity;
Provide services to their members, including technical advice and farm business management;
Add value to agricultural products through post-harvest, processing, packaging and storage facilities.
Sell products on domestic market and to agri-business supplying export markets;
Adopt and promote to their members new technologies including ICT enabled services, especially those supported under other
ongoing/completed IFAD projects;
Develop/customise and promote the use of MIS for administrative and financial management of /POs;
Strengthen women’s voice and leadership within the POs, including meeting quotas for women’s representation, awareness
raising and leadership skills training for women and incorporating elements of the Gender Action Learning System (“GALS-
lite”) in the business skills trainings;
Strengthen administration, governance, inclusiveness (especially in terms of ID-Poor, women, youth and people form IPs),
and Social, Environmental and Climate risk management.
118.
Formalisation of POs will be facilitated by Provincial Departments of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (PDAFFs). In most
cases, this will mean registration of the PO as an Agricultural Cooperative (AC) which is the mandated responsibility of the
PDAFF.
119.
Capacity development activities will be implemented by specialised service providers with a track record in support to POs.
These service providers will be contracted by ASPIRE Secretariat but will work in close cooperation with PDAFFs in the Pro-Poor
Value Chain Areas they are assigned responsibility for. One service provider will be recruited early in the project with the dual
role of (1) supporting capacity development of POs in the initial five Pro-Poor Value Chain Areas in Year 1; and (2) further
developing procedures and working methods as a basis for recruiting up to four additional service providers based either on
cluster areas or on specific value chains, from Year 2 onwards.
120.
Support to POs will scale down with the aim that graduated PO should be self-sustaining by the end of the project.
121.
The first step in implementation of Sub-Component 3.1 will be identification of Pro-Poor Value Chain Areas based on mapping of
existing ACs and POs (including BCs supported by ASPIRE and AIMS) active in the target value chains. Mapping of BCs will be
conducted under the Readiness Action Plan with support from ASPIRE. Data on registered ACs will be obtained from the study
recently completed by Centre for Policy Studies (CPS). Mapping will be updated later if needed (e.g. if more value chains are
added). Parameters to be mapped will include:
Relevant value chain activities of each PO;
Registration status of PO;
Membership data (total membership; number of members who are smallholders; number of women and youth members,
number of ID-Poor, IP and persons with disabilities members etc);
For small or informal PO, voluntary willingness of members to become members of a formally registered AC (or other type)
with minimum 200 members;
Marketing arrangements of the PO (e.g. contract farming, informal agreements);
Governance arrangements, including representation of women and other target groups;
Willingness to upgrade governance if needed, including adopting gender-transformative principles.
122.
Based on the mapping, the project will prepare a Pro-Poor Value Chain Area work plan identifying number of PO to be supported,
number of new AC to be formed based on the existing PO; number of existing AC to be strengthened; priority technical approach.
Pro-Poor Value Chain Area work plans will also identify additional targeting parameters: (1) Economic Poles supported by
SAAMBAT; (2) Density and intensity of rural poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition, based on available national data sets; (3)
incidence of environmental degradation and climate vulnerability, based on available national data sets; and (4) complementarity
with the intervention areas of other development partners. Geographic targeting of ASPIRE-AT interventions will be finalised by
ASPIRE Secretariat based on prioritisation of these work plans.
123.
The second step in the process will be initial baseline assessment (maturity score card system along targeted performance for
“graduated PO” as well as identification of main challenges and opportunities in terms of agricultural activities) and registration of
AC (and, potentially, other types of PO). PDAFFs will conduct AC registration and basic training in AC law, regulation and
governance, under an output-based contract with ASPIRE Secretariat. GDA - Department of Agricultural Cooperatives Promotion
(DACP) will provide backstopping support. DACP will also be responsible for formal registration of UAC, beginning in Year 2 of
the project (in Year 1, the project will work with existing UAC but will not form new UAC).
124.
Following registration and initial maturity assessment of the POs, the Service Providers will provide a tailored package of capacity
development support to enable the POs to achieve graduation status and prepare business plans eligible for investment under
Component 1. Existing AC may be at or near this status already (and may have existing business plans) while newly formed AC
are likely to need a more extensive package of support. Capacity development packages will address the following areas:
19/39
Governance functions (membership, committees, bylaws etc);
Women’s representation, including leadership skills training for women leaders;
Recruitment and training of key staff;
Identify suitable MIS that can be customised (Existing Agritech/Fintech solutions) and provide support towards deployment
and maintenance procedures enabling record keeping, business management, accounting, internal audits and potentially e-
payments etc.;
Preparation of overall business models (what is PO value proposition and services, which revenue streams, which main cost
and tentative viability). Specific business plans will then be developed through a participatory process with particular regard to
the needs of poorer PO members, women, youth, IPs and people living with disabilities;
Digital literacy and awareness of a “menu” of digital services available to the PO and its members and facilitate onboarding of
solution providers especially around improved production, farm record keeping, climate smart technologies, marketing and
logistics, digital financial services among others; such digital services may also include simple digital tools to facilitate
cooperative relationship with members, including participatory planning and feedback system, members registry with baseline
data facilitating targeting and contact, WhatsApp group communication system etc; and
Environmental, social and climate risk management.
125.
The next step will be finalisation of the Business Plan and submission to ASPIRE Secretariat for approval (triggering eligibility to
apply for financing under Component 1). Business plans will include the following:
Priority value chain activities to be supported;
Market opportunities, including identification of partnerships with value chain agribusinesses and branding;
Technical assistance needs, and source of assistance;
Priority types of investment by farmers, with estimated number and cost;
Proposed income-generating investments by POs, with estimated cost;
Need for enabling market infrastructure, with estimated cost and sustainable O&M mechanisms;
Digital services that improve efficiency, effectiveness and transparency of proposed operations;
Total number of PO members benefiting from implementation of the Business Plan, with number of smallholders, women, IPs,
youth and persons with disabilities;
Measures for economic empowerment of women and creating opportunities for youth;
Estimated employment generated by implementation of the Business Plan;
Environment, climate and social risk management.
126.
On submission of the Business Plan, ASPIRE Secretariat will verify that the PO has achieved graduation status and that the
Business Plan is eligible for financing (subject to screening and due diligence checks by ARDB).
127.
The service provider will assist the PO to prepare a financing proposal (including separate financing requests for the PO and for
each farmer wishing to borrow to invest) and submit the proposal to ARDB.
128.
The service providers will provide further management coaching to the PO implementation of the Business Plan. The role of the
service providers will also include: (i) assistance to the PO and individual members to procure equipment in line and compliance
with the investment plan, (ii) monitoring of the Business Plan by the POs and individual members, (iii) Facilitation of the marketing
arrangements, (iv) assistance to the PO and individual members in managing the social, environmental and climate impacts in
line with the ESCMP.
129.
It is envisaged that for a newly registered AC, the service provider will provide capacity building and business planning support in
the first year of engagement followed by support to implementation of the Business Plan in the second year. The service provider
will continue to provide coaching support for two further years, so the length of engagement with the PO will be four years in
total, after which it is expected that the PO will be fully self-sustaining. For an existing registered AC, engagement of the service
provider would be for a two-year period.
130.
Sub-Component 3.1 will support one Agronomy and Post-Harvest specialist, one Producer Organisation specialist and a fund for
short-term technical inputs under management of ASPIRE Secretariat.
131.
Sub-Component 3.1 will also support Cooperative Facilitators (CF) in newly-formed ACs. The CFs will be recruited by the ACs
with priority for young people with good administrative, numeracy and computer skills. In the first year of employment the CFs will
be trained by the service providers and will be paid a small salary from the project. The AC will pay 50% of the CF salary in the
second year and 100% from year 3 onward.
132.
A pilot of customised MIS and accounting software for ACs will be conducted with up to 10 ACs that can demonstrate sufficient
capacity to make use of this service. ARDB will be consulted on the selection and customisation of the solution. Based on the
success of this pilot, further AC will be encouraged to include the deployment of the software in their loan financing proposals
under Sub-Component 1.1. Service costs of the software (including licence renewal and salaries of operators) will be the
responsibility of the AC.
133.
Sub-component 3.2 Technical Advice and Centers of Excellence will support establishment of Centers of Excellence (CoE)
for development and dissemination of improved agriculture techniques prioritized in key value chains partnership and activities
supported along component 1 and 2, including to respond to identified standards/GAP, specific quality requirements identified by
the value chain partners and key climate risks and environmental issues. The purpose of CoE is development, promotion and
demonstration of improved production and post-harvest technologies which may include (1) improved, pest and disease tolerant
and climate resilient cultivars responding as well to market requirements; (2) modern, environmental friendly and climate resilient
production techniques including Climate Smart Agriculture, integrated cropping systems etc.; (3) Integrated pest and disease
control techniques to manage such threats while mitigating environmental and health risks ; (4) enhanced crop planning and crop
calendars adapted to evolving climates; (5) integrated soil fertility management including use of bio-inputs and valorization of
animal waste; (6) farm machinery, including innovative energy-efficient models and women friendly/ drudgery reducing
machinery; (7) energy and water saving techniques; (8) post-harvest, processing and storage techniques; (9) early warning
systems; and (10) renewable energy technologies (RET). CoE should demonstrate a wide range of products adapted to targeted
beneficiaries (so looking at farmers scale and investment capacities, cost-benefit etc.) and value chain requirements. It shall
become a “neutral platform” to guide farmers’ investment choices and offer bankable options that can be financed by banks
(including through on farm investments in component 1). Female and young role models and those coming from ethnic minorities
will be promoted and if need be, specific models may emerge for them.
20/39
134.
Criteria for investment in CoE will include (1) well defined expected results in terms of adoption of new technology by Cambodian
farmers; (2) institutional plan including secured funding for operation and maintenance of the Centre; and (3) buy-in from several
private sector partners willing to co-invest, to demonstrate their products and to participate in operation of the Centre; and (4)
Climate resilience and environmental sustainability alongside SECAP safeguards / ESMP.
135.
It is envisaged that a pilot CoE will be developed at an existing site operated by GDA, with the Agriculture Research Station at
Banteay Daek in Kandal Province and the Conservation Agriculture Research for Development Center (CARDEC) at Bos Khnor
in Kampong Cham having been identified as candidates. Based on a successful pilot, CoE could be established at sub-national
level, most likely through partnerships between PDAFFs, UAC and the private sector.
136.
The CoE will also enable private providers of RET supported by GEF-funded CREA to demonstrate and promote their
technologies/ products in the center of excellence for farmers to try and purchase. Where possible, financial products will be
available for each of the RET technologies demonstrated to facilitate their uptake by POs’ members.
137.
Sub-Component 3.2 will link the CoE to lead farmers who act as input suppliers and last-mile service providers and will be
technical focal points for the AC/PO. Female, young and lead farmers from ethnic minorities will be prioritised. Adoption and
results of various agricultural innovations and practices will be carefully monitored and evaluated together with the partners
through relevant digital monitoring tools. Best innovations will be documented in in videos and practical replication technical
guidelines. It is expected that this will also inform standards / good agricultural practices
138.
Expected Results: By the end of the project there will be around 100,000 smallholder farmers enrolled in around 500 graduated
POs in the target value chains, with some of the ACs being further aggregated in UACs. Graduated POs will be self-sustaining,
profitable and able to mobilise investment finance from private and State financial service providers. The Graduated POs will be
inclusive, supportive of women’s economic empowerment and will generate employment opportunities for land-poor rural
households. Graduated POs will support adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and
practices.
E. Theory of Change
139.
A Theory of Change is presented graphically as Annex 2. The development problem, summarised from Section A, is that
smallholder farmers, the rural poor and disadvantaged groups (such as women, youth and IPs) risk being left behind by
Cambodia’s transition to a market economy and unable to adapt to climate change. Small farmers lack scale, productive assets
and knowledge needed to produce efficiently for the market and are not attractive partners for value chain businesses.
Underdeveloped value chains do not create enough decent jobs for land-poor households. The weak competitiveness of
Cambodian produce in export markets and key domestic markets and the low number of profitable agribusiness result in
insufficient investment in smallholder-based value chains. Women farmers and rural workers suffer additional disadvantages as
a result of gender norms, including excessive workload, lack of voice in decision-making and lack of access to and / or control
over resources. Climate-related losses reduce resources and increase risks of investments, further increasing the challenge of
adaptation.
140.
ASPIRE-AT will select pro-poor value chains based on the expected opportunities for the project target beneficiaries (including
smallholders and rural workers, and considering participation of women, youth and IPs) as well as confirmed market demand and
buyer interest. It will address market failures and gaps in service provision at all levels of the value chain, but with the key focus
being on assisting smallholder farmers to organise, aggregate and invest through highly effective POs and increase their climate
resilience and adaptive capacity.
141.
The key mechanism for raising the productivity of smallholder farmers and stimulating investment in value chains, leading to
increased incomes, employment generation and increased climate resilience, will be investments in productive assets under
Component 1 of the project supported by soft investments in improved and climate resilient agricultural practices. These
investments will potentially be at farm level, in PO-owned enterprises or in market infrastructure and will be available to POs that
have reached threshold levels of business capacity, partnership with agri-business and inclusivity criteria, and provide a positive
return to capital. Financing of investments will be designed to empower women and create opportunities for youth. All
investments will be climate-proofed and informed by climate smart principles.
142.
Component 2 will assist in catalyzing development of strong private sector agri-businesses and the enabling environment that is
a necessary complement to investments at the producer and PO level. Component 2 will increase the market size by expanding
export opportunities, support the services that are needed to meet export and domestic market requirements, and assist in rolling
out ICT-based services for farmers, POs and agri-businesses. Specific measures will increase opportunities for women and
young entrepreneurs. Investments that enhance climate resilience and result in adoption of climate-smart practices will be
prioritised.
143.
Component 3 will support farmers, particularly those already developing their skills in business clusters AIMS and ASPIRE, to
aggregate and form high-capacity POs, so increasing the pool of “graduated POs” able to finance and manage investments
(Component 1) and be attractive partners for agri-business (Component 2). In building capacity of POs, the project will address
gender norms and integrate measures to increase empowerment of women and will mainstream climate adaptation. Capacity
building will be complemented by specific investments in climate-smart technology, while the social capital formed in the POs will
enhance adaptive capacity.
21/39
144.
The change pathway assumes continued growth and structural transformation of Cambodia’s economy and potential to increase
competitiveness of Cambodian produce, particularly in premium markets where price is not the overriding factor. It is assumed
that farmers, POs and enterprises are willing to take investment risks to take advantage of the emerging opportunities given
access to appropriate financing and sufficient support. Climate-related risks will be mitigated by project support to adaptation
through the Centres of Excellence and through climate advisory services. It is also assumed that farmers understand the potential
benefits of organising in POs and are willing to invest the social effort required. It is assumed that investment in public-private-
cooperative partnership and improved practices along the agriculture value chains results in a diversified, productive and climate
resilient rural economy with decent job opportunities.
145.
Key distributional assumptions are that, by focusing on value chains with potential for smallholder production, a high proportion
of poorer and more vulnerable farmers can benefit. Working through POs will create opportunities to structure interventions so
that disadvantaged sections of the community, including women, youth and people from ethnic minorities, can benefit and
discriminatory social norms are addressed. Increased employment opportunities will inherently benefit people who are dependent
on wage income, which includes the poorest sections of rural society. Increased productivity and household incomes will further
enhance capacity for climate adaptation.
146.
The combined effect of the three components will be to ensure an inclusive, climate-adaptive and sustainable transition path for
Cambodia’s agriculture sector and rural society.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
a.   Alignment with SDGs
147.
ASPIRE-AT contributes to achievement of the SDG Outcomes identified in the COSOP 2022-27 Results Framework. The Project
Goal aligns with of SDG-1 (no poverty) by enabling poor households, and households that are vulnerable to falling back into
poverty, to gain secure, sustainable and climate-resilient incomes through market-linked smallholder farming and through decent
wage employment. In particular, ASPIRE-AT contributes to SDG 1.2 (reduce poverty by at least half) and SDG 1.5 (build the
resilience of the poor and vulnerable). ASPIRE-AT will also contribute to SDG-2 (zero hunger), specifically SDG-2.3 (double the
agriculture productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers).
148.
ASPIRE-AT will mainstream support for gender equality (SDG 5) and will contribute to SDG‑8 (inclusive and sustainable
economic growth, employment and decent work for all). ASPIRE-AT will contribute to climate action (SDG-13) strengthening
resilience and adaptive capacity to climate related disaster (SDG 13.1).
b.   Alignment with national priorities
149.
ASPIRE-AT aligns strongly with GoKC’s policy for the agriculture sector as outlined in Section A. In particular, GoKC has
indicated that design of ASPIRE-AT should align closely with the 3R strategy and with the ADP; and should contribute to inclusive
economic growth in the agriculture sector through increased exports of high-value commodities, as well as substituting for import
in important domestic value chains, particularly horticulture.
150.
Therefore, ASPIRE-AT will contribute to the four thematic areas of the ADP (i) Modernizing and commercializing the agriculture
value chain; (ii) Public and private investments in the agriculture sector; (iii) Growing sustainably and increasing resilience to
climate change; and (iv) Institutional reforms and cross-cutting issues. Alignment with specific strategies of the ADP is illustrated
in Table 3.
Table 3: Alignment of ASPIRE-AT with the Agricultural Development Policy
Theme
Strategy
ASPIRE-AT Alignment
(1) & (3): Increase productivity and value addition of crop and livestock
value chains
C1, C2, C3
(5): Smart technology in value chains
Centres of Excellence C3
1. Modernising and
commercializing the
agriculture value chain
(6): Digitisation and e-agriculture
ICT C3
(7): Increase market access for small and medium farmers
C1, C2, C3
2. Public and private
investments in the
agriculture sector
(3): Promote agricultural investment, credit and agri-business
22/39
facilitation
C1 and C2
(4): Agriculture sector finance
C1 and C2, working with ARDB,
SME Bank, AMK and others
(3): Promote agricultural land resource management
3. Growing sustainably
and increasing resilience
to climate change
(4): Strengthen climate resilience
C3
C3
(5): Sustainable food system
C2 Certification
(5) COVID-19 recovery and pandemic response strategy
C1, C2, C3
4. Institutional reforms
and cross-cutting issues
(6) Gender mainstreaming in value chain
C1, C2, C3
(7) Trade facilitation
C2
151.
In addition, ASPIRE-AT supports the specific priorities identified in Cambodia’s Roadmap for Food Systems for Sustainable
Development 2030 (Healthy Diets for All; Empowerment of youth, women and the vulnerable; Resilient livelihoods and resilient
food systems; and Governance for a more inclusive food system).
c.    Alignment with IFAD policies and corporate priorities
152.
The alignment of ASPIRE-AT with IFAD policies and corporate priorities has been described in Section C above. ASPIRE-AT
contributes to the Strategic Objectives (SO) of the COSOP 2022-27 which are closely aligned with IFAD’s global SO. ASPIRE-AT
supports development of pro-poor value chains using IFAD’s value chain targeting strategy designed to ensure benefits reach
the poor, based on IFAD’s worldwide experience and lessons learned in this area. ASPIRE-AT addresses IFAD key cross-cutting
concerns with gender equality, employment opportunities for rural youth, climate change adaptation and use of ICT in pro-poor
agriculture value chains.
d.   Country ownership
153.
Design of ASPIRE-AT was initiated based on a request from GoKC following the observed success of ongoing Cambodia country
portfolio projects, most particularly ASPIRE but also AIMS. Component 1 design responds to the request from MEF for a higher
proportion of IFAD finance to be used for creation of durable economic assets. Component 2 reflects specific requests from
MAFF for assistance in developing export trade infrastructure. The value of Component 3, building on the decentralised,
pluralistic extension-plus model of ASPIRE, was strongly emphasized by MAFF representatives during the mission wrap-up
meeting.
154.
ASPIRE-AT will be a high profile project, reflecting the overall project size which is large for an agriculture sector project in
Cambodia, and the involvement of EIB and EU as financing partners together with IFAD. As such, MEF have been strongly
involved in the development of the design and will provide strategic direction and oversight. MAFF contributed in detail to the
work of the design mission and indicated their strong commitment to the project, as was affirmed in a meeting with the Minister.
The project concept has been presented and discussed in the TWG-AW to enhance the design and ensure buy-in from GoKC
and its development partners. MAFF-GDA will play a leading role in technical direction, while project management will be
assigned to ASPIRE Secretariat which has demonstrated leadership and commitment in delivery of ASPIRE.
e.   Harmonization and partnerships
155.
A large number of stakeholders are engaged in agriculture sector development, rural finance and / or the pro-poor value chains
targeted by ASPIRE-AT. Some of these have direct roles in project implementation while others are potential partners for
coordination, strategy and policy development. A Stakeholder Analysis is presented as Annex 11.
156.
ASPIRE-AT will continue IFAD’s long-standing partnership with MAFF, which has delivered six major projects in the IFAD
portfolio since 2001. ASPIRE-AT will benefit from continuity with ASPIRE, while adopting a significantly changed approach
focused on priority value chains, as directed by GoKC.
157.
Delivery of ASPIRE-AT will require partnership with ARDB (which has previously partnered with IFAD on AIMS) and with SME
Bank which has not previously been engaged in IFAD projects. Dialogue and informal or semi-formal partnerships with agri-
businesses have been developed under ASPIRE and AIMS; ASPIRE-AT will build on this to establish more formal partnership
arrangements including with agritech and fintech providers.
158.
IFAD has an existing partnership with the private AMK financial institution which benefits from an IFAD NSO loan which is
designed to improve the eco-system for rural finance in Cambodia. The NSO loan will remain operationally separate from
ASPIRE-AT but will assist in creating the conditions needed for farmers, POs and SMEs to graduate from project financing to
borrowing in the commercial market based on capacity developed by the project. Separately, AMK intermediates credit from the
wholesale lending mechanism of SME Bank which will be used by ASPIRE-AT, therefore AMK is expected to be in a position to
access ASPIRE-AT financing through this route.
23/39
159.
Financing of ASPIRE-AT will be through a partnership with EIB and EU as well as GoKC; this is the same partnership financing
the ongoing SAAMBAT project, which is working well, and so ASPIRE-AT represents a deepening of this important relationship.
160.
ASPIRE-AT will continue and strengthen the partnership of IFAD with the Rome-Based Agencies FAO and WFP in Cambodia.
IFAD and FAO partner for sector policy development through their roles as co-facilitators of the TWG-AW. In ASPIRE-AT, FAO
will coordinate closely through its PEARL project which will also adopt a producer organisation financing approach. WFP has
developed expertise and resources in market price information systems which will extend benefits to ASPIRE-AT POs and
farmers.
161.
As emphasized by GoKC during the mission wrap-up, ASPIRE-AT will harmonise its approach to support to ACs and SMEs,
particularly credit and grant financing, with the approaches used by other major financing agencies in this sector which include
World Bank and ADB. Other agencies active in the field and with potential for partnership include AfD, USAID (which has a
partnership MOU with IFAD Cambodia), KfW, GIZ and SDC.
162.
IFAD has a long-standing partnership with two Cambodian farmer organisation representative agencies: Farmer and Nature Net
(FNN) and Cambodia Farmer Federation Association of Agricultural Producers (CFAP). The support to producer organisations
under ASPIRE-AT will benefit from this partnership. FNN and CFAP will participate in policy engagement around ASPIRE-AT,
including activities financed by the sector policy development facility financed by IFAD grant within SAAMBAT.
f.    Synergies with IFAD Country Projects
163.
IFAD’s country programme in Cambodia as defined by the COSOP takes a programmatic approach and emphasises synergies
between projects within the programme. Attention has been drawn to these synergies in the component descriptions. ASPIRE-AT
builds directly on the achievements of ASPIRE (ending in 2022) as well as AIMS which will continue in parallel with ASPIRE-AT
until 2025, particularly through aggregating the established grassroots Business Clusters into more formal producer
organisations. ASPIRE-AT will benefit from investments by SAAMBAT in value chain infrastructure (roads, markets etc.) and in
development of digital services for the agriculture sector (Khmer Agriculture Suite). ASPIRE-AT will create opportunities to
promote and scale out renewable energy technologies which will be supported through CRIA. There are significant synergies,
though not an operational connection, between ASPIRE-AT and the NSO loan to AMK. IFAD’s irrigation sector intervention,
CAISAR, is likely to create further opportunities for synergies with ASPIRE-AT, for example by investing in public irrigation
infrastructure which will supply the privately owned water management and distribution equipment invested in by ASPIRE-AT
farmers and POs.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
164.
The total project cost inclusive of taxes and duties amounts to USD 194.0 million over a seven-year implementation period. All
costs are estimated based on currently prevailing prices in Cambodia. Project costs by component are presented in Table 4.
Project costs by components including 15% price and physical contingencies are: USD 83.7 million for Component 1, (43 percent
of project costs) and USD 76.7 million for Component 2 (39 percent of project costs); USD 23.5 million for Component 3 (12
percent of project costs); and USD 10.1 million for Project management (5 percent of project cost).
165.
The IFAD loan funds from PBAS will finance USD 33.9 million[41] and IFAD BRAM will finance USD 14.0 million; the Government
of Cambodia will provide USD 19.2 million; European Investment Bank (EIB) will contribute USD 60.6 million; SSTC Grant will
provide USD 0.3 million; Partner Financial Institutions, USD 42.9 million; beneficiary contribution, USD 1.1 million; and SME
contribution, USD 2.2 million; and there is a funding gap of USD 20.0 million (10%). The total recurrent cost takes 5.3% of the
total project cost.
Table 4: Financing Plan by Component and Financier (000's USD)
24/39
Table 5: Financing Plan by Expenditure Categories and Financier (000's USD)
166.
The project component cost distributed by the project period is presented in Table 5. The 1st year takes 5% of the budget and the
7th year, 10% of the budget. By mid- term of the project in 2026 the budget has the allocation of 65% of the total project cost.
Table 6: Project Costs by Component and Year (000's USD).
25/39
167.
Funding for implementation of the ESCMF is included in the project budgets. The estimated costs are indicated in table 7. Costs
associated with the time of Project Management Unit Staff, including a Project Safeguards Officer, coordinating the
implementation of this ESCMF are not shown. Further detail is found in the budget of the Project Document.
Table 7: Tentative Breakdown of project level costs for ESCMF implementation
Item
Approximate Budget Cost (USD)
Social, Climate and Environment Specialist 
Mainstreamed in design report
RADB safeguard Specialist
Mainstreamed in design report
SME Safeguard process
45,000
External hire for safeguard preparation*
150,000
Travel expenses for consultations*
Capacity building/training expenses
25,000
40,000
Audio-visual & print production expenses
10,000
Total:
270,000
*Required if the project needs to prepare safeguard reports through service providers.
168.
As per the IFAD mainstreaming tracking template, the total amount of IFAD climate finance for this project is preliminarily
calculated as USD 13 million or 27% of IFAD total project cost. Under the subcomponent 1.1, 35% of the loan financing to
smallholders and POs (36.2% of subcomponent) is counted as climate financing. Based in the climate adaptation priority; 35% of
the credit flow in subcomponent 2.2 (21.2% of subcomponent) and 50% of the support to new and old POs under subcomponent
3.1 (41.2% of the subcomponent) are primarily calculated as climate financing.
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
169.
IFAD financing terms: IFAD shall provide USD 22.7 million on Highly Concessional terms, USD 11.2 million on Blend Lending
Terms from PBAS12, USD 14.0 million on Normal Lending Terms from BRAM. The details of lending terms can be found in
below link: https://www.ifad.org/en/financial-products-and-terms.
170.
IFAD is a leading agency in development assistance for the agriculture sector in Cambodia. The core start-up activities and
critical investments such as providing productive and resilient assets for Producer Organisations and initiating business
partnership and market access implemented mainly in the 1st and the 2nd years of the project are financed with IFAD PBAS
resources. The EIB, as the main co-financier will start providing funds from the first year onwards supporting start-up activities to
proceed further and to elevate to business undertaking. The Government co-finance has been committed as the second co-
financiers to finance all the project management activities including monitoring and evaluation and staff cost. With a financing gap
of USD 20 million, the project opens opportunity for IFAD and the Government of Cambodia to include additional resources to
already programmed and budgeted activities.
26/39
171.
The project will have significant amounts as annual disbursement targets, particularly in the second year of the project.
Experience from ASPIRE I in Cambodia shows the ability of projects to commit and allocate the annual amounts. However, IFAD
and the government will need to pay required attention to planning and strategizing the disbursement strategies from the 1st year
of the project as the largest amount of disbursement, almost 30% of the project budget, is expected in the second year of the
project.
c. Disbursement
172.
Except where explicitly stated otherwise, the following paragraphs relate to disbursement of IFAD funds only.
173.
The withdrawal and use of IFAD funds for ASPIRE-AT will be governed by the IFAD’s Project Financial Management & Financial
Control Handbook and Financing Agreement (FA) between IFAD and the GoKC. The procedures of disbursement, financial
reporting and maintenance of appropriate project records will be described in detail in the Project Financial Management and
Financial Control Arrangements Letter (FMFCL) subsequently after signing the FA. Three standard disbursement procedures are
available for IFAD financing:
Advance withdrawal
Direct payment
Reimbursement
174.
Designation letter for authorised signatory: Before disbursement can begin, IFAD must receive, a duly completed Authorised
User(s) Letter, from [the designated representative or a sufficiently senior delegated official], designating the name(s) of official(s)
authorised to approve Withdrawal Application(s) and Interim Financial Reports (IFR).
175.
The designated delegated officials will be authorised to undertake actions in the IFAD’s systems including the IFAD Client Portal
(ICP) commensurate to the respectively assigned roles, which shall include the electronic submission of documentation through
the ICP. Electronic submission of documentation must be performed in accordance with the Terms and Conditions as included in
FMFCL.   
176.
Interim Financial Reports (IFR):  IFRs are required both for reporting and disbursement purposes.  IFRs for reporting purposes
must be submitted in accordance with the frequency and submission deadlines detailed in the Project Financial Management and
Financial Control Arrangements Letter . When submitted as a component of Withdrawal Applications, IFRs must be submitted in
a form and quality acceptable to IFAD.
177.
Expenditure thresholds and supporting documentation. Each Withdrawal Application shall be submitted to IFAD in
accordance with the requirements set out in FMFCL.  Where deemed applicable by IFAD, expenditure thresholds (also referred
to as statement of expenditure thresholds or SOEs) may be determined at financing instrument, expense category and/or
contract levels.  Expenditure items or contracts that exceed the expenditure threshold/s, where applicable, must be accompanied
by copies of relevant supporting documentation.
178.
Designated Accounts and Project Accounts: Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) and the ASPIRE-AT Secretariat (MAFF)
shall open and maintain in the National Bank of Cambodia the following Bank Accounts: (i) One Designated Account in USD to
receive the IFAD Loans proceeds.
179.
MEF shall authorize the opening of the following USD Project Accounts for the IFAD Loan proceeds: One Project Accounts at the
ASPIRE Secretariat for IFAD loan; One Project Account for GoKC contribution; and two accounts at the ARDB and SME banks
respectively, to receive funds from the Designated Account(s) for Credit Line activities.
180.
Fund flow from  other financiers will flow to a separate DA/PA and be managed by the PMU.
181.
Retroactive financing: To facilitate the transition and continuity from ASPIRE to ASPIRE- AT, retroactive financing may be
applicable to project.  Provisions for retroactive financing are included in Section E of the FA. To be eligible for retroactive
financing, expenditures shall meet the criteria of reasonable cost of goods, works and services required for the project and shall
be procured in conformity with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines.
182.
Maximum amount that may be withdrawn for retroactive financing may be a specific amount for each category or a global
amount for two or more categories, preferably expressed in the loan denomination currency. This amount should normally not
exceed 10% of the financing.  Expenditures will only be eligible for retroactive financing and thus reimbursed to the
Borrower/Recipient after entry into force of the FA and satisfactory compliance with any conditions precedent to first withdrawal.
The date after which expenditures become eligible for retroactive financing should not be earlier than the project design date.
Since the legal documents specify that expenditures after this date are eligible, it is preferable to choose the last day of a month
as the ‘deadline’ date, particularly in cases where claims will be submitted on the basis of IFR.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
183.
The ASPIRE-AT project will directly reach an estimated 125,000 households. Out of these, 100,000 will be households who have
land, will become members of 500 graduated POs and will increase their farm incomes. An additional 25,000 households will
benefit from increased employment opportunities. In addition, 500 POs and 17 SMEs will also be supported. The EFA has
included 100,000 farmer producers who are members of POs and in addition 265 typical enterprises managed by the POs and
benefiting from project assistance, and 17 SMEs benefiting from project assistance. The financial benefits of the project are
derived from addressing market failures and gaps in service provision at all levels of the value chain that would assist smallholder
farmers to organise, aggregate and invest through highly effective producer organisations; financing investments in productive
assets; catalyzing development of strong private sector agri-businesses; and contributing to increase market sizes by expanding
export opportunities. The priority value chain that the project is supporting include vegetables, cassava, cashew, fruits and
poultry. The discount rate of 6% was used for the computation of financial profitability indicators which is the current lending rate
according to the National Bank of Cambodia, January 2022.
27/39
184.
Table 8 summarises the financial profitability of the farm enterprises of smallholder beneficiaries, enterprises managed by POs,
and SMEs. All enterprises are financially viable. The annual net return at full development (FD) was used to assess the
contribution of these enterprises in alleviating poverty. The farm model analysis, which is presented in Annex 4, indicated that all
models with combinations of these crops would generate an annual net income that is higher than the poverty level of USD 4,434
per household per year.
185.
The PO managed enterprises and all SMEs have a substantial level of net present values (6% financial discount rate for 20-year
period), incremental annual net revenues, positive return on investments (ROI) and encouraging financial internal rate of returns
(IRR).
Table 8: Results of the financial analysis of the typical enterprises representing each value chain
186.
The EFA analysis estimated that the enterprises included in the analysis contribute in generating an incremental total
employment of 29,934 persons. Also, according to the EFA, there is a demand of USD 110 million of loan to finance these
enterprises including farm activities.
187.
The EFA estimated the capacity of the farm models and all other enterprise models to repay the loans that the entrepreneurs
including smallholder farmers would wish to acquire. The estimation shows that almost all the models have a positive cash flow
from 2nd year onwards to support the livelihood or ensuring adequate profit in the case of POs after repayment of capital and the
interest of credit. The terms of the credit were assumed as 6% annual interest and 1-2 years repayment period. Other family
income sources such as wage labour etc have not been used for this analysis.
188.
The project beneficiaries typically maintain mix cropping systems. In order to demonstrate the impact of project assistance in
improving crops on the whole farm, a series of farm model analyses were carries out, which was based on the cluster approach
that the project is adopting to support value chains. On that basis as well as the type of crops representing main value chains, 8
farm models were derived. The estimation shows that all farm models will have annual net income at full development that is
above the poverty line. Annex 4 presents the details results of the analysis for all 8 farm models.
189.
The economic analysis of the whole project was carried out after taking required adjustments to the cash flows. The financial
prices of tradable, locally traded and non-tradable (commodities with near perfect competition) inputs and outputs of all enterprise
models were converted to economic prices using appropriate conversion factors (standard conversion factor of 1.1, derived using
border transactions, for tradable goods; 1 for locally traded goods and shadow wage rate factor of 0.91 for all wages). The SCF
was computed taking the ratio between Official Exchange Rate (OER)[42] and Estimated Shadow Exchange Rate (SER)[43]
[SCF=ER/SER]. EFA excel sheets presents details. For the economic analysis, the economic investment cost of the project is
based on the project cost net of financing for loans and grants during the 7-year implementation period generated by COSTAB
programme. It deducts the amounts payable for taxes and provisions for price contingencies from the financial costs.
28/39
190.
The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) is 32% and the economic benefit cost ratio is 1.46 with the economic discount rate
of 1.4%, which is Scheduled Banks Weighted Fixed Deposit Rate (National Bank of Cambodia, Jan 2022). The project earns an
Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) of USD 948 million (Riels 3,833 billion) for the 20-year period with 1.4% discount rate.
Table 8 presents the results together with the results of the sensitivity analyses.
191.
The risk factors that have been identified in the project Integrated Risk Matrix were used as the basis to rationalise the sensitivity
scenarios, presents the risk factors considered and the results of the sensitivity analyses. The project generates EIRRs that are
higher than the opportunity cost of capital under all sensitivity scenarios. The analyses indicate therefore that the enterprise
models and the overall ASPIRE-AT project are both financially and economically justifiable even under the adverse risky
environments. The EFA, however, shows that the highest drop in EIRR is seen in the scenario of 20% benefits decrease. This
alarms the project to monitor for cost escalations and keep adequate controls to maintain the cost as estimated.
Table 9: Results of the Economic Analysis and the Sensitivity Analyses
Sensitivity Analyses
EIRR
B/C Ratio
NPV (USD
mn)
NPV (Riels
Billion)
Risk Factor
Base Case
32%
1.42
525
2,125
With Funding Gap risk
28%
1.38
347
1,404
Only 66% of the Grant dependent
enterprises are included as 34% of grants
would be financed by the Funding Gap
All cost increase by 10%
26%
1.29
All cost increase by 20%
20%
1.18
399
273
1,614
1,104
Public sector investments financed by the
project not sustainable because of lack of
institutional plans
All benefits decrease by 10% 25%
1.27
347
1,402
All benefits decrease by 20% 17%
1.13
168
679
Agriculture sector severely impacted by
macroeconomic instability
Project vulnerability to environmental
conditions
Cost increase by 10% and
benefits decrease by 10%
19%
1.16
220
892
Financing instruments are not attractive for
partner financial institutions to deliver
1 year delay in getting benefits 19%
1.34
344
1,390
Private agribusiness unwilling to invest
because of governance concerns
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
192.
The sustainability of benefits is assured through careful appraisal of investments including committed funding for operation and
maintenance of both public and private assets. The project strategy is to build the capacity of the farmer organizations, financial
institutions, and the brokering the business partnerships between key actors in the value chains. This strategy will ensure the
sustainability of activities after the project ends.
193.
ASPIRE-AT interventions are expected to result in a self-sustaining eco-system including capable market-linked smallholder
farmers and producer organisations partnering with agri-businesses with the market knowledge and technical skills to take
advantage of expanding opportunities in export and domestic value chains, financed by public and private financial institutions
offering appropriate products and an environment including efficient public services with adequate operating budgets. Annex 10
describes the pathway to achieving these sustainability conditions.
194.
Benefits to the key target groups of market linked smallholders and rural workers will be sustained based on inclusive growth of
the agriculture economy. Smallholders, producer organisations (POs) and agri-business will have increased incentive and ability
to invest, further increasing employment. Climate change and environmental degradation are potential threats to sustainability
and these issues will be mainstreamed in the selection and design of project investments and prioritization of value chains so as
to achieve resilience and environmental sustainability. In addition, dedicated investments are foreseen in component 3 to support
identification and dissemination of more climate resilient practices, adoption of quality environmental safeguards and adopt
relevant climate advisory.
29/39
195.
By the end of the project, producer organisations (ACs and UACs) should be registered as legal entities, have adequate business
management capacity and have secure partnerships with agri-businesses and attract credit and investment from financial
organizations. The POs will benefit from the extensive mobilisation and business development work carried out under AIMS and
ASPIRE. These organisations should no longer need capacity building support from the public sector, although PDAFFs are
expected to maintain a residual coordinating role. To achieve this, capacity building support to POs will be structured in a series
of milestones monitored through a scorecard. The project will reduce supporting costs for each successive milestone achieved.
Achieving the milestones will enable PO to access investment and partnership opportunities of components 1 and 2, thereby
generating additional revenues to cover their own running costs and staffing. It is also expected that banks and value chain
partners will see the benefits and decreased costs engaged in working with organized and mature PO and therefore be motivated
to also continue working and incentivizing such PO[44]. with reducing costs for each successive milestone achieved.  PDAFFs
will deliver support through output-based contracts specifying the number of POs completing each step. Overall costs for this
capacity building effort will be highest in the first year of the project and will decline to near zero in the final year.
196.
The financing model of ASPIRE-AT emphasizes sustainability as most investment finance will be in the form of loans, and grants
will be delivered through partner financial institutions (PFI) which will be responsible to screen the viability of proposed
investments. Project interventions will demonstrate the viability for the private sector of offering finance for farmers and POs with
appropriate (non-land) collateral, will buy down credit risk and will directly build the capacity of the PFIs. Each borrower will be
entitled to only one round of grant finance so it is expected that financing will increasingly be on commercial terms in the later
stage of the project. Digital solutions will support development of production, cash flow and credit history for smallholders and
POs supporting bankable investment plans.
197.
The enterprises supported by ASPIRE-AT (including enterprises of the PO as well as private agri-businesses) should be self-
sustaining by the end of the project with the ability to mobilise capital and allocate to remunerative investments based on market
opportunities. This will be achieved through experience and also through specialist advice and business support services
provided by the project.
198.
Public services supported by the project, including physical facilities such as laboratories, centres of excellence, etc, but also
“soft” services such as GAP certification, ICT for smallholder value chains etc, should be self-sustaining by the end of the project.
Cases will differ in detail, but the general principle will be maintained that a clear path to sustainability, including sufficient
investments in institutional capacities and an income stream to cover operational costs, must be demonstrated before approval of
the project investment.
199.
Project support to the enabling environment including trade negotiations will lead to expanded market opportunities by the end of
the project. Demonstration of successful models and improved access to finance should facilitate further market entrants,
including producer organisations as well as agri-businesses, to finance and execute growth-boosting investments without project
support.
200.
The sustainability of Centres of Excellence and other facilities: The facilities will be subject to full feasibility and design studies for
each facility which will be a requirement for final approval of funding under the EIB framework loan modality (provisional inclusion
of these facilities does not represent approval of financing, under this modality). Therefore, full frameworks for establishing and
verifying sustainability of these facilities will be determined before financing approval.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
201.
ASPIRE AT is considered a low risk project overall. As shown in the Integrated Project Risk Matrix (Annex 4), some risks are
assessed as moderate, mainly based on IFAD experience of previous projects in Cambodia.
202.
Country context risks are generally low. Cambodia has a stable political environment and no major or sudden changes of
policy direction affecting the project are foreseen. Likewise, the security environment is good and is not expected to change.
Cambodia has enjoyed a generally favourable macro-economic environment but as an open, trading economy, is potentially
vulnerable to unfavourable events internationally. Cambodia’s governance and economic regulatory environment are not strong
but the project design is based on models that have demonstrated success in the current environment.
203.
However, a resurgence of COVID-19 could affect the project through domestic economic impacts or through impacts on export
markets. International economic recession might reduce potential market size for some export commodities. The current Ukraine
crisis is expected to increase prices of energy and fertiliser, which might affect Cambodia’s terms of trade and the profitability of
some value chains. These costs might be offset by food price increases, but this would be felt differently in different value chains.
The project will partially mitigate trade-related macro risks by focusing also on domestic value chains which are likely to be less
severely affected.
204.
The risk that there may be insufficient scope for smallholders to compete in the market is assessed as a medium risk, mitigated
to low residual risk by careful selection of appropriate value chains.
205.
The proposed financing instrument for farmer, PO and agri-business investments, comprising a blend of loans and grants, is
recognised as carrying some risk, if it proves insufficiently attractive to PFIs or to borrowers. Both these risks are assessed as
medium without mitigation. The risks are mitigated by basing the design on existing models, building in features to reduce risk to
the PFIs and to increase attractiveness to borrowers, and through discussion with potential PFIs.
30/39
206.
There is a high inherent risk that some public sector investments may be proposed for project funding without adequate
assurance of their viability and / or without adequate institutional plans and assured operational budgets required for
sustainability. This risk will be reduced to medium by ensuring that favourable feasibility studies and fully developed institutional
plans, with identified operating budgets, are a requirement before investments are approved.
207.
The most significant project specific risks, which will require mitigation measures, relate to sustainability of the public sector
investments financed by the project due to the lack of institutional plans and / or operating budgets. To mitigate this risk, the
design establishes criteria for approval of investments. All major public sector investments will be subject to detailed feasibility
study and preparation of an institutional plan.
208.
As described above, country projects have suffered implementation delays and insufficient management focus on strategic
results. This risk will be addressed through clear forward-planning arrangements based on the Annual Work-Plan and Budget
(AWPB), use of clear and adequate timelines for recruitment and procurement procedures, and appointment of advisers with
strong management capacity and a relationship of trust with project management. IFAD will work proactively with project
management to prevent problems arising.
209.
The project is complex and there is a risk of failure if project management capacity is insufficient (medium risk). This risk is
mitigated to low by use of the proven capacity established in the ASPIRE Secretariat. M&E systems will likewise be based on
proven operational models.
210.
Procurement risk is assessed as Moderate. The main project procurement risks include (i) There is no integrated system to
monitor procurement values and records at the General Department of Public Procurement (PEFA 2021); (ii) The Corruption
Perceptions Index (CPI) for 2021 remains below 30 (score at 23/100, ranked 157th out of 180 countries); (iii) Limited capacity
and experience to conduct procurement activities at sub-national levels; and (iv) Procurement processes (planning, bidding,
contract award and contract implementation) are often delayed.
211.
Financial management (FM) risk: The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) has embarked on an ambitious Public Financial
Management Reform Program since 2004. The ASPIRE FM inherent risk is moderate based on use of the Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP) for externally financed projects/programmes in Cambodia, issued by MEF. The SOP are separated from the
functioning of the government treasury and state audit systems. At the project level, the FM risk is moderate. ASPIRE AT
replicates the success of ASPIRE. MAFF will continue to be the Executing Agency and the operation is assigned to the
Secretariat, this model overcomes the weakness in public financial management, balances the control of Executing Agency and
utilizes the expertise of contracted staff and advisers. ASPIRE AT will provide lines credit to ARDB and SME Banks, the
Secretariat will coordinate to ensure these funding are consolidated in IFR, financial report and financial audit.
I. Environment and Social category
212.
The proposed environmental and social category for ASPIRE-AT is moderate, based on the SECAP screening tool. ASPIRE AT
will have zero forest encroachment and deforestation strategy, the Project will not impact on any sensitive areas or result in loss
of natural habitat and biodiversity. Considering the possibility to work in cultural heritage areas, a cultural heritage management
plan has been developed and will be implemented to avoid any negative impacts. The Project design has directed at
environmentally sound and sustainable agriculture and poultry: a) chemical inputs will be regulated, project will encourage to
produce and use locally made bio inputs; farmers will be motivated to apply integrated pest management, b) renewable energy
technology will be promoted as part of the value chain and support market development activities, c) intercropping will be
promoted to maintain soil health and minimize the damage of disease and pest outburst, d) crop rotation will be encouraged
where applicable, e) efficient water use technologies will be promoted to reduce water stress, f) minimize waste from agriculture,
poultry, processing and market centers, and as far as possible these will be recycled for manure production, and g) support good
agriculture practices.
213.
The Project has planned to support small-scale climate proofed infrastructure with no further harm on environment. There will be
no investment from the project side on the infrastructures that demands private land acquisition or resettlement of project affected
people. An Environmental, Social, and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF) has been included in the design, which
contains a preliminary Environmental, Social, and Climate Management Plan (ESCMP). The ESCMF establishes procedures for
the environmental and social assessment of sub-projects, and provides guidelines in the preparation of site-specific ESCMPs for
these sub-projects.
214.
The project has a strong focus on social inclusion with targets for the inclusion of women, youth IPs. The design has included
Indigenous People Plan to maximize their participation and benefit from the project and minimize potential negative impacts from
the project. The project interventions will be implemented with explicit free, prior and informed consent of local communities.
J. Climate Risk classification
215.
As per the SECAP screening tool, the climate risk category of the project is determined as substantial. Following are the key
themes and steps followed to assess climate risks: (i) Hazard identification: As per the ThinkHazard report, the project
intervention area is likely to experience river flood, urban flood, landslides, cyclones, extreme heat and wildfires. Likewise,
foreseen future climate scenario predicts changes in temperature, climate variability and alterations in intensity and frequency of
extreme events. (ii) Exposure Assessment: The project targets agricultural systems, ecosystems or livelihoods that are exposed
to weather-related hazards. Crop production is frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in
temperature or pests and diseases. (iii)Sensitivity: The human development score is above 5 (score of 6.3) and the
Multidimensional Poverty Index is above 5 (score of 8.3); both aspects trigger a positive response in the screening tool. (iv)
Adaptation capacity and climate resilience: Cambodia still lack disaster coping capacity (DDR score of 6.8 as per the INFORM)
and climate and weather information services are not effectively being delivered to farmers, rural dwellers, and end users.
However, the country has an early action plan (preparedness and emergency response) to mitigate the impacts of weather-
related hazards once the shock occurs. To some extent, the government or other institutions (including projects and CSO/NGOs)
support the target population/communities with the necessary social and economic resources to prepare for or respond to
climate-related events. Farmers still face difficulties in access adequate financial credit and loans that are tailored to their needs.
31/39
216.
An in-depth climate risk analysis indicates project targeted farmers are mostly dependent on rainfall for major crops. The Project
will help to update community level seasonal crop calendar following the recent precipitation trend and collaboration will be made
to disseminate early climate information. ASPIRE AT will promote climate smart agriculture practices. The screening checklist
provided in ESCMF will guide project to include adequate adaptation and mitigation measures while working in climate
vulnerable areas.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
217.
ASPIRE-AT will be overseen by a Joint Country Programme Steering Committee chaired by MEF and also responsible for
oversight of the current ASPIRE, AIMS and SAAMBAT. Following this established practice, the Joint Country Programme
Steering Committee will set the policy and technical direction of the project, ensure alignment with GoKC policy and with
interventions financed by other donors, and facilitate synergies between IFAD portfolio projects following the Programme Based
Approach.
218.
The Project Executing Agency will be MAFF which will assign project management responsibilities to the existing ASPIRE
Secretariat, thus making use of established capacity, ensuring continuity and facilitating implementation of the project readiness
action plan.
219.
ASPIRE Secretariat responsibilities will include (1) project planning and reporting; (2) project financial management and
procurement; (3) monitoring and evaluation; (4) social, environment and climate change risk management; (5) guide
implementation of the Gender Transformative Approach; and (5) mainstream adoption of digital technology in all components.
220.
ASPIRE Secretariat will recruit and manage a core team of project technical advisers comprising Chief Technical Adviser; Deputy
Chief Technical Adviser; Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist; Social, Environment and Climate Change Specialist, M&E and
Planning Specialist, ICT Specialist, Finance and Accountant Specialist and Procurement Specialist.
221.
MAFF-GDA will be responsible for technical guidance of the project in key areas including (1) formation and capacity building of
ACs and UACs in compliance with the Law on Agriculture Cooperatives; (2) registration of UACs; (3) selection, design and
implementation of public service investments under Component 2.2; (4) development and approval of technical protocols for crop
production; (5) development of relevant policy and regulation, particularly to expand trade and market access in target value
chains; (6) coordination of the project ICT strategy; and (7) management of Centres of Excellence established / upgraded under
Sub-Component 3.2.
222.
ARDB will be an Implementing Agency. ARDB will finance investments in Sub-Component 1.1 through (1) management of
project funds to finance loans and grants to eligible farmers and graduated POs; (2) screening of investment proposals; (3)
financing loans and grants to eligible farmers and graduated POs; (4) reporting to ASPIRE Secretariat. ARDB will sign a sub-
agreement with MEF to specify the loan terms and condition, financial management and reporting obligations.
223.
SME Bank will be an Implementing Agency. SME Bank will finance investments in Sub-Component 2.1 through (1)
management of project funds to finance loans and credit guarantees in partnership with CGCC; (2) screening of investment
proposals; (3) financing of loans backed by credit guarantees in partnership with CGCC; and (4) reporting to ASPIRE Secretariat.
SME Bank will sign a sub-agreement with MEF to specify the loan terms and condition, financial management and reporting
obligations.
224.
Provincial Departments of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (PDAFF) will (1) conduct mapping of pro-poor value chains
and producer organisations; (2) conduct formation and registration of Agriculture Cooperatives; (3) manage and coordinate
networks of Lead Farmers including identifying training needs; (4) cooperate with regional service providers for business
development services to graduated POs; (5) project planning, monitoring and reporting at Provincial level.
225.
Graduated POs (ACs, UACs and other types of formal producer organisation) will (1) ensure compliance with good governance
and inclusivity criteria; (2) prepare business plans; (3) develop partnerships with agri-businesses; (4) prepare applications for
investment financing under Component 1; (5) counter-sign and monitor implementation of farmer loan and grant agreements; (6)
directly implement PO loan and grant agreements; (7) conduct community procurement to identify preferred suppliers for farmer
and PO investments; (8) monitor implementation of enabling infrastructure investments; (9) operate enterprises and cash-
generating activities; (10) operate and maintain enabling infrastructure; and (11) report on activities, outputs and outcomes via
the project MIS.
226.
32/39
AC Business Development Service Providers will be recruited by the project based on proven track record and expertise in
working with POs, in specific value chains and specific geographic areas. It is envisaged that between 3 – 5 service providers will
be recruited according to TORs to be included in the PIM, with one service provider recruited in Year 1 responsible for
developing procedures and training curricular, and the remainder service providers recruited in Year 2. The roles of these service
providers will include (1) strengthening governance and inclusiveness of the POs, with particular regard to promoting women’s
voice and leadership roles; (2) strengthening administrative and financial management capacity of the POs; (3) facilitating
partnerships with between POs and agri-businesses; (4) supporting preparation of PO Business Plans through a participatory
process with PO members and in consultation with private sector partners; (5) supporting preparation of investment proposals for
Component 1 financing; and (6) an ongoing coaching and backstopping role during implementation of the Business Plan.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
227.
Following the successful FM performance of existing ASPIRE, the Design Mission has assessed options for financial
management in considerable details and has proposed the arrangements outlined below. It is agreed that MEF, while broadly in
agreement with the principles, may review these arrangements with the aim of ensuring coordination and accountability and may
propose alternatives. The proposed fund flows are illustrated in the following diagram.
228.
ASPIRE AT Secretariat and the Implementing Agencies shall apply the updated SOP and the Financial Management Manual and
Procurement Manual from ASPIRE, on the condition that these procedures are adequately adapted to fulfil the specific financial
management requirements of ASPIRE-AT while taking into consideration local circumstances and capacities in respect of the
implementation of ASPIRE AT activities at subnational level. ARDB and SME bank shall apply existing FM systems to carry out
sub-component activities and are subject to financial reporting, auditing and financial management conditions under the sub-
agreement with MEF.  ARDB and SME Bank shall submit financial reports and audit report to MEF, ASIPRE AT Secretariat in
accordance to procedures in ASPIRE AT’s Project Implementation Manual and Finance Manual
229.
Staffing: The Finance Management Unit (FMU) staff of ASPIRE Secretariat will be expected to stay with ASPIRE AT, FMU shall
carry out all financial management tasks of the Project, and shall perform its duties in close cooperation with the Department of
Accounting and Finance (DAF) of MAFF; the PMU shall be staffed by sufficient number of officers (experienced staff with ASPIRE
are preferred); the officers shall be seconded from DAF and/or hired from outside MAFF.  ARDB and SME Bank shall use
existing FM staff for managing the line of credit activities.
230.
Internal control: Procedures and record maintenance at all levels have to be significantly strengthened by addressing the issues
of non-availability of skilled finance staff, setting up of internal controls, setting up of effective monitoring and review, introduction
of accounting software, preparation of a detailed section in the PIM on Financial Management with guidance notes.
231.
For the assurance of internal control and alignment with SOP, Internal Audit will be conducted by the Department of Internal Audit
(MAFF). The internal audit report will be shared with ASPIRE-AT Secretariat.
232.
ASPIRE internal control is designed to ensure the compliance with SOP and PIM, transparency, segregation of duty and
safeguard of project assets. Seconded Finance Officer from MAFF will be assigned to oversee and review the financial
transactions, reporting.
233.
ARDB and SME Bank shall employ the existing internal control system and shall provide the internal audit report to ASPIRE AT
Secretariat and MEF.
234.
Accounting systems, policies, procedures and financial reporting: ASPIRE-AT FM system shall employ the current
structure, policy and system of existing ASPIRE and continue to enhance to fulfil the design and activities of ASPIRE-AT. Cash
Basis accounting is applied through SAGE 50 Accounting System which is followed to RGC Accounting Standard stated in FMM.
235.
Each implementing agency will submit Monthly Financial Progress Reports to the ASPIRE AT Secretariat electronically. ASPIRE
AT Secretariat will consolidate data received and will be the entry contact point with IFAD. ASPIRE Secretariat will prepare
AWPB, IFR, annual consolidated financial statements including data provided by all other implementing agencies. ASPIRE-AT
Secretariat and the Implementing Agencies shall apply cash basis accounting principles in accordance with the updated SOP.
236.
ASPIRE AT shall continue to use the current accounting software from phase 1 with customizations to tailor the need of FM of
ASPIRE AT, the software can fit the IFAD IFR reporting requirements and shall be able to report different source of financings
that use in the pool of Designated Account.
237.
ARDB and SME Bank shall use existing FM staff and system for managing the Line of Credit activities and providing the financial
reports in the format as required by IFAD and ASPIRE Secretariat. Financial reporting requirements shall be outlined in the sub-
agreement between MEF and the banks.
238.
External Audit.  The annual financial statements for the Project shall be subject to annual audit by an external auditor to be
appointed by MEF. The audit shall have to be performed with due diligence, in particular in respect of the effectiveness of the
project internal control system, and the accuracy and completeness of the financial statements according to the TOR acceptable
to IFAD. Project accounts at ARDB and SME Bank will be audited to ensure the completeness of financial reporting and control,
conditions of the audit will be included in the Agreement between ASPIRE AT and ARDB/SME Banks.
239.
Public procurement in Cambodia has been governed by the Law on Public Procurement (2012), and the Implementing Rules and
Regulations Governing Public Procurement. For donor-funded projects, the Standard Operating Procedures on Procurement for
All Externally Financed Projects and Programs (SOP) was promulgated in February 2007 and subsequently amended in 2012
and 2019[45]. The SOP 2019 on procurement contains a comprehensive procurement manual including (i) Volume I - rules and
regulations governing procurement operations and procurement arrangements and procedures; (ii) Volume II - Standard National
Procurement/ Bidding Documents (SPD/SBD) for procurement of goods and works; and (iii) Volume III - Standard International
Competitive Bidding Documents (goods, works), Sample RFP, Templates of contract negotiation for consulting services, and
Sample contracts of Individual consulting services. The revised SOP document took into consideration the revised procurement
policies of donors (ADB and the World Bank).
33/39
240.
The MEF, through the General Department of Public Procurement (GDPP) is responsible for administration of the Law on Public
Procurement. The GDPP oversees the activities for domestically financed procurement. The General Department for
International Cooperation and Debt Management (GDICDM) oversees the externally financed procurement and is actively
involved in the preparation of the SOP and its associated manuals, standard procurement documents, in addition to participation
in various procurement committees and maintaining oversight. The RGC has adopted the Sub-decree no.21 ANKr.BK, dated 21
February 2018, on Rules and Procedures for Complaints and Mechanism of Complaint Resolution. The GDPP is acting as a
technical adviser to the Committee and provides recommendations but the ultimate decision is made above GDPP[46].
241.
Currently, there is no system of e-procurement in the government. However, all Ministries and MEF do post the procurement
plan, advertisements and contract award details. The Government is planning to adopt e-procurement in the near future[47]. It is
envisaged that e-Procurement in Cambodia will be implemented in a phased manner under the Budget System Reform Strategy
2018-2025.
242.
Procurement risk assessment for ASPIRE AT shows that national procurement system risk (Part A) is moderate, and the
overall procurement risk (Part A and Part B) is moderate (see Annex 9) on Procurement Risk Matrix of ASPIRE AT). The inherent
procurement risk rating is moderate. The main project procurement risks include (i) There is no integrated system to monitor
procurement values and records at the General Department of Public Procurement[48][49]; (ii) The Corruption Perceptions Index
(CPI) for 2021 remains below 30 (score at 23/100, ranked 157th out of 180 countries); (iii) Limited capacity and experience to
conduct procurement activities at sub-national levels; and (iv) Procurement processes (planning, bidding, contract award and
contract implementation) are often delayed.
243.
Several mitigation measures for project procurement risks are: (i) Using IFAD’s web-based procurement management and
tracking system (that currently is NOTUS and will be upgraded to a new system from 2023) and ICP Contract Monitoring Tool for
monitoring project procurement activities; (ii) Upload information on procurement plans, contract awards and resolution of
procurement complaints on IAs/project websites; (iii) Request bidders and contractors signing the Self-Certification Forms on
anticorruption, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation and abuse as a part of bids/proposals and contract documents; (iv)
Conduct prior and ex-post reviews to strengthen enforcement of the debarment system; (v) Retain competent ASPIRE
procurement staff and specialist; (vi) Carry out coaching, on-the-job trainings and refresher trainings on procurement (IFAD
project procurement guidelines and manual, ICP, No Objection Tracking Utility System (NOTUS), Standard Operating
Procedures on Procurement for All Externally Financed Projects/Programs in Cambodia, BUILDPRO procurement training
program, etc.); (vii) Launch recruitment processes of staff and key service providers, timed so that key staff and key service
providers will be contracted in time after the project effectiveness date; and (viii) The ASPIRE Secretariat monitor and update
regularly implementation progress of the procurement plan with both planned and actual data.
244.
Applicable regulations and Procurement Arrangements.  Procurement using IFAD funds will follow the SOP to the extent
such are consistent with the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. ASPIRE-AT Secretariat will be directly responsible for project
procurement activities, except for activities under Sub-component 1.1 and 2.1.2 using IFAD financing via ARDB and SME Bank
which will be responsible by the borrowers (POs, smallholders and agri-businesses). There will be Subsidiary Financing
Agreements between MEF and ARDB/SME Bank to manage the wholesale lines of credit and compensate deposited grant
financed by ASPIRE AT under Sub-components 1.1. and1.2. Procurement using EIB funds will comply with EIB’s Guide to
Procurement.
245.
The project shall retain competent ASPIRE procurement staff and specialists to continue their jobs for ASPIRE-AT. A new
procurement staff might be recruited for procurement activities using EIB’s financing.
246.
The initial 18-month Procurement Plan, and subsequently the annual procurement plans in consistence with the AWPBs shall be
prepared and obtain IFAD no objection before proceeding with procurement activities. Similar goods or works should be bulked to
sizable packages for procurement when taking into account implementation capacities of potential suppliers/ contractors. IFAD
procurement plan template[50] will be used for preparation and monitoring implementation progress of project procurement plans.
The first 18-month procurement plan and subsequently annual procurement plan must include as a minimum: (i) A brief
description of each procurement activity to be undertaken during the period; (ii) The estimate value of each procurement activity;
(iii) The method of procurement or selection to be adopted for each procurement activity; and (iv) An indication as to whether
IFAD shall carry out prior or post review in respect of every procurement activity.
247.
Procurement methods. The following procurement methods are proposed be used:
248.
Works and works-related Non-Consulting Services
International Competitive Bidding (ICB): is mandatory for contracts estimated to cost USD3,000,000 or more;
National Competitive Bidding (NCB): might be applied to contracts estimated to cost less than USD3,000,000 and more than
USD100,000;
Shopping: might be applied to contracts estimated to cost USD100,000 or less; and
Direct Contracting: applies to the indicated contracts in the Procurement Plan, and all direct contracts to cost more than
USD5,000 shall be subject to IFAD’s prior review and no objection.
249.
Goods and goods-related Non-Consulting Services
34/39
International Competitive Bidding (ICB): is mandatory for contracts estimated to cost USD 2,000,000 or more;
National Competitive Bidding (NCB): might be applied to contracts estimated to cost less than USD 2,000,000 and more than
USD100,000;
Shopping: might be applied to contracts estimated to cost USD100,000 or less; and
Direct Contracting: applies to the indicated contracts in the Procurement Plan, and all direct contracts to cost more than
USD5,000 shall be subject to IFAD’s prior review and no objection.
250.
Consulting Services and related Non-Consulting Services
Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS): is mandatory for contracts with firms estimated to cost USD200,000 or more;
Quality Cost Based Selection (QCBS), Fixed Budget Selection (FBS) or Least Cost Selection (LCS): might be applied to
contracts with firms estimated to cost less than USD200,000;
Consultants Qualification Selection (CQS): might be applied to contracts with firms estimated to cost below USD65,000;
Individual Consultants Selection (ICS): applies to contracts with individuals regardless of the value;
Sole/Single Source Selection (SSS): applies to the indicated contracts (with firms or individuals) in the Procurement Plan, and
all SSS contracts to cost more than USD5,000 shall be subject to IFAD’s prior review and no objection.
251.
Prior review requirements. In accordance with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines and IFAD’s Procurement Handbook, the
following are proposed to be subject to IFAD’s prior review and no objection:
Procurement Plans submitted as part of AWPB and any subsequent upgrade of these plans;
Award of any contract for goods and goods-related non-consulting services estimated to cost USD 150,000 or more;
Award of any contract for works and works-related non-consulting services estimated to cost USD 200,000 or more;
Award of any contract for consulting services and related non-consulting services and/or Memorandums of
Understanding/Agreement estimated to cost USD 100,000 or more;
Award of any contract for an Individual Consultant estimated to cost USD25,000 or more;
Award of any Direct Contracting or Sole/Single Source Selection to cost more than USD 5,000. A sufficiently detailed
justification shall be submitted to IFAD and shall include the rationale for the choice of direct contracting/single source
selection and the basis for recommending a particular contractor/service provider;
252.
The aforementioned thresholds may be modified by IFAD during the course of Project implementation.
253.
Requests for IFAD prior review and no objection, should be routed through IFAD’s web-based procurement management and
tracking system, that currently is NOTUS and will be upgraded into a new end-to-end system in 2023. Data and information of all
contracts including Memorandum of Agreements must be listed and updated regularly in the IFAD Client Portal - Contract
Monitoring Tool (ICP-CMT).
254.
Governance and Anti-corruption measures. Project staff, beneficiaries, and all bidders, suppliers, contractors and consultants
under IFAD-financed contracts are expected to observe the highest standard of ethics and integrity during the procurement and
execution of project activities. IFAD will not finance expenditures for goods, works or consulting services that have not been
procured in accordance with IFAD Project Procurement Guideline and the Financing Agreement. In such cases, IFAD may, in
addition, take other remedial action under the financing agreement, including cancellation of the amount in question from the loan
account by declaring it ineligible. Even if the contract was awarded following IFAD’s “no objection” statement, IFAD may still
declare mis-procurement if it concludes that this statement was issued on the basis of incomplete, inaccurate or misleading
information furnished by the Borrower/Recipient.
255.
The Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption has been integrated into IFAD's legal framework (Project Procurement
Guidelines[51], General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing[52], IFAD’s Code of Conduct[53]) and applies to all
recipients of IFAD financing. In line with this, the implementing agencies will ensure that all project activities are implemented
within a transparency framework. This framework will include measures to ensure that procurement activities are carried out in
accordance with IFAD project procurement guidelines and the project implementation manual. Measures that form part of the
framework for transparency include:
Upload information on procurement plans, contract awards and resolution of procurement complaints on IAs/project websites;
Annexes on Additional Provisions and Self-Certification Form to be included in bidding document/RFP and contract
documents;
Bidders and contractors signing the Self-Certification Forms on anticorruption, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation and
abuse as a part of bids/proposals and contract documents;
Debriefing and Protest procedures for all procurement activities based on the procedures laid down in the IFAD Procurement
Handbook including the requirements to issue a Notice of Intent to Award and of a standstill period.
Conduct prior and ex-post reviews to strengthen enforcement of the debarment system;
IFAD’s direct supervision to address fiduciary compliance;
Involvement of Project stakeholders (and especially farmers and their organisations) in planning, implementation and M&E of
project activities.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
256.
257.
The AWPB will be prepared by ASPIRE Secretariat based on submissions from participating producer organisations and agri-
businesses, PDAFFs, GDA and PFIs.
35/39
AWPBs will reflect targets set in the project logframe and annually updated to reflect the progress of supported producer
organisations to become legal entities with business management capacity, agri-business partnerships and investment
readiness. Therefore, planning will begin with the POs, with information verified and aggregated by PDAFF. Implementation
plans for Sub-Component 2.1 will be prepared directly by ASPIRE Secretariat with assistance of service providers. Plans for
public investments under Sub-Component 2.2 will be based on submissions by GDA.
258.
Following established procedure, AWPB will be reviewed by MAFF management and submitted to MEF for approval.
259.
It is expected that all or part of the EIB financing for ASPIRE-AT will be under EIB’s Framework Loan modality. Proposed
expenditures of EIB funds will be reflected in the AWPB for completeness; however, EIB will not issue NOL on the AWPB and
instead will review and approve eligible investments submitted in the form of Sub-Project Fiches.
260.
ASPIRE Secretariat will prepare six-month and annual Project Progress Reports including updated logframe indicators, based
on MIS data and direct reporting from PDAFFs and other agencies.
261.
ASPIRE Secretariat will regularly conduct qualitative assessments of project progress, identify challenges and bottlenecks as
well as notable success stories, and document lessons learned which will be used to strengthen the further implementation of the
project.
262.
A Communications Plan for the project will be developed and implemented by ASPIRE Secretariat in coordination with IFAD
communications specialists. Knowledge sharing will be primarily through digital means (avoiding expenditures on hard-copy
publications). The project will establish and regularly update a web-site and will develop a range of web-based knowledge
products including blogs, policy and technical briefs and video segments. ASPIRE Secretariat will also reach out to stakeholders
including individual farmers by making use of mobile applications to communicate simple messages and to invite feedback. Due
regard will be paid to appropriate acknowledgement of IFAD financing and support to the project and also to the need to protect
IFAD from reputational risk.
263.
An outline Monitoring and Evaluation Plan for ASPIRE-AT is presented in the PIM (Annex 8). Data collection will be based on
two key instruments, an Outcome Survey and a Management Information System based on the one already operational in
ASPIRE.
264.
The Outcome Survey will follow IFAD guidelines for measurement of Core Indicators which include IFAD’s Empowerment
Indicator. The survey will be based on a panel sample of household members of households enrolled POs at the time when
project support to each PO begins. The Outcome Survey will also draw a separate sample of ID-Poor households living in the
same area as the sampled PO members. The sample will include representative numbers of women and youth and will include a
sufficiently large sub-sample of IP households for valid conclusions to be drawn. The Outcome Survey will be conducted at base-
line, mid-term and end-line in compliance with the COI Measurement Guidelines.
265.
The ASPIRE MIS includes individual farmer profiles and data on crops, revenues and expenditures updated annually. In ASPIRE-
AT the MIS will also capture information at the level of POs and enterprises. Data will be regularly uploaded to the MIS by
Community Facilitators in line with current ASPIRE practice. POs benefiting from project financing will be required to submit
regular progress reports structured to facilitate monitoring of output indicators in the ASPIRE-AT logframe. Similar reporting
requirements will apply to supported enterprises (some anonymization may be needed for business confidentiality purposes).
Data will also be collected from the PFIs. Total outreach and output-level logframe indicators will be updated twice annually
based on these data sources.
b. Innovation and scaling up
266.
Innovative features of the project will include (1) the investment financing model with a blend of loans and grants disbursed
through the PFIs; (2) technical packages to be developed and promoted through the POs for investment support – these may
include, inter alia, climate-smart agriculture techniques, disease free seed production and protocols for production of premium
varieties; and (3) the sustainability pathway by which POs will become independent of project support. All these features will be
capable of scaling up based on demonstrated and documented success.
M. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
a. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback.
267.
The purpose of the engagement and feedback mechanisms is to allow the target groups and their organizations to participate in a
meaningful and continuous way in the planning, monitoring, implementation and evaluation of project interventions.
268.
Target group engagement and feedback processes will be centred on the supported POs and their members. Core elements
embedded in the design to ensure target group priorities drive project investments, ensure regular feedback and lead to
adjustment of interventions where necessary include:
PO capacity building so they graduate to become independent self-managing organizations engaged in the market and local
development processes. This includes building their capacity to establish and manage networks and relationships, engage in
local policy and decision-making processes to represent their interests (e.g. with Commune Council, local value chain
36/39
coordination groups such as multi-stakeholder platforms). Specialist Service Providers will deliver tailored packages of
capacity development support to enable the POs to achieve graduation status and prepare business plans eligible for
investment under Component 1;
POs and their members will determine for themselves their priorities for investment support from the project, with technical
assistance from the Specialist Service Providers through the bespoke capacity building and business planning process above;
Establishing good governance within POs to ensure the POs represent the interests of their members, including capacity
building of all members on good practices and tools for PO operation and governance to enhance confidence and
transparency within the PO;
Ensure POs are inclusive in their membership, so that voices and interests of marginalized groups are represented. While
the project will primarily work with existing POs, such as those supported by ASPIRE and AIMS, the capacity strengthening
process will also involve mobilization of additional group members from those interested but initially excluded from existing
groups where opportunities exist to do so. This will be based on communication with existing members to highlight the
advantages to the group of being larger and more dynamic and, therefore, able to maintain stronger relationship with buyers.
Thus, it is in the interest of existing members to increase the size and inclusiveness of groups;
Cluster-level feedback across networks of POs: The project will build on the cluster development process initiated by
ASPIRE and AIMS. These will involve periodic meetings between networks of POs and businesses involved in the supported
VCs in an area, typically at the district or province cluster level. These multi-stakeholder industry meetings provide an
important regular mechanism for the priorities and feedback from POs to influence project priorities and also the agenda of
other support agencies and government authorities that will also participate in these open events. Building the capacity of POs
to be able to effectively participate in these meetings and process is an important part of ensuring effective feedback and
advocacy of the interests of the POs and their members;
Results-based contracts with service providers: Contract with specialist service providers supporting POs will include key
performance measures linked to payments, including i) capacity outcomes and ii) PO satisfaction with the services provided.
269.
Data, quantitative and qualitative, related to beneficiary engagement and feedback will be collected and analysed at three levels:
Individual beneficiary level. The project MIS, as highlighted above, will capture individual farmer profiles and data on crops,
revenues and expenditures updated annually on all members of POs. This provides a data rich environment to assess what is
working and what is not for different groups or individuals. The farmer diaries and other tools will be adapted to allow
individuals to provide feedback to the project on their emerging priorities and on the services received from the project to date.
In addition, the project will use periodic household surveys that include satisfaction and IFAD empowerment indicators.
PO-level feedback will be integrated into the regular tracking and backstopping process for PO capacity strengthen by the
contracted Specialist Service Providers (Component 3). This is expected to include the use of standardized capacity
assessment tools to be used by the POs themselves as part of the tailored capacity building package provided to each PO.
These will be monitored annually by the Secretariat including feedback from the PO on the services received as part of the
results—based contract of the Specialist Service Providers.
Cluster-level: Emerging priorities and feedback from networks of POs at the cluster level will be captured and reflected from
the periodic cluster meetings between networks of POs and business and documented in regularly updated cluster
development plans.
b. Grievance redress.
270.
The Project will establish an accessible and transparent process for those affected by the Project to make complaints, report
wrongdoing, or seek redress in compliance with the Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and
Operations, and IFAD’s Policy on Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) 2018
and IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 2021.
271.
The project will establish confidential reporting mechanisms using dedicated accounts on social media, email, and a telephone
hotline for reporting complaints. Existence and details of these reporting channels will be widely publicly promoted via Project
communication materials and platforms and communicated directly to POs and their members through the capacity building
processes.
272.
The Project will document and establish an independent process for reviewing and handling complaints received consistent with
government regulations and IFAD policies. The Project will, as a minimum, produce 6 monthly reports on complaints and
grievance redress included in their regular progress report. This will, as a minimum, include the number and types of complaints
received, progress in dealing with each complaint and resulting resolution and actions taken.
273.
A detailed description of the project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is included in the project’s ESCMF. In addition
to that, affected people may also access IFAD's Complaints Procedure[54] which ensures that appropriate mechanisms are in
place to allow individuals and communities to contact IFAD directly and file a complaint if they believe they are or might be
adversely affected by an IFAD-funded project/programme not complying with IFAD's Social and Environmental Policies and
mandatory aspects of SECAP. The project-level GRM and IFAD's Complaints Procedure shall be fully explained to stakeholders
during the project start-up and to beneficiaries during the awareness building on project activities.
274.
All contracts for Project personnel, contractors, service providers and third parties receiving Project funding must include: i)
provisions prohibiting acts of sexual harassment or SEA; ii) provisions to establish the obligation to immediately report to MAFF
and competent national authorities, on incidents of harassment and/or SEA in connection with the actions and activities
established in the contract; iii) provisions to allow contract termination based on proven acts of sexual harassment and/or SEA.
N. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
37/39
275.
A Project Readiness Action Plan has been prepared and agreed with GoKC. The Readiness Action Plan will be implemented in
the period July to December 2022 by ASPIRE Secretariat with available resources of the ASPIRE Programme and with technical
support from IFAD.
276.
The purpose of the Project Readiness Action Plan is to ensure that all conditions are in place so that key activities of ASPIRE-
AT, notably investments under Component 1 and capacity development of POs under Component 3, can be initiated during Year
1 of project implementation. Lessons learned from the relatively slow start-up of SAAMBAT and other projects have been
reflected in the Project Readiness Action Plan.
277.
Key actions under the Project Readiness Action Plan include (1) Preparation of Value Chain Profiles for target value chains; (2)
mapping of target value chains and existing Business Clusters, with identification of priority BCs to be aggregated and
strengthened to become graduated POs in Year 1 of the project; (3) identification of existing POs meeting qualifying criteria, and
preparation of investment plans for financing in Year 1; (4) Preparation of the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) including
agreeing detailed design of financing instruments and associated screening criteria with ARDB and SME Bank, TORs of advisers
and service providers, design of the Impact Survey etc.; (5) Preparation of the Gender Action Plan; (6) Preparation of the ICT
Strategy; (7) Preparation of the ESMF; (8) Upgrade ASPIRE MIS to meet needs of ASPIRE-AT; (9) launch recruitment processes
of staff and service providers, timed so that key staff will be contracted in the first month of project effectiveness and key service
providers will be on-board not later than three months after project effectiveness.
278.
A Project Implementation Manual (PIM) is included as Annex 8 mission and includes Terms of Reference (TORs) for key service
providers. GoKC will be encouraged to initiate the procurement process for these service providers in advance of project
effectiveness, thus avoiding the long delays that have affected ongoing projects (e.g. SAAMBAT) due to the time required to
agree TORs and contract service providers. Some resources of ongoing ASPIRE may be used to support this readiness activity
for ASPIRE-AT.
Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
279.
Project supervision, Mid-Term Review (MTR) and Completion Reviews will be conducted jointly by GoKC, IFAD and EIB. IFAD
will take the lead in preparing supervision and review reports.
280.
One Implementation Support Mission will be conducted each year during project implementation (seven missions in total), with
the first mission to take place not more than three months after the project becomes effective.
281.
One Supervision Mission will be conducted each year during project implementation (seven missions in total) with the first
mission planned for the final quarter of 2023.
282.
The project MTR mission is provisionally planned for early 2026. As an alternative, MTR could replace the Supervision Mission in
late 2025, but in this case it would be early to assess the outcomes of the project investments.
283.
One Completion Review mission will be conducted in late 2029 or early 2030.
Footnotes
[1] Asian Development Bank (2015). Promoting women’s economic empowerment in Cambodia.
[2] National Institute of Statistics, Directorate General for Health and ICF International. 2015. Cambodia Demographic and Health
Survey 2014.
[3] BCs bring together informal groupings of smallholder producers with local value chain actors. There are currently about 4,000 BCs
supported by ASPIRE and AIMS.
[4] UNDP Human Development Report 2020
[5]https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/cambodia/overview#1
[6] World Bank Cambodia Country Economic Update, December 2021
[7] Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey 2019-20 (Ministry of Planning, 2021).
[8] IFPRI, 2022, COUNTRY BRIEF 16 Cambodia: Impacts of the Ukraine and Global Crises on Poverty and Food Security
 https://doi.org/10.2499/p15738coll2.135964
[9] NIS defines small-scale landholders as the producers at the intersection of the bottom 40% of farm physical size (land, livestock)
and the bottom 40% of the distribution of economic size (revenues). Under this definition, “smallholders” constitute almost 75% of all
farmers in Cambodia
[10] Based on discussions with exporting companies during design mission. Specific examples are "best rice" award-winning
Cambodian fragrant rice; Cambodian cashews etc.
[11] Agriculture Sector Master Plan (ASMP) 2030
[12] ADB (2021) Cambodia Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development Sector Assessment, Strategy and Road Map
38/39
[13] SAMBAAT: Sustainable Assets for Agriculture Markets, Business and Trade Project
[14] https://summitdialogues.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/FS-Roadmap_Cambodia_Final-for-submission-1.pdf
[15]https://mef.gov.kh/download-counter?post=7116
[16] UNFCCC: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
[17] https://hdr.undp.org/
[18] Asian Development Bank (2015). Promoting women’s economic empowerment in Cambodia.
[19] UN Women. Cambodia – Country Fact Sheet https://data.unwomen.org/country/cambodia
[20] Government of Cambodia (2011). National Policy on Youth Development.
[21] OECD Development Centre (2017), “Youth Well-being Policy Review of Cambodia”, EU-OECD Youth
Inclusion Project, Paris.
[22] CIPA & AIPP (2019). Situation of Indigenous Peoples in Cambodia. Submission for the 3rd Cycle of Universal Periodic Review of
Cambodia 32nd Session of the Human Rights Council January – February 2019, Astbury, J. and F. Walji. 2013. Triple Jeopardy:
Gender-based Violence and Human Rights Violations Experienced by Women with Disabilities in Cambodia. Canberra, AusAID.
[23] National Institute of Statistics, Directorate General for Health and ICF International. 2015. Cambodia Demographic and Health
Survey 2014.
[24] Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency. 2015. Disability Rights in Cambodia.
[25] FAO Cambodia Food Security and Nutrition Profile DI Profile - Cambodia 160914.xlsx (fao.org)
[26] International Food Policy Research Institute (2017). Climate change, gender and nutrition linkages: Research priorities in
Cambodia.
[27] IFPRI, 2022
[28] AIMS: Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders
[29] In AIMS and ASPIRE, a Business Cluster is an informal grouping of smallholder farmers together with local agribusinesses,
extension workers etc.
[30] More specifically, the new Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE-AT)
currently under design foresees in its exit strategy that “By the end of the project, producer organisations (ACs and Unions of ACs)
should be registered as legal entities, have adequate business management capacity and have secure partnerships with agri-
businesses and attract credit and investment from financial organizations.”
[31] Grow Asia, 2019, Inclusive Business Models: Lessons from Grow Asia’s Experience;
http://exchange.growasia.org/system/files/Grow%20Asia%20x%20iBAN%20Knowledge%20Paper_FINAL_0.pdf
[32] Grow Asia, 2019, pathways to scale. http://exchange.growasia.org/system/files/Pre-read_Pathways%20to%20Scale_170509.pdf
[33] Grow Asia report on inclusive value chain business model, 2020:
http://exchange.growasia.org/system/files/Grow%20Asia%20x%20iBAN%20Knowledge%20Paper_FINAL_0.pdf
[34] Targeting strategy is further discussed in Annex 5: SEACAP Review Note
[35] See IOE’s Country Programme Strategic Evaluation of Cambodia.
[36]https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/42266596/propoor_vc_guidelines.pdf/10bcbf35-36bc-a0a0-2d0b-f4a9bd3c5e5f?
t=1616421969633
[37] See IFAD Pro-Poor Value Chain Development
[38] This would impose a limit on financing size between $4,000 (25% grant) and $5,000 (35% grant) with the latter perhaps
representing a $4,000 investment plUSD1,000 working capital.
[39] For an AC with 200 smallholder members and assuming 30% grant financing, this would limit the total investment finance to
$100,000. For a large AC / UAC with 1000 smallholder members, financing limit would be $500,000.
[40] So an AC with 200 smallholder members (minimum size) can get $60,000 which is quite a lot.
[41] From the IFAD12 PBAS, US$5.0 million were still available for Cambodia. This will be used for the new CAISAR project currently
under design, which would mobilize US$180 million co-financing from AIIB and GCF.
[42] Official Exchange Rate (ER) June 2022] IMF rates: www.google.com /search?q= imf+exchange +rate+of+cambodia&rlz=1,
C1RUCY_enCA736CA736&oq = IMF+exchange+rate +of+cambo&aqs = chrome.1.69i57j33i160l2.16172j0j
7&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8
39/39
[43]Computed: SER = [[b+(b*c)] + [a-(a*d)]/ [b+a] ]*e: a = average export value; b = average import values; c = Import Tariff (the
average Most Favored Nation tariff rate: MFN is the relevant rate); d = Export duties (export of all business items); and e = Official (or
market) Exchange Rate.
[44] For instance, Olam calculated that they reduced their sourcing cost by 30% when working with cooperatives
[45] Sub-Decree 181 ANK/BK, 02 December 2019
[46] PEFA 2021.
[47] Cambodia Country and Sector/Agency Procurement Assessment, ADB 2019 (CSPA).
[48/49] PEFA 2021
[50] IFAD Procurement Plan Template can be accessible at https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/41917572
[51]https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-detail/asset/39438991
[52]https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-detail/asset/39500875
[53]https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-detail/asset/40186603
[54]https://www.ifad.org/en/accountability-and-complaints-procedures.
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Logical Framework
1/8
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outreach 
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
Project
MIS
Annual
PMU
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
0 100000 250000
0 100000 250000
0
40000 100000
Indigenous people
0
3000
7500
Non-Indigenous people
Total number of persons
receiving services
0 200000 500000
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Households
0
50000 125000
Corresponding number of households reached
Landless or land-poor –
Households
0
10000
25000
Project
MIS
Project
MIS
Annual
PMU
Annual
PMU
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
Project
MIS
Annual
PMU
Household members
0 200000 500000
100,000 smallholder
hh in POs and
25,000 landless or
land-poor hh
benefitting from
employment
opportunities
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Project Goal 
Rural poverty and vulnerability has decreased and climate resilience of Cambodian rural
households has increased through inclusive and environmentally sustainable growth in
the agriculture sector.
Declining rural poverty rate
Poverty headcount
17
15
10
Annual
National
poverty
statistic
(%)
Agriculture value added growth of 3% per annum (ADP Policy
Indicator 1)
National
Accounts
Annual
Average growth of value added
in agriculture sector
4
3
3
National
Institute of
Statistics
National
Institute of
Statistics
Development Objective 
Inclusive and sustainable agriculture sector growth based on exports and domestic
markets has increased incomes of rural producers and workers.
# of rural households with household income increased by at
least 20%
Outcome
survey
BL, MT, EL Service
provider
Number of households
Women-headed households
Total number of household
members
0
0
0
20000
50000
6000
7500
27000 225000
IE.2.1 Individuals demonstrating an improvement in
empowerment
Outcome
Survey
Service
Provider
Total persons
Total persons
Females
Females
Males
Males
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
10
10000
25000
4
10
5000
12500
4
10
5000
12500
Increased volume
and / or value
added will result in
increased incomes
for smallholders and
employment
opportunities for the
rural poor, therefore
contributing to
reduced national
poverty headcount
based on inclusive
growth.
There are market
opportunities to
increase volumes
and / or capture
more value-added
in pro-poor value
chains.
Outcome 
Stakeholders Feedback
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-
making of local authorities and project-supported service
providers
Outcome
survey
BL, MT, EL Service
provider
Responsive and
accountable
governance of ACs.
Household members
0 100000 225000
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outcome 
Outcome 1 Smallholders’ and PO’s Investments in productive assets have increased
their productivity and competitiveness in domestic and exports-based value chains.
Indigenous households
Women-headed households
Households (%)
Households (number)
0
0
0
0
350
750
8500
18750
20
45
22500
50000
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services
Household members
0 126000 315000
Outcome
survey
BL, MT, EL Service
provider
Indigenous households
Women-headed households
Households (%)
Households (number)
0
0
0
0
420
1050
4200
10500
25
56
28000
70000
# beneficiary households with labour productivity increasing in
line with ADP target (8% p.a.)
Outcome
survey
BL, MT, EL Service
provider
Total number of household
members
Number of households
Women-headed households
0
0
0
80000 200000
20000
50000
3000
7500
2.2.5 Rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase in
sales
MIS
Annual
PMU
50% of supported
households able to
achieve this
increase.
Percentage of rural POs
Number of Rural POs
Rural POs wtih women in
leadership position
Rural POs - crop
0
0
0
0
35
180
180
90
450
450
180
450
Output 
1.1.1 Financial support provided to PO with bankable investment
Number of rural producers benefiting from loan-financed
investments by AC / PO
MIS
Annual
PMU
Rural producers benefiting
Males
0
0
20000
50000
10000
25000
POs willing to
accept risks of
investing if suitable
assistance
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/8
Name
females
Indigenous People
Young
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
0
0
0
10000
25000
300
750
4000
10000
Output 
1.1.2 Financial support provided to smallholders with bankable investment proposals in
productive and resilient assets
1.1.3 Rural producers accessing production inputs and/or
technological packages
MIS
Annual
PMU
Males
Females
Young
Indigenous people
Total rural producers
0
0
0
0
0
600
600
240
10
1500
1500
600
25
1200
3000
Farmers willing to
accept risks of
investing if suitable
assistance and
finance is provided
Output 
1.2 Enabling market infrastructure for Producer Organisations
# members of PO/AC with access to physical infrastructure
assets provided by the project.
MIS
Annual
PMU
Outcome 
2. PO’s partnerships with agribusinesses have been enhanced and their market access
improved
Total PO/AC members
Males
Females
Indigenous people
Young
0
0
0
0
0
16000
40000
8000
20000
8000
20000
240
600
1600
4000
2.2.2 Supported rural enterprises reporting an increase in
profit
MIS
Annual
PMU
Number of enterprises
Percentage of enterprises
0
0
4
25
9
60
2.2.1 Persons with new jobs/employment opportunities
Males
Females
Indigenous people
Young
0
0
0
0
5000
12500
5000
12500
150
375
2000
5000
Outcome
survey
BL, MT, EL Service
provider
Investments create
equivalent of about
10,000 full-time
jobs, with most roles
being part time /
seasonal.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
5/8
Name
Total number of persons with
new jobs/employment
opportunities
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
0
10000
25000
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Policy 3 Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies
proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or
amendment
Outcome
survey
BL, MT, EL Service
provider
Number
0
1
3
Output 
2.1.1. Private investments for agricultural market and trade development promoted and
facilitated
2.1.1 Rural enterprises accessing business development
services
MIS
Annual
PMU
Rural enterprises
0
6
15
Output 
2.1.2 Digital and financial technology service providers supported to develop and / or
scale up use of digital applications.
Number of smallholder farmers using digital applications
promoted by the project
MIS
Annual
PMU
Number of smallholder farmers
Males
Females
Indigenous People
Young
0
0
0
0
0
4000
10000
2000
5000
2000
5000
60
150
800
2000
Output 
Output 2.1.3 Financial support provided for agribusinesses to invest in increased
processing capacity
# rural enterprises accessing financial services
MIS
Annual
PMU
Enterprises
0
6
15
Collaboration with
existing institutions
to identify
participating
businesses and
deliver
complementary
support (e.g. Khmer
Enterprise,
EuroCham).
Digital applications
available for roll-out
/ scale up.
Retail financial
institutions able to
access existing
credit guarantee
schemes (Co-
financing Guarantee
Scheme of SME
Bank and Women
Entrepreneurs
Guarantee Scheme.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
6/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
2.2.1 Strategic infrastructure for agriculture trade facilitation established (Post Harvest
Reference Centres, Quarantine Inspection Offices, Plant Health Reference Laboratories
etc.)
Number of facilities completed and operational with
sustainable management and financing plans.
Facilities
0
3
Output 
Output 2.2.2 Review of policy and regulatory framework supported to strengthen
competitiveness
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
Number
0
1
MIS
Annual
PMU
MIS
Annual
PMU
7
3
Outcome 
3. Smallholders have been organised and coordinated in Agriculture Cooperatives and
other Producer Organisations, and have been enabled to produce in response to market
requirements for type, volume and quality standards.
2.2.4 Supported rural producers’ organizations providing new
or improved services to their members
MIS
Annual
PMU
Number of POs
Total number of POs members
Males POs members
Females POs members
Young POs members
Indigenous POs members
0
0
0
0
0
0
214
535
40000 100000
20000
50000
20000
50000
8000
20000
600
1500
2.2.3 Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private
entities
Number of POs
Percentage of POs
Women in leadership position
0
0
0
150
375
30
90
75
225
MIS
Annual
PMU
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices
Outcome
survey
BL, MT, EL Service
provider
Total number of household
members
Households
Women-headed households
0
0
0
20000
50000
4
10
500
1250
Sustainable
business model for
facilities identified
Govt willing to
engage on policy
dialogue -this will
likely not happen in
fact.
Consolidation and
formalisation of POs
leads to improved
services Farmers
understand the
potential benefits of
forming ACs / POs
Enterprises willing
to enter
partnerships with
ACs and UACs
Resilient and
sustainable
production
technologies can be
market-competitive
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
3.1 Producer organisations / Agriculture Cooperatives (AC) established and
strengthened
7/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Households
0
4440
11100
2.1.3 Rural producers’ organizations supported
MIS
Annual
PMU
Total size of POs
Rural POs supported
Males
Females
Young
Indigenous people
Rural POs supported that are
headed by women
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
40000 100000
214
535
20000
50000
20000
50000
4000
10000
600
120
1500
300
2.1.4 Supported rural producers that are members of a rural
producers' organization
MIS
Annual
PMU
Total number of persons
Males
Females
Indigenous people
Young
0
0
0
0
0
40000 100000
20000
50000
20000
50000
600
20000
8000
1500
POs will consist of
200 existing ACs
with 40,000
members and 300
ACs or other type of
regstered PO with
60,000 members
formed by
aggregating
Business Clusters
supported by
ASPIRE / AIMS..
About 1,000 BCs (of
existing 4,400) will
be aggregated,
yielding about
40,000 members,
with an additional
20,000 members
recruited to the new
structures. It is
assumed that all
these existing or
successfully created
entities will achieve
graduation status by
the end of the
project. 35 higher-
level Unions of
Agriculture
Cooperatives
(existing or newly
created) will be
supported, their
members are
counted amongst
the members of the
POs.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
8/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
3.2.1 Centres of excellence and Lead Farmers established and supported for
development and dissemination of improved agricultural, post-harvest and processing
technologies
Suitable sites and
sustainable
business models for
Centres of
Excellence
identified.
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or
technologies
MIS
Annual
PMU
Total number of persons trained
by the project
Total number of attendances to
training sessions
Men trained in crop
Women trained in crop
Young people trained in crop
Indigenous people trained in
crop
Total persons trained in crop
Males trained at least once by
the project
Females trained at least once by
the project
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8000
20000
8000
20000
4000
10000
4000
10000
1600
4000
120
300
8000
20000
4000
10000
4000
10000
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2: ToC 
Annex 2:  Theory of Change  
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming calculation  
Annex 3:  Project cost and financing:  
Detailed costs tables 
CambodiaAgriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE-AT)Table 1. Productive and Resilient Assets for Producer OrganisationsDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit2023202420252026202720282029Total(US$)2023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. Investment in productive and resilient assets of POs and smallholders1. Loan Financing to Smallholders /a% of loan0.180.30.20.180.10.04-13,948,0007111,184790711395158-3,9482. Loan Financing to Smallholders Contribution from ARDB% of loan--0.180.30.20.1811.863,948,000--7111,1847907113,9487,3433. Loan Financing to Smallholders contributed by beneficiary% of loan0.180.30.20.180.10.04-1394,8007111879713916-3954. Grant Financing to Smallholders /b% of grant0.060.10.120.150.180.190.215,922,0003555927118881,0661,1251,1845,9225. Grant Financing to Smallholders gap% of grant0.060.10.120.150.180.190.218,820,0005298821,0581,3231,5881,6761,7648,8206. Incremental cost of screening against project criteria: Loans and Grants to SH% fees0.0050.0040.0030.0020.0020.0020.0020.023,948,0002016128888797. Loan Financing to Producer Organisations% of loan0.180.30.20.180.10.04-16,550,0001,1791,9651,3101,179655262-6,5508. Loan Financing to Producer Organisations contribution from ARDB% of loan--0.180.30.20.1811.866,550,000--1,1791,9651,3101,1796,55012,1839. Loan Financing to Producer Organisations contribution from the POs% of loan0.180.30.20.180.10.04-1655,0001181971311186626-65510. Grant Financing to Producer Organisations /c% of grant0.060.10.120.150.180.190.219,830,0005909831,1801,4751,7691,8681,9669,83011. Incremental cost of screening against project criteria: Loans and Grants to PO% of fees0.0050.0040.0030.0020.0020.0020.0020.026,550,0003326201313131313112. Value Chain Financing Specialist /dPerson-Months6121212121212783,00020424345464850295Subtotal3,6266,0067,2238,9807,7457,08915,48356,151B. Enabling market infrastructure for Producer Organisations1. Infrastructure Grant Finance for new Producer Organisations /ePO-6610010066--33264,470-4,9597,7457,9845,433--26,1212. Engineering services for feasibility study, design and construction supervisionPO-6610010066--3326,200-478748774528--2,528Subtotal-5,4378,4938,7585,961--28,649Total3,62611,44315,71617,73713,7067,08915,48384,800 _________________________________\a The amount of the loan provided by the project is gradually reducing and ending at the 6th year, but the reflows of loan repayments will be used to finance loans in the later part of the project.\b Farmers are eligible for blended loan and grant finance with minimum 25% grant element. Farmers meeting specific project priority criteria may qualify for additional grant up to maximum 35% of the investment amount.\c The maximum grant element for PO will be determined by the number of smallholder farmer members of the graduated PO who are expected to benefit from the investment\d One full-time adviser to assist ARDB to analyse investments and move towards value chain financing\e Community infrastructure for PO that have not benefitted from grant assistance previously. Funding for infra related to production, handling, processing or marketing of commodities in the targeted VC which include buildings, or fixed  items 
Mainstreaming calculation  
Cambodia Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE-AT)Table 2.1. Strengthening private investment for agricultural market and trade developmentDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit2023202420252026202720282029Total(US$)2023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs A. Strengthening private investment for agricultural market    and trade development  (Sub-Comp 2.1) 1. Investment-oriented technical support to agri-businesses /a VC mobilization and brokering (in-country) Lump Sum-2332--1050,000-117181187129--614Export market research, exposure and trade promotion Events-2332--1050,000-117181187129--614Specialist investment advice to businesses Events-51015---3020,000-117241374---733Links with international centres of expertise /b Lump Sum122221-1050,0005611712112512967-614Technical assistant to promote export to China Lump Sum0.50.5-----1100,0005050-----100Subtotal 10651772487438767-2,6752. Agri-business investment team International Agribusiness Investment Specialist /c Person-Months888888-4825,000226233241250258267-1,475Snr National Agribusiness Investment Specialist Person-Months121212121212-722,500343536373940-221National Agribusiness Specialists Person-Months242424242424-1441,500414243454648-266Subtotal 300311321332343355-1,9623. Agribusiness investment financing Line of credit /d Lump Sum14552--171,000,0001,1034,5895,9666,2052,581--20,445Line of credit contribution from SME Bank Lump Sum--14652181,000,000--1,1934,9647,7446,7112,79223,404Line of credit contribution from SME Lump Sum14652--18100,000110459716620258--2,164Specialist TA to PFIs for VC financing Lump Sum1111---4102,350116119124128---486Subtotal 1,3295,1687,99911,91710,5836,7112,79246,4994. Vehicles and equipment Laptops Each4--4---81,0005--5---10Office equipment Lump Sum2--1---310,00024--13---37Subtotal 29--19---47Total Investment Costs 1,7655,9959,04413,14111,3147,1332,79251,184II. Recurrent Costs A. DSA for in-country travel /e Days240240240240240240-1,4403591010101111-61B. Other operating costs Lump Sum111111-625,000272829313233-180Total Recurrent Costs 373839414244-241Total 1,8016,0339,08413,18211,3567,1772,79251,425 _________________________________\a The project is expected to work with about 40 growth-oriented agri-businesses and will be provided on a cost sharing basis with the participating agri-businesses.\b Service provider will facilitathe activity\c Short term intermittent position, 8 month per year, 2 international travels per year.\d The line of credit will complement SME Bank's existing SME loan co-financing.\e 5 days per specialist per month in field 
Mainstreaming calculation  
Table 2.2. Strengthening the enabling environment for competitive agriculturalQuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Detailed CostsUnit2023202420252026202720282029Total(US$)2023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs A. Strengthening the enabling environment for competitive    agricultural value chains and trade (Sub-Comp 2.2) 1. Post Harvest Plant Quarantine Research Centre /a Building construction Sites-1-----11,370,000-1,597-----1,597Post-harvest scientific equipment and tools Set-1-----11,850,000-2,289-----2,289Laboratory chemicals and consumables Set-11----250,000-6264----126Office equipment Lump Sum-1-----1100,000-124-----124Training of staff for operation equipment & centre management Lump Sum-11----2100,000-117121----237Subtotal -4,188185----4,3732. Regional Plant Quarantine Offices Building construction Sites-5-----5540,000-2,997-----2,997Scientific and inspection equipment and tools Set-5-----5210,000-1,181-----1,181Laboratory chemicals and consumables Sites-55----1020,000-112116----229Office equipment Sites-5-----550,000-281-----281Vehicle - pick-up Unit-2-----230,000-64-----64Motorcycles Unit-10-----102,000-22-----22E-Phyto system development for digital certificates System-1-----11,500,000-1,684-----1,684Training of staff for operation equipment & centre management Lump Sum-11----2100,000-112116----228Subtotal -6,455232----6,6873. Plant Health Reference Lab and Facilities Building construction Sites-1-----12,550,000-2,972-----2,972Post-harvest scientific equipment and tools Set-1-----11,400,000-1,732-----1,732Laboratory chemicals and consumables Set-11----2100,000-124128----252Office equipment Lump Sum-1-----1100,000-124-----124Training of staff for operating equipment & lab management Lump Sum-11----2100,000-117121----237Subtotal -5,069249----5,3184. Plant Health Research Stations Infrastructure for stations Sites-3-----3850,000-2,972-----2,972Tools and equipment Set-3-----3100,000-371-----371Office equipment Set-3-----350,000-186-----186Subtotal -3,529-----3,5295.Technical consultant service to design and supervise of the construction work and training the use of the facility Lump Sum-111---3287,115-322333345---1,0006. Improved Negotiation of Export Protocols Protocol negotiation preparation, completion and logistics /b Lump Sum11111--5123,400139144149154159--746International TA for improvement protocol negotiations Person-Months443----1125,00011311791----320Technical Assistance to support protocol negotiation with China /c Lump Sum0.50.5-----1100,0005050-----100Subtotal 302311239154159--1,1667. Strengtheing of plant health & SPS policies    and regulation for agricultural exports Review and strengthening of policies and regulations,    vs international best practice Lump Sum11111--5100,000113117121125129--604Total Investment Costs 41519,9911,359623288--22,677II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff 1. Sub-Component Coordinator Person-Months1212121212--6030044445--222. Deputy Coordinator Person-Months2424242424--12025077778--363. Admin and Accountant Officers Person-Months2424242424--12020056666--294. Project Implementation Officers Person-Months180180180180180--9002004041434546--215Subtotal 5658606365--301B. Operating costs 1. Per diem for project officer implementation Lump Sum1,3201,3201,320####1,320--6,600344951535557--2642. Transportation, fuel month1212121212--605,0006668717376--3543. Office Operating Expenses month1212121212--603,0003941424446--2124. Other driver allowance (2) month2424242424--12025077778--355. O&M Vehicles & Equipment month1212121212--6035055555--256. Laboratory expenses + cleaner (6 person) month7272727272--3602502020212223--106Subtotal 185192199206214--996Total Recurrent Costs 241250259269279--1,297Total 65620,2411,618892567--23,974\a This is to support producers and exporters in the priority VC to maintain competitiveness while complying with SPS/market access requirements.\b Service provider will facilitate\c Negotiation of competitive export protocols with China and provide input on design and operation of the planned Post-Harvest Reference Centre (x1) and other priority public services and infrastructure to support export protocol negotiation. 
Mainstreaming calculation  
Cambodia Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE-AT) Table 3. Aggrgating Farmers and Integrating them in Value Chains Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit2023202420252026202720282029Total(US$)2023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs A. Structure and Capacity of Producer Organisations 1. Capacity building of Newly Registered Producer by Service Provider Establishment of PO management functions PO5010010050---3007,500423876905468---2,672Business planning and marketing arrangements PO5010010050---3005,000282584603312---1,781Investment planning for comp. 1 support PO5010010050---3005,000282584603312---1,781Support to implementation of investments PO-5010010050--3007,500-438905936484--2,763Follow-up Coaching PO--50150200150506002,500--1514686455011731,937Marketing activity to promote PO and its VC Lump Sum-0.20.20.20.20.2-12,000,000-400400400400400-2,000Subtotal 9882,8813,5682,8961,52990117312,9352. Support to Exsting PO Capacity Building and Investment Planning PO50505050---2007,500423438453468---1,782Support to Investment Implementation and Follow-Up PO-50505050--2007,500-438453468484--1,842Support AC of AC- MIS accounting system.  Lump Sum-1-----1200,000-247-----247Subtotal 4231,123905936484--3,8723. PO's registration and follow-up (PDAFF) Cost of AC Registration PDAFF PO5010010050---3002,000113233241125---713Follow-up support from GDA PO5010010050---30050028586031---178Subtotal 141292302156---8914. Technical Assistance Agronomy and post-harvest technical specialist Person-Months12121212121212842,50034353637394041263Producer Organisation Specialist Person-Months12121212121212842,50034353637394041263Short-term technical expertise Person-Months612121212126725,00034707275778041450Subtotal 102140145150155160124976Subtotal 1,6544,4364,9204,1382,1681,06129718,673B. Technical Advice and Centres of Excellence /a 1. Centre of Excellence under GDA Facility11-----2500,000598619-----1,2172. CoE (UAC) - capital investment Facility-122---5100,000-124256265---6453. CoE (UAC) - operation start up and private companies Facility--135421524,000--3195164136704974. F2F extension led by Lead Farmers PO-75757575--3002,000-175181187194--7375. Producer Organisation Facilitator Staff Person-Months5015025025015050-9001006183031197-1116. Technical coordination and oversight /b Province5101616116-6420,000113233386399284160-1,576Subtotal 7171,169884978661303704,782Total 2,3715,6045,8045,1162,8291,36436723,455 _________________________________\a The support is for upgrading one existing public research station in a Center of Excellence for development and dissemination of improved agriculture techniques\b Considered as a service provision 
Mainstreaming calculation  
Table 4. Management, monitoring and evaluationQuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Detailed CostsUnit2023202420252026202720282029Total(US$)2023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs A. Project Operations 1. Training, meetings and workshops Start up workshop and other project management workshop and exchange visit Lump Sum4444444285,00022232425262728174Joint Programme Review with IFAD Review Mission and COSOP activity Lump Sum1111111710,0001111121213131487Subtotal 333436373940422612. Studies and Surveys /a Adjustment of MIS ASPIRE and follow up support Lump Sum1------130,00034------34Impact assessment (base line, ending and Impact)- Firm Lump Sum1111111770,00079828487909397613Audit Lump Sum1111111720,00023232425262728175Subtotal 136105109112116120124822Subtotal 1691391441501551601661,083B. Vehicles and equipment Cars, 4w-Drive, station wagon (3 for ASPIRE SEC) Each3------335,000112------112Computers (laptop or desktops with UPS and printer) Each15---15--301,10020---23--42Office furniture (desk, tables, chairs, shelves, safe) Each1---1--25,0006---7--13Subtotal 138---29--167C. Technical Assistance 1. International Team Leader Person-Months12121212121212849,9001341391431481531591641,0402. Deputy Team Leader Person-Months12121212121212843,200434546485051533363. Gender and Social Inclusion Adviser Person-Months12121212121212842,500343536373940412634. Social, Environment and Climate Change Specialist Person-Months12121212121212842,500343536373940412635. Senior M&E and Planning Specialist- Team leader Person-Months12121212121212842,700373839404243452846. ICT Specialist Person-Months12121212121212841,800242526272829301897. Finance and Accountant Specialist- as team leader Person-Months12121212121212842,500343536373940412638. Procurement Specialist- a Team leader Person-Months12121212121212842,500343536373940412639. Provincial Management Adviser /b Person-Months96961921921921921921,1521,6001731793713833964104242,33810. Technical Assistant for the managment of the SSTC grant Lump Sum0.50.5-----1100,0005050-----100Subtotal 5976167707978248528815,338Total Investment Costs 9047559159461,0081,0131,0486,589II. Recurrent Costs A. Project staff - Recruitment 1. M&E and Planning Staff /c Person-Months12121212121212841,000131414151516171052. KM & Communication Specialist (2 staff) /d Person-Months242424242424241681,800485052545658603763. Finance and Accountant Staff (3 staff) /e Person-Months363636363636362521,500606264677072754714. Cashier (2) /f Person-Months24242424242424168700191920212223231465. Procurement Staff (2 staff) /g Person-Months24242424242424168900242526272829301886. Administration Staff /h Person-Months24242424242424168800212223242526271677. Support staff (1 cleaner) Person-Months12121212121212843004444555318. Driver (6 new cars and 3 existing car) Person-Months10810810810810810810875630036373940424345282Subtotal 2242332422522622722831,767B. Project staff - POC 1. Programme Director Person-Months12121212121212843505555566372. Programme Manager Person-Months12121212121212843505555566373. MEF Team /i Person-Months48484848484848336250131414151516171054. MIS Officer /j Person-Months12121212121212842503344444265. Gender Promotion Officer /k Person-Months12121212121212842503344444266. Safeguard Officer /l Person-Months12121212121212842503344444267. M&E and Planning Officer /m Person-Months12121212121212842503344444268. Financial and Accounting Officer /n Person-Months12121212121212842503344444269. KM & Communication Officer /o Person-Months121212121212128425033444442610. Procurement Officer /p Person-Months121212121212128425033444442611. Administration Officer /q Person-Months121212121212128425033444442612. Administration Officer /r Person-Months121212121212128425033444442613. Director at PDAFF: General management /s Person-Months96961801801801801801,0921501617323435363820714. M&E and Planning Officer at PDAFF /t Person-Months96961801801801801801,0921501617323435363820715. Agricultural Cooperative Officer at PDAFF /u Person-Months96961801801801801801,09215016173234353638207Subtotal 1001041531591661721791,034C. Travel and allowances 1. Travel Cost Lump Sum111111178,00099910101111692. DSA Lump Sum1111111730,00033343537383941257Subtotal 42434546485052326D. Operation & Maintenance 1. Cars Vehicles12121212121212844,200555759626466694322. Office Lump Sum111111175,0005666677433. Advertisement and O&M Office Lump Sum1111111710,00011111212131314864. Translating documents Lump Sum1111111710,0001111121213131486Subtotal 838689929599103646Total Recurrent Costs 4484655295495715936173,772Total 1,3521,2211,4441,4961,5791,6061,66410,361 
Mainstreaming calculation  
Mainstreaming calculation  
Phases 
Principles 
Criteria 
Phase 1 
Context and 
location-specific 
focus 
Step 1. Vulnerability 
context  
Step 2. Statement of 
intent 
Step 3. Linkage to project activities 
Project document 
describes the current and 
anticipated impacts of 
climate change?  
Explicitly states intent 
to reduce identified 
vulnerability? 
Clearly links vulnerability context to 
project activities/policies? 
Yes 
Ranking  the Strength of 
the Vulnerability Context 
MDB adaptation 
sector/topic: 
Yes 
Robust 
Yes 
Climatic threats identified 
Cross-cutting sectors 
MDB adaptation sub-sector/topic: 
Flooding, pest and disease, pattern and 
intensitity of rainfall, storm, drought, 
extrement heat 
Description of 
components/sub-
components/activities 
of project 
(only those relevant 
to climate) 
Total IFAD Loan 
funding 
of sub-
component/activities 
(USD) 
Total IFAD 
Grant 
funding 
of sub-
component 
/ activities 
(USD) 
Is this 
component/sub-
component 
adaptation 
focused? 
% of 
component/sub-
component that 
counts as 
adaptation 
finance 
Phase 
2 
Granularity & 
Conservativeness 
Total 
amount 
counted as 
adaptation 
finance 
(excluding 
Project 
management 
costs) 
Mitigation 
co-
benefits? 
Other notes 
Component 1: 
Productive and 
Resilient Assets for 
Producer 
Organisations  
Mainstreaming calculation  
Sub-Component 1.1: 
Investment in 
productive and 
resilient assets of POs 
and smallholders 
 $                                             
 [Insert 
amount]  
12,706.00  
Yes 
32.6% 
 $                                               
[Select] 
4,142.16  
70.To be eligible for component 1 support .... (iii) 
strong governance and social inclusivity and social 
and environmental risk management. (PDR, 
page:9). 
72.The project will work with GoKC’s Agriculture 
and Rural Development Bank (ARDB) to provide 
financial support to qualifying POs and 
smallholders with eligible investment proposals 
through the integration of credit line and results-
based grants. (PDR, page 9) 
75. Eligible investments by smallholders must be 
...... (4) not included in a negative list based on 
social and environmental safeguards. (PDR, page 
10) 
(35% of loan financing to smallholders and POs) 
Sub-Component 1.2: 
Enabling market 
infrastructure for 
Producer 
Organisations  
Component 2: 
Business Partnership 
and Market Access 
Sub-Component 2.1: 
Strengthening private 
investment for 
agricultural market 
and trade 
development  
Sub-Component 2.2: 
Strengthening the 
enabling environment 
for competitive 
agricultural value 
chains and trade  
 $                                                           
-    
 [Insert 
amount]  
[Select] 
[Insert %] 
[Select] 
 [Insert 
 $                                             
amount]  
18,571.00  
Yes 
21.2% 
 $                                               
[Select] 
3,937.05  
92. ….. Priority will be given to those businesses in 
each priority value chain that can credibly 
demonstrate …. ii) greatest impact on priority 
groups including women, youth, ethnic minorities 
and the disabled, and iii) those introducing 
innovative technologies or business practices, 
especially addressing climate change related 
mitigation or adaptation issues. (PDR, page: 12) 
( 35% of line of credit based on the priority) 
 $                                               
 [Insert 
amount]  
2,713.00  
[Select] 
[Insert %] 
[Select] 
Mainstreaming calculation  
Component 3: 
Aggregating Farmers 
and integrate them 
into Value Chains 
Sub-Component 3.1: 
Structure and Capacity 
of Producer 
Organisations  
Sub-Component 3.2: 
Technical Advice and 
Centers of Excellence  
IFAD Total Project 
costs without PMC 
 $                                             
 [Insert 
amount]  
10,688.00  
Yes 
42.1% 
 $                                               
[Select] 
4,499.65  
115. Sub-Component 3.1 Structure and Capacity of 
Producer Organisations will provide assistance to 
POs to structure themselves in formal 
organisations and to increase their capacity in the 
following key functions:  ….j. Strengthen 
administration, governance, inclusiveness 
(especially in terms of ID-Poor, women, youth and 
people form ethnic minorities), and Social, 
Environmental and Climate risk management. 
(PDR, page 16) 
(50% support to new and old POs) 
 $                                               
 [Insert 
amount]  
3,322.00  
[Select] 
[Insert %] 
[Select] 
 $                                            
48,000.00  
 Sub-total  
 $                                      
12,579  
Phase 3 
IFAD PMC counted as adaptation 
finance (pro rata) 
Project management 
costs (PMC) 
Total IFAD PMC 
(USD) 
% Adaptation 
finance to be 
assigned to PMC 
IFAD PMC counted as 
adaptation finance (USD) 
Component 5 
 $                                                           
-    
26% 
 $                                                           
-    
Phase 4 
Total adaptation finance 
Amount (USD) 
% 
 $                                    
13,000  
27% 
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4: EFA  
Annex 4: AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
1. 
Introduction and methodology 
The design mission for the ASPIRE-AT project carried out the Economic and Financial 
Analysis (EFA) to asses the financial and economic viabilities of ASPIRE-AT. The ASPIRE-
AT project will directly reach an estimated 125,000 households. Out of these, who have 
land  and  would  increase  their  on-farm  and  livestock  production  would  be  100,000 
households, and employees of business enterprises that the project would support would 
be 25,000. The distribution of the beneficiaries by type of enterprises and by project years 
are presented in Table1. 
  Methodology  and  Approach  of  EFA:  The  representative  gross  margin  (GM) 
models were developed based on the relevant information received from various sources. 
The sources of data (EFA excel sheets presents specific references that were used to derive 
GM  models)  include  project  documents  of  the  Accelerating  Inclusive  Markets  for 
Smallholders  Project  (AIMS),  Cambodia  including  the  Project  Design  Report  and  its  EFA 
annex;  CamAgriMarket app  (mobile  phone  app);  ASPIRE-I  MIS  system1;  market  data 
collection  undertaken  by  the  in-country  team  for  the  design  mission  and  a  number  of 
reports and publications. Field data collection for building required gross margin models 
was not possible due to the timing of the design. A list of the prices of relevant inputs and 
outputs  was  obtained  from  the  EFA  of  the  ASPIRE-I  project  and  these  prices  were 
converted to 2022 prices using the current exchange rate of Riels 4,054 to one USD.  Other 
sources of information include National Bank of Cambodia, National Institute of Cambodia, 
and  World  Bank  Commodity  Forecast  and  various  other  reference  source  for  required 
information  to  build  EFA  models2.  The  main  types  of  data  that  were  used  for  the  FEA 
include (i) crop and livestock production data; (ii) market prices; (iii) capital and working 
capital  expenditure  of  on-farm  and  off-farm  micro-enterprise;  (iv)  cost  of  farm  tools, 
machineries  and  livestock  slaughter  house  equipment;  (v)  international  prices  for 
computing parity prices of tradable commodities; and (v) cost of fertiliser and other agro-
chemicals. 
Table1  summarises  the  number  of  enterprises  by  type  and  their  phasing  over  the 
project period. Since there is a strong project attribution, as described below, in generating 
benefits,  the  phasing  of  the  project  beneficiaries  was  designed  in  parallel  to  the  yearly 
distribution of the project budget. The percentage distributions of HHs and the budget are 
close to each other as shown in Table1 below. 
Table1: Distribution of beneficiaries by project years and by type of enterprises 
The EFA retained the targets for key performance indicators (KPIs) of the project that are 
presented in the project log frame.  
Table  2  shows  the  relevant  KPI  indicators  for  the  EFA.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  first  3 
indicators are sub-sets of the core indicator 2.1.4 and the EFA maintained this distribution. 
1 http://aspire.avenasoft.com/monitoring/login 
2 The list of the documents is presented as attachment 1 to this Annex. 
I 
Type of Beneficiaries Yr 2023  Yr 2024  Yr 2025  Yr 2026  Yr 2027  Yr 2028  Yr 2029 TotalFarmers        3,350           16,650           10,200           14,167                200          5,430                 -         49,997 Farmers - Loan Financed        1,000           12,833           11,700           11,000           13,470               -                   -         50,003 Farm based Models        4,350           29,483           21,900           25,167           13,670          5,430                 -       100,000 ACs / POs              30                  65                120                  50                   -                 -                   -              265 SMEs              -                      3                    6                    8                   -                 -                   -                17 Distribution HH4%30%22%25%14%5%0%100%Budget Distribution5%23%18%20%15%9%10%100% 
Annex 4: EFA  
Table 2: Project Logframe indicators that were retained in the EFA 
The ASPIRE-AT project will generate multiple social, nutritional, financial, economic 
and  institutional  benefits.  The  beneficiaries  of  ASPIRE-AT  represent  the  following  value 
chain sectors: vegetables, poultry, cassava, cashew, fresh fruits and processed fruits. In 
order  to  represent  these  sectors  and  to  capture  the  benefits  of  the  ASPIRE-AT,  several 
gross margin modes were included in the EFA. Table33 summarises the GM models that 
are farm-based models, and AC based modes and small and medium industry models. The 
project would also support production of elite cassava planting material under poly tunnel 
culture. This investment would be managed by the AC. Two types of cassava cultivations 
were  modeled  to  capture  the  cultivations  with  elite,  disease  free  planting  material  and 
regular material. The differentiated prices were used to capture the elite planting material 
production enterprise.  
The assumptions used to build up the GM models were presented with details in the 
EFA excel sheets. Table44 presents a few of the key references that were used to build the 
GM models. The critical indicators of the GM models (yield level etc) were presented to the 
country team3 who assisted to design mission to verify the indicators. The data provided 
by the team further validated and improved the WOP and the WP scenarios. 
Table3: Typical value chains supported by the project and the GM models represented 
the VCs 
Value Chain 
Typical investments 
GM Models used for the EFA 
Vegetable 
Greenhouse,  water  management,  post-
harvest handling. 
Backyard chicken 
Production facilities, slaughter and packing 
Cassava 
Disease free planting material 
Organic cassava 
Improved soil management 
Cashew 
Post-harvest and processing 
Fresh fruit 
Post-harvest, treatment, packing etc 
Processed fruit 
Processing 
Irrigated vegetable (farms), Vegetables: ACs set-
up simple collection/grading centers, improved 
packhouses with cold storage 
Chicken - Hatchery; back-yard poultry; Larger, 
professional slaughterhouse; small 
slaughterhouse; 
Cassava regular 
Organic Cassava with Elite PM 
Orchard development / replanting; Export 
processing business 
Orchard development, ACs set-up simple 
collection/grading centers 
Export processing business 
Table4: Data sources used for the estimation of cost and benefits of the EFA 
GM Model 
Vegetable 
Data sources to build WOP situation 
Accelerating Inclusive Markets for 
Smallholders Project, Cambodia 
ASPIRE-1: Tracking the economic 
performance4. The Economic 
Performance Report of the website 
Data sources to build WP situation 
Yield and Prices: Economic Performance Data 2021-
2022; ASPIRE Project mange the website (EP-Data) 
3 Mr Mao Narith was very helpful and responded with appropriate information as well as sources of information for the EFA. 
4 http://aspire.avenasoft.com/monitoring/login 
II 
Logframe IndicatorsNb HHsNumber of rural producers benefiting from loan-financed investments by AC / PO50,000Rural producers accessing production inputs and / or technological packages3,000Number of smallholder farmers benefitting from business development services directly or as PO members50,000Core 3.2.2 # Households reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices50,000Core 2.1.4 # of supported rural producers that are members of a rural producers' organisation.100,000 
Annex 4: EFA  
Backyard chicken 
Cassava 
Cashew 
provides the average size of 
cultivation of all crops and vegetable 
is one of them. Final Survey Report, 
of ASPIRE-I main impact assessment, 
December 20215 
Accelerating Inclusive Markets for 
Smallholders Project, Cambodia 
Accelerating Inclusive Markets for 
Smallholders Project, Cambodia 
Cambodian Cashew Nut Value Chain 
Assessment Report, Version 4 / 
December 2019, Heks/Eper 
Cambodia;  
Fruit 
Accelerating Inclusive Markets for 
Smallholders Project, Cambodia 
EP-Data 
Analysis of the cassava yield variation at Cambodia 
Thailand border; Asian Journal of Agricultural and 
Environmental Safety, 2020 (1): 17–27; ISSN: 
2575423, https://www.ajaes.org 
EP-Data 
Cashew Production, Processing And 
Commercialization In Kampong Thom And Preah 
Vihear - Field Assessment Report, Cambodian 
Institute For Research And Rural Development 
(CIRD); Cambodia Partnership For Sustainable 
Agriculture (CPSA) 
https://www.agrifarming.in/longan-fruit-farming-
and-cultivation-practices 
Attribution:  The  EFA  methodology  needs  to  identify  a  clear  linkage  between  the 
beneficiaries  and  one  or  more  project  interventions  to  elicit  benefits  and  corresponding 
costs.  The  project  will  contribute  in  generating  quantifiable  financial  benefits  to  about 
100,000  direct  beneficiaries  who  are  members  of  500  ACs/POs,  265  ACs/POs  managed 
enterprises and 17 SMEs that would be managed by the private individual (members of 
ACs) with project supported credit. The beneficiaries’ investments are assisted by loans 
and grants with ASPIRE-AT financing and several other facilities. The EFA recognises the 
following as the main contributory factors to create incremental benefits of the enterprises 
that were selected for the analysis. These include: 
These assistances would be available to the beneficiaries who would either expand 
the existing enterprises including farming or would improve the productivity of the crops 
and livestock, and several AC level enterprises and SMEs. 
2. 
Project Cost, beneficiaries and assumptions 
Costs. The estimated cost of the ASPIRE-AT, generated from COSTAB, was used as 
the project cost with the following adjustment. The ASPIRE-AT provided loans and grants 
was deducted from the project cost in the EFA since these would be provided to meet the 
production cost of the enterprise models including farm models. The production cost of all 
GM models is included in the computation of the gross margins. The ASPIRE-AT project 
5  Agriculture  Services  Program  for  Innovation,  Resilience  and  Extension  (ASPIRE),  ASPIRE  Main 
Impact Assessment, DELIVERABLE 13, FINAL SURVEY REPORT, December 2021 
III 
Annex 4: EFA  
cost net of loans and grant provided by IFAD and other co-fanciers, thus forms the cost of 
the project (see EFA excel sheets for details).  
Beneficiaries. 1 summarised the distribution of the direct beneficiary households, 
ACs and SMEs of ASPIRE-AT project by the enterprises and by the project years. The yearly 
distribution of the beneficiaries is presented in the EFA excel sheets. 
  Gender. The enterprises that ASPIRE-AT is supporting have adequate gender focus. 
Enterprises  such  as  poultry,  vegetable  production,  etc  are  operated  predominantly  by 
women. 
  The EFA was based on the following general assumptions: 
3. 
Financial Analysis 
Enterprise Budgets 
  The financial profitability parameters of all GM models together with the number of 
enterprises  and  the  typical  cultivation  sizes  are  presented  in  Table  15.  The  following 
specific assumptions were used in estimating the indicators: 
6 https://www.fao.org/family-farming/data-sources/dataportrait/country-details/en/?cnt=KHM 
IV 
Annex 4: EFA  
  The net benefits, estimated as the net present value (NPV: at 6% financial DR and 
for 20-year period) and return on investment (ROI: net return divided by total investment 
cost) of all the models have increased with the help of ASPIRE-AT interventions (WP case). 
Table  15  summarises  the  results.  The  same  parameters  for  off-farm  enterprises  are 
presented in the table. All models have positive indicator levels and the return to family 
labour which is higher than the current wage rate in the project area. Positive ROIs for all 
models indicate the financial worthiness of investing beneficiaries’ assets and public funds 
in these models. Table 15 also presents the demand for credit for each enterprise per unit 
of activity. This was generated through the GM models’ cost flows. The EFA excel sheets 
provides the details. 
V 
Annex 4: EFA  
Table 15: Financial profitability indicators of all GM models that were used in the EFA 
A.  Employment generation 
  Table 15 summarises the employment generation, by way of labour use, as a result 
of undertaking project supported farm and off-farm enterprises. The EFA excel sheet has 
the  details  of  employment  for  each  crop  model  for  with  and  without  situations.  The 
incremental total employment creation is 29,934. The farm enterprises such as vegetable, 
poultry etc employ women labour as well and therefore the project provide opportunities 
for  women.  Most  of  the  semi-skill  and  skill  labour  required  for  SMEs  and  AC  based 
enterprises are provided by youth, thus there is opportunity for youth employment as well. 
B.  Credit demand 
  Table 15 indicated the credit demand per unit of enterprise, which is estimated using 
the enterprise cash flow. The amount demanded was then populated using the number of 
beneficiaries of all the enterprises supported by the project. Table 26 presents the credit 
demand distributed by year and the EFA excel sheets has the details. 
VI 
WOP (USD/ha)Net Present Value (6% DR, 20-Yrs)Net Present ValueIncrementAnnual Net Revenue (at FD)ROIReturn to Labour (USD/md)IRRB/C RatioLabour use (md/yr)Credit Need (USD)Farm based enterprisesCassava regular         6,697 0.6318039821851258%1626%1.12110259 Organic Cassava - Elite PM       25,470 0.65-344729 1,074842135%2137%1.2819386 Irrigated vegetable       22,768 0.519,70228,865 9,1632,98991%9528%3.14212,028 Fruit: orchard development       16,000 0.819,21349,323 30,1094,34770%4133%2.081262,191 Fruit: orchard development with credit         1,765 0.8524235,681 35,4395,591101%5569%1.7524631,425 Cashew: Orchard development / replanting       18,000 0.82,4196,421 4,003807260%1431%2.42350 Chicken - Hatchery (traditional breed): New            300 11,303 11,303 1,860 31%2841%1.20751,900 Native chicken - back-yard poultry         9,000 -546240 68410226%762%1.1312Total: Farm based enterprises     100,000 Acs / PO level enterprisesVegetables: ACs set-up simple collection/grading centres20059,565 6,7277,73528%2826%1.4336013,794 Fruit: ACs set-up simple collection/grading centres15117,539 117,539 16,681 85%35531%1.314812,090 Chicken - traditional breed50250,334 250,334 49,050 20%6116%1.41902147,887 SMEsVegetables: Improved packhouses with cold storage5440,187 15,35752,21242%1011%1.041755022,816 Cashew: Export processing business113,977,650 458,547459,80183%44659%1.091045414,551 Chicken: Larger, professional poultry slaughterhouse                1 15,365,363 1,841,8261,865,58683%29249%2.0866001,373,984 Gross Margin ModelsTotal Nb EnterprisesAverage Size of the crop in the farm (ha)WP (USD/ha)Profitability (Incremental analysis) 
Annex 4: EFA  
Table 26: Credit demand of the enterprises estimated using the cash flows of the 
enterprises 
R. Sustainability analysis.  
  The EFA estimated the capacity of the farm models and all other enterprise models 
to repay the loans that were estimated and also estimated the remaining cash flow to be 
used  for  livelihood.  The  details  are  in  the  EFA  excel  sheets.  The  estimation  shows  that 
almost  all  the  models  have  a  positive  cash  flow  from  2nd  year  onwards  to  support  the 
livelihood  after  repayment  of  capital  and  the  interest  of  credit.  The  terms  of  the  credit 
were assumed as 6% annual interest and 1-2 years repayment period. Other family income 
sources such as wage labour etc have not been used for this analysis. 
S. Farm model analysis 
 The  project  beneficiaries  typically  maintain  mix  cropping  systems.  In  order  to 
demonstrate  the  impact  of  project  assistance  in  improving  crops  on  the  whole  farm,  a 
series of farm model analyses were carries out. The farm model analyses were based on 
the cluster approach that the project is adopting to support value chains. The project is 
focusing on the following provinces during its initial years: Battambang (all value chains 
except cashew can be suported); Kandal (vegetable and native chicken can be supported); 
Preah Vihear (cashew and cassava); Siem Reap (vegetable and native chicken) and Takeo 
(vegetable and native chicken). On that basis  as well as the type of crops representing 
main value chains, 8 farm models were derived. In this analysis, the following assumption 
was  maintained:  although  each  farm  of  targeted  100,000  farmers  would  have  several 
crops and livestock, one focused crop or livestock activity would get project benefits and 
productivity of that farm enterprise will be improved. The others enterprises in the farm 
will continue to have cash flows that are similar WOP condition of the farm. Although there 
would be variations, analysis retains the situation where one crop per farm is supported 
by the project. Table7 presents the 8 farm models distributed in the provinces that were 
analysed  (each  model  with  the  combination  of  crops  are  shown  in  different  colours  for 
quick identification). For example, the Farm Mode 1 in Battambang province has irrigated 
VII 
 Yr 2023  Yr 2024  Yr 2025  Yr 2026  Yr 2027  Yr 2028  Yr 2029 Farm based enterprisesCassava regular         6,697 Organic Cassava - Elite PM       25,470 03861,5442,7025,20000Irrigated vegetable       22,768 02,02820,42215,6198,11400Fruit: orchard development       16,000 013,1448,76313,144000Fruit: orchard development with credit         1,765 02,13700000Cashew: Orchard development / replanting       18,000 0000000Chicken - Hatchery (traditional breed): New            300 9519019095000Native chicken - back-yard poultry         9,000 Total: Farm based enterprises     100,000 9517,88630,91931,56013,31400Acs / PO level enterprises               -   Vegetables: ACs set-up simple collection/grading centres            200 3456901,379345000Fruit: ACs set-up simple collection/grading centres              15 0606060000Chicken - traditional breed              50 7391,4792,2182,958000Total: Acs / PO level enterprises            265 1,0842,2293,6583,363000SMEs               -   Vegetables: Improved packhouses with cold storage                5 0234646000Cashew: Export processing business              11 08291,2442,487000Chicken: Larger, professional poultry slaughterhouse                1 001,3740000Total: SMEs              17                   -                 852        2,663        2,533                  -             -                -   Grand Total Credit Demand (USD 1000)110,1571,17920,96737,24037,45613,31400Gross Margin ModelsTotal Nb EnterprisesCredit Demand (USD 1000) 
Annex 4: EFA  
vegetable as the focused crop which got project assistance, and in this typical farm there 
is  fruit  orchard  (longan)  and  native  chicken.  For  model  2,  organic  cassava  with  elite 
planting material is the focused crop and so on.  
Table7: Farm model structure in the provinces that were designed and estimated 
Kandal + Siem Reap + Takeo 
Preah Vihear 
Battambang 
Irrigated vegetable 
Fruit: orchard development 
Native chicken - back-yard poultry 
Irrigated vegetable 
Fruit: orchard development 
Native chicken - back-yard poultry 
Cashew: Orchard development / 
replanting 
Organic Cassava - Elate PM 
Organic Cassava - Elate PM 
Irrigated vegetable 
Cashew: Orchard development / 
replanting 
Fruit: orchard development 
Irrigated vegetable 
Fruit: orchard development with credit 
Irrigated vegetable 
Chicken - Hatchery 
Irrigated vegetable 
Native chicken - back-yard poultry 
Irrigated vegetable 
Brief description of the farm models: The average land size of all the crops to 
represent WOP situation in the models were obtained from the ASPIRE-I data platform , 
design report of ASPIRE-I and the Final Survey Report, of ASPIRE-I main impact 
assessment, December 2021 . The project will contribute to achieve increased income in 
(i) regular cassava with better marketing (model 1); (ii) organic cassava with better 
planting material and marketing (model 2); (iii) irrigate vegetables with same average 
land area as WOP, which was reported in ASPIRE-I project design report (Appendix 10, 
Financial and Economic Analysis) but better marketing (model 3) with sprinkler irrigation 
facilities; (iv) orchard development with marketing (model 4); (v) orchard development 
with project financial support (credit) and better marketing; (vi) chicken hatchery 
(model 6) as a new enterprise with credit support and marketing (model 6); (vii) native 
chicken with better marketing; and (viii) cashew cultivation as an orchard (model 8) with 
credit and better marketing. As the ASPIRE-I main impact assessment and the ASPIRE-I 
data platform indicate, nearly 80% of the farmers in the project area cultivate 
vegetables in their farm both for domestic consumption and sale. Therefore, vegetable 
has been included in the farm models, even without an incremental income, to estimate 
average farm income. 
The total target for farm enterprises included in eight models is based on the log-frame 
Core indicator 2.1.4, i.e. # of supported rural producers that are members of a rural 
producers' organisation, which has the end-line target of 100,000 producers. 
  Table88 (A) and (B) presents the results of the farm model analysis. The cash flows 
were scaled down by the typical size of the farm to represent the cost and returns of the 
farm enterprises for the farmer. The annual net revenue at full development (FD) for each 
crop is presented in the last  column of  each table. The summation  of the net revenues 
provides  the  farm  income  to  the  beneficiary.  This income  is  compared  with  the  poverty 
line  computed  for  a  4.5-member  family  for  365  days  [the  national poverty  line  in 
Cambodia is riel 10,951 or is equivalent to  USD2.7 in 2022 (market exchange rate) per 
person  per  day  (World  Bank)]  which  is  presented  in  green  under  each  table.  Except  in 
Model 7, the estimated annual income of the farm models is higher than the poverty line, 
VIII 
Annex 4: EFA  
indicating that the project supported farm models are capable of alleviating poverty. As 
the  end-line impact  study  of  ASPIRE-I  indicates  (page  24),  over  85%  of  the  farmers  in 
these  areas  earn  about  USD  2,595  on  average  from  non-farm  income.  Such  off-farm 
income is expected in various PO managed enterprises with the support of ASPIRE-II. As 
such the it is important to note that these farm models are only one source of income for 
the beneficiaries for their livelihood.   
Table8: (A) Results of the Farm model 
IX 
BattambangWOP (USD/Farm)Model 1Net Present ValueNet Present ValueIncrementCassava regular         6,697 0.63180398218512Irrigated vegetable0.259,8519,85103,366Fruit: orchard development0.4           9,607        9,607 0           2,550 Native chicken - back-yard poultry-546-5460102Total Model         6,697 1.2819,09219,3102186,530PL ($/HH/Yr)4,435BattambangWOP (USD/Farm)Model 2Net Present ValueNet Present ValueIncrementOrganic Cassava - Elate PM       25,470 0.65-3447291,074842Irrigated vegetable0.259,8519,85103,366Cashew: Orchard development / replanting0.41,2091,2090180Total Model       25,470                    1 10,71611,7901,0744,388PL ($/HH/Yr)4,435Kandal + Siem Reap + TakeoWOP (USD/Farm)Model 3Net Present ValueNet Present ValueIncrementIrrigated vegetable       22,768 0.519,70228,8659,1632,989Fruit: orchard development0.4           9,607        9,607             -              2,550 Native chicken - back-yard poultry-546-546            -   102Total Model       22,768 28,76337,9269,1635,641PL ($/HH/Yr)4,435Kandal + Siem Reap + TakeoWOP (USD/Farm)Model 4Net Present ValueNet Present ValueIncrementFruit: orchard development       16,000 0.819,21349,32330,1094,347Irrigated vegetable0.25           9,851        9,851             -              3,366 Total Model       16,000 29,06459,17430,1097,713PL ($/HH/Yr)4,435Total Nb Farmers in the farm modelAverage Size of the crop in the farm (ha)WP (USD/Farm)Annual Net Revenue (at FD): USD/FarmTotal Nb Farmers in the farm modelAverage Size of the crop in the farm (ha)WP (USD/Farm)Annual Net Revenue (at FD): USD/FarmTotal Nb Farmers in the farm modelAverage Size of the crop in the farm (ha)WP (USD/Farm)Annual Net Revenue (at FD): USD/FarmTotal Nb Farmers in the farm modelAverage Size of the crop in the farm (ha)WP (USD/Farm)Annual Net Revenue (at FD): USD/Farm 
Annex 4: EFA  
(B) Results of the Farm model… continue 
T. Overall Financial Analysis 
  The cashflows of all the enterprise models populated with appropriate targets over 
the 7-year ASPIRE-AT project period were aggregated to compute the total gross benefit 
flow  of  the  ASPIRE-AT  project.  The  total  cost  is  comprised  of  (i)  the  ASPIRE-AT  project 
cost, based on 2022 prices, net of all grants and loans provided; and (ii) the incremental 
cost  of  all  enterprises.  The  incremental  benefits  of  all  enterprise’s  models  provided  the 
benefit  flow.  The  EFA  excel  sheets  presents  the  details.  The  Financial  Internal  Rate  of 
Return (FIRR) is 31% with Net Present Value (NPV) of USD 617 million at 6% financial DR. 
The net benefit flow was discounted at 6% to ascertain the break-even point of the project 
cash flows. At the 7th year (2029), the project will be able to breakeven the total project 
investment  and  the  beneficiaries’  investment  during  the  project  period  and  start 
generating a positive net benefit flow.  
X 
Kandal + Siem Reap + TakeoWOP (USD/Farm)Model 5Net Present ValueNet Present ValueIncrementFruit: orchard development with credit         1,765 0.8524235,68135,4395,591Irrigated vegetable0.259,8519,85103,366Total Model         1,765 9,8519,85135,4398,957PL ($/HH/Yr)4,435Kandal + Siem Reap + TakeoWOP (USD/Farm)Model 6Net Present ValueNet Present ValueIncrementChicken - Hatchery (traditional breed): New            300 0011,30311,3031,860Irrigated vegetable0.259,8519,85103,366Total Model            300 9,8519,85111,3035,226PL ($/HH/Yr)4,435Kandal + Siem Reap + TakeoWOP (USD/Farm)Model 7Net Present ValueNet Present ValueIncrementNative chicken - back-yard poultry         9,000 0240684444102Irrigated vegetable0.259,8519,85103,366Total Model         9,000 9,8519,8514443,468PL ($/HH/Yr)4,435Preah VihearWOP (USD/Farm)Model 8Net Present ValueNet Present ValueIncrementCashew: Orchard development / replanting       18,000 0.82,4196,4214,0036,578Organic Cassava - Elate PM               -   0.325-172-17201,296Total Model       18,000 -172-1724,0037,874PL ($/HH/Yr)4,435Total Nb Farmers in the farm modelAverage Size of the crop in the farm (ha)WP (USD/Farm)Annual Net Revenue (at FD): USD/FarmTotal Nb Farmers in the farm modelAverage Size of the crop in the farm (ha)WP (USD/Farm)Annual Net Revenue (at FD): USD/FarmTotal Nb Farmers in the farm modelAverage Size of the crop in the farm (ha)WP (USD/Farm)Annual Net Revenue (at FD): USD/FarmTotal Nb Farmers in the farm modelAverage Size of the crop in the farm (ha)WP (USD/Farm)Annual Net Revenue (at FD): USD/Farm 
Annex 4: EFA  
4. 
Economic analysis 
  The economic analysis was carried out by adjusting the cost and benefits flows that 
were used in the financial analysis of the ASPIRE-AT project to reflect economic values. In 
addition to the assumptions made in the financial analysis, the following assumptions were 
used in the economic analysis. 
  After making the required adjustments to the cash flows of the financial analysis 
on the basis of the above assumptions, the economic analysis for the ASPIRE-
AT was carried out. The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) is 30% and the 
economic benefit cost ratio is 1.42 with the economic discount rate of 5.5%. The 
project earns an Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) of USD 525 million (Riels 
2,125 billion) for the 20-year period with 5.5% discount rate. Table 4 presents 
the results. 
In  addition  to  the  quantified  economic  benefits,  ASPIRE-AT  project  will  generate 
economic multiplier effects across the rural economy. The enterprises that were expanded 
in scale or with enhanced productivity would demand for inputs which will create multiplier 
effects.  In  addition,  some  of  these  enterprises  will  be  graduated  to  access  credit  from 
mainstream  financial  institutions  with  low  interest  rates  but  with  collateral  requirement 
which those enterprise will be able to provide. Such increase in the credit demand would 
further enhance the broad multiplier effects in the rural economy. 
  Sensitivity analyses were carried out to assess whether the project is economically 
robust  in  light  of  potential  risks  that  could  increase  cost  of  production  of  enterprise, 
decrease benefits or delay in realising benefits. The risk factors that have been identified 
7 Official Exchange Rate (ER) June 2022] IMF rates: 
www.google.com/search?q=imf+exchange+rate+of+cambodia&rlz=1 C1RUCY_enCA736CA736&oq = 
IMF+exchange+rate+of+cambo&aqs= chrome.1.69i57j33i160l2.16172j0j7&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8 
8 Computed: SER = [[b+(b*c)] + [a-(a*d)]/ [b+a] ]*e: a = average export value; b = average import values; c = Import Tariff (the average Most Favored Nation 
tariff rate: MFN is the relevant rate); d = Export duties (export of all business items); and e = Official (or market) Exchange Rate. 
9 [https://taxsummaries.pwc.com/cambodia/corporate/other-taxes] 
10 https://www.chiefbank.com.kh/Products/FixedDeposit 
XI 
Annex 4: EFA  
in the project Integrated Risk Matrix were used as the basis to rationalise the sensitivity 
scenarios. 
  Funding Gap analysis. Additionally, the impact of whether or not the project 
being able to fill the Funding Gap on the economic viability of the project is 
analysed as a sensitivity scenario. The project cost tables allocate 34% of the 
total grants provided to smallholders and to producer organizations to the 
Funding Gap. At the design stage there is no assurance that this Gap will be 
filled by a potential financier during the project period. This uncertainty 
therefore may affect the possibility of starting enterprises that are depending 
on the Grant, namely: (i) Irrigated vegetable; (ii) Fruit orchard development; 
(iii) Cashew: Orchard development / replanting; (iv) Chicken - Hatchery 
(traditional breed); (v) Vegetables: ACs set-up simple collection/grading 
centres; (vi) Fruit: ACs set-up simple collection/grading centres; and (vii) 
Cashew: Export processing business; and (viii) poultry breeders at PO level. 
Since 34% of the total Grants would depend on the Funding Gap, it is assumed 
that 66% of the number of these enterprises could start the operations and run 
business. In line with this assumption, the incremental benefit flows of these 
enterprises have been limited only to 66% of the number or enterprises and 
the EIRR of the project has been reassessed. The EIRR with the Funding Gap 
risk is 28% with and benefit cost ratio of 1.38 (see Table 9). 
 Table 39 presents the risk factors considered and the results of the sensitivity 
analyses. The project generates EIRRs that are higher than the opportunity cost 
of  capital  under  all  sensitivity  scenarios,  including  the  Funding  Gap  risk.  The 
analyses indicate therefore that the enterprise models and the overall ASPIRE-
AT  project  are  both  financially  and  economically  justifiable  even  under  the 
adverse risky environments. The EFA, however, shows that the highest drop in 
EIRR is seen in the scenario of 20% benefits decrease. This alarms the project 
to monitor for cost escalations and keep adequate controls to maintain the cost 
as estimated. 
Table 39: Results of the Economic Analysis and the Sensitivity analyses 
Sensitivity Analyses 
Base Case 
EIRR 
32% 
B/C Ratio 
1.42 
NPV (USD 
mn) 
9525  
NPV (Reils 
Billion) 
32,125 
Risk Factor 
With Funding Gap risk 
All cost increase by 10% 
All cost increase by 20% 
28% 
26% 
20% 
1.38 
1.29 
1.18 
347  
7399  
5273  
1,404 
31,614 
21,104 
All benefits decrease by 10% 
25% 
1.27 
6347  
21,402 
All benefits decrease by 20% 
Cost increase by 10% and 
benefits decrease by 10% 
17% 
19% 
1.13 
1.16 
3168  
1679 
4220  
1892 
1 year delay in getting 
benefits 
19% 
1.34 
7344  
21,390 
Only 66% of the Grant dependent 
enterprises are included as 34% of grants 
would be financed by the Funding Gap 
Public sector investments financed by the 
project not sustainable because of lack of 
institutional plans 
Agriculture sector severely impacted by 
macroeconomic instability 
Project vulnerability to environmental 
conditions 
Financing instruments are not attractive for 
partner financial institutions to deliver 
Private agribusiness unwilling to invest 
because of governance concerns 
  Switching  value  analysis.  This  is  considered  as  the  percentage  change  in  a 
variable  required  to  reduce  the  economic  net  present  value  (ENPV)  to  ‘zero’  at  a  social 
XII 
Annex 4: EFA  
discount rate of 5.5%. The chosen variables for the analysis are: (i) total benefits flow; 
(ii) total cost flow; (iii) total number of project beneficiaries or producers, which is assumed 
at 100,000; (iv) PO managed vegetable collecting centers; (v) PO managed Fruit collection 
centres; (vi) PO managed improved pack houses with cold storage facilities; (vi) cashew 
export  processing;  and  (vii)  larger,  professional  poultry  slaughterhouse.  The  number  of 
farmer  producers  was  gradually  decreased  to  assess  the  switching  values,  keeping  the 
number of PO managed enterprises unchanged and vis versa. The results of the switching 
value analyses are presented in Table 4. 
  The  switching  value  of  the  total  benefits  is  -30.6%  (reduced)  and  total  cost  is 
+141.7%  (increased),  where  the  ENPV  becomes  zero.  The  results  of  the  rest  of  the 
analyses are summarised in Table 4. The results indicate that the project becomes unviable 
when the farmer producer enterprises and PO managed enterprises drop by 30% of the 
current  target.  The  results  thus  indicate  that  the  project  has  the  capacity  to  face  even 
drastic drops in the outreach. However, the PO managed enterprises contributes more to 
the  benefit  flow  of  the  project  and  thus  it  is  important  that  the  project  takes  required 
implementation steps to encourage such enterprises to commence and well operate. 
Table 4: Results of the Switching Value Analysis 
Scenario for switching value 
Total Benefits reduced 
Total Cost increased  
Nb Farm producers while POs managed enterprises are Constant 
% Change 
-30.6% 
+141.7% 
-70% 
Both Farm producers and POs managed enterprises are changing 
-30% + (-30%) 
ENPV (USD mn) 
0 
0 
-1 
-7 
  Conclusion.  The  EFA  analyses  indicate  that  the  project  is  adequately  viable  in 
financial  and  economic  terms  and  also  has  the  capacity  to  face  many  risk  factors  while 
being viable. The project therefore is suitable for receiving public funds for investments. 
XIII 
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
The SECAP Review note should build on the preliminary note mentioned above, draw on the results of the screening exercise and be informed by the issues raised
during the design mission, the stakeholders interviews, publicly available tools and dataset, and environmental, social or climate-related studies that inform on the
characteristics of the project location. The SECAP review note includes the revised ESMP and should be attached to the Project Design Report, integrated in Draft Project
Implementation Manual (PIM) and COSTAB and shall be submitted to Design Review Meeting (DRM) or IRC (for NSOs).
1/10
1. Introduction
1.
2.
This Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) background contributes the formulation of the new Agriculture Services Program for
Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE-AT) project covered in the 12th IFAD’s replenishment cycle 2022-2024. In this framework, a wide
consultation process was undertaken, involving the Government of the Kingdom of Cambodia (GoKC) line agencies at central, provincial, district levels; civil society
and non-governmental organisations, private sector entities including agri-businesses and service providers, and target groups including the Indigenous Peoples in
potential target provinces. International organisations, development partners and projects teams (including the current IFAD funded ASPIRE[1], SAAMBAT[2] and
AIMS[3] projects) closely collaborated in the SECAP notes preparation process.
The overall goal of the ASPIRE-AT project is that women and men in Cambodia, in particular the marginalized and vulnerable, live in a safer, healthier, more secure
and ecologically balanced environment with improved livelihoods and are resilient to natural and climate change related trends and shocks. The Project
Development Objective of ASPIRE-AT is the inclusive and sustainable agriculture sector growth based on exports and domestic markets has increased incomes of
rural producers and workers.
2. Situational analysis and potential project impacts
3.
ASPIRE-AT objective will be delivered through three main components / outcomes: Productive and Resilient Assets for Producer Organisations, Business
Partnership and Market Access, and Aggregating Farmers and Integrated them into Value Chains. The potential selected value chains are the ones already widely
supported by ASPIRE and AIMS with visible success (namely vegetable and native chicken, for the domestic market), production of clean disease-free cassava
planting material, and export oriented perennial crops, most of which are already in production on a wide scale and do not require significant extension through new
plantations (mango, longan, cashew nut, etc). 
2.1 Socio-economic assessment
a. Overall poverty situation
4.
5.
Poverty in Cambodia is defined by the Ministry of Planning as people living with a daily earning under the poverty line threshold[4]. Under this definition, the poverty
headcount fell from around 15% in 2013 to less than 10% in 2019, but the COVID-19 pandemic has reversed some of the progress made in poverty alleviation.
National poverty headcount is now estimated at 17.8% of the total population, ranging from 12.6% in urban areas other than Phnom Penh to 22.8% in rural areas,
based on the results of the Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey 2019-2020 (MoP, 2021).
Cambodia's HDI value for 2019 is 0.594— which put the country in the medium human development category—positioning it at 144 out of 189 countries and
territories (UNDP Human Development Report 2020). With a Gender Inequality Index of 0.474 in 2019, Cambodia is ranked 117 over 162 countries (HDR report,
2020).
b. Gender
6.
7.
In the five-year strategic plan for strengthening gender mainstreaming and women’s empowerment (Neary Rattanak V, 2019-2023), the Ministry of Women Affairs
(MoWA) reported that gender equality and women empowerment had progressively improved before the pandemic. The ministry adopts the Gender Gap Index as a
key indicator widely used to quantify the gaps between women and men in four key areas: health, education, economy, and politics.
Cambodia gender gap ranking improved from 108th in 2014 to 89th out of 152 countries in 2019. However, the pandemic has had a negative impact on gender
equality and some of the progress made over the last decade has been reversed: The latest gender gap report indicates that Cambodia has a gender parity score of
0.684 in 2021, ranking 103rd out of 156 countries worldwide and 12th out of 20 countries of East Asia-Pacific region.
Table 17 Gender Gap indicators for Cambodia (Global Gender Gap Report, 2021)
Rank in 2006
Rank in 2019
(pre-pandemic)
Rank in
2021
Score 2021
Global Gender Gap Index
Economic Participation and
Opportunity
89
29
Educational Attainment
105
Health and Survival
Political Empowerment
1
94
(*) Score of 1 reflects gender parity
89
25
124
73
119
103
0,684 *
46
0.729
128
0.919
46
0.978
126
0.111
8.
9.
Another metric, the UN Gender Inequality Index (GII) is a composite measure reflecting inequality in achievement between women and men in three dimensions:
reproductive health, empowerment and the labour market (UNDP, 2019). It has a value of 0.474 for Cambodia, ranking it 144 out of 170 countries in 2019, but it has
not been updated since the pandemic started to impact Cambodia in early 2020.
Economic empowerment: As per the latest Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey 2019/20, women’s share of wage employment was the highest in the service sector
(39%) followed by agriculture sector (36%) and the industrial sector (25%). Women participation in the labour force is 80.5%, significantly less than men (89.6%) and
wage equality for similar work remains far from achieving parity: Women in Cambodia earn an estimated USD 3,500 on average, vs USD 4,400 for men. However,
Cambodia fares well in terms of income earned by women, ranking 13th Job positions with higher responsibilities (legislators, senior officials and managers) are
overwhelmingly held by men (75.9%) while professional and technical work positions are more evenly balanced (54.1% men and 45.9% women). Gender imbalance
in economic opportunities has worsen during the pandemic. As many jobs were lost in the garment, hospitality, entertainment, restaurant, and construction sectors,
women suffered high levels of unemployment in 2020, forcing many from the formal economy into the informal economy and/or into debt. Recent data suggest that
at least as many women re-entered the labor market in the second half of 2020 as those who had left in the first half of the year, but they did so into ‘lower quality’
jobs than they had prior to the crisis, often informal, own-account or contributing family work (ADB, 2022).
2/10
Workload of rural women and division of labour: Women have a relatively high representation in agricultural households[5]: Members of agricultural households are
in vast majority female (61%), and 24% of agricultural households are women-headed, vs 21.5% in the general population[6]. They have a higher work burden
because of their triple role (which includes their reproductive, productive and social roles). Women generally perform most of the on-farm work (sowing, weeding,
crop maintenance, animal feeding), at the exception of operations involving agricultural machinery such as land preparation (mechanized at 98%) and harvesting
(mechanized ay 75% although machinery availability remains a constraint at peak season).
During field visits, it was observed that women employed in agri-processing factories are generally assigned low technical labour-intensive tasks (sorting pepper,
peeling mangoes, shelling cashew nuts, etc.) while men perform more technical tasks (e.g. operating machinery and equipment) and are more often in supervisor
and manager positions.
Access and control over assets: Gender discrimination remains a key constraint for women to control and manage productive assets such as land, buildings, and
equipment. Legally, the Land Law guarantees equal rights to land for men and women but in practice female-headed households as much as women in male-
headed households face various constraints with regard to access to land. Customary practices undermine principles of joint ownership in male-headed households.
In addition, gender-biased norms often prevent women from exercising or claiming their rights[7]. It is estimated that less than 9% of women between 15 and 49
years of age own land, both alone and jointly[8]. Women have also relatively less access to productive services such as credit, markets, etc.
Women’s voice and role in decision making: Data-based evidence from on-going projects show that women are relatively well represented in community-based
producers organisations, although parity is not achieved. Among the 1200 Agricultural Cooperatives currently registered nationwide, women represent 63% of the
total number of members. In business clusters (informal producers organisations supported by the ASPIRE programme), women represent around 40% of the
members. Women are also well represented in last mile extension workers positions. Gender parity is almost achieved for roles such as Community Extension
Workers (CEWs).
Regarding decision making at household level, 86.3% of women participated in making major decisions in the household in 2014: 96% of women participate in
decision about visits to family, relatives, or friends, 93% in decision about making major household purchase and 91% in decision about their own health care (World
Bank gender data).
At community organisation level, women’s participation in decision has improved but gender parity has yet to be fully achieved. A recent assessment of around 2,000
business clusters showed that gender parity in decision-making positions is almost achieved with 40% of administrative positions occupied by women. In most
cases, however, women are assigned the role of cashier (46%) while they are much less likely to be in deputy and leader positions (31% and 23% respectively). The
same pattern is also valid across the 1200 Agricultural Cooperatives registered nationwide: there are around 40% of women in cooperative management
committees. Women represented 20.1% of those employed in senior and middle management in 2017 and at national level, only 20% of seats in national parliament
were held by women in 2020 (World Bank gender data).
Gender based violence: Economic pressures such as loss of employment, reduced income, or indebtment are known factors that contributes to gender-based
violence (GBV), by causing women to remain in abusive situations for financial reasons or to become vulnerable to exploitation (report by the NGO Committee on the
United Nations’ Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)). In Cambodia, the share of women who have experienced
intimate partner violence[9] is 27%, less than the world average (World Bank gender data). However, Recent studies and assessments indicated that the pandemic
impact on employment and Indebtness had direct repercussions on more frequent Gender Based violence.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
c. Youth
17.
18.
19.
Youth are defined[10] by people who are between 15 and 30-year-old of age as per the National Youth Policy and the National Youth Action Plan. The share of
youth aged 15-29 not in employment, education, or training (NEET) is relatively low at 6.4%. The majority of NEETs are inactive, i.e. not looking for a job and not
studying, and they are mostly women[11]. Young women are clearly disadvantaged compared to young men in the labour market.
Civil society organisations are progressively gearing up to the challenge and provide support to youth to integrate in the society and take part in the national
economy. For example, JCI has a network of seven chapters nationally and work in four areas: Entrepreneur ship, skill development, community impact,
international cooperation. Business matching events are also organised to facilitate access to finance and support for potential young entrepreneurs.
Entrepreneurship opportunities for youth in rural areas remain rare. Rural youth may be attracted by modern farm business models (hydroponic, nethouses, etc.).
Ultimately agroprocessing facilities owned and operated by either SMEs or ACs in rural areas are the best options to provide employment opportunities to youth,
both for unskilled work and technical, administrative or management positions.
d. Indigenous peoples
20.
21.
In Cambodia, the government defined indigenous peoples as the group of people that resides in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia whose members manifest
ethnic, social, cultural and economic unity and who practice a traditional lifestyle, and who cultivate the lands in their possession according to customary rules of
collective use.[12]
The National Report on Demography Socio-Economic Status of Indigenous People published by the Ministry of Planning in 2021 stated that : “ identified indigenous
peoples or group is based on the mother tongue, which found there are 22 indigenous ethnic groups[13] are located in 15 provinces[14] with the population of
183,831 or equal to 1.25% of the total population of Cambodia[15]. Among the 22 indigenous ethnic groups, there are six groups who have majority of indigenous
population that over 10,000 people, these include Tampoun, Bunong, Kroeung, Kui, Jarai and Brov, which combined makes up 88% of the total indigenous
population in Cambodia. Even though the indigenous peoples live in 15 provinces, but majority of them which is around (92.40%) are living in the six provinces
Ratanakiri, Mondulkiri, Kratie, Stung Treng, Kampong Thom and Preah Vihear[16].” The details on IPs are presented in IP’s plan, and Free, Prior and Informed
Consent (FPIC) implementation plan.
e. Marginalised groups
22.
According to the 2019 General Population Census, 4.9% of Cambodia’s population aged five years and above experience some difficulty in performing basic
functions. Persons with disabilities face multiple challenges such as inequality and discrimination in access to education, healthcare, employment, social protection,
and justice, public transport and are particularly vulnerable to violence and other violations of their rights. Women and girls with disabilities face additional
discrimination and barriers when accessing services compared to men with disabilities. They are also vulnerable to violence because of their gender and disabilities
(UNDP).
f. Nutrition
23.
Prevalence of undernourishment[17] decreased from 17% in 2004/2006 to 6.2% in 2019, but overall prevalence of food insecurity in the general population is still
high: severe food insecurity affects 13.4% of the population and moderate food insecurity 44.8%. Another preoccupying issue is the severe prevalence of anemia that
affected more than 47% of women of reproductive age (age 15-49) in 2019 (State of food security and nutrition in the World, SOFI, 2021).
24.
25.
At consumer level, food safety concerns influence dietary behaviours in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) but despite food safety concerns, consumers
could not always ensure that they consumed safe food; barriers were affordability, accessibility and appeal. Key concerns included fear of pesticides, fertilizers,
hygiene in/around food outlets, unhygienic vendor practices and household storage/preparation methods (Liguor J. et al, 2021).
3/10
There is also scope for IFAD interventions to focus on food safety at farm and Producers Organisation levels in particular when supporting post-harvest and
processing operations. “Food safety is the absence, or safe, acceptable levels, of hazards in food that may harm the health of consumers. Food borne hazards can
be microbiological, chemical or physical in nature and are often invisible to the plain eye; bacteria, viruses or pesticide residues are some examples.” (FAO food
safety website). The food products for which food safety challenges are most prominent are cereals and nuts susceptible to aflatoxin contamination, and high-value
fresh products such as fresh fruit and vegetables, meat and dairy (IFAD, 2017).
2.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implications
26.
Landscapes and biodiversity
27.
28.
29.
Within the broad Indo-Malayan ecological region, Cambodia encompasses a rich diversity of landscapes, categorised in eight distinct eco-regions, three of which
have conservation status assessed as critical/endangered. The links in the figure below provide detailed information on the characteristics of each eco-regions
including their intrinsic biodiversity features[18].
Cambodia has a total land area of 176,500 km², of which 41% is under protected area status. The 2008 Protected Areas Law (2008) defined eight categories of
natural protected areas, for forest land, wetland and marine ecosystems. As late 2017, Cambodia had almost 50 protected areas, covering 7.5 million hectares.
However, fragile forest habitats of Cambodia have been affected by deforestation, and three of the country’s eight ecoregions are now considered as critical /
endangered.
Current estimates of remaining natural forest cover vary considerably, but the official consensus is that about half of Cambodia’s land area has some form of forest
cover (MoP-NIS, Statistical Yearbook, 2021). The World Bank data show that forest cover declined from 60% in 2009 to less than 46% in 2020. Hayward, D. and
Diepart J.‐ (2021) identified three key drivers of deforestation: (i) large‐scale acquisition of land for agro‐industrial development, (ii) Agrarian expansion by
smallholder farmers and (iii) illegal logging. The study estimates that large‐scale agro‐industrial plantations cover 831,300 ha, equivalent to about 31% of the
deforestation that occurred between 2001 and 2019. The study also links smallholder’s agrarian expansion to deforestation, due to internal migratory movements
between rural areas, in the context of on-going transition from subsistence farming to commercial agriculture.
30.
Land use and land degradation
31.
Cambodia’s 31.5% of the total land area is agricultural land. The figures 1 and 2 below provide an overview of the land use map for Cambodia in 2020. Detailed
maps can be accessed at here.
32.
Soils of Cambodia belong to two main texture classes: Clay-loam in the low-lying areas of the Tonle Sap and Mekong delta zones, and sandy clay loam (SaClLo, as
per USDA classification) on sloping land of higher grounds in the plateau/mountain zone, where siliceous sedimentary formations occur.
33.
These sandy soils are of low fertility and are also the most prevalent in agricultural lands. When not under vegetation cover, these soils are also particularly
susceptible to erosion and land degradation. In respect to soil erosion, Cambodia has about 4.45 million ha of land under highly erodible class. The map in figure 11
below show Land Productivity Dynamics, which is a representation of land productivity trends that have persisted between 2001 and 2018. These trends (decline,
stress, stability and gain of productivity) are generated through the interaction of three NDVI-based indicators (Steadiness, Initial standing biomass, and Standing
biomass at change).
Figure 2: Overview of IPCC Land Use Classification for Cambodia, 2020- CCI/ESA
– Earthmap.
Figure 3: Land Productivity Dynamics in Cambodia – MODIS, 2010-2018 –
Earthmap.
34.
The drivers of land degradation in Cambodia have been attributed mainly to deforestation, expanding agricultural lands, climate change, pest and diseases,
unsustainable land management, and infrastructure development (MAFF, 2018)[19].
35.
In the framework of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCDD), the government has determined Land Degradation Neutrality Targets to
2030. A set of ambitious measures have been defined to achieve the target of Land Degradation Neutrality by 2030, including forest protection and reforestation,
restoration of degraded and deforested landscapes in Kampong Thom, Preah Vihear and Siem Reap provinces[20], reduction of forest land conversion by cessation
of economic land concession program, governance and law enforcement, increased productivity of cropland by applying good agriculture and animal husbandry
production standards (GAP and GAHP), application of sustainable agricultural practices (Conservation agriculture, organic farming) to increase soil organic matter
content to 4% of cropland per year (Rice, vegetables, fruit trees), among other measures (MAFF, 2018).
36.
The Integrated farming systems promoted under the SUCRA component of ASPIRE in collaboration with the Center for Agriculture and Environment studies (CAES)
and the Center for Development and Environment of the University of Bern have also proven resilient in the context of the pandemic and migrants moving back to
rural areas. The analytical framework design to measure Integrated Farming Systems benefits on the long run is also of particular interest to build evidence for
further dissemination of integrated farming systems and sustainable agriculture practices.
4/10
a. Environmental assessment
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
Agricultural soils in Cambodia are generally assessed as having low chemical fertility. Analysis of soil sample in the national database showed that all types of soils
low pH (ranging from 4.6 to 5.4), low to very low Cation Exchange Capacity and very low organic Carbon content (ranging from 0.25 to 1.17%). In addition,
conventional rice cultivation destroys any structure that they have.  
Potential pathways to build and maintain soil fertility are to shift from monocropping and promote more diversified crop rotations and introduce relay crops, cover
crops, mix/inter crop and other form of crop association. Other options include soil conservation techniques (zero tilling or minimal soil preparation) to limit soil
disturbance and promote soil microorganisms. Moreover, use of bio compost and innovative soil carbon sequestration options that have multiple benefits on soils
structure, microbiological activity, water retention capacity. In turn this soil management approach has proven positive impacts on plant health that ensure higher
tolerance to pests and diseases.
Another emerging issue in agricultural soil management is linked to the intensification of vegetable production under nethouses. With up 9 production cycles a year,
nutrient depletion of soils under nethouse is a growing concern. Similarly, the use of hormones to produce mango three times a year is also affecting the soil health
and local biodiversity.
Agricultural intensification and monocropping is also linked with pests and disease outbreaks affecting cassava, banana, mango, cashew nut as well as poultry
production. Increased use of agrochemicals has direct adverse impact on rural households’ health, and ecosystems (aquatic life, soil biodiversity, fauna and flora).
The project will mitigate these risks by promoting sustainable production practices, promoting tolerant and resistant seed varieties, good agricultural practices,
integrated pest management, mix/intercropping, organic agriculture and technologies that reduce pest infestation such as nethouses that protect vegetables from
insect pests for instance.
Agricultural intensification is also associated with increased use of equipment made of plastic for greenhouses, plastic sheets for mulching and soil solarization, drip
lines and other “water saving irrigation” equipment, protective fruit bagging on mango, banana trees, agro-chemical packages, vegetable and fruit retail packages,
etc. In absence of adequate handling and disposal practices, plastics may end up in the soils and negatively affect the soil microbiologic activity.
Water resources: About 70% of the annual water resources are water inflow from upstream countries, mostly through the Mekong River. About 86% of Cambodian
territory is located within the Mekong River Basin that include the Mekong Mainstream, the Bassac river, the Tonle Sap River and associated Great Lake. Variations
in water availability are by nature highly seasonal in Cambodia, due to the rainfall distribution and fluctuations of river discharges in the Mekong basin. This annual
pattern typically features floods, typhoon and droughts and poses challenges in terms of water management to fulfill the ever-increasing water demand of various
end users: Agriculture accounts for 96% of all water use, domestic rural use 1%, and industry, domestic urban, and aquaculture use less than 1%. Water quality in
the Lower Mekong Basin is regularly monitored by the River Mekong Committee[21] and has been consistently assessed as of good or very good for the protection of
both human health and aquatic life.
It is estimated that only about 2% of the total surface water volume is currently used, but water shortages regularly occur (frequently in dry season in the Tonle Sap
river basin), due to lack of water storage and constraints in access to water. Water shortage directly affect crops, livestock, fisheries, and domestic use but also
ecosystems sustainability. It is expected that the current water management challenges will be further compounded by the effect of climate change (see section
below). To address these challenges, the Government, through the Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology has defined a National Water Resources
Management and Sustainable Irrigation Road Map and Investment Program 2019–2033. It has identified the water management constraints as: (i) lack of water
storage to support all water user needs including agriculture, urban, and the environment; (ii) minimal water resources information to support evidence based
decision-making; (iii) lack of integrated water resources management and water allocation plans at river basin levels; and (iv) irrigation schemes that lack modern
facilities to support efficient water delivery and higher agriculture production including diversification into high value crops.
44.
There is tremendous potential to improve irrigated agriculture and production: There are about 2,500 irrigation schemes nationwide, serving a cumulated command
area of about 1.2 million hectares, which represents only 22% of all arable land. In more than 50% of the irrigation schemes, only one crop cycle can be achieved.
The schemes located in the Tonle Sap River Basin represent 60% of the country’s irrigated areas but the majority do not have access to reliable, year-round water
sources (ADB brief 171, 2021).
45.
ASPIRE-AT will not develop new irrigation schemes but will support farmers and their organisations in improving on-farm water management for vegetable
production and orchads. These interventions will focus on water storage and water saving technologies including RET (solar pumps). They are expected to be small
scale and geographically dispersed and will not result in significant incremental extraction of water over the baseline situation.
b. Climate trends and impacts
46.
47.
48.
The climate in Cambodia is affected by two major weather systems: the South Asian summer monsoon circulation and the Westerly Jet circulation. Under these two
weather systems, the climate of Cambodia has two distinct seasons: a monsoon-driven rainy season from May to October accounting for up to 90% of annual
precipitation, and a dry season from November to April), with cooler temperatures, particularly between November and January.
The dominant sub-climate types after the Köppen–Geiger climate classification system are: (i) Tropical savanna climate with dry-winter characteristics (Aw) over
most of the country and (ii) tropical monsoon climate (Am) over a wide band along the coast of the Gulf of Thailand and in the mountainous North-Eastern corner of
the country bordering Lao PDR and Vietnam.
Precipitation: The annual average rainfall is typically 1,400-2,000 mm and varies significantly across the country geographic zones. Average annual rainfall can be as
low as 1,400 mm in the central lowlands and as high as 4,000 mm near the Cardamom mountains and nearby coastal areas in the southwest. The eastern plains
receive approximately 2,000 to 2,600 mm of rainfall annually and may exceed those amounts in the mountainous areas in the Northeast. Broadly, precipitations are
higher in the coastal and highland areas and lower in the inland zones of the Tonle Sap and the Mekong plain and delta.
49.
Temperatures: Temperatures remain between 25-27°C throughout most of the year and can rise over 32°C in March-April before the onset of the westerly monsoon.
Despite relatively moderate altitude variations across the country, average temperatures are relatively uniform.
50.
Cambodia’s climate vulnerability is characterised by frequent floods and irregular rainfall, coupled with an agrarian based economy, limited human and financial
resources, insufficient physical infrastructure, and limited access to technologies. Socio-economic status, location, access to resources and technologies all influence
Cambodian’s ability to manage climate impacts. Different social groups experience climate vulnerability differently, and women, children, the disabled, the elderly
and other socially marginalised groups are often hit harder.
51.
The detail analysis of climate historical trends, climate futures, trends in extreme events, climate risk and vulnerability are available in the ASPIRE AT’s ‘Climate Risk
Analysis’ report. The report has used IFAD’s Climate Adaptation in Rural Development (CARD)[22] tool to assess the impact of climate change on project selected
commodities.
c. Climate change mitigation
52.
The detail climate risk analysis, ESCMP, and ESCMF (annexes) have identified major climate impacts to the project and potential impact on the climate from the
project. The documents have also detailed potential adaptation and mitigation measures. The project will follow the adaptation and mitigation measures and will
include the monitoring indicators in project M&E framework.
2.3 Target group profiles
5/10
53.
The key target group of the ASPIRE-AT are agricultural households and in particular the members of existing business clusters supported by ASPIRE and AIMS.
About 50% of beneficiaries will be women, 20% will be youth and, in line with Cambodia’s population, 1.5% will be Indigenous Peoples. In the 2019 Cambodia
Intercensal Agriculture Survey, the National Institute of Statistics of the Ministry of Planning in coordination with MAFF reported that the country counts 1,726,000
agricultural households out of which 23.5% are women-headed and only 1% youth-headed (i.e the head of farm household is between 14 and 25 y.o. of age) About
13% of farm households are headed by persons aged 65 y.o. or more.
54.
The combined number of members of agricultural households is 6.8 million people (42% of the total country’s population), out of which almost 1.2 million are young
people. On average, there are 3.9 members (persons) per agricultural household, ranging from 3.2 in Kandal Province to 4.9 in Stung Treng Province.
Table 18 Socio-demographic characteristics of agricultural household members
 Agricultural households (nb of ppl)
total
Female
Female (%)
Ag Household head
Incl. Young HH head
1,735,000
408,000
20,000
6,000
Ag Households members
5,109,000
3,103,000
Incl. Young HH members
1,188,000
601,000
Total nb of people in ag HH
6,845,000
3,511,000
24%
30%
61%
51%
51%
55.
56.
57.
Smallholders: The National Institute of Statistics defines small-scale landholders as “Small-scale holders are defined using a combination of two criteria, namely the
physical size of the food producer, as expressed by the amount of operated land and number of livestock heads in production, and the economic size of the food
producer, as expressed by its revenues. They are identified as the producers at the intersection of the bottom 40% of the distribution of farm physical size and the
bottom 40% of the distribution of holding’s economic size”. Under this definition, “smallholders” constitute almost 75% of all farmers in Cambodia, with some degree
of variability amongst provinces.
Land tenure[23] : Almost all (98%) of agricultural households are owners of their landholding (or have owner-like possession of some part of their agricultural
holding), but formal land registration remains rare: only 19% of the landholders are “sole proprietor with land registration”. Land rented from other households
concerns only 4% of agricultural households.
In the Tonle Sap and Mekong Plain zones, agricultural landholdings have become increasingly fragmented and can no longer support rural households’ livelihoods
(figure 10 below).  A recent study[24] highlighted the link between agricultural land fragmentation in the Tonle Sap and Mekong Plain zones and smallholder’s
agrarian expansion towards the Plateau / mountain zone of the North-East. The internal migratory movements between rural areas are an on-going trend, in the
context of on-going transition from subsistence farming to commercial agriculture.
3. Institutional analysis
58.
59.
60.
61.
The most important institutions that have potential to help achieve IFAD’s mainstreaming agenda are the Ministries, their technical departments and line agencies at
subnational levels, including: MAFF, the Ministry of Rural Development (MRD, implementing the SAAMBAT project), the Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MoIC,
implementing the AIMS project) and the Ministry of Environment.
At subnational level, PDAFFs (provincial department of agriculture, fisheries and forestry) are the main public stakeholders in charge of delivering services to farmers
through the five national subprogrammes (crops, livestock, fisheries, forestry and capacity building). The PDAFF have developed 5-year Provincial Agriculture
Strategic Development Plan (PASDP) that define priorities for the agriculture sector and guide investments through the programme budgeting mechanism. Under the
recent public administration reform, the District Agriculture Office have been dissolved, but the District Administration employ agriculture staff, although it is unclear
what mandate and roles, they will have in rural service delivery.
Private sector entities have an increasingly important role in mainstreaming sustainability and social inclusiveness in the agricultural sector. By complying with
import countries requirements for sustainability, transparency and sustainability of agricultural products supply chains, private companies directly promote higher
production and post-harvest standards (GAP and Organic standards). These companies all face difficulties in ensuring a reliable and consistent supply of raw
agricultural products from small individual producers and have expressed interest in interventions aiming at assisting smallholders and informal producer
organisations to structure themselves in Agricultural Cooperatives and Union of Agricultural Cooperatives. They have also expressed concern in ensuring adequate
seed systems, maintaining and improving soil fertility through crop rotation and adequate crop calendars, managing the impacts of pests and diseases outbreaks,
strengthening certification systems (including Internal Control Systems), and building the management capacity of producers’ organisations. All these areas of
concern present high potential for intervention by current and up-coming projects under the current COSOP.
Information and Communication technologies (ICT) are also becoming increasingly important in linking farmers to market, facilitate access to information and
inputs, receive tailored technical advice, or record farm operations and sales, etc. These app follow various logics depending on whether they are provided by private
actors (BRONX in the case of the CHAMKA app), government agencies (the Techo Startup Center in the case of the Khmer Agriculture Suite) or NGO
(CordAid/ICCO in the case of the Angkor Salad app). Further attention is required on inclusiveness of these ICT apps and ensure that they serve the purpose and
need of farmers, including women, youth, and marginal groups (IP, PwD). The MAFF is considering the formulation of a policy on ICT in agriculture and this will be
instrumental in protecting end users data, ensuring adequate feed back loops are embedded and that the services provided do not encourage unsustainable
agricultural practices.
62.
Academia and research: The ASPIRE programme has actively supported curriculum development at the Royal University of Agriculture for bachelor and master’s
level students, and the Prek Leap National Institute of Agriculture (for in-service training of Community Extension Workers and students. Linkages with on-going or
recently completed research interventions could benefit the country programme as a whole, in particular in the field of sustainable agriculture practices as
demonstrated by ASPIRE under SUCRA in collaboration with the Center for Agriculture and Environment studies (CAES) and the Center for Development and
Environment of the University of Bern. The analytical framework design to measure Integrated Farming Systems benefits on the long run is also of particular interest.
63.
Civil society and non-governmental organisations (CSOs/NGOs) have traditionally been key implementation partners in the IFAD programme in Cambodia.
They are experienced, qualified and well positioned to provide smallholders and producers organisations with support in organisational and governance aspects of
Producers Organisations management, technical services for production and post-harvest and market access facilitation.
64.
Producers’ organisations: Informal agriculture producers organisations such as business clusters supported by ASPIRE and AIMS, IGRF (formed under PADEE)
and SLGs under the TSSD project are currently supported to further structure their organisational set-up and register in formal outfits, such as Agricultural
Cooperatives, Union of Cooperatives, Farmers Water User Communities (FWUC), and potentially rural MSMEs or microfinance institutions. Currently, there are
more than 1200 agricultural cooperatives registered in Cambodia, with more than 155,000 members. There are also 2584 Business clusters supported by ASPIRE
and AIMS, with a total membership of more than 88,000 smallholders. A recent assessment suggests that around 25% of these established business clusters have
acquired skills and experience in organising commercial production and engage with private stakeholders to access reliable and remunerative markets extension
services, finance, input and equipment supply, etc. As a second tier, another half of the business clusters (some established more recently) have gained medium
capacity and are on the path to become mature market-ready producers organisations. At national level, several umbrella farmers’ organisations are engaging in
policy dialogue with public agencies and facilitate networking among Producers Organisations, and with civil society, private sector entities, development partners
and other stakeholders: The SMILE Khmer vegetable Network, supported by GrowAsia, the Farmer and Nature Net (FNN), Cambodian Farmers Federation
Association of Agricultural Producers (CFAP), among others.
6/10
65.
Last mile service delivery: Community-based mechanisms to deliver last-mile services to smallholders are a critical element in achieving IFAD strategic objectives,
while ensuring sustainability and inclusiveness. Under ASPIRE, the community extension workers and lead farmers have been instrumental in linking public
extension services, private service providers and smallholders’ farmers engaged in subsistence and commercial agriculture as members of business clusters. These
front-line extension workers have been intensively supported by ASPIRE (including paid salary in the case of CEWs) but identified sustainability pathways have
demonstrated that income streams can be derived through commercial input production in the case of lead farmers (selling vaccinated chicks for example), or
through brokering of ICT services, input supply and market access in the case of CEWs.
66.
Under forthcoming projects and programme, there is scope to consolidate these models of service delivery to the last mile. In particular, continuous training and
coaching could ensure sustainability by strengthening the agripreneur approach such as lead farmers supported by ASPIRE. Regular evaluation of their capacity and
need for support and networking could further strengthen their role in delivering service. Lead farmers as last mile extension service providers could also benefit from
official recognition as part of the national extension system.
Policy and regulatory frameworks
67.
The GoKC has been developing the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2019-2030 which is the backbone underpinning national strategies and initiatives
to attain the targets set in the Cambodian Sustainable Development Goals Framework 2016-2030.
68.
The NSDP in turn, is informed by two further strategic processes: (i) the Rectangular Strategy (RS), now in its fourth Phase, for socioeconomic dimensions of
Government’s agenda towards growth, employment, equity and efficiency and (ii) the Cambodia’s long-term plan: Vision 2030, which sets a path to graduation to
upper middle-income status, and Vision 2050, which targets attainment of high-income status.
69.
In the agriculture sector, two recent strategic documents set the framework and priorities, namely the Agriculture Sector Development Plan (ASDP) 2019-2023 and
the Agriculture Sector Master Plan, both formulated with support of the ASPIRE programme.
70.
71.
The recent national Roadmap for Food Systems for Sustainable Development – 2030, has four strategic priorities all relevant to IFAD priority areas: (i) healthy
diets for all; (ii) empowerment of youth, women and the vulnerable; (iii) resilient rural livelihoods and resilient food systems; and (iv) governance for a more inclusive
food system.
Climate change policies: The GoKC is committed to combating climate change and accelerating the transition to a climate-resilient, low-carbon sustainable mode
of development. Cambodia is a signatory country of United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) since 1996. In 2016, Cambodia has also
ratified the Paris Agreement by which the country submitted an ambitious Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). In 2020, Cambodia has submitted an
updated National Determined Contribution to the UNFCCC. In its Second National Communication to the UNFCCC, the Royal Government of Cambodia has
identified agriculture as one of the most vulnerable sectors along with water resources, forestry, coastal zones, and human health.
72.
The Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014 – 2023 vision is “Cambodia develops towards a green, low-carbon, climate-resilient, equitable, sustainable and
knowledge-based society”. It aims at creating a national framework for engaging the public, private sector, civil society organizations and development partners in a
participatory process for responding to climate change to support sustainable development.
73.
Mitigation contributions: NDC scenarios for energy generation, transport, waste, industry, agriculture, and the building sectors were modelled using PROSPECT+,
while NDC scenarios for the Forest and Land Use sector were developed using the EX-ACT tool.
Table 19 Selected NDC priorities for mitigation and alignment with COSOP and projects
NDC priorities for mitigation
Lead
Ministry
IFAD Strategic
objectives/Projects
Bio-digesters construction
MAFF
SO3: S-RET / CREA
Increasing the effectiveness and sustainability of agricultural land management techniques (Conservation
Agriculture)
MAFF
SO1 ASPIRE AT
Organic input agriculture and bio-slurry; and deep placement fertilizer technology
MAFF
SO1 ASPIRE AT
Promote manure management through compost making process to reduce carbon emission
MAFF
SO1
74.
Adaptation contribution: Cambodia is considered one of the most vulnerable countries to the impacts of climate change. The country is particularly vulnerable to
floods, droughts, windstorms, and seawater intrusion. Climate change may reduce the country’s annual average GDP growth by 6.6% and absolute GDP by 0.4% in
2020, by 2.5% in 2030, and up to 9.8% in 2050. Accordingly, Cambodia has begun working to develop a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) based on the National
Adaptation Programme of Actions (NAPA, 2006).
Table 20 Summary of NDC priorities for adaptation and alignment with COSOP and projects
NDC priorities for adaptation
Lead
Minis
try
IFAD Strategic
objectives/Proj
ects
Development of Horticulture and other food crops for increase production, improved quality-safety; harvesting and post harvesting technique and
agro-business enhancement
MAF
F
SO1 / SO2
ASPIRE AT
Development of Industry crops for increase in production, improved quality-safety; harvesting and post harvesting technique and agro-business
enhancement
7/10
MAF
F
Improvement of support services and capacity building to crop production resilient to climate change by promoting research, trials and up-scaling
climate-smart farming systems that increase resilience to CC and extreme weather events 
MAF
F
SO1 /SO2
ASPIRE AT
SO3
ASPIRE AT
Building climate change resilience on cassava production and processing
MAF
F
SO1 / SO2
ASPIRE AT
Research for the development and enhancement of agricultural productivity, quality, and transfer through strengthening of crop variety
conservation and new crop variety release responding to the impacts of climate change
MAF
F
SO3
Development of new technologies and increased yields by using new crop varieties which adapt to climate change
MAF
F
SO3
Strengthening capacities for risk prevention and reduction, effective emergency preparedness and response at all levels; enhancing livestock
and disease-related early warning system, and integrating disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation measures into recovery and
rehabilitation initiatives in the livestock sector
MAF
F
SO1
Establish nationally standardized best-practice systems for irrigation Water resources
MOW
RAM
SO2 CAISAR
75.
The updated NDC also includes detailed measures for cross-cutting dimensions.
76.
NDC priorities for Gender mainstreaming:
77.
78.
79.
In mitigation measures, there is high potential to contribute to gender equality through increasing energy access in rural areas, by diversifying household and
community energy generation sources. For example, by reducing the reliance on biomass as an energy source. Gender equality can be encouraged in mitigation
actions such as through eco-payments.
In adaptation measures, NDC priorities included: increase women’s income generation while decreasing their work burden by improving agricultural practices and
access to technology, as well as fostering women’s collective working groups. In terms of infrastructure, particularly in climate proofing of buildings and roads,
opportunities for women to contribute more prominently to restoration and construction are needed, in order to increase their access to income and livelihoods
NDC priorities for Youth: the NDC identifies potential areas for youth involvement such as inputs in construction design, promoting and sharing knowledge of Early
Warning Systems (EWS) with their communities, enhancing their role in awareness-raising campaigns such as water conservation. Youth also play a key role in the
tourism sector, from working in eco-tourism to promoting local organic products. Youth are also a target of higher education abroad programmes, especially in the
water resources sector.
80.
NDC priorities for Indigenous people: During the NDC implementation and particularly for mitigation measures in the FOLU, the GoKC will seek to promote the rights
of indigenous peoples, specifically concerning land ownership. Respect for the traditional knowledge held by indigenous peoples is integral to an understanding of
traditional livelihoods and of culture and is, therefore, an essential component of safeguarding these rights
81.
Impacts and priorities for adaptation and resilience:
82.
The identified strategic interventions for climate change mitigation in the agriculture sector are: (i) Less methane-intensive rice cultivars, (ii) Direct seeding practices,
(iii) Alternate wetting and drying practices, (iv) Promotion of organic fertilizer and deep fertilizer technology, (v) Feed additives for cattle, (vi) Improved fodder
management, (vii) Introduction of composting technology, among others.
83.
Other key policy and strategic documents are summarised below:
Strategic Framework and Programs for Economic Recovery in the Context of Living with COVID-19 in a New Normal 2021-2023
The Agricultural Development Policy (draft) defines strategies to increase productivity and growth, and to facilitate the transition to modern, sustainable food
systems. It defines four main areas and thematic policies for intervention, namely (i) Modernizing and commercializing the agricultural value chain; (ii) Public and
private investments in the agriculture sector; (iii) Growing sustainably and increasing resilience to climate change; and (iv) Institutional reforms and cross-cutting
issues
Renewable Energy policy which was endorsed by TWG-CCAFF in 2021
Strategic Development Plan for Cambodian Agro-Industries 2019-2030
Cambodia Digital Economy and Society Policy Framework 2021 - 2035 
4. Environmental and social category
84.
The proposed environmental and social category for ASPIRE AT is moderate, based on the SECAP screening tool. ASPIRE AT will have zero forest encroachment
and deforestation strategy and will not impact on any sensitive areas or result in loss of natural habitat and biodiversity. Considering the possibility to work in cultural
heritage areas, a cultural heritage management plan has been developed and will be implemented to avoid any negative impacts. The Project design has directed at
environmentally sound and sustainable agriculture and poultry: a) chemical inputs will be regulated, project will encourage to produce and use locally made bio
inputs; farmers will be motivated to apply integrated pest management, b) renewable energy technology will be promoted as part of the value chain and support
market development activities, c) intercropping will be promoted to maintain soil health and minimize the damage of disease and pest outburst, d) crop rotation will
be encouraged where applicable, e) efficient water use technologies will be promoted to reduce water stress, f) minimize waste from agriculture, poultry, processing
and market centers, and as far as possible these will be recycled for manure production, and g) support good agriculture practices.
85.
The Project has planned to support small-scale climate proofed infrastructure with no further harm on environment. There will be no investment from the project side
on the infrastructures that demands private land acquisition or resettlement of project affected people. An Environmental, Social, and Climate Management
Framework (ESCMF) has been included in the design, which contains a preliminary Environmental, Social, and Climate Management Plan (ESCMP). The ESCMF
establishes procedures for the environmental and social assessment of sub-projects, and provides guidelines in the preparation of site-specific ESCMPs for these
sub-projects.
86.
The project has a strong focus on social inclusion with targets for the inclusion of women, youth and people from ethnic minorities. The design has included
Indigenous People Plan to maximize their participation and benefit from the project and minimize potential negative impacts from the project. The project
interventions will be implemented with explicit free, prior and informed consent of local communities.
8/10
5. Climate risk category
87.
As per the SECAP screening tool, the climate risk category of the project is determined as substantial. Following are the key themes and steps followed to assess
climate risks: (i) Hazard identification: As per the ThinkHazard report, the project intervention area is likely to experience river flood, urban flood, landslides, cyclones,
extreme heat and wildfires. Likewise, foreseen future climate scenario predicts changes in temperature, climate variability and alterations in intensity and frequency
of extreme events. (ii) Exposure Assessment: The project targets agricultural systems, ecosystems or livelihoods that are exposed to weather-related hazards. Crop
production is frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature or pests and diseases. (iii) Sensitivity: The human development
score is above 5 (score of 6.3) and the Multidimensional Poverty Index is above 5 (score of 8.3); both aspects trigger a positive response in the screening tool. (iv)
Adaptation capacity and climate resilience: Cambodia still lack disaster coping capacity (DDR score of 6.8 as per the INFORM) and climate and weather information
services are not effectively being delivered to farmers, rural dwellers, and end users. However, the country has an early action plan (preparedness and emergency
response) to mitigate the impacts of weather-related hazards once the shock occurs. To some extent, the government or other institutions (including projects and
CSO/NGOs) support the target population/communities with the necessary social and economic resources to prepare for or respond to climate-related events.
Farmers still face difficulties in access adequate financial credit and loans that are tailored to their needs.
88.
An in-depth climate risk analysis indicates project targeted farmers are mostly depend on rainfall for major crops. The Project will help to update community level
seasonal crop calendar following the recent precipitation trend and collaboration will be made to disseminate early climate information. ASPIRE AT will promote
climate smart agriculture practices. The screening checklist provided in ESCMF will guide project to include adequate adaptation and mitigation measures while
working in climate vulnerable areas.
89.
The detail description of the preparedness, response and recovery, which are the three main phases of disaster risk management, are presented in the Climate Risk
Report.
6. Recommendations for project design and implementation
90.
The following points warrant further consultations with key stakeholders during the detail design stage to complete risk screening and to include adequate measures
to manage these risks.
91.
Targeting
92.
The project has a nationwide outreach. However, as a general principle, the targeting strategy will identify and exclude areas that present risks in terms of negative
impacts on the environment, including: habitats (forest, wetland, etc. ) that are legally protected, officially proposed for protection, or recognized as protected by
traditional local communities and/or authoritative sources (e.g. National Park, Nature Conservancy, Indigenous Community Conserved Area, , Indigenous collective
land title(CLTs), community forestry (CF) ICCA, etc.). The project will follow the ESCMF to exclude critical areas and to avoid potential negative social and
environmental impacts to subproject implementation areas.
93.
The project will work with business clusters and other producers’ organisations that are already supported by ASPIRE and AIMs. ASPIRE-AT will continue to involve
rural communities, including IPs where relevant, at an early stage of the interventions and should seek Free Prior Informed Consent (FPIC) following the FPIC
implementation plan. FPIC processes will allow IPs to determine and priorities their strategic aspiration/needs and to identify any sites of socio-economic and cultural
importance for IPs (burial sites, cultural sites) and will systematically exclude these areas from project interventions.
94.
IFAD Mainstreaming areas:
95.
Gender mainstreaming as promoted under ASPIRE will be pursued under ASPIRE-AT to ensure that women voice with key focus on IPs women, labour conditions,
and economic opportunities are promoted throughout the project interventions. The project will also address the risk of Gender based violence (including sexual
exploitation and abuse) that has surged during the COVID pandemic.
96.
Youth: Promotion of rural entrepreneurships for youth could be continued by supporting young lead farmers and promote agricultural production models that are
attractive to young rural people (vegetable production under net-house, hydroponic technologies, RET) as well as processing units.
97.
Indigenous peoples: there are additional elements to be clarified to complete risk screening. FPIC and grievance redress mechanisms are designed in coordination
with IPs
98.
Nutrition: food safety at production, post-harvest and processing stages and consumer awareness on food safety and certification schemes are key areas where the
project has potential value addition in relation with nutrition.
99.
Financial intermediaries and direct investments:
100.
Investments into financial intermediaries and private sector companies are a key instrument for promoting sustainable financial markets and provide financial
products and services to farming businesses and to the rural micro, small and medium-sized enterprise sector. ASPIRE-AT has identified the Agriculture and Rural
Development Bank (ARDB) and the SME Bank as potential partners. The banks will conduct the screening and due diligence to assess the environmental and social
policies and an associated environmental and social management system (ESMS) of these financial intermediaries.
101.
Sustainable agriculture practices
102.
The ASPIRE-AT will continue to promote sustainable agricultural practices across the board of the selected value chains: native chicken (biosafety measures),
vegetable production under net-houses, orchards with potential for promoting agroforestry models. Inter/mix cropping will be encouraged. The use of chemical inputs
will be regulated and the farmers/POs/ACs will be motivated to use bio-inputs.
103.
The WOCAT database of Sustainable Land Management and adaptation options has been developed with IFAD support in Cambodia. These practices will be
promoted through the extension channels in place: PDAFF, community extension workers, lead farmers, ICT, etc.
104.
Available guidelines and tools will also be mobilised to provide sustainable production options to farmers and producers organisations: FAO Climate smart
Agriculture source book, the IFAD Adaptation Framework Thematic Brief (Rainfed Crops + Adaptation Option database), Socio-economic benefits, nutritional
outcomes and ecosystems services of Integrated Farming Systems promoted under the SUCRA component of the ASPIRE programme in collaboration with the
Royal University of Agriculture and the CDE of the University of Bern, are being measured through a holistic analytical framework. This long-term transversal
assessment tool will provide valuable lessons for further promoting integrated farming systems. Other assessment tools could also be considered: the IFAD Climate
Adaptation in Rural Development (CARD) assessment tool, Tool for Agroecology Performance Evaluation, FAO Tool for Agroecology Performance Evaluation
(TAPE), etc.
105.
Climate adaptation and mitigation
106.
The detail climate risk analysis, ESCMP, and ESCMF have identified major climate impacts to the project and potential impact on the climate from the project. The
documents have also detailed potential adaptation and mitigation measures. The project will follow the adaptation and mitigation measures and will include the
monitoring indicators in project M&E framework.
9/10
7. Further studies needed
107.
Following the suggestion of SECAP review note developed during the concept note phase, following reports/documents have been prepared: i) Environmental,
Social, and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF); Detailed Climate Risk Analysis; Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHMP); Indigenous People’s Plan
(IPP); and Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) implementation plan. A brief ESCMP has been prepared and annexed in ESCMF. Having these, there is no
further study required at the design stage.
8. Monitoring and evaluation
108.
Monitoring of outreach at project and programme level can be built on the existing detailed MIS databases maintained by project teams. In the coming years, the
database of members of Business Clusters and Agricultural Cooperatives (AC) could be maintained at AC level to be used as a management tool by the AC
administrative committee as well as by the project team to monitor outreach indicators in the result framework.
109.
ASPIRE has developed innovative M&E systems and users feedback loops that directly inform the project interventions to reach the intended targets set out in the
ASPIRE Logical Framework:
Programme budgeting performance measurement system, collected by CEW and directly feeding into the ASPIRE MIS system
ICT4D: farmers’ diary function included in CHAMKA app
Social media groups allow for real-time interaction with representatives of beneficiaries and front-line extension workers on the ground
110.
Such ICT based monitoring functions could be mainstreamed throughout the new interventions in the framework of the COSOP and provide real time data to inform
the result framework indicators with disaggregation across mainstreaming dimensions: gender, youth, indigenous peoples, PwD and covering aspects related to
nutrition and environment and climate.
Mapping as monitoring tools is already developed under ASPIRE and AIMS projects.
Maps of business clusters is available on-line here
111.
Map of the agricultural cooperatives nationwide is also maintained by GDA here:
112.
Knowledge management functions across projects and programmes could also be harmonized to build on lessons learned and disseminate good practices. There
are valuable example of KM activities supported under ASPIRE that could be replicated in forthcoming projects. Such KM function have proved useful to generate
evidence for policy studies and formulation of national policies and strategies.
9. References
·       ADB, brief 171 Surface Water Resources Assessment of the Tonle Sap and Mekong Delta River Basin Groups: Improving Climate Resilience, Productivity, and
Sustainability. Jungo Sakara, March 2021 (link)
·       Blair G, Blair N. Nutrient Status of Cambodian Soils, Rationalisation of Fertiliser Recommendations and the Challenges Ahead for Cambodian Soil Science. Curr
Agri Res
·       Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia (2021): The World Bank Group and Asian Development Bank. link
·       GFDRR, Cambodia Think Hazard report, 2020 (link)
·       Hariri N. CDE, Scaling - up Sustainable Land Management (SLM) practices by smallholder farmers: working with agricultural extension to identify, assess and
disseminate SLM practices, March 2021
·       Hayward, D. and Diepart J.‐C. (2021). Deforestation in Cambodia. A story of land concessions, migration and resource exploitation. link
·       Henning A., Cambodia - Context and Land Governance, 2021 - in Land Portal link
·       ILO, Decent Work Country Programme 2019-2023 (2019) link
·       Ingalls, M.L., Diepart, J.-C., Truong, N., Hayward, D., Niel, T., Sem, T. and al, State of Land in the Mekong Region, 2019 link
·       Liguori J. et. Al, 2022, How do food safety concerns affect consumer behaviors and diets in low- and middle-income countries? A systematic review. Global Food
SecurityVolume 32, March 2022, 100606. link.
·       RGC (2018). Rectangular Strategy IV, Phnom Penh
·       RGC (2019). National Strategic Development Plan 2019-2023. Phnom Penh: RGC
·       RGC MoP, (2020). Report of Cambodia-Socio economic survey 2019/20. MoP: Cambodia
·       RGC, Cambodia Intercensal Agriculture Survey (CIAS), 2019 link
·       RGC, General Population Census of Cambodia 2019
·       RGC, Land Degradation Neutrality Targets, MAFF, January 2018 link
·       RGC, Law on Agricultural Cooperatives
·       RGC, Law on Water Resources (2009)
·       RGC, Ministry of Planning - National Report on Demography Socio-Economic Status of Indigenous People, 2021 (in Khmer) link
·       RGC, MoP-NIS, Statistical Yearbook, 2021
·       RGC, Neary Rattanak V, 2019-2023: Ministry of Women's Affairs’ Five Year Strategic Plan link
·       SNEC, Cambodia’s Agriculture Productivity: Challenges and Policy Direction, 2021
·       UNDP, The Next Frontier: Human Development and the Anthropocene Briefing note for countries on the 2020 Human Development Report, Cambodia, 2020
·       UNICEF and WFP, COVID-19 socio-economic impact assessment, July 2021 (link)
ESCMP Matrix
113.
Refer to the appendices for the following studies;
The Environmental, Social And Climate Management Framework (ESCMF)
Detailed Climate Risk Analysis
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP)
Free, Prior and Informed Consent Implementation Plan (FPIC)
Footnotes
[1] Agricultural Services Programme for Innovation, Resilience and Extension
[2] Sustainable Assets for Agriculture Markets, Business and Trade
10/10
[3] Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders
[4] The poverty line has been updated as: KHR 10,951 (USD 2.67) per day for Phnom Penh, KHR 9,571 (USD 2.33) per day in other urban areas of Cambodia and KHR
8,908 (USD 2.17) per day in rural areas
[5] Ministry of Planning – NIS, Cambodia Inter-Censal Agriculture Survey 2019
[6] Ministry of Planning - Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey 2019/2020
[7] Anne Hennings, 2021: https://landportal.org/book/narratives/2021/cambodia
[8] The percentage of women age 15-49 who both solely and jointly with someone else own a land which is legally registered with their name or cannot be sold without
their signature. "Both alone and jointly" Implies a woman owns a land alone and another land jointly with someone else.
[9] Intimate partner violence is by far the most prevalent form of violence against women globally and is defined as the percentage of ever-married women (ages 15-49)
who have ever experienced physical or sexual violence committed by their husband or partner, whereas those who have ever experienced any form of sexual violence is
the percentage of women (ages 15-49) who ever experienced sexual violence irrespective of marital status and perpetrator.
[10] In IFAD-funded ASPIRE, the Management Information System was revised in 2019 to change the acceptation of Youth as people between 16 and 24 years of age. 
[11] Youth Well-being Policy Review of Cambodia, OECD 2017: https://www.oecd.org/dev/inclusivesocietiesanddevelopment/Youth-well-being-policy-review-
Cambodia.pdf
[12] Land law 2001 article 23 paraph #1
[13]The 24 IPs groups are, Tumpun, Jarai, Kreung, Prao, Kavet, Pnong, Kouy, Steang, Kraol, Mil, Kachak, Por, Khaonh, Chorng, Sui, Thmol, Lun, Sa-och, Rode, Khe,
Ro-orng, Spung, Laern, and Samre IPs groups.
[14] Rattanakiri, Mondulkiri, Kratie, Preah Vihear, Kampong Thom, Stung Treng, Oddor Meanchey, Kampong Cham, Pursat, Kampong Speu, Koh Kong, Kampong
Saom, Battambang, Bantheay Meanchey and Siem Reap provinces
[15] National report on demography, socio-economic status of indigenous peoples in Cambodia.
[16] National report on demography, socio-economic status of indigenous peoples in Cambodia.
[17] after World Bank data
[18] Cambodia is one of the most biodiverse countries in Southeast Asia, with as many as 8,260 plant species (10% of which may be endemic) along with more than 250
species of amphibian and reptile, 874 fish species and over 500 bird species (https://www.fauna-flora.org/countries/cambodia/)
[19] Land Degradation Neutrality Targets, MAFF, January 2018
[20] Approaches include implementing Restoration Opportunities Assessment Methodology (ROAM) and Forest Landscape Restoration, as well as assisted natural
regeneration
[21]http://interactive.mrcmekong.org/sobr-2018-findings/environmental-dimension/
[22]https://www.ifad.org/en/web/knowledge/-/publication/climate-adaptation-in-rural-development-card-assessment-tool
[23] Cambodia Intercensal Agriculture Survey (CIAS, 2019) : https://www.nis.gov.kh/nis/Agriculture/CIAS2019/CIAS%202019%20report_FINAL_EN.pdf
[24] Hayward, D. and Diepart J.‐C. (2021). Deforestation in Cambodia. A story of land concessions, migration and resource exploitation.
https://landportal.org/file/59897/download
Environmental and Social Safeguards Classification: Moderate
1/6
Environmental and Social Safeguards
Biodiversity conservation
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
1.1 Could the project potentially involve or lead to conversion or degradation
of biodiversity, habitats (including modified habitat, natural habitat and critical
natural habitat) and/or ecosystems and ecosystem services?
1.2 Could the project involve or potentially lead to activities involving habitats
that are legally protected, officially proposed for protection, or recognized as
protected by traditional local communities and/or authoritative sources (e.g.
National Park, Nature Conservancy, Indigenous Community Conserved Area,
ICCA, etc.)?
1.3 Could the project potentially involve or lead to an increase in the chance
of human-wildlife encounters/conflict?
1.4 Could the project potentially involve or lead to risks to endangered
species (e.g. reduction, encroachment on habitat)?
1.5 Could the project potentially involve or lead to impacts/risks to migratory
wildlife?
1.6 Could the project potentially involve or lead to introduction or utilization of
any invasive alien species of flora and fauna, whether accidental or
intentional?
1.7 Could the project involve or lead to the handling or utilization of
genetically modified organisms?
1.8 Could the project involve or lead to procurement through primary
suppliers of natural resource materials?
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
2.1 Could the project involve or lead to the release of pollutants to the
environment due to routine or non-routine circumstances with the potential
for adverse local, regional, and/or transboundary impacts?
Yes
Unlikely
Minor
Pollutants may
possibly be
released, either
routinely or by
accident, but
treatment systems
are proven and
verified. Receiving
environment has
absorptive
capacity.
Risk
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
Low
2.2 Could the project involve or lead to primary not environmentally
sustainable production of living natural resources? (Note: this includes the
cultivation or rearing of plants or animals, including annual and perennial crop
farming, animal husbandry (including livestock), aquaculture, plantation
forestry, etc )
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
2.3 Could the project involve or lead to engagement in areas of forestry,
including the harvesting of natural forests, plantation development, and/or
reforestation?
Yes
Highly
unlikely
Project is partly
dependent on
production of
living natural
resources, but not
enough to require
serious
environmental or
social controls.
Negligible
Low
The project will
not involve
engagement of
forestry in any
form
Environmental and Social Safeguards
2.4 Could the project involve or lead to significant consumption of raw
materials, energy, and/or water?
2/6
2.5 Could the project involve or lead to significant extraction, diversion or
containment of surface or ground water (e.g. construction of dams,
reservoirs, river basin developments, groundwater extraction)?
No
No
Low
Low
2.6 Could the project involve inputs of fertilizers and other modifying agents? Yes
Likely
Minor
Moderate
The project only
requires minimal
amounts of
fertilizer
2.7 Could the project involve or lead to procurement, supply and/or result in
the use of pesticides on crops, livestock, aquaculture or forestry?
Yes
Likely
Minor
Moderate
The project only
requires minimal
amounts of
pesticide.
2.8 Could the project be located in an area which is being, or has been,
polluted by an external source (e.g. a mine, smelter, industry)?
No
Low
2.9 Could the project involve livestock – extensive and intensive systems and
animal products (dairy, skins, meat, etc.)?
Yes
Likely
Minor
Moderate
Cultural Heritage
3.1 Could the project be located in areas that are considered to have
archaeological (prehistoric), paleontological, historical, cultural, artistic, and
religious values or contains features considered as critical cultural heritage?
The project
involves livestock
or fisheries, but
not in extensive or
intensive systems.
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
Risk
Rating
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
The project is
thought to be
close to an area
that is considered
to have
archaeological
(prehistoric),
paleontological,
historical, cultural,
artistic, and
religious values or
contains features
considered as
critical cultural
heritage. The site
has been
comprehensively
surveyed, and all
tanglible and
intangible cultural
heritage is well
known.
Environmental and Social Safeguards
3.2 Could the project directly or indirectly affect indigenous peoples’ rights,
lands, natural resources, territories, livelihoods, knowledge, social fabric,
traditions, governance systems, and culture or heritage (tangible and
intangible)?
3/6
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
Minor impact to
indigenous
population. No
damage to/or loss
of access to
indigenous land,
assets, resources,
and/or cultural
heritage.
Low
Low
Low
Low
3.3 Could the project involve or lead to significant excavations, demolitions,
movement of earth, flooding or other environmental changes?
3.4 Could the project involve or lead to adverse impacts to sites, structures,
or objects with historical, cultural, artistic, traditional or religious values or
intangible forms of culture (e.g. knowledge, innovations, practices)? (Note:
projects intended to protect and conserve Cultural Heritage may also have
inadvertent adverse impacts)
3.5 Could the project involve or lead to alterations to landscapes and natural
features with cultural significance?
3.6 Could the project involve or lead to utilization of tangible and/or intangible
forms (e.g. practices, traditional knowledge) of Cultural Heritage for
commercial or other purposes?
No
No
No
No
indigenous peoples
4.1 Could the project be sited in areas where indigenous peoples are present
(including the project area of influence)?
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
Risk
Rating
Yes
Likely
Minor
Moderate
The project is not
sited in an area
where indigenous
people are
present, but
associated
facilities may
impact on
indigenous
people.
4.2 Could the project result in activities located on lands and territories
claimed by indigenous peoples?
4.3 Could the project result in impacts on the rights of indigenous peoples or
to the lands, territories and resources claimed by them?
4.4 Could the project result in the utilization and/or commercial development
of natural resources on lands and territories claimed by indigenous peoples?
4.5 Could the project lead to impacts on the Cultural Heritage of indigenous
peoples, including through the commercialization or use of their traditional
knowledge and practices?
No
No
No
No
Labour and Working Conditions
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
5.1 Could the project operate in sectors or value chains that are
characterized by working conditions that do not meet national labour laws or
international commitments? (Note: this may include discriminatory practices,
high gender inequality and the lack of equal opportunities, denial of freedom
of association and collective bargaining, labour migrants)
5.2 Could the project use or operate in a value chain where there have been
reports of forced labour? (Note: Risks of forced labour may be increased for
projects located in remote places or where the status of migrant workers is
uncertain)
No
No
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
Low
Low
Environmental and Social Safeguards
5.3 Could the project involve children (a) below the nationally-defined
minimum employment age (usually 15 years old) or (b) above the nationally-
defined minimum employment age but below the age of 18 in supported
activities or in value chains?
4/6
No
Low
5.4 Could the project: (a) operate in a sector, area or value chain where
producers and other agricultural workers are typically exposed to significant
occupational and safety risks, and/or (b) promote or use technologies or
practices that pose occupational safety and health (OSH) risks for farmers,
other rural workers or rural populations in general? (Note: OSH risks in
agriculture might include: dangerous machinery and tools; hazardous
chemicals; toxic or allergenic agents; carcinogenic substances or agents;
parasitic diseases; transmissible animal diseases; confined spaces;
ergonomic hazards; extreme temperatures; and contact with dangerous and
poisonous animals, reptiles and insects. Psychosocial hazards might include
violence and harassment.)
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
The project
operates in a
sector, area, or
value chain where
workers are
occasionally
exposed to
significant OSH
risks, and where
regulation is
known to be
effective.
Community Health, Safety and Security
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
No
No
No
No
6.1 Could the project be at risk from water-borne or other vector-borne
diseases (e.g. temporary breeding habitats), and/or communicable and non-
communicable diseases?
6.2 Could the project lead to unintended negative impacts on nutrition?
6.3 Is there a possibility of harm or losses due to failure of structural elements
of the project (e.g. collapse of buildings or infrastructure)?
6.4 Could the project involve or lead to the construction or rehabilitation of
dams?
6.5 Could the project involve or lead to transport, storage, and use and/or
disposal of hazardous or dangerous materials (e.g. explosives, fuel and other
chemicals during construction and operation)?
6.6 Could the project lead to adverse impacts on ecosystems and ecosystem
services relevant to communities’ health (e.g. food, surface water purification,
natural buffers from flooding)?
Risk
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
The project has
only minor
involvement with
the transport,
storage, and use
and/or disposal of
hazardous or
dangerous
materials, and
regulation of
hazardous
materials is
effective.
Yes
Unlikely
Minor
Low
The project will
only have minor
impacts on
ecosystem
services, and
these can be
mitigated through
standard
environmental
management
planning.
Environmental and Social Safeguards
6.7 Could the project lead to the potential for gender-based violence,
including sexual harassment, exploitation and abuse, as a result of labour
influx, land redistribution, or other actions that alter community dynamics?
5/6
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
Minor changes to
community
dynamics.
Resulting serious
recorded cases of
gender-based
violence and/or
sexual
exploitation.
Gender-based
violence protocols
in place.
6.8 Could the project lead to increases in traffic or alteration in traffic flow?
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
changes to traffic
volumes or
alterations to
traffic flow. Risk of
injury or death is
reduced by good
design and
implementation of
safety protocols.
New construction,
rehabilitation or
upgrade of rural
roads, with
Annual Average
Daily Traffic
(AADT) below
400
6.9 Could the project lead to an influx of project workers?
6.10 Could the project involve or lead to the engagement of security
personnel to protect facilities and property or to support project activities?
No
No
Physical and economic resettlement
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
7.1 Could the project result in temporary or permanent and full or partial
physical displacement (including people without legally recognizable claims
to land)?
7.2 Could the project result in economic displacement (e.g. loss of assets or
access to resources due to land acquisition or access restrictions – even in
the absence of physical relocation)?
7.3 Could the project present a risk of forced evictions?
7.4 Could the project result in impacts on or changes to land tenure
arrangements and/or community-based property rights/customary rights to
land, territories and/or resources?
No
No
No
No
Financial intermediaries and direct investments
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
8.1 Could the investment be granted to an institution that does not have an
environmental and social policies and an associated environmental and
social management system (ESMS) in place (transparent, publicly
available)?
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
The institution has
an ESMS in
place. Reports
are not publicly
available.
Environmental and Social Safeguards
8.2 Could the investment be granted to an institution with insufficient
capacities (i.e. unqualified personnel e.g. ES Officer) to implement the
ESMS?
6/6
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
The institution
employs an ES
Officer, and
employs field staff
to implement the
ESMS.
8.3 Could the investment be granted to an institution that does not have an
Exclusion List?
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
8.4 According to the institution's portfolio classification: Could the institution
have potential high-risk projects in their portfolio?
8.5 Is there evidence that the institution does not comply with the local legal
framework?
No
No
The institution has
an Exclusion List,
but cannot verify
the
Low
Low
8.6 Does the institution provide a stable communication channel with
stakeholders and local communities (e.g. a Grievance Redress Mechanism)?
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
8.7 Does the organization provide auxiliary or capacity building support
services.
Yes
Almost
certain
Communities and
stakeholders can
contact the
institution and and
a process is in
place for
institutionalizing
the
communication
channels (e.g.
complaint-
management
system) and
training staff
accordingly.
Minor
Moderate
The institution
offers basic
training services
to customers
(directly or thrid
party service
providers to
imrpove business
and livelihood
opportunities.
Climate Risk Classification: Substantial
Step 1: Hazard identification
1/2
What are the expected hazards in the project intervention area?
No, Yes, TBD
River flood
Costal Flood
Urban Flood
Landslide
Cyclone
Water Scarcity (agricultural droughts and/or dry spells)
Extreme Heat
Wildfires
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Future climate scenarios foreseen (period 2040-2059) - Change in frequency and intensity
No, Yes, TBD
Change in temperature (increase or decrease)
Change in rainfall (increase or decrease)
Climate variability (larger or smaller)
Intensity and frequency of extreme events (larger or smaller)
Is the project expected to have an impact on climate?
Is the project expected to be a significant emitter of greenhouse gases?
Step 2: Exposure Assessment
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No, Yes, TBD
No
Is the project located in exposed areas to weather-related natural hazards?
No, Yes, TBD
Low-lying areas (valleys, coastal zones, and small islands)
Very warm areas (subtropical)
Tropical areas (rainforests)
Arid and semi-arid areas (deserts)
Mountains zones and permafrost areas (tundra)
River banks
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Does the project target agricultural systems, ecosystems or livelihoods exposed to weather-related
hazards?
No, Yes, TBD
Is crop production frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature or pests
and diseases?
Is livestock productivity frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature or
diseases?
Are fisheries frequently affected by ocean acidification, water salinity and changes in sea surface temperature due
to ocean-atmospheric oscillations or climate change?
Is forest productivity frequently affected by wildfires, diseases, rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, or changes in
temperature?
Is the biodiversity in the project area likely to be affected by changes in climate variables?
Is any stage of the agricultural value chain (production, storage, processing and marketing) exposed to climate
related hazards?
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Is any rural infrastructure likely to be affected by flooding, landslides, changes in temperatures, and extreme winds. Yes
Step 3: Sensitivity Assessment
What are key sensitivities for the populations in the project’s areas of intervention?
No, Yes, TBD
Is conflict exacerbating the population's sensitivity to weather related hazards?
Is population displacement being exacerbated by climate change impacts?
No
No
Are diseases (e.g. COVID-19, malaria, cholera) increasing the population´s vulnerability and affecting their capacity
to address potential weather-related hazards?
2/2
Is the income of the target population predominately coming from agriculture?
Are social inequalities (e.g. based on gender, youth, indigenous persons and other marginalized groups) being
exacerbated by climate change?
Is the Human Development Index (HDI) equal to or below 0.6?
Is the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) equal to or above 0.1?
Step 4: Adaptive capacity and climate resilience
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
What are key adaptive capacities in the areas of project intervention?
No, Yes, TBD
Is the country well ranked in the Disaster risk reduction progress score?
Are climate and weather information services (real-time weather data, seasonal forecasts etc.) effectively being
delivered (through radio, TV, SMS, extension services etc.) to farmers, rural dwellers, and end users?
Does the project country have an early action plan (preparedness and emergency response) to mitigate the
impacts of weather-related hazards once the shock occurs?
Does the government or other institutions support the target population/communities with the necessary social and
economic resources to prepare for or respond to climate-related events?
Is the target community carrying out (using their own means) agricultural adaptation?
Does the target population have the economic means or support to adjust or adapt their activities in response to
weather related shocks?
Do policies/mechanisms exist that make financial credit, loans, and agricultural insurance available?
Are rural infrastructures effectively delivering services to farmers and rural dwellers?
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 6: First year AWPB 
Annex 6:  First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
67 
Cambodia Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE-AT) Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (US$ '000) The GovernmentIFAD PBASIFAD BRAMEIBGAPSSTC GrantTotalAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountA. Works 4,084--32,576--36,659B. Trainning, Capacity Building and Workshop -1. Training and capacity building 3,75211,638-6333,501-19,5242. Workshops 261-----261Subtotal 4,01411,638-6333,501-19,785C. Equipment, Material and Vehicle -1. Vehicles 19159-20--1982. Equipment & Material 2,716--6,888--9,604Subtotal 2,735159-6,908--9,802D. Goods, Services, Inputs and Consultancies -1. Goods, Services and Inputs 1,6073,353-1,515--6,4752. TA: Consultancies (Int.) 4443,096-900-3004,7403. TA: Consultancies (Nat.) 9585,1131,2372,275--9,583Subtotal 3,00911,5621,2374,690-30020,798E. Credit and Guarantee Funds -1. Credit -10,49812,763-7,682-30,9432. Grants ---15,7528,820-24,572Subtotal -10,49812,76315,75216,502-55,515F. Operating costs -1. Salaries & allowance 3,428-----3,4282. Operating costs 1,883-----1,883Subtotal 5,311-----5,311Total PROJECT COSTS 19,15233,85714,00060,55920,003300147,871 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 6: First year AWPB 
68 
Disbursement by Resource of Fund By CategoryAWPB 2023RGCIFAD PBASIFAD BRAMEIBSSTC GRANTGAPSME ContributionPartner Financial InstitutionBeneficiary Contribution Cat.I-Works-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                  -                 -                 Cat.II- Trainning, Capacity Building and Workshop1,305,000.00   157,500.00      771,400.00      -                 -                 -                 376,100.00      -                  -                 -                 Cat.III-Equipment, Material and Vehicle650,500.00      555,758.50      94,741.50       -                 -                 -                 -                 -                  -                 -                 Cat.IV-Goods, Services, Inputs and Consultancies1,862,040.00   334,293.00      1,257,570.00   104,265.00      15,912.00       150,000.00      -                 -                  -                 -                 Cat.V. Credit and Guarantee Funds4,652,924.00   -                 2,513,940.00   -                 945,120.00      -                 904,900.00      100,000.00       -                 188,964.00      Cat.VI. Operating costs659,680.00      659,680.00      -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                  -                 -                 TOTAL9,130,144.00   1,707,231.50   4,637,651.50   104,265.00      961,032.00      150,000.00      1,281,000.00   100,000.00       -                 188,964.00      Q1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalCat.I-Works-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                  -                 -                 Cat.II- Trainning, Capacity Building and Workshop39,375.00       39,375.00       39,375.00       39,375.00       157,500.00      192,850.00      192,850.00      192,850.00       192,850.00      771,400.00      Cat.III-Equipment, Material and Vehicle132,939.63      156,939.63      132,939.63      132,939.63      555,758.50      23,685.38       23,685.38       23,685.38        23,685.38       94,741.50       Cat.IV-Goods, Services, Inputs and Consultancies90,587.67       89,564.17       84,564.17       69,577.00       334,293.00      338,130.00      338,130.00      293,130.00       288,180.00      1,257,570.00   Cat.V. Credit and Guarantee Funds-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 1,100,895.00   1,100,895.00   156,075.00       156,075.00      2,513,940.00   Cat.VI. Operating costs164,920.00      164,920.00      164,920.00      164,920.00      659,680.00      -                 -                 -                  -                 -                 TOTAL427,822.29      450,798.79      421,798.79      406,811.63      1,707,231.50   1,655,560.38   1,655,560.38   665,740.38       660,790.38      4,637,651.50   Disbursement by Resource of Fund By CategoryRGCIFAD PBASQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalCat.I-Works-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                  -                 Cat.II- Trainning, Capacity Building and Workshop-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                  -                 -                 Cat.III-Equipment, Material and Vehicle-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                  -                 -                 Cat.IV-Goods, Services, Inputs and Consultancies40,896.00       31,684.50       31,684.50       -                 104,265.00      3,978.00         3,978.00         3,978.00          3,978.00         15,912.00       Cat.V. Credit and Guarantee Funds-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 374,260.00      315,040.00      255,820.00       -                 945,120.00      Cat.VI. Operating costs-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                  -                 -                 TOTAL40,896.00       31,684.50       31,684.50       -                 104,265.00      378,238.00      319,018.00      259,798.00       3,978.00         961,032.00      Disbursement by Resource of Fund By CategoryIFAD BRAMEIBQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalCat.I-Works-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                  -                 0Cat.II- Trainning, Capacity Building and Workshop-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 94,025.00       94,025.00       94,025.00        94,025.00       376,100.00      Cat.III-Equipment, Material and Vehicle-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                  -                 -                 Cat.IV-Goods, Services, Inputs and Consultancies54,166.67       54,166.67       29,166.67       12,500.00       150,000.00      -                 -                 -                  -                 -                 Cat.V. Credit and Guarantee Funds-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 358,525.00      358,525.00      93,925.00        93,925.00       904,900.00      Cat.VI. Operating costs-                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                  -                 -                 TOTAL54,166.67       54,166.67       29,166.67       12,500.00       150,000.00      452,550.00      452,550.00      187,950.00       187,950.00      1,281,000.00   Disbursement by Resource of Fund By CategorySSTC GRANGAP 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 6: First year AWPB 
69 
Cambodia Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE-AT) Table 1. Productive and Resilient Assets for Producer Organisations Detailed Costs Unit CostUnit2023Q1Q2Q3Q4Total(US$)Q1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Investment in productive and resilient assets of POs and smallholders 1. Loan Financing to Smallholders /a % of loan0.180.09        0.09        0.18           3,948,000355,320.00    355,320.00    -             -           710,640.00    2. Loan Financing to Smallholders Contribution from ARDB % of loan--         -         -         -         -             3,948,000-               -               -             -           -               3. Loan Financing to Smallholders contributed by beneficiary % of loan0.180.05        0.05        0.05        0.05        0.18           394,80017,766.00      17,766.00      17,766.00   17,766.00 71,064.00      4. Grant Financing to Smallholders /b % of grant0.060.030      0.020      0.010      0.06           5,922,000177,660.00    118,440.00    59,220.00   -           355,320.00    5. Grant Financing to Smallholders gap % of grant0.060.03        0.03        0.06           8,820,000264,600.00    264,600.00    -             -           529,200.00    6. Incremental cost of screening against project criteria: Loans and Grants to SH % fees0.0050.0013    0.0013    0.0013    0.0013    0.01           3,948,0004,935.00       4,935.00       4,935.00     4,935.00   19,740.00      7. Loan Financing to Producer Organisations % of loan0.180.09        0.09        0.18           6,550,000589,500.00    589,500.00    -             -           1,179,000.00 8. Loan Financing to Producer Organisations contribution from ARDB % of loan--         -         -         -         -             6,550,000-               -               -             -           -               9. Loan Financing to Producer Organisations contribution from the POs % of loan0.180.05        0.05        0.05        0.05        0.18           655,00029,475.00      29,475.00      29,475.00   29,475.00 117,900.00    10. Grant Financing to Producer Organisations /c % of grant0.060.020      0.020      0.020      0.06           9,830,000196,600.00    196,600.00    196,600.00 -           589,800.00    11. Incremental cost of screening against project criteria: Loans and Grants to PO % of fees0.0050.002      0.002      0.002      0.005          6,550,00010,916.67      10,916.67      10,916.67   -           32,750.00      12. Value Chain Financing Specialist /d Person-Months61.50        1.50        1.50        1.50        6.00           3,0004,500.00       4,500.00       4,500.00     4,500.00   18,000.00      Subtotal -             1,651,272.67 1,592,052.67 323,412.67 56,676.00 3,623,414.00 B. Enabling market infrastructure for Producer Organisations -             1. Infrastructure Grant Finance for new Producer Organisations /e PO--             64,470-               -               -             -           -               2. Engineering services for feasibility study, design and construction supervision PO--             6,200-               -               -             -           -               Subtotal -               -               -             -           -               Total 1,651,272.67 1,592,052.67 323,412.67 56,676.00 3,623,414.00  _________________________________\a The amount of the loan provided by the project is gradually reducing and ending at the 6th year, but the reflows of loan repayments will be used to finance loans in the later part of the project.\b Farmers are eligible for blended loan and grant finance with minimum 25% grant element. Farmers meeting specific project priority criteria may qualify for additional grant up to maximum 35% of the investment amount.\c The maximum grant element for PO will be determined by the number of smallholder farmer members of the graduated PO who are expected to benefit from the investment\d One full-time adviser to assist ARDB to analyse investments and move towards value chain financing\e Community infrastructure for PO that have not benefitted from grant assistance previously. Funding for infra related to production, handling, processing or marketing of commodities in the targeted VC which include buildings, or fixed  itemsQuantitiesBase Cost (US$) 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 6: First year AWPB 
70 
Cambodia Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE-AT) Table 2.1. Strengthening private investment for agricultural market and trade development Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit2023Q1Q2Q3Q4Total(US$)Q1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Strengthening private investment for agricultural market    and trade development  (Sub-Comp 2.1) 1. Investment-oriented technical support to agri-businesses /a VC mobilization and brokering (in-country) Lump Sum--50,000-             -             -             -             -               Export market research, exposure and trade promotion Events--50,000-             -             -             -             -               Specialist investment advice to businesses Events--20,000-             -             -             -             -               Links with international centres of expertise /b Lump Sum10.25     0.25     0.25     0.25   150,00012,500.00   12,500.00   12,500.00   12,500.00   50,000.00      Technical assistant to promote export to China Lump Sum0.50.25     0.25     1100,00025,000.00   25,000.00   -             -             50,000.00      Subtotal 37,500.00   37,500.00   12,500.00   12,500.00   100,000.00    2. Agri-business investment team International Agribusiness Investment Specialist /c Person-Months82.00     2.00     2.00     2.00   825,00050,000.00   50,000.00   50,000.00   50,000.00   200,000.00    Snr National Agribusiness Investment Specialist Person-Months124.00     4.00     4.00     122,50010,000.00   10,000.00   10,000.00   -             30,000.00      National Agribusiness Specialists Person-Months246.00     6.00     6.00     6.00   241,5009,000.00     9,000.00     9,000.00     9,000.00     36,000.00      Subtotal 69,000.00   69,000.00   69,000.00   59,000.00   266,000.00    3. Agribusiness investment financing Line of credit /d Lump Sum10.25     0.25     0.25     0.25   11,000,000250,000.00 250,000.00 250,000.00 250,000.00 1,000,000.00 Line of credit contribution from SME Bank Lump Sum--       -       -       -     -1,000,000-             -             -             -             -               Line of credit contribution from SME Lump Sum10.33     0.33     0.33     1100,00033,333.33   33,333.33   33,333.33   -             100,000.00    Specialist TA to PFIs for VC financing Lump Sum10.4000 0.3000 0.3000 1.0000 102,35040,940.00   30,705.00   30,705.00   -             102,350.00    Subtotal 324,273.33 314,038.33 314,038.33 250,000.00 1,202,350.00 4. Vehicles and equipment Laptops Each4441,000-             4,000.00     -             -             4,000.00       Office equipment Lump Sum22210,000-             20,000.00   -             -             20,000.00      Subtotal -             24,000.00   -             -             24,000.00      Total Investment Costs 430,773.33 444,538.33 395,538.33 321,500.00 1,592,350.00 II. Recurrent Costs A. DSA for in-country travel /e Days24060.00   60.00   60.00   60.00 240352,100.00     2,100.00     2,100.00     2,100.00     8,400.00       B. Other operating costs Lump Sum10.25     0.25     0.25     0.25   125,0006,250.00     6,250.00     6,250.00     6,250.00     25,000.00      Total Recurrent Costs 8,350.00     8,350.00     8,350.00     8,350.00     33,400.00      Total 439,123.33 452,888.33 403,888.33 329,850.00 1,625,750.00  _________________________________\a The project is expected to work with about 40 growth-oriented agri-businesses and will be provided on a cost sharing basis with the participating agri-businesses.\b Service provider will facilitathe activity\c Short term intermittent position, 8 month per year, 2 international travels per year.\d The line of credit will complement SME Bank's existing SME loan co-financing.\e 5 days per specialist per month in fieldBase Cost (US$) 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 6: First year AWPB 
72 
Cambodia Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE-AT) Table 2.2. Strengthening the enabling environment for competitive agricultural Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit2023Total(US$)Q1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Strengthening the enabling environment for competitive    agricultural value chains and trade (Sub-Comp 2.2) 1. Post Harvest Plant Quarantine Research Centre /a Building construction Sites--     -     -     --          1,370,000-                     -              -              -              -              Post-harvest scientific equipment and tools Set--          1,850,000-                     -              -              -              -              Laboratory chemicals and consumables Set--          50,000-                     -              -              -              -              Office equipment Lump Sum--          100,000-                     -              -              -              -              Training of staff for operation equipment & centre management Lump Sum-100,000-                     -              -              -              -              Subtotal -                     -              -              -              -              2. Regional Plant Quarantine Offices Building construction Sites--          540,000-                     -              -              -              -              Scientific and inspection equipment and tools Set--          210,000-                     -              -              -              -              Laboratory chemicals and consumables Sites--          20,000-                     -              -              -              -              Office equipment Sites--          50,000-                     -              -              -              -              Vehicle - pick-up Unit--          30,000-                     -              -              -              -              Motorcycles Unit--          2,000-                     -              -              -              -              E-Phyto system development for digital certificates System--          1,500,000-                     -              -              -              -              Training of staff for operation equipment & centre management Lump Sum--          100,000-                     -              -              -              -              Subtotal -                     -              -              -              -              3. Plant Health Reference Lab and Facilities Building construction Sites-2,550,000-                     -              -              -              -              Post-harvest scientific equipment and tools Set-1,400,000-                     -              -              -              -              Laboratory chemicals and consumables Set-100,000-                     -              -              -              -              Office equipment Lump Sum-100,000-                     -              -              -              -              Training of staff for operating equipment & lab management Lump Sum-100,000-                     -              -              -              -              Subtotal -                     -              -              -              -              4. Plant Health Research Stations Infrastructure for stations Sites-850,000-                     -              -              -              -              Tools and equipment Set-100,000-                     -              -              -              -              Office equipment Set-50,000-                     -              -              -              -              Subtotal -                     -              -              -              -              5. Technical consultant service to design and supervise of the construction work and training the use of the facility Lump Sum-287,115-                     -              -              -              -              6. Improved Negotiation of Export Protocols Protocol negotiation preparation, completion and logistics /b Lump Sum10.250.250.250.251.00        123,40030,850.00            30,850.00    30,850.00    30,850.00    123,400.00  International TA for improvement protocol negotiations Person-Months42.002.004.00        25,00050,000.00            50,000.00    -              -              100,000.00  Technical Assistance to support protocol negotiation with China /c Lump Sum0.50.130.130.130.130.50        100,00012,500.00            12,500.00    12,500.00    12,500.00    50,000.00    Subtotal 93,350.00            93,350.00    43,350.00    43,350.00    273,400.00  7. Strengtheing of plant health & SPS policies    and regulation for agricultural exports Review and strengthening of policies and regulations,    vs international best practice Lump Sum10.250.250.250.251.00        100,00025,000.00            25,000.00    25,000.00    25,000.00    100,000.00  Total Investment Costs 118,350.00          118,350.00  68,350.00    68,350.00    373,400.00  II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff 1. Sub-Component Coordinator Person-Months123.003.003.003.0012.00       300900.00                900.00         900.00         900.00         3,600.00      2. Deputy Coordinator Person-Months246.006.006.006.0024.00       2501,500.00             1,500.00      1,500.00      1,500.00      6,000.00      3. Admin and Accountant Officers Person-Months246.006.006.006.0024.00       2001,200.00             1,200.00      1,200.00      1,200.00      4,800.00      4. Project Implementation Officers Person-Months18045.0045.0045.0045.00180.00     2009,000.00             9,000.00      9,000.00      9,000.00      36,000.00    Subtotal 12,600.00            12,600.00    12,600.00    12,600.00    50,400.00    B. Operating costs 1. Per diem for project officer implementation Lump Sum1,320330.00330.00330.00330.001,320.00  3411,220.00            11,220.00    11,220.00    11,220.00    44,880.00    2. Transportation, fuel month123.003.003.003.0012.00       5,00015,000.00            15,000.00    15,000.00    15,000.00    60,000.00    3. Office Operating Expenses month123.003.003.003.0012.00       3,0009,000.00             9,000.00      9,000.00      9,000.00      36,000.00    4. Other driver allowance (2) month246.006.006.006.0024.00       2501,500.00             1,500.00      1,500.00      1,500.00      6,000.00      5. O&M Vehicles & Equipment month123.003.003.003.0012.00       3501,050.00             1,050.00      1,050.00      1,050.00      4,200.00      6. Laboratory expenses + cleaner (6 person) month7218.0018.0018.0018.0072.00       2504,500.00             4,500.00      4,500.00      4,500.00      18,000.00    Subtotal 42,270.00            42,270.00    42,270.00    42,270.00    169,080.00  Total Recurrent Costs 54,870.00            54,870.00    54,870.00    54,870.00    219,480.00  Total 173,220.00          173,220.00  123,220.00  123,220.00  592,880.00   _________________________________\a This is to support producers and exporters in the priority VC to maintain competitiveness while complying with SPS/market access requirements.\b Service provider will facilitate\c Negotiation of competitive export protocols with China and provide input on design and operation of the planned Post-Harvest Reference Centre (x1) and other priority public services and infrastructure to support export protocol negotiation.Base Cost (US$) 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 6: First year AWPB 
73 
Cambodia Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE-AT) Table 3. Aggrgating Farmers and Integrating them in Value Chains Detailed Costs Unit CostUnit2023Q1Q2Q3Q4Total(US$)Q1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Structure and Capacity of Producer Organisations 1. Capacity building of Newly Registered Producer by Service Provider Establishment of PO management functions PO5012.50 12.50 12.50 12.50 50.00 7,50093,750.00   93,750.00   93,750.00   93,750.00   375,000.00    Business planning and marketing arrangements PO5012.50 12.50 12.50 12.50 50.00 5,00062,500.00   62,500.00   62,500.00   62,500.00   250,000.00    Investment planning for comp. 1 support PO5012.50 12.50 12.50 12.50 50.00 5,00062,500.00   62,500.00   62,500.00   62,500.00   250,000.00    Support to implementation of investments PO--     -     -     -     -     7,500-             -             -             -             -               Follow-up Coaching PO--     -     -     -     -     2,500-             -             -             -             -               Marketing activity to promote PO and its VC Lump Sum--     -     -     -     -     2,000,000-             -             -             -             -               Subtotal 218,750.00 218,750.00 218,750.00 218,750.00 875,000.00    2. Support to Exsting PO Capacity Building and Investment Planning PO5012.50 12.50 12.50 12.50 50.00 7,50093,750.00   93,750.00   93,750.00   93,750.00   375,000.00    Support to Investment Implementation and Follow-Up PO--     -     -     -     -     7,500-             -             -             -             -               Support AC of AC- MIS accounting system.  Lump Sum--     -     -     -     -     200,000-             -             -             -             -               Subtotal 93,750.00   93,750.00   93,750.00   93,750.00   375,000.00    3. PO's registration and follow-up (PDAFF) Cost of AC Registration PDAFF PO5012.50 12.50 12.50 12.50 50.00 2,00025,000.00   25,000.00   25,000.00   25,000.00   100,000.00    Follow-up support from GDA PO5012.50 12.50 12.50 12.50 50.00 5006,250.00     6,250.00     6,250.00     6,250.00     25,000.00      Subtotal 31,250.00   31,250.00   31,250.00   31,250.00   125,000.00    4. Technical Assistance Agronomy and post-harvest technical specialist Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00 2,5007,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     30,000.00      Producer Organisation Specialist Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00 2,5007,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     30,000.00      Short-term technical expertise Person-Months61.50   1.50   1.50   1.50   6.00   5,0007,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     30,000.00      Subtotal 22,500.00   22,500.00   22,500.00   22,500.00   90,000.00      Subtotal 366,250.00 366,250.00 366,250.00 366,250.00 1,465,000.00 B. Technical Advice and Centres of Excellence /a 1. Centre of Excellence under GDA Facility10.25   0.25   0.25   0.25   1.00   500,000125,000.00 125,000.00 125,000.00 125,000.00 500,000.00    2. CoE (UAC) - capital investment Facility--     -     -     -     -     100,000-             -             -             -             -               3. CoE (UAC) - operation start up and private companies Facility--     -     -     -     -     24,000-             -             -             -             -               4. F2F extension led by Lead Farmers PO--     -     -     -     -     2,000-             -             -             -             -               5. Producer Organisation Facilitator Staff Person-Months5012.50 12.50 12.50 12.50 50.00 1001,250.00     1,250.00     1,250.00     1,250.00     5,000.00       6. Technical coordination and oversight /b Province51.25   1.25   1.25   1.25   5.00   20,00025,000.00   25,000.00   25,000.00   25,000.00   100,000.00    Subtotal 151,250.00 151,250.00 151,250.00 151,250.00 605,000.00    Total 517,500.00 517,500.00 517,500.00 517,500.00 2,070,000.00  _________________________________\a The support is for upgrading one existing public research station in a Center of Excellence for development and dissemination of improved agriculture techniques\b Considered as a service provisionQuantitiesBase Cost (US$) 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 6: First year AWPB 
74 
Table 4. Management, monitoring and evaluationUnit CostDetailed CostsUnit2023Q1Q2Q3Q4Total(US$)Q1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Project Operations 1. Training, meetings and workshops Start up workshop and other project management workshop and exchange visit Lump Sum41.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   4.00     5,0005,000.00     5,000.00     5,000.00     5,000.00     20,000.00      Joint Programme Review with IFAD Review Mission and COSOP activity Lump Sum10.25   0.25   0.25   0.25   1.00     10,0002,500.00     2,500.00     2,500.00     2,500.00     10,000.00      Subtotal 7,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     30,000.00      2. Studies and Surveys /a Adjustment of MIS ASPIRE and follow up support Lump Sum10.25   0.25   0.25   0.25   1.00     30,0007,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     30,000.00      Impact assessment (base line, ending and Impact)- Firm Lump Sum10.25   0.25   0.25   0.25   1.00     70,00017,500.00   17,500.00   17,500.00   17,500.00   70,000.00      Audit Lump Sum10.25   0.25   0.25   0.25   1.00     20,0005,000.00     5,000.00     5,000.00     5,000.00     20,000.00      Subtotal 30,000.00   30,000.00   30,000.00   30,000.00   120,000.00    Subtotal 37,500.00   37,500.00   37,500.00   37,500.00   150,000.00    B. Vehicles and equipment Cars, 4w-Drive, station wagon (3 for ASPIRE SEC) Each30.75   0.75   0.75   0.75   3.00     35,00026,250.00   26,250.00   26,250.00   26,250.00   105,000.00    Computers (laptop or desktops with UPS and printer) Each153.75   3.75   3.75   3.75   15.00   1,1004,125.00     4,125.00     4,125.00     4,125.00     16,500.00      Office furniture (desk, tables, chairs, shelves, safe) Each10.25   0.25   0.25   0.25   1.00     5,0001,250.00     1,250.00     1,250.00     1,250.00     5,000.00       Subtotal-                                                                                                                31,625.00   31,625.00   31,625.00   31,625.00   126,500.00    C. Technical Assistance 1. International Team Leader Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   9,90029,700.00   29,700.00   29,700.00   29,700.00   118,800.00    2. Deputy Team Leader Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   3,2009,600.00     9,600.00     9,600.00     9,600.00     38,400.00      3. Gender and Social Inclusion Adviser Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   2,5007,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     30,000.00      4. Social, Environment and Climate Change Specialist Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   2,5007,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     30,000.00      5. Senior M&E and Planning Specialist- Team leader Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   2,7008,100.00     8,100.00     8,100.00     8,100.00     32,400.00      6. ICT Specialist Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   1,8005,400.00     5,400.00     5,400.00     5,400.00     21,600.00      7. Finance and Accountant Specialist- as team leader Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   2,5007,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     30,000.00      8. Procurement Specialist- a Team leader Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   2,5007,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     30,000.00      9. Provincial Management Adviser /b Person-Months9624.00 24.00 24.00 24.00 96.00   1,60038,400.00   38,400.00   38,400.00   38,400.00   153,600.00    10. Technical Assistant for the managment of the SSTC grant Lump Sum0.50.17   0.17   0.17   0.50     100,00016,666.67   16,666.67   16,666.67   -             50,000.00      Subtotal 137,866.67 137,866.67 137,866.67 121,200.00 534,800.00    Total Investment Costs 206,991.67 206,991.67 206,991.67 190,325.00 811,300.00    II. Recurrent Costs A. Project staff - Recruitment 1. M&E and Planning Staff /c Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   1,0003,000.00     3,000.00     3,000.00     3,000.00     12,000.00      2. KM & Communication Specialist (2 staff) /d Person-Months246.00   6.00   6.00   6.00   24.00   1,80010,800.00   10,800.00   10,800.00   10,800.00   43,200.00      3. Finance and Accountant Staff (3 staff) /e Person-Months369.00   9.00   9.00   9.00   36.00   1,50013,500.00   13,500.00   13,500.00   13,500.00   54,000.00      4. Cashier (2) /f Person-Months246.00   6.00   6.00   6.00   24.00   7004,200.00     4,200.00     4,200.00     4,200.00     16,800.00      5. Procurement Staff (2 staff) /g Person-Months246.00   6.00   6.00   6.00   24.00   9005,400.00     5,400.00     5,400.00     5,400.00     21,600.00      6. Administration Staff /h Person-Months246.00   6.00   6.00   6.00   24.00   8004,800.00     4,800.00     4,800.00     4,800.00     19,200.00      7. Support staff (1 cleaner) Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   300900.00       900.00       900.00       900.00       3,600.00       8. Driver (6 new cars and 3 existing car) Person-Months10827.00 27.00 27.00 27.00 108.00 3008,100.00     8,100.00     8,100.00     8,100.00     32,400.00      Subtotal 50,700.00   50,700.00   50,700.00   50,700.00   202,800.00    B. Project staff - POC 1. Programme Director Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   3501,050.00     1,050.00     1,050.00     1,050.00     4,200.00       2. Programme Manager Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   3501,050.00     1,050.00     1,050.00     1,050.00     4,200.00       3. MEF Team /i Person-Months4812.00 12.00 12.00 12.00 48.00   2503,000.00     3,000.00     3,000.00     3,000.00     12,000.00      4. MIS Officer /j Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   250750.00       750.00       750.00       750.00       3,000.00       5. Gender Promotion Officer /k Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   250750.00       750.00       750.00       750.00       3,000.00       6. Safeguard Officer /l Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   250750.00       750.00       750.00       750.00       3,000.00       7. M&E and Planning Officer /m Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   250750.00       750.00       750.00       750.00       3,000.00       8. Financial and Accounting Officer /n Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   250750.00       750.00       750.00       750.00       3,000.00       9. KM & Communication Officer /o Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   250750.00       750.00       750.00       750.00       3,000.00       10. Procurement Officer /p Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   250750.00       750.00       750.00       750.00       3,000.00       11. Administration Officer /q Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   250750.00       750.00       750.00       750.00       3,000.00       12. Administration Officer /r Person-Months123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   250750.00       750.00       750.00       750.00       3,000.00       13. Director at PDAFF: General management /s Person-Months9624.00 24.00 24.00 24.00 96.00   1503,600.00     3,600.00     3,600.00     3,600.00     14,400.00      14. M&E and Planning Officer at PDAFF /t Person-Months9624.00 24.00 24.00 24.00 96.00   1503,600.00     3,600.00     3,600.00     3,600.00     14,400.00      15. Agricultural Cooperative Officer at PDAFF /u Person-Months9624.00 24.00 24.00 24.00 96.00   1503,600.00     3,600.00     3,600.00     3,600.00     14,400.00      Subtotal 22,650.00   22,650.00   22,650.00   22,650.00   90,600.00      C. Travel and allowances 1. Travel Cost Lump Sum10.25   0.25   0.25   0.25   1.00     8,0002,000.00     2,000.00     2,000.00     2,000.00     8,000.00       2. DSA Lump Sum10.25   0.25   0.25   0.25   1.00     30,0007,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     7,500.00     30,000.00      Subtotal 9,500.00     9,500.00     9,500.00     9,500.00     38,000.00      D. Operation & Maintenance 1. Cars Vehicles123.00   3.00   3.00   3.00   12.00   4,20012,600.00   12,600.00   12,600.00   12,600.00   50,400.00      2. Office Lump Sum10.25   0.25   0.25   0.25   1.00     5,0001,250.00     1,250.00     1,250.00     1,250.00     5,000.00       3. Advertisement and O&M Office Lump Sum10.25   0.25   0.25   0.25   1.00     10,0002,500.00     2,500.00     2,500.00     2,500.00     10,000.00      4. Translating documents Lump Sum10.25   0.25   0.25   0.25   1.00     10,0002,500.00     2,500.00     2,500.00     2,500.00     10,000.00      Subtotal 18,850.00   18,850.00   18,850.00   18,850.00   75,400.00      Total Recurrent Costs 101,700.00 101,700.00 101,700.00 101,700.00 406,800.00    Total 308,691.67 308,691.67 308,691.67 292,025.00 1,218,100.00 QuantitiesBase Cost (US$) 
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 6: First year AWPB 
Annex 7:  Procurement Plan for first 18 months  
75 
Procurement Plan SUMMARYCountry:Project Name:Project ID:VersionVersion DatePrepared by:Approved by:Procurement CategoryCurrencyUSDLCUUSDLCUGoods7,575,500.00             -                          -                          -                          Works13,762,000.00           -                          -                          -                          Consulting Services15,061,000.00           -                          -                          -                          Non-Consulting Services-                             -                          -                          -                          Grants2,521,000.00             -                          -                          -                          TOTAL38,919,500.00     -                        -                        -                        CategoryGoods and goods-related Non-Consulting ServicesWorks and works-related Non-Consulting ServicesConsulting Services and related Non-Consulting Services and/or MoU/AgreementsIndividual ConsultantsDecisions concerning Abnormally Low Bids shall be subject to the No Objection of IFAD:Threshold>= US$ 150,000>= US$200,000>= US$ 100,000>= US$ 25,000Only for procurement activities subject to prior reviewThe exchange rate at time of submission will be used for reviews.CQSQBS/LCS/FBSQCBSShortlistingSSS - FirmsSSS - IndividualsConsulting Services and related Non-Consulting Services<= US$ 65,000< US$ 200,000>= US$ 200,000>= US$ 0.00> US$ 5,000.00 subject to prior review; Justification required> US$ 5,000.00 subject to prior review; Justification requiredDirect ContractingShoppingNCBICBGoods and goods-related Non-Consulting Services> US$ 5,000.00 subject to prior review; Justification required<= US$ 100,000< US$ 2,000,000>= US$ 2,000,000Force AccountNot AllowedWorks and works-related Non-Consulting Services> US$ 5,000.00 subject to prior review; Justification required<= US$ 100,000< US$ 3,000,000>= US$ 3,000,000Community ParticipationAllowedRGCPDT11-Aug-22PlanActualAgriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE-AT) Cambodia20000034331.0The threshold tables below are based on the new LTB Template 2020. Please fill in the fields that are applicable based on the provisions in the LTB for the project.Prior Review ThresholdsAll Direct Contracting and Single-Source Procurements are Prior Review (in alignment with IFAD Procurement Handbook), or based on the thresholds stipulated in the LTBProcurement Method ThresholdsOther Procurement Methods or Arrangements 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
18 Month Procurement Plan: Goods 
76 
Version1.011-Aug-22AWPB/Component Ref№DescriptionNonConsultingFundingLot №/DescriptionProject Area or Procuring EntityPre-or Post QualificationPrior or Post ReviewProcurement MethodEnvelopesAmount (USD)Amount (LCU)Plan vs. ActualIssue of NOITA&StandstillDateContractAwardSubmission of Draft ContractNo-Objection DateDateContractSignatureAmount(USD)Remarks1SECPost-QualPost ReviewNS14,000.00                        PlanN/A1-Mar-236-Mar-23N/A10-Mar-234,000.00                      -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPost ReviewNS120,000.00                      PlanN/A1-Mar-236-Mar-23N/A10-Mar-2320,000.00                    -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewICB11,850,000.00                 Plan25-Jun-2410-Jul-2415-Jul-2422-Jul-2426-Jul-241,850,000.00               -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPost ReviewNS150,000.00                      PlanN/A29-Apr-244-May-24N/A8-May-2450,000.00                    -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPost ReviewNS1100,000.00                    PlanN/A29-Apr-244-May-24N/A8-May-24100,000.00                  -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewICB11,050,000.00                 Plan25-Aug-249-Sep-2414-Sep-2421-Sep-2425-Sep-241,050,000.00               -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPost ReviewNS1100,000.00                    PlanN/A29-Jun-244-Jul-24N/A8-Jul-24100,000.00                  -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB1250,000.00                    Plan3-Aug-2418-Aug-2423-Aug-2430-Aug-243-Sep-24250,000.00                  -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB1150,000.00                    Plan3-Aug-2418-Aug-2423-Aug-2430-Aug-243-Sep-24150,000.00                  -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPost ReviewNS120,000.00                      PlanN/A29-Jun-244-Jul-24N/A8-Jul-2420,000.00                    -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewICB11,500,000.00                 Plan25-Aug-249-Sep-2414-Sep-2421-Sep-2425-Sep-241,500,000.00               -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewICB11,400,000.00                 Plan25-Aug-249-Sep-2414-Sep-2421-Sep-2425-Sep-241,400,000.00               -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPost ReviewICB1100,000.00                    Plan11-Aug-2426-Aug-2431-Aug-24N/A4-Sep-24100,000.00                  -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPost ReviewICB1100,000.00                    Plan11-Aug-2426-Aug-2431-Aug-24N/A4-Sep-24100,000.00                  -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB1300,000.00                    Plan3-Jun-2418-Jun-2423-Jun-2430-Jun-244-Jul-24300,000.00                  -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB1150,000.00                    Plan3-Jun-2418-Jun-2423-Jun-2430-Jun-244-Jul-24150,000.00                  -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB1200,000.00                    Plan2-Sep-2317-Sep-2322-Sep-2329-Sep-233-Oct-23200,000.00                  -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPost ReviewNCB1210,000.00                    Plan22-Mar-236-Apr-2311-Apr-23N/A15-Apr-23210,000.00                  -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPost ReviewNS116,500.00                      PlanN/A1-Mar-236-Mar-23N/A10-Mar-2316,500.00                    -                                 -                                 Actual1SECPost-QualPost ReviewNS15,000.00                        PlanN/A1-Mar-236-Mar-23N/A10-Mar-235,000.00                      -                                 -                                 ActualC4 Computers (laptop or desktops with UPS and printer) - 15 setsGovC4Office furniture (desk, tables, chairs, shelves, safe)GovC3.1Support AC of AC- MIS accounting systemGOVC4Cars, 4w-Drive, station wagon (3 for ASPIRE SEC, and 1 for GDA, 2MEF)IFADC2.2Tools and equipment - Plant Health Research Stations (3)EIBC2.2Office equipment - Plant Health Research Stations (3)EIBC2.2Laboratory chemicals and consumables - Plant Health Reference Lab and FacilitiesEIBC2.2Office equipment - Plant Health Reference Lab and FacilitiesEIBC2.2E-Phyto system development for digital certificates - Regional Plant Quarantine Offices (5)EIBC2.2Post-harvest scientific equipment and tools - Plant Health Reference Lab and FacilitiesEIBC2.2Vehicle - pick-up (5) - Regional Plant Quarantine Offices (5)EIBC2.2Motocycles (10) - Regional Plant Quarantine Offices (5)EIBC2.2Laboratory chemicals and consumables - Regional Plant Quarantine Offices (5)EIBC2.2Office equipment - Regional Plant Quarantine Offices (5)EIBC2.2Office equipments - Post Harvest Plant Quarantine Research Centre /aEIBC2.2Scientific and inspection equipment and tools - Regional Plant Quarantine Offices (5)EIBC2.2Post-harvest scientific equipment and tools - Post Harvest Plant Quarantine Research Centre /aEIBC2.2Laboratory chemicals and consumables - Post Harvest Plant Quarantine Research Centre /aEIBC2.1Laptops (4)GOVC2.1Office equipment (2)GOVBasic DataContract Award & Signature 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
18 Month Procurement Plan: Works 
77 
Version1.011-Aug-22AWPB/Component Ref№DescriptionNonConsultingFundingLot №/DescriptionProject Area or Procuring EntityPre-or Post QualificationPrior or Post ReviewProcurement MethodEnvelopesAmount (USD)Amount (LCU)Plan vs. ActualIssue of NOITA&StandstillDateContractAwardSubmission of Draft ContractNo-objection DateDateContractSignatureAmount(USD)RemarksMulti lotsSECPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB14,092,000.00               Plan4-Apr-2419-Apr-2424-Apr-241-May-245-May-244,092,000.00               -                              -                              Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB11,370,000.00               Plan3-Jun-2418-Jun-2423-Jun-2430-Jun-244-Jul-241,370,000.00               -                              -                              Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB12,700,000.00               Plan3-Aug-2418-Aug-2423-Aug-2430-Aug-243-Sep-242,700,000.00               -                              -                              Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB12,550,000.00               Plan3-Aug-2418-Aug-2423-Aug-2430-Aug-243-Sep-242,550,000.00               -                              -                              Actual1SECPost-QualPrior ReviewNCB12,550,000.00               Plan3-Jun-2418-Jun-2423-Jun-2430-Jun-244-Jul-242,550,000.00               -                              -                              Actual1SECPost-QualPost ReviewNCB1500,000.00                  Plan19-Nov-234-Dec-239-Dec-23N/A13-Dec-23500,000.00                  -                              -                              ActualC2.2Infrastructure for stations - Plant Health Research Stations (03)EIBC3.2Centre of Excellence under GDA (1)GOVC2.2Building design and construction - Regional Plant Quarantine Offices (05)EIBC2.2Building design and construction - Plant Health Reference Lab and FacilitiesEIBC1.2Infrastructure Grant Finance for new Producer Organisations /eEIBC2.2Building design and construction - Post Harvest Plant Quarantine Research Centre /aEIBBasic DataContract Award & Signature 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
18 Month Procurement Plan: Consultancies 
78 
Version1.011-Aug-22AWPB/Component Ref№Description*GrantNonConsultingFundingProject Area or Procuring EntityShortlist(Yes|No)Prior or Post ReviewProcurement MethodAmount (USD)Amount (LCU)Plan vs. ActualIssue of NOITA&StandstillDate Contract AwardNegotiations completedSubmission of Draft ContractNo-objection DateDateContractSignatureAmount(USD)RemarksSECYesPrior ReviewICS36,000.00                 PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-2336,000.00             -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewQCBS2,058,000.00            Plan25-Feb-2312-Mar-2327-Mar-231-Apr-238-Apr-2312-Apr-232,058,000.00        -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS200,000.00               PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-23200,000.00           -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS30,000.00                 PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-2330,000.00             -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS18,000.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2318,000.00             -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS18,000.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2318,000.00             -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewQCBS409,000.00               Plan25-Feb-2312-Mar-2327-Mar-231-Apr-238-Apr-2312-Apr-23409,000.00           -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewQCBS861,000.00               Plan25-Feb-2312-Mar-2327-Mar-231-Apr-238-Apr-2312-Apr-23861,000.00           -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS100,000.00               PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-23100,000.00           -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewQCBS100,000.00               Plan28-Jun-2313-Jul-2328-Jul-232-Aug-239-Aug-2313-Aug-23100,000.00           -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewQCBS100,000.00               Plan25-Feb-2312-Mar-2327-Mar-231-Apr-238-Apr-2312-Apr-23100,000.00           -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewQCBS2,500,000.00            Plan25-Feb-2312-Mar-2327-Mar-231-Apr-238-Apr-2312-Apr-232,500,000.00        -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewQCBS2,500,000.00            Plan25-Nov-2310-Dec-2325-Dec-2330-Dec-236-Jan-2410-Jan-242,500,000.00        -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewQCBS2,500,000.00            Plan25-Nov-2410-Dec-2425-Dec-2430-Dec-246-Jan-2510-Jan-252,500,000.00        -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewQCBS2,500,000.00            Plan25-Nov-2410-Dec-2425-Dec-2430-Dec-246-Jan-2510-Jan-252,500,000.00        -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS30,000.00                 PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-2330,000.00             -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS30,000.00                 PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-2330,000.00             -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS30,000.00                 PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-2330,000.00             -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewQCBS100,000.00               Plan25-Feb-2312-Mar-2327-Mar-231-Apr-238-Apr-2312-Apr-23100,000.00           -                            -                         ActualC3.2Technical coordination and oversight /bIFADC3.1Producer Organisation SpecialistIFADC3.1Short-term technical expertiseIFADC3.1Service provider for capacity building of Producer Organisations #4IFAD/ EIB/ GOVC3.1Agronomy and post-harvest technical specialistIFADC3.1Service provider for capacity building of Producer Organisations #2IFAD/ EIB/ GOVC3.1Service provider for capacity building of Producer Organisations #3IFAD/ EIB/ GOVC2.2Review and strengthening of policies and regulations,  vs international best practiceIFADC3.1Service provider for capacity building of Producer Organisations #1IFAD/ EIB/ GOVC2.2International TA for improvement protocol negotiationsIFADC2.2Technical Assistance to support protocol negotiation with China /cSSTC GrantC2.1Specialist TA to PFIs for VC financingIFADC2.2Technical consultant service to design and supervise of the construction work and training the use of the facilityEIBC2.1National Agribusiness Specialist #1IFADC2.1National Agribusiness Specialist #2IFADC2.1International Agribusiness Investment SpecialistIFADC2.1Snr National Agribusiness Investment SpecialistIFADC1.2Engineering services for feasibility study, design and construction supervisionEIBBasic DataContract Award & SignatureC1.1Value Chain Financing Specialist /dIFAD 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
79 
SECYesPrior ReviewICS30,000.00                 PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-2330,000.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewQCBS140,000.00               Plan25-Feb-2312-Mar-2327-Mar-231-Apr-238-Apr-2312-Apr-23140,000.00           -                         -                            -                         ActualSEC/MEFYesPrior ReviewQCBS20,000.00                 Plan25-Feb-2312-Mar-2327-Mar-231-Apr-238-Apr-2312-Apr-2320,000.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS119,000.00               PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-23119,000.00           -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS38,000.00                 PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-2338,000.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS30,000.00                 PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-2330,000.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS30,000.00                 PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-2330,000.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS32,000.00                 PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-2332,000.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS21,600.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2321,600.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS30,000.00                 PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-2330,000.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewICS30,000.00                 PlanN/A21-Jan-234-Feb-239-Feb-2316-Feb-2320-Feb-2330,000.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS19,200.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2319,200.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS19,200.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2319,200.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS19,200.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2319,200.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS19,200.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2319,200.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS19,200.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2319,200.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualC4Provincial  Management Advisor #2 /bIFADC4Provincial  Management Advisor #3 /bIFADC4Provincial  Management Advisor #4 /bIFADC4Provincial  Management Advisor #5 /bIFADC4Provincial Management Advisor #1 /bIFADFinance and Accountant Specialist- as team leaderIFADC4Procurement Specialist- a Team leaderIFADC4Senior M&E and Planning Specialist- Team leaderIFADC4ICT SpecialistIFADC4C4Gender and Social Inclusion AdviserIFADC4Social, Environment and Climate Change SpecialistIFADC4Adjustment of MIS ASPIRE and follow up supportIFADC4AuditIFAD/GovC4Impact assessment (base line survey) - FirmIFADC4Deputy Team LeaderIFADC4International Team LeaderIFAD 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
80 
SECYesPost ReviewICS19,200.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2319,200.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS19,200.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2319,200.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS19,200.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2319,200.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPrior ReviewQCBS100,000.00               Plan28-Jun-2313-Jul-2328-Jul-232-Aug-239-Aug-2313-Aug-23100,000.00           -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS12,000.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2312,000.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS21,600.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2321,600.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS21,600.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2321,600.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS18,000.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2318,000.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS18,000.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2318,000.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS18,000.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2318,000.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS8,400.00                   PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-238,400.00               -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS8,400.00                   PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-238,400.00               -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS10,800.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2310,800.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS10,800.00                 PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-2310,800.00             -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS9,600.00                   PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-239,600.00               -                         -                            -                         ActualSECYesPost ReviewICS9,600.00                   PlanN/A24-Jan-237-Feb-2312-Feb-23N/A16-Feb-239,600.00               -                         -                            -                         ActualYesARDBNoPrior ReviewSelection (Design/PIM)948,000.00               PlanN/A7-Apr-2428-Apr-243-May-2410-May-2414-May-24948,000.00           -                         Yes-                            -                         ActualYesARDBNoPrior ReviewSelection (Design/PIM)1,573,000.00            PlanN/A6-Jun-2427-Jun-242-Jul-249-Jul-2413-Jul-241,573,000.00        -                         Yes-                            -                         ActualC1.1Grant Financing to Producer Organisations /dEIBC4Provincial  Management Advisor #8 /bIFADC1.1Grant Financing to Smallholders /bEIBC4Technical Assistant for the managment of the SSTC grantSSTC GrantC4Finance and Accountant Staff (#3 staff) /eGOVC4Administration Staff #2 /hGOVC4Provincial  Management Advisor #6 /bIFADC4Provincial  Management Advisor #7 /bIFADGOVC4C4Finance and Accountant Staff (#1 staff) /eGOVC4Procurement Staff (#2 staff) /gGOVC4Administration Staff #1 /hGOVC4Finance and Accountant Staff (#2 staff) /eC4Procurement Staff (#1 staff) /gGOVC4Cashier (#1) /fGOVC4Cashier (#2) /fGOVKM & Communication Specialist (#1 staff) /dGOVC4KM & Communication Specialist (#2 staff) /dGOVC4M&E and Planning Staff /cGOV 
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
ANNEX 8: PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL (PIM) 
ASPIRE-AT at a Glance 
Project Name  Agriculture  Services  Programme  for  an  Inclusive  Rural  Economy  and 
Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE-AT) 
Executing 
Agency (EA) 
Implementing 
Agencies (IA) 
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) 
ARDB, SME Bank, GDA 
Start Date 
01/01/2023 
End Date 
31/12/2029 
Project Cost 
USD 147 million 
Project 
Financing 
(1) IFAD loan on blend terms of USD 33.9 million; (2) IFAD loan on BRAM terms 
of USD 14 million; (3) Grant funding of USD 0.3 million from IFAD South-South 
Technical Cooperation Fund; (4) EIB loan financing of USD 60 million; (5) GoKC 
counterpart funding in cash of USD 19 million; (6) Funding gap of $US 20 million. 
Beneficiary contributions and GoKC contributions in kind will be estimated and 
included in the final estimates in the project cost tables later. 
Sectors 
Agriculture 
Themes 
Value chains, Agriculture Cooperatives, Agricultural Trade 
Target Area 
National Program: can support activities in any Province of Cambodia 
Targeting 
Strategy 
Based on selection of value chains that benefit small and medium farmers and 
create employment for poor rural Cambodians 
GOAL 
Rural  poverty  and  vulnerability  has  decreased  and  climate  resilience  of 
Cambodian 
inclusive  and 
environmentally sustainable growth in agriculture sector. 
rural  households  has 
increased 
through 
Development 
Objective 
Inclusive  and  sustainable  agriculture  sector  growth  based  on  exports  and 
domestic markets has increased incomes of rural producers and workers. 
Beneficiaries 
100,000 smallholder farm households in about 500 ACs / POs, plus about 25,000 
land-poor households benefitting from employment opportunities. 
Components, Outcomes and Key Results 
Component 
Name / Agency 
Key Results 
Component 1 
Productive  and  Resilient  Assets 
for Producer Organisations 
  Business  investment  by  around  500 
POs,  with  around  75,000  members 
1 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Outcome 
Smallholders’ and PO’s 
Investments in productive assets 
have increased their productivity 
and competitiveness in domestic 
and exports-based value chains. 
plus  direct  investments  by  around 
3,000 smallholders 
  Around 200 infrastructure installations 
linked  to  POs  /  ACs  or  UACs  with 
(40% 
around  40,000  members 
assumed also supported under Comp 
1.1) 
  40  agri-businesses  in  5  value  chains 
investment  oriented 
from 
benefit 
technical support 
  15  agri-businesses  with  around 
30,000  smallholders  in  their  supply 
networks  benefit  from  financing  for 
investment 
Investments  in  public  services  for 
export and trade facilitation 
 
  100,000 smallholder farmers enrolled 
in about 500 registered AC/PO 
  About  35  Unions  of  AC 
strengthened or created 
(UAC) 
  Centres of Excellence established 
  Lead Farmer network strengthened 
Component 2 
Business Partnerships and 
Market Access 
Outcome 
PO’s business partnerships with 
agribusinesses have been 
enhanced  and their market 
access improved   
Component 3 
Aggregating Farmers and 
Integrating them in Value Chains 
Outcome 
Smallholders have been 
organised and coordinated in 
Agriculture Cooperatives and 
other Producer Organisations, 
and have been enabled to 
produce in response to market 
requirements for type, volume and 
quality standards. 
2 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
 This section of the PIM; 
  Describes the purpose of the PIM and who will use it; 
  Explains that the PIM sets out principles but cannot define all detailed procedures 
needed for project implementation; 
  Explains that the PIM is a living document that will be updated when necessary; 
  Defines the relationship of the PIM to RGC’s Standard Procedures and to IFAD and EIB 
rules and procedures. 
This  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  guides  implementation  of  the  Agriculture  Services 
Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy, Agriculture and Trade (ASPIRE-AT). The PIM is intended 
primarily for use by Project Management, implementing agencies and contracted services providers. 
The purpose of the PIM is to assist Project Management to achieve the Project Development Objective 
and Project Outcomes defined in the Project Design Report and the Project Financing Agreement. The 
PIM reflects agreements between IFAD, the European Investment Bank (EIB) and Royal Government 
of Cambodia (RGC) on how project funds will be used. The PIM provides guidance on: 
  Project implementation structure, including roles and responsibilities; 
  Project planning; 
  Eligible uses of project funds; 
  Rules that apply to project implementation, including sub-project selection and prioritisation, 
environmental and social safeguards (ESS), project administration, financial management, 
procurement; and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and reporting. 
The  PIM  presents  important  principles  and  guidelines  for  implementing  project  activities.  The  PIM 
cannot  provide  every  detail.  Detailed  procedures  will  be  developed  as  needed  by  the  project 
implementation team and consultants during the start-up phase of implementation. The PIM itself is a 
living document that can be changed through agreement between the Project Director and IFAD. 
The framework for implementation of ASPIRE-AT is RGC’s Sub-Decree on Promulgating the Updated 
Standard Operating Procedures on Project Management, Standard Operating Procedures on Financial 
Management,  Standard  Operating  Procedures  on  Procurement  for  Implementing  All  Externally 
Financed  Projects  /  Programs,  in  Cambodia,  Updated  Version  December  2019,  and  it  subsequent 
amendments.  
Under  the  agreement  between  IFAD  and  RGC,  in  any  case  where  IFAD  rules  and  procedures  are 
different  from  RGC  rules  and  procedures,  IFAD  rules  will  take  precedence.  For  all  sub-projects  and 
activities  financed  by  EIB  the  rules  and  procedures  of  EIB  shall  apply,  in  particular  the  EIB 
Environmental and Social Standards1 and EIB Guide to Procurement2. 
This PIM does not repeat details of procedures that are described in the Standard Procedures manuals. 
The PIM indicates which Standard Procedures apply to implementation of ASPIRE-AT, and any cases 
where procedures for ASPIRE-AT are different from Standard Procedures. 
The PIM is a living document. That means it will be updated and improved continuously during project 
implementation. 
In particular, Terms of Reference for service providers and technical advisers should be annexed to the 
PIM. Forms and checklists used in project implementation should also be annexed. The first draft PIM 
1 https://www.eib.org/en/publications/environmental-and-social-standards 
2 https://www.eib.org/en/publications/guide-to-procurement 
3 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
includes a general list of the TORs, forms and checklists that will be needed but not all these have been 
developed yet. When an new TOR, form or checklist is developed for use in the project it should be 
added to the PIM annexes so that all these documents are available in one place. 
PROJECT PURPOSE, RESULTS AND LOGFRAME 
2 
 This section of the PIM: 
  Defines the key results that ASPIRE-AT will achieve; 
  Emphasizes that the key task of Project Management is to ensure that project 
results are achieved (Results Based Management). 
  Presents the Project Logframe 
Project Development Objective 
3 
The  Project  Development  Objective  (PDO)  of  ASPIRE-AT  is  “Inclusive  and  sustainable  agriculture 
sector growth based on exports and domestic markets has increased incomes of rural producers and 
workers.” 
AGRICULTURE SECTOR GROWTH means that the total value created by Cambodian 
farmers and agri-businesses increases. Agriculture sector growth results from land and 
workers becoming more productive, by using better techniques or growing higher-value 
products, or because of investments in equipment for production or processing.  
Inclusive  growth  means  that  growth  results  in  increased  incomes  and  better  living 
conditions for all groups, including smallholder farmers, poor rural Cambodians, women, 
youth, people living with disabilities, indigenous peoples etc. 
Sustainable growth means that productivity is increased in a way that does not cause 
damage to the environment (for example, clearing forest for agriculture land, over-use of 
land or water, harmful use of agriculture chemicals etc). 
The Project Development Objective of ASPIRE-AT is aligned with GoKC’s Agricultural Development 
Policy 2021-2030 (ADP). 
Table 1: Alignment of ASPIRE-AT with the Agriculture Development Policy 
Theme 
Strategy 
ASPIRE-AT Alignment 
1. Modernising 
and 
commercializing 
the agriculture 
value chain 
(1) & (3): Increase productivity and value addition of 
crop and livestock value chains 
C1, C2, C3 
(5): Smart technology in value chains 
(6): Digitisation and e-agriculture 
(7): Increase market access for small and medium 
farmers 
Centres of Excellence 
C3 
ICT C2 
C1, C2, C3 
4 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
2. Public and 
private 
investments in 
the agriculture 
sector 
3. Growing 
sustainably and 
increasing 
resilience to 
climate change 
4. Institutional 
reforms and 
cross-cutting 
issues 
(3): Promote agricultural investment, credit and 
agri-business facilitation 
C1 and C2 
(4): Agriculture sector finance 
(3): Promote agricultural land resource 
management 
(4): Strengthen climate resilience 
(5): Sustainable food system 
(5) COVID-19 recovery and pandemic response 
strategy 
C1 and C2, 
working with 
ARDB, SME Bank, 
AMK and others 
C3 
C3 
C2 Certification 
C1, C2, C3 
(6) Gender mainstreaming in value chain 
C1, C2, C3 
(7) Trade facilitation 
C2 
Indicators for the PDO are: 
  By 2027, 50,000 households with household income increased by at least 20%; 
  By 2027, 70,000 households are satisfied with project-supported services; 
  By 2027, a 25% increase (compared to the baseline) in households reporting that they can 
influence decision-making of local authorities and project-supported service providers. 
For all these indicators, 15% of households will be women-headed households (WHH) and 1.5% of 
households will be indigenous people (IP) households. 
PDO indicators will be measured by the Outcome Survey. 
Project Outcomes 
4 
ASPIRE-AT has three Outcomes 
Outcome 1: Smallholders’ and PO’s Investments in productive assets have increased their 
productivity and competitiveness in domestic and exports-based value chains. 
Outcome 1 Indicators:  
  By 2027, 50,000 households (15% WHH, 1.5% IP) have increased their productivity in line 
with the ADP target of 8% per year; 
  By 2027, 90% of producer organisations (ACs and other types) supported by the project 
report an increase in sales. 
Outcome 2: PO’s business partnerships with agribusinesses have been enhanced and their 
market access improved. 
Outcome 2 Indicators: 
  By 2027, 60% of 15 supported rural enterprises report an increase in profits 
  By 2027, 25,000 people (50% women, 20% youth) have new jobs or employment 
opportunities. 
Note: the employment indicator can include new jobs created by investments in Component 1 as well 
as in Component 2. The jobs will not all be full-time jobs (many agriculture sector jobs are seasonal). 
5 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
The intention is that 25,000 people will benefit from the creation of jobs equivalent to 10,000 full-time 
jobs. 
Outcome 3: Smallholders have been organised and coordinated in Agriculture Cooperatives 
and other Producer Organisations and have been enabled to produce in response to market 
requirements for type, volume and quality standards. 
Outcome 3 Indicators:  
  By 2027, 535 rural producer organisations (AC, Unions of ACs and other types of PO) 
members report new or improved services provided by their organisation; 
  By 2027, 70% of 535 rural producer organisations are engaged in formal partnerships / 
agreements or contracts with public or private entities. 
Outcome indicators will be measured by the Outcome Survey except for increase in profits which will 
be reported by the enterprises, and partnerships with public or private entities which will be reported 
by the POs. 
Results Based Management 
5 
The key responsibility of project management is to achieve the Project Development Objective and 
the Outcomes defined above, as measured by the indicators. 
Project Management cannot change the objective, outcomes, indicators or targets except by 
agreement with the financing agencies. 
The Logframe defines indicators and targets to be achieved by Mid-Term and at the end of the 
project. Each year, Project Management should define targets to be achieved by the end of the year. 
The AWPB should be designed to ensure these targets are met. If the project is not on track to 
achieve the outcome targets, Project Management should report to the Steering Committee to identify 
changes that need to be made.
6 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
6 
ASPIRE-AT Logical Framework 
Results Hierarchy 
Outreach 
Project Goal 
Rural poverty and 
vulnerability has 
decreased and climate 
resilience of Cambodian 
rural households has 
increased through 
inclusive and 
environmentally 
sustainable growth in 
agriculture sector. 
Development Objective 
Inclusive and sustainable 
agriculture sector growth 
based on exports and 
domestic markets has 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Indicators  (x.x.x Core Indicator #) 
Name 
Baseline  Mid-
Term 
End 
Target 
1. Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project 
Males 
Females3 
Young4 
Not Young 
Indigenous People5 
1.a Corresponding number of households 
reached 
Households 
Landless or land-poor households 
Declining rural poverty rate 
250,000 
250,000 
100,000 
400,000 
6,000 
125,000 
25,000 
10% 
Poverty headcount 
Agriculture value added growth of 3% per annum (ADP Policy Indicator 1) 
17% 
Average growth of value added in agriculture 
sector 
3% p.a. 
Source 
Frequency  Respons-
MIS 
Annual 
ibility 
PMU 
Links 
COSOP 
SO and 
ADP 
Goal 
Source: 
NIS data 
100,000 
smallholder hh in 
POs and 25,000 
landless or land-
poor hh 
benefitting from 
employment 
opportunities 
Increased 
volume and / or 
value added will 
result in 
increased 
incomes for 
smallholders and 
rural 
There are market 
opportunities to 
increase 
volumes and / or 
capture more 
# of rural households with household income increased by at least 20% 
Number of households 
Women-headed households 
Total number of household members 
50,0006 
Outcome 
survey 
BL, MT, EL  Service 
provider 
3 About 51% rural people living under USD2.80 a day are women. 
4 Youth define as people ages between 15-30 years (following the government’s definition).  
5 IP lives in 16 provinces; they represent of 1.5% of the total population. They engage actively in Cassava, Cashew, Coffee value chain.     
6 This target includes 4 000 smallholder farmer (45% are female and 20% youth) who will benefiting from SSTC grant facility.  
7 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Results Hierarchy 
increased incomes of 
rural producers and 
workers. 
Outcome 1 
Smallholders’ and PO’s 
Investments in productive 
assets have increased 
their productivity and 
competitiveness in 
domestic and exports-
based value chains. 
Output 1.1.1 
Financial support 
provided to PO with 
bankable investment 
proposals in productive 
and resilient assets 
Indicators  (x.x.x Core Indicator #) 
Name 
Baseline  Mid-
Term 
End 
Target 
Source 
Frequency  Respons-
ibility 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
SF 2.1 Number (%) of  households satisfied with project supported services 
70,000 
Number of households 
10,500 
Women-headed households 
Indigenous People households 
1,050 
SF2.2 Number (%) of households reporting that they can influence decision-
making of local authorities and project-supported service providers 
Number of households 
Women-headed households 
Indigenous People households 
# beneficiary households with labour productivity increasing in line with ADP 
target (8% p.a.) 
50,000 
Number of households 
7,500 
Women-headed households 
Total number of household members 
200,000 
CI 2.2.5: % of supported rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase 
in sales 
Percentage of rural POs 
BL+25%  
BL+25%  
BL+25%  
TBD 
90% 
Outcome 
survey 
BL, MT, EL  Service 
provider 
Outcome 
survey 
BL, MT, EL  Service 
provider 
Outcome 
survey 
BL, MT, EL  Service 
provider 
MIS 
Annual 
PMU 
Rural POs with women in leadership 
positions 
Number of rural producers benefiting from loan-financed investments by AC / 
PO 
Total # of rural producers 
50,000 
MIS 
Annual 
PMU 
Males 
Females 
Young 
Indigenous People 
25,000 
25,000 
10,000 
750 
8 
value-added in 
pro-poor value 
chains 
Responsive and 
accountable 
governance of 
ACs 
50% of 
supported 
households able 
to achieve this 
increase 
POs willing to 
accept risks of 
investing if 
suitable 
assistance and 
finance is 
provided 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Results Hierarchy 
Output 1.1.2 
Financial support 
provided to smallholders 
with bankable investment 
proposals in productive 
and resilient assets 
Output 1.2 
Enabling market 
infrastructure for Producer 
Organisations 
Outcome 2 
PO’s partnerships with 
agribusinesses have been 
enhanced and their 
market access improved   
Indicators  (x.x.x Core Indicator #) 
Name 
Baseline  Mid-
Term 
End 
Target 
1.1.3 Rural producers accessing production inputs and / or technological 
packages 
Total # of rural producers 
3,000 
Males 
Females 
Young 
Indigenous people 
# members of PO/AC with access to physical infrastructure assets provided 
by the project. 
Total PO/AC members 
1,500 
1,500 
600 
25 
40,000 
Males 
Females 
Young 
Indigenous people 
Core 2.2.2 # 60% of 15 supported rural enterprises reporting an increase in 
profit 
Number of enterprises 
Core 2.2.1 Persons with new jobs 
/employment opportunities 
20,000 
20,000 
4,000 
600 
9 
Total number of people 
Males 
Females 
Young 
Indigenous 
Output 2.1.1 
Private investments for 
agricultural market and 
trade development 
promoted and facilitated 
Core 2.1.1 # rural enterprises accessing 
business development services 
Rural Enterprises 
25,000 
12,500 
12,500 
5,000 
375 
15 
9 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Source 
Frequency  Respons-
MIS 
Annual 
ibility 
PMU 
MIS 
Annual 
PMU 
MIS 
Annual 
PMU 
Outcome 
survey 
BL, MT, EL  Service 
provider 
MIS 
Annual 
PMU 
Farmers willing 
to accept risks of 
investing if 
suitable 
assistance and 
finance is 
provided 
60% of 
enterprises 
Investments 
create equivalent 
of about 10,000 
full-time jobs, 
with most roles 
being part time / 
seasonal 
Firms willing to 
accept risks of 
investing if 
suitable 
assistance and 
finance is 
provided 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators  (x.x.x Core Indicator #) 
Name 
Baseline  Mid-
Term 
End 
Target 
Source 
Frequency  Respons-
ibility 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Output 2.1.2 
Financial support 
provided for 
agribusinesses to invest 
in increased processing 
capacity 
Output 2.2.1 
Strategic infrastructure for 
agriculture trade 
facilitation established 
(Post Harvest Reference 
Centres, Quarantine 
Inspection Offices, Plant 
Health Reference 
Laboratories etc.) 
Output 2.2.2 
Review of policy and 
regulatory framework 
supported to strengthen 
competitiveness 
Outcome 3 
Smallholders have been 
organised and 
coordinated in Agriculture 
Cooperatives and other 
Producer Organisations, 
and have been enabled to 
# rural enterprises accessing financial services 
Enterprises 
15 
MIS 
Annual 
PMU 
Number of facilities completed and operational with sustainable management 
and financing plans. 
# Facilities 
7 
MIS 
Annual 
PMU 
Sustainable 
business model 
for facilities 
identified 
Policy 1. Number of policy-relevant knowledge products completed 
MIS 
Annual 
PMU 
Number 
3 
Core 2.2.4 # supported rural producers' organisation members reporting new 
or improved services provided by their organisation7  
Outcome 
survey 
BL, MT, EL  Service 
provider 
Number of POs 
Percentage of POs 
POs with women in leadership positions 
Core 2.2.3: # (70%) of 535 rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal 
partnerships /agreements or contracts with public or private entities8 
535 
100% 
300 
MIS 
Annual 
PMU 
Consolidation 
and formalisation 
of POs leads to 
improved 
services 
Farmers 
understand the 
potential benefits 
7 AC reporting using finance service engaging in the business with private sector. 
8 about 500 registered AC/PO and 35 UAC 
10 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Results Hierarchy 
produce in response to 
market requirements for 
type, volume and quality 
standards. 
Indicators  (x.x.x Core Indicator #) 
Name 
Number of POs 
Percentage of POs 
POs with women in leadership positions 
Baseline  Mid-
Term 
Core 3.2.2 # Households reporting adoption 
of environmentally sustainable and climate-
resilient technologies and practices 
Number of households 
Female headed households 
Indigenous People households 
End 
Target 
375 
75% 
225 
50,000 
7,500 
750 
Output 3.1 
Producer organisations / 
Agriculture Cooperatives 
(AC) established and 
strengthened 
Core 2.1.3 # of rural producers' organisations (AC) supported9 
MIS 
Annual 
PMU 
Number of POs 
POs with women in leadership positions 
535 
300 
Core 2.1.4 # of supported rural producers that are members of a rural 
producers' organisation. 
Number of rural producers 
Males 
Females 
Young 
Indigenous People 
100 000 
50,000 
50,000 
20,000 
1,500 
MIS 
Annual 
PMU 
9 about 25% of Business Clusters created by AIMS and ASIRE  
11 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Source 
Frequency  Respons-
ibility 
Outcome 
survey 
BL, MT, EL  Service 
provider 
of forming  ACs / 
POs 
Enterprises 
willing to enter 
partnerships with 
ACs and UACs 
Resilient and 
sustainable 
production 
technologies can 
be market-
competitive 
XXX existing 
Business 
Clusters 
consolidated in 
500 ACs and 35 
Unions 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Results Hierarchy 
Output 3.2.1 
Centres of excellence and 
Lead Farmers established 
and supported for 
development and 
dissemination of improved 
agricultural, post-harvest 
and processing 
technologies 
Indicators  (x.x.x Core Indicator #) 
Name 
Baseline  Mid-
Term 
End 
Target 
Core 1.1.4 # of rural producers trained in production packages and / or 
technologies10 
Number of rural producers 
20 000 
Males 
Females 
Young 
Indigenous People 
10,000 
10,000 
4,000 
300 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Source 
Frequency  Respons-
MIS 
Annual 
ibility 
PMU 
Suitable sites 
and sustainable 
business models 
for Centres of 
Excellence 
identified 
10 5% of the supported AC members  
12 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
7 
TARGETING 
 This section of the PIM: 
Identifies groups that will benefit from additional assistance 
  Defines the target beneficiaries of ASPIRE-AT 
 
  Defines Producer Organisations eligible for assistance 
  Defines a Graduated Producer Organisation 
 
 
  Defines principles for selection of geographic target areas, called Clusters. 
Identifies SME eligible for assistance 
Sets criteria for selection of target value chains 
Target Beneficiaries 
Types of Beneficiary 
ASPRIRE-AT will reach out to about 125,000 rural households (corresponding to 500,000 people) 
who are within the target group of the COSOP 2022-27, that is, poor and vulnerable rural 
Cambodians whose income is less than 150% of the national poverty line.  
ASPIRE-AT has two direct beneficiary groups: 
  100,000 smallholder farm households who are either poor or near-poor and vulnerable to 
falling into poverty due to climate, market or other shocks but who have productive potential 
and can take advantage of market opportunities; 
  An additional 25,000 landless or land-poor households who are expected to benefit from 
increased employment opportunities created by ASPIRE-AT investments. 
Women, youth, poor households, indigenous peoples and people living with disabilities will receive 
priority for some types of project benefit. 
Project Monitoring and Evaluation (Chapter 10) must count these different types of beneficiary 
separately. 
Therefore, it is important to have clear definitions of each type of beneficiary.  
Definition of Smallholder Farmers 
The National Institute of Statistics (NIS) defines small-scale landholders using a combination of two 
criteria, namely the physical size of the food producer, as expressed by the amount of operated land 
and number of livestock heads in production, and the economic size of the food producer, as 
expressed by its revenues. Under this definition, “smallholders” constitute almost 75% of all farmers in 
Cambodia. 
ASPIRE-AT targets smallholder households with income below 150% of the national poverty line. This 
group is considered to be approximately equivalent to smallholders under the NIS definition. 
For practical purposes, ASPIRE-AT needs a definition of eligible smallholder farmers that can easily 
be applied and verified. For this reason, smallholders will be defined as those farmers that do not 
exceed any one of the following limits:   
  More than 3ha of single-cropping rice land; 
  More than 2ha of double-cropping rice land; 
  More than 5ha of tree plantation; 
  More than 5ha of non-rice field crop land (e.g. corn, cassava); 
  More than 1ha of land that is prepared for horticulture (e.g. raised beds, drip irrigation); 
  More than 20 large animals (cows, buffaloes); 
13 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  More than 50 medium-sized animals (pigs, goats); 
  More than 5,000 small livestock (chickens, ducks). 
It is important to note that Producer Organisations (POs) are likely to include some farmers who are 
not smallholders under this definition. It is not a problem if non-smallholders are members of the PO 
and benefit from investments by the PO or by partner enterprises. However, non-smallholders cannot 
access individual benefits of the project (e.g. loans and grants from ARDB) and cannot be counted for 
the following purposes: 
  Eligibility of the PO (minimum number of smallholders who are members); 
  Maximum investment amounts per PO (based on number of smallholders); 
  Project outreach target. 
Definition of landless and land-poor households 
For the purpose of the project, a household can be counted as part of the outreach target for landless 
and land-poor households if: 
  The household has wage labour as its primary source of income; 
  The household benefits from employment opportunities created by project investments; 
  The household is not counted in the outreach target for smallholders. 
Priority Groups 
Women: ASPIRE-AT is a gender-transformative project (see Chapter 8). ASPIRE-AT aims for 50% of 
direct beneficiaries to be women. Women will receive priority for certain project activities and benefits, 
as described in Chapter 4. 
For project monitoring, a woman-headed household is a household headed by a woman who does 
not have a husband living with her. It does not matter whether the woman is the first name on the 
family book or not. 
Youth are defined as persons aged between 15 and 30. ASPIRE-AT aims for 20% of direct 
beneficiaries to be youth. Youth will receive priority for certain project activities and benefits, as 
described in Chapter 4. A woman who is aged 15-30 can be counted in the outreach target for women 
and in the outreach target for youth. 
Indigenous People are members of minority indigenous groups recognised by Ministry of Rural 
Development. ASPIRE-AT aims for 1.5% of direct beneficiaries to be indigenous people. Project 
activities that may affect indigenous people require Free, Prior and Informed Consent (see Chapter 
7). Indigenous people will receive priority for certain project activities and benefits, as described in 
Chapter 4. 
Persons with Disabilities means people who are registered as disabled by the Ministry of Social 
Affairs and / or recognised as disabled by the local authorities. Persons with disabilities will receive 
priority for certain project activities and benefits, as described in Chapter 4. 
Poor households means households with an ID-Poor card issued by Ministry of Planning. Poor 
households will receive priority for certain project activities and benefits, as described in Chapter 4. 
Producer Organisations 
Producer Organisation means any type of formal or informal grouping of farmers for the purpose of 
improving their agriculture production, post-harvest handling, storage, processing or marketing. 
Organisations that have credit schemes as their sole or main activity do not qualify for project support. 
14 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Producer organisations and their members can only qualify for investment support from ASPIRE-AT 
(under Component 1) after they achieve “Graduated PO status.” To become a Graduated PO, the PO 
must meet the following criteria: 
  The PO has at least 200 members who are smallholder farmers under the definition above; 
  The PO is engaged in at least one of the target value chains of ASPIRE-AT; 
  The PO has held an election for the governing Board within the last 3 years, with at least 40% 
of eligible members voting; 
  At least 40% of the members of the governing Board and senior leadership positions are 
women. 
  The PO has at least one administrative staff member who receives a salary; 
  The PO keeps complete annual accounts showing, at a minimum, receipts, expenditures, 
cash position and assets on a cash basis; 
  The PO has a formal partnership agreement with one or more private sector buyers; 
  At least 3 officers of the PO have successfully completed a training on assessing and 
managing social, environment and climate change related risks; 
  The PO has capacity to assess and manage social, environment and climate change related 
risks; 
  The PO has completed and approved a Business Plan that is endorsed by the Provincial 
Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (PDAFF). 
A PO Graduation Scorecard will be used to measure the baseline capacity, progress and graduation 
status of each PO.  
Small and Medium Enterprises 
Small and Medium Enterprises can receive direct support from the project under Component 2 if they 
meet the following criteria: 
  Are actively seeking to expand their activities in one of the target value chains of ASPIRE-AT  
  Have a proven business track record in the target value chain or a comparable business, 
  Are committed to increase sourcing of products from smallholders and POs in the ASPIRE-AT 
target cluster areas; 
  Are willing to share costs of technical support (if such support required from the programme), 
  Are legally registered to conduct the planned business activities. 
Target Value Chains 
Value chain selection is based on the GoKC priorities set out in the Agriculture Development Policy 
(ADP) and the prioritization criteria defined in the new operational guidelines on IFAD’s engagement 
in pro-poor value chain development11, that focus on: (i) growth potential, (ii) inclusive and 
sustainable development potential and (iii) enabling environment responsiveness.  
Based on these criteria and building on the achievement of ASPIRE and AIMS projects, the value 
chains listed in Table 2: Priority Value Chains and Typical Investments below are selected for the first 
year of ASPIRE-AT. Developing these value chains will contribute directly to the double objective of 
import substitution and export of quality products to the EU and other remunerative markets. 
1. 
Table 2: Priority Value Chains and Typical Investments  
Value Chain 
Vegetable 
Leafy  and  non-leafy 
types 
Native chicken 
Economic impact 
Import substitution 
Typical investments 
Greenhouse,  water  management,  post-harvest 
handling. 
Import substitution 
Production facilities, slaughter and packing 
11      https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/42266596/propoor_vc_guidelines.pdf/10bcbf35-36bc-a0a0-
2d0b-f4a9bd3c5e5f?t=1616421969633 
15 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Cassava 
Export 
Cashew 
Fresh fruit 
Longan, Mango etc. 
Processed fruit  
Dried Mango etc. 
Export 
Export 
Export 
Disease free planting material 
Organic cassava 
Improved soil management 
Post-harvest and processing 
Post-harvest, treatment, packing etc 
Processing 
Additional value chains may be selected based on the following criteria: (1) strong potential for 
exports or import substitution; (2) selected from amongst the 15 priority crops identified in the 
Agriculture Development Policy (ADP) 2030; (3) high proportion of smallholder producers; (4) strong 
potential to generate employment, particularly for women and youth; (4) zero deforestation.  
In order to align with institutional priorities of EIB and EU, and because the rice value chain is very 
heavily supported by other DP projects, the rice value chain will not be included. 
Geographical Target 
ASPIRE-AT will be national in scope, meaning that in principle, eligible beneficiaries organised in 
producer organisations in the targeted pro-poor value chains can qualify for support. Geographic 
targeting will be required primarily for intensive support to capacity development of POs under 
Component 3 and will be based on the areas where production of the target commodities is located. 
To maximise efficiency and impact, areas representing clusters of production activities in the target 
value chains will be prioritised for capacity building support for producer organisations. 
Therefore, geographic targeting is based on clusters, not on provinces. Clusters may be in one 
province or more than one province. Clusters will be selected first, then project activities will be 
planned in the provinces where the clusters are. 
A cluster is a geographic area where there is potential to scale up smallholder production of one or 
more of the target value chains. Clusters may group poorer areas with less poor areas. Clusters 
should have strong market links. 
Selection of a cluster for ASPIRE-AT is subject to demonstrating that there are at least 5,000 
smallholder farmers who can potentially benefit from ASPIRE-AT investments. 
In selecting these cluster areas, the following criteria will be considered:  
  Potential for development of the pro-poor value chains;  
  Access to markets;  
  Presence of ASPIRE and AIMS Business Clusters with relevant production activities;  
  Economic Poles targeted by SAAMBAT;  
  Density and intensity of rural poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition;  
  Presence of ethnic minorities;  
 
  Complementarity with the intervention areas of other development partners (identifying under-
Incidence of environmental degradation and climate vulnerability; and  
served areas as priority for ASPIRE-AT). 
In the first year of project implementation, cluster areas will be targeted in five clusters which will 
include a substantial number of existing POs that can move to investment-ready status quickly. Initial 
assessment is that these clusters are likely to be in the following provinces: Battambang (all value 
chains except cashew); Kandal (vegetable and native chicken); Preah Vihear (cashew and cassava); 
Siem Reap (vegetable and native chicken) and Takeo (vegetable and native chicken). Clusters may 
include parts of more than one Province. This selection will be confirmed through the mapping study 
to be conducted under the Readiness Action Plan (see above). A further 11 clusters will be added in 
Year 2 and Year 3 of the project. Selection of a cluster will be subject to a plan demonstrating 
16 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
potential to achieve outreach to a minimum of 5,000 smallholders within two years. PDAFFs may 
propose clusters individually or through cooperation with a neighbouring Province. 
OUTPUTS AND INVESTMENTS BY COMPONENT AND SUB-COMPONENT 
 This section of the PIM: 
  Describes outputs and other investment expenditures of each Component and 
Sub-Component of ASPIRE-AT  
  For each output / investment type the PIM defines: 
o  What are eligible investments? 
o  Who are eligible beneficiaries? 
o  How is the investment financed? 
o  What is the process to identify, screen, approve, design and implement 
the investments? 
COMPONENT 1: PRODUCTIVE AND RESILIENT ASSETS FOR PRODUCER ORGANISATIONS 
Table 3: Summary of Component 1 
Sub-
3. 
Component 
1.1 
7. 
Investment in 
productive and 
resilient assets of 
POs and 
smallholders 
2. 
Outcome 
Smallholders’ 
6. 
and PO’s 
Investments in 
productive assets 
have increased their 
productivity and 
competitiveness in 
domestic and 
exports-based value 
chains. 
1.2 
12. 
Enabling market 
infrastructure for 
POs 
4. 
Output 
5. 
Approach 
8. 
1.1.1 Financial 
support provided to POs with 
bankable investment 
proposals in productive and 
resilient assets 
1.1.2 Financial 
10. 
support provided to 
smallholders with bankable 
investment proposals in 
productive and resilient 
assets 
1.2.1 Enabling 
13. 
market infrastructure for 
Producer Organisations 
Loans and 
9. 
grants to POs through 
ARDB 
Loans and 
11. 
grants to farmers 
through ARDB 
Community 
14. 
infrastructure assets 
implemented by the 
project 
Sub-Component 1.1: Investment in Productive and Resilient Assets of POs and Smallholders 
Sub-Component Description 
1. 
Sub-Component 1.1 is implemented through GoKC’s Agriculture and Rural Development Bank 
(ARDB). ARDB provides loan and grant financing to eligible POs and farmers. ARDB is responsible 
for screening and due diligence of investment proposals. ARDB reports to ASPIRE Secretariat. 
Financing Instrument 
2. 
Loan and grant financing is managed as a single package with one approval process. The grant 
element of the financing is held by ARDB in a special account until the loan is repaid and is called a 
“blocked grant”. After the loan is repaid, the grant amount is released to the borrower (PO or farmer).  
Therefore, the grant is partial collateral for the loan. The asset purchased with the investment is also 
collateral. In this system, ARDB should not need additional collateral (e.g. land) from the borrower. 
17 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
ARDB will regard the blocked grant as collateral for loans up to two times the grant value ($1 of 
blocked grant collateralizes $2 of loan).  The asset purchased with the loan will be accepted as 
collateral for 50% of the asset value. Examples of how this could work with different grant amounts 
are shown in the table. 
Value 
15. 
of Asset 
16. 
% 
Grant 
Grant 
17. 
Amount 
Loan 
18. 
Amount 
Collateral 
19. 
(Grant 200%, 
Asset 50%) 
20. 
21. 
$10,000  22. 
25% 
23. 
$2,500 
24. 
$7,500 
25. 
$10,000 
26. 
27. 
$10,000  28. 
35% 
29. 
$3,500 
30. 
$6,500 
31. 
$12,000 
32. 
In the case where the collateral value is more than the asset value, the borrower may use the 
additional collateral to collateralise a loan for working capital, financed from ARDB core resources (i.e. 
not financed from project funds). 
General Process 
3. 
The process for implementation of investments under Sub-Component 1.1 will be as follows: 
1.  The borrower (a graduated PO or a farmer member of a graduated PO) submits a financing 
proposal to ARDB. The financing proposal must be based on a Business Plan approved by 
PDAFF (see Component 3). 
2.  ARDB conducts screening and due diligence checks to ensure that the financing proposal 
complies with all eligibility criteria. 
3.  ARDB issues approval for the financing. 
4.  The blocked grant amount is deposited in a unique escrow account. 
5.  The PO carries out a simple procurement process to identify a preferred supplier. 
6.  ARDB releases the financing directly to the supplier once the asset is supplied. 
7.  The borrower repays the financing in instalments in the same way as for a normal loan. 
8.  After the last repayment, ARDB deposits the Grant amount into an account opened by the 
borrower in a private sector bank or finance institution. 
9.  The borrower can withdraw the grant amount, keep it as savings or use it as collateral for a 
new loan. 
Reporting 
4. 
ARDB is responsible to report aggregate results (number of borrowers, number of loans, portfolio at 
risk etc.) to ASPIRE Secretariat on a quarterly basis.  
Output 1.1.1 Financial support provided to POs with bankable investment proposals in productive and 
resilient assets 
Output 1.1.1 finances investments in productive assets by graduated POs. 
Eligible Investments 
5. 
The following criteria apply to all investments proposed for financing under Output 1.1.1. 
 
 
 
 
Investment is identified in the graduated PO’s Business Plan;  
Investment is related to enterprises or cash-generating activities of the graduated POs in the 
targeted value chains; Investment contributes to a partnership with one or more identified 
private sector partners of the graduated PO;  
Investment is for physical assets with useful life longer than 1 year;  
Investment is not included in a negative list based on social and environmental safeguards 
and is rated as moderate risk (category B) or lower based on the screening checklist in the 
ESCMF; and 
  Project financing is not used to buy land. 
18 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
POs may include items such as computers and software for AC administrative and management 
purposes in the investment package, provided that overall financial viability is maintained.  
Loans for working capital will not be financed from the project line of credit but may be financed from 
ARDB resources using the blocked grant and asset as collateral. Alternatively, graduated POs 
requiring working capital may be assisted to apply for loan financing from other financial institutions. 
Amount of Financing 
6. 
The amount of project financing for PO investments is limited by a maximum grant amount. There is 
no fixed limit on the amount of loan financing for an investment that meets the eligibility criteria.  
The maximum grant amount available to the PO over the lifetime of the project will be based on $150 
per smallholder farmer who benefits from the investments. 
The maximum grant amount in any one investment will be 40% of the investment amount. 
Therefore, a PO with 200 smallholder members can receive grants up to $30,000. 
If the grant is 40% of the investment, the maximum size of the investment would be $75,000. 
However, the PO may apply for a larger loan (so the grant will be a smaller percentage). Based on 
collateral requirements (see above) the PO can access financing of up to $120,000 with a grant 
percentage of 25%. 
The maximum amount of loan will be determined by ARDB based on collateral (blocked grant, asset 
value and any other collateral offered by the borrower) and on ARDB due diligence checks. 
7. 
Co-Financing 
There is no fixed amount for co-financing in kind by the PO, but the following types of costs must be 
provided by the PO as co-financing in kind: 
  Land needed for construction of fixed assets; 
  Administrative work of the PO committee in managing the investment; 
  Labour by PO members needed to implement the investment. 
Output 1.1.2: Financial support provided to smallholders with bankable investment proposals in 
productive and resilient assets 
Output 1.1.2 finances investments in productive assets by smallholder farmers who are members of 
graduated POs. Eligible investment types will be identified in the PO Business Plan which is approved 
by PDAFF (see Component 3). Individual smallholder farmers can choose to apply for financing for 
these investments. The financing contract is between ARDB and the individual smallholder, with the 
PO as a witness. However, the PO will help smallholders to coordinate their financing applications, so 
that ARDB will be able to screen and process financing for a group of smallholders with similar 
investment types (e.g. ten farmers who want to invest in greenhouses). This will increase efficiency 
and reduce costs for ARDB. 
Eligible Investments 
8. 
The following criteria apply to all investments proposed for financing under Output 1.1.2. 
 
 
Investment is a type identified in the graduated PO’s Business Plan (see Component 3); 
Investment is related to production of the targeted value chain commodity or to value chain 
enterprises of individual farmers;  
19 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  The financing is used for purchase of physical assets with useful life longer than 1 year 
 
(working capital is not eligible for project financing; 
Investment is not included in a negative list based on social and environmental safeguards 
and is rated as moderate risk (category B) or lower based on the screening checklist in the 
ESCMF; and 
  Project financing is not used to buy land. 
9. 
Amount of Financing 
The amount of project financing for smallholder investments is limited by a maximum grant amount. 
There is no fixed limit on the amount of loan financing for an investment that meets the eligibility 
criteria.  
The maximum grant amount available to one eligible smallholder household over the lifetime of the 
project is $1,000. 
Any eligible smallholder may apply for grant up to 25% of the total financing amount, provided the limit 
of $1,000 is not exceeded. 
Eligible smallholders who are in one of the following categories may apply for grant up to 35% of the 
total financing: 
  Woman; 
  Youth; 
 
  Person living with a disability. 
Indigenous Person; 
If the grant is 25% of the investment, the maximum amount of financing is $4,000. 
If the grant is 35% of the investment, the maximum amount of financing is $2,857. 
However, the smallholder may apply for a larger loan (so the grant will be a smaller percentage). For 
example, a woman farmer who wants financing of $4,000 can apply for a loan of $3,000 and a grant 
of $1,000 (25%).  
Farmers may apply for larger loan amounts (so grant is less than 25% of the financing) subject to 
ARDB decision on whether collateral is adequate and other due diligence checks. 
Co-Financing 
10. 
There is no fixed amount for co-financing in kind by the farmer, but the following types of costs must 
be provided by the farmer as co-financing in kind: 
  Land needed for construction of fixed assets; 
  Farmer’s labour needed to implement the investment. 
Sub-Component Description 
Sub-Component 1.2 Enabling market infrastructure for Producer Organisations 
11. 
Sub-Component 1.2 will finance physical infrastructure assets that will be owned, operated and 
maintained by a graduated PO and that are important for achieving competitiveness and sustainability 
but which cannot easily generate revenue and the costs of which cannot otherwise be met by the 
graduated PO. Eligible investments meeting these criteria include, but are not limited to, 
farm/business access roads, community-owned water management infrastructure, hard standings for 
trucks and loading areas for bulk produce. The O&M of the infrastructure will be part of the investment 
proposal.  
20 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Graduated PO that have received infrastructure investment support from other projects in the past are 
not eligible for Sub-Component 1.2 investments. Therefore, Sub-Component 1.2 will mainly benefit 
Agriculture Cooperatives and other types of graduated PO formed with support from Component 3. 
Financing Instrument 
12. 
The financing instrument for Sub-Component 1.2 is a grant from the project to the PO. Procurement 
and financial management are handled by ASPIRE Secretariat. 
Eligible Investments 
13. 
The following criteria apply to investments under Sub-Component 1.2: 
 
 
 
Investment is identified in the graduated PO’s Business Plan which is approved by PDAFF 
(see Component 3); 
Investment will create an asset that will be owned and managed by the graduated PO; 
Investment is related to production, handling, processing, storage or marketing of 
commodities in the targeted value chains;  
  Financing is for buildings and / or fixed physical infrastructure only (not electrical or 
mechanical equipment except as part of a building); not cash-generating (although buildings 
to house cash-generating enterprises financed under Sub-Component 1.1 can qualify);  
  Project financing is not used to buy land; 
  Not included in a negative list based on social and environmental safeguards and is rated as 
moderate risk (category B) or lower based on the screening checklist in the ESCMF; and 
  The proposal includes a a viable operation and maintenance plan, with clear commitment and 
source of funding. 
Land required for the infrastructure will be considered as a contribution-in-kind by the graduated PO.  
Examples of eligible investments include: (1) access roads; (2) loading areas; (3) collection and 
handling facilities; (4) water management and infrastructure (e.g. community ponds; distribution 
channels linking public irrigation canals to farms) and (5) multi-purpose buildings for the PO. For 
some investments, the AC/PO will be required to finance complementary expenditures (e.g. 
mechanical equipment) using loans under Sub-Component 1.1. 
Financing 
14. 
Costs of works under Sub-Component will be 100% financed by ASPIRE-AT. 
The maximum amount of financing for one PO during the lifetime of the project is $1,000 per 
smallholder farmer benefitting from the investment. 
Any land needed must be provided by the graduated PO and is considered as co-financing in kind. 
Process 
15. 
The process for implementation of investments under Sub-Component 1.2 will be as follows: 
1.  The graduated PO includes the investment in its Business Plan which is approved by PDAFF 
(Component 3); 
2.  The graduated PO completes an outline proposal form and submits it to ASPIRE-AT through 
PDAFF; 
3.  ASPIRE-AT requests infrastructure service provider to conduct a feasibility study. 
4.  The Infrastructure Service Provider produces a Feasibility Study that (1) confirms that the 
proposed investment complies with the Eligibility Criteria; (2) that the PO meet the Eligibility 
Criteria; and (3) calculates the maximum allowable investment size; and (4) includes an 
outline design.  
5.  The role of the Infrastructure Service Provider is to assist the PO to develop the best possible 
proposal. Therefore, the Infrastructure Service Provider may advise the PO to modify the 
proposal to comply with the Eligibility Criteria, or to increase the cost-effectiveness of the 
investment. 
21 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
6.  ASPIRE-AT reviews and approves the Feasibility Study report; 
7.  ASPIRE-AT signs an Investment Agreement with the PO, with PDAFF counter-signing as 
witness. 
8.  The Infrastructure Service Provider prepares the detailed design and bills of quantities for the 
investment; 
9.  ASPIRE-AT procures a contract for construction of the output. 
10.  On completion, the PO signs a Handover Agreement with ASPIRE-AT. 
Component 2: Business Partnership and Market Access 
Table 4: Summary of Component 2 
Outcome 
Sub-Component 
Output 
Approach 
PO’s 
partnerships 
with 
agribusinesses 
have been 
enhanced and 
their market 
access 
improved   
2.1 Strengthening 
private investment 
for agricultural 
market and trade 
development 
2.1.1 Private investments for 
agricultural market and trade 
development promoted and 
facilitated 
2.1.3 Financial support provided 
for agribusinesses to invest in 
increased processing capacity 
Loans and credit 
guarantees to SMEs 
2.2 Strengthening 
the enabling 
environment for 
competitive 
agricultural value 
chains and trade 
2.2.1 Strategic infrastructure for 
agriculture trade facilitation 
established (Post Harvest 
Reference Centres, Quarantine 
Inspection Offices, Plant Health 
Reference Laboratories etc.) 
Construction of 
facilities 
2.2.2 Review of policy and 
regulatory framework supported 
to strengthen competitiveness 
Policy review 
Component 2 supports public and private investment to increase the number and competitiveness of 
agri-businesses operating in priority value chains and the associated enabling public goods and 
services to support competitive export growth.  
Sub-Component 2.1: Strengthening private investment for agricultural market and trade 
8 
development 
Sub-Component 2.1 facilitates private investment in modern agribusinesses to increase export trade 
and import substitution in priority products as well as investment in associated service businesses. 
The sub-component has two major elements: i) Investment-oriented technical support to agri-
businesses to plan and deliver successful upgrading investments for their businesses, ii) Agri-
business investment financing via a wholesale line of credit to SME Bank to provide access to 
affordable investment finance in collaboration with the existing credit guarantee schemes of 
Cambodia Credit Guarantee Corporation (CCGC) to reduce collateral requirements for investors. 
Eligibility Criteria for SME 
Supported businesses must meet the following eligibility criteria: 
  The business is actively seeking to expand its activities in one of the priority value chains; 
  The business has a proven business track record in the priority value chain or a comparable 
business; 
22 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  The business is committed to increase sourcing of products from smallholders and graduated 
POs in the ASPIRE-AT clusters; 
  The business is willing to share costs of technical support (if such support required from the 
programme); 
  The business is legally registered to conduct the planned business activities.  
  The business is compliant with the requirements of the ESCMF and the potential risk level of 
the planned activities are in line or lower than the project’s overall environmental and social 
risk category (moderate).  
  The business is committed to ensuring low GHG emissions from planned activities. 
Priority will be given to those businesses in each priority value chain that can credibly demonstrate: 
  The greatest potential impact per USD of project support, measured as the greatest increase 
in revenue to smallholders and / or increase in employment opportunities for rural people 
resulting from their planned investments per USD of project support required; 
  Greatest impact on priority groups including women, youth, ethnic minorities and the 
disabled; and iii)  
The business is introducing innovative technologies or business practices, especially 
addressing climate change related mitigation or adaptation issues. 
Output 2.1.1 Investment-Oriented Technical Support to Agri-Businesses 
9 
Output 2.1.1 will provide technical support to about 40 agri-businesses on a cost-sharing basis. 
Technical support will include: 
  Market exposure and trade promotion to meet potential customers in target international 
markets and understand the specific market requirements, dynamics and competition.  
  Bespoke technical investment advice to businesses on issues including specific modern 
technologies and equipment, operational processes, supplier management systems, business 
planning and cash flow management, product standards and certification requirements and 
compliance for market access (including. sanitary and phyto-sanitary, MRL, food safety).   
  Facilitation of links to centres of industry-leading international knowledge and expertise, 
including through knowledge exchange visits, training and technical support for groups of 
agri-businesses in each priority value chain. The objective is to establish systematic linkages 
at the industry level to recognized leading centres of expertise that can support industry 
competitiveness now and into the future. 
  Climate change adaptation and mitigation to ensure resilient and low emission agri-
businesses. 
Participating businesses will also be actively facilitated to establish improved trading relationships with 
networks of producers and POs, especially the graduated POs supported by ASPIRE-AT. 
Implementation 
16. 
Implementation of investment-oriented technical support will be led by a small team of experienced 
agri-business investment and trade development specialists contracted by ASPIRE Secretariat. 
Bespoke technical investment advice will require specialist industry specific expertise for each value 
chain and will be contracted in as required to compliment the expertise of the team in the Secretariat.  
This agri-business investment team will collaborate with other institutions active in similar areas 
including Khmer Enterprise, EuroCham and others to identify potential participating business and 
delivery complementary support. 
Output 2.1.2 Agribusiness Investment Financing 
10 
ASPIRE-AT finances will be provided via a wholesale line of credit to SME Bank for on-lending to 
partner financial institutions. The line of credit will focus on medium term capital investment loans, 
equipment leasing and other financing for investments in the range of USD 0.5 million – USD 5 million 
for expansion or upgrading of existing businesses and start-ups.  The line of credit will complement 
SME Bank’s existing SME loan co-financing which has up to USD 1.0 million loan size (including a 
23 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
50% co-finance by SME Bank). Individual loan appraisal will be by the partner financial institutions of 
SME Bank, as is currently practiced. Execution of the business investments, including procurement, 
will be by the agri-business themselves.   
Agri-businesses borrowing from SME Bank will be eligible for credit guarantees through the SME 
Bank model of Cambodia Credit Guarantee Corporation (CCGC). Women entrepreneurs may also be 
eligible for the Women Entrepreneurs Guarantee scheme. These schemes provide guarantees of up 
to 80% of the loan amount and so reduce the need for collateral. 
Implementation 
17. 
SME Bank will lead implementation, supervised by ASPIRE Secretariat who will recruit one finance 
and investment specialist. The investment specialist will coordinate the relationship with SME Bank, 
CCGC and other collaborating financial institutions under the SME Bank wholesale scheme. They will 
also coordinate the relationship with ARDB under the arrangements in Component 1. 
Reporting 
18. 
SME Bank is responsible to report aggregate results (number of borrowers, number of loans, portfolio 
at risk etc.) to ASPIRE Secretariat on a quarterly basis.  
Sub-Component 2.2 Strengthening the Enabling Environment for Competitive Agriculture Value 
Chains and Trade 
Sub-Component 2.2 supports upgrading of critical public services and associated infrastructure to 
enable competitive export growth, with a focus on export-oriented plant health and quarantine 
services. Investments will include upgrading of physical infrastructure and equipment as well as 
capacity strengthening of the institutions and staff required to operate the upgraded services. The 
sub-component will also support a review of policies and regulations affecting the priority sectors and 
proposals for adjustment to strengthen competitiveness. 
Criteria for eligible investments 
19. 
All investments supported by Sub-Component 2.2 must comply with the following criteria which will be 
verified by a feasibility study: 
  There is a demonstrable link to enabling inclusive export growth in priority value chains, in 
one of the following aspects: 
o  Establishing or maintaining market access,  
o  Delivery efficient export sanitary/phyo-sanitary and quarantine service,  
o  Sustaining competitiveness within agreed market access frameworks via 
identification/promotion of current best practice for plant health and post-harvest 
management. This will include demonstrating high levels of confirmed interest from 
farmers and/or firms for the planned upgraded service.  
  There is an Institutional management plan in place covering,  
o  Financing plan, showing expected costs and sources of financing for the ongoing 
operation and maintenance or all related infrastructure and services;  
o  Human resource plan for the ongoing delivery of the planned service in response to 
industry needs; and  
o  Operational plan, setting out setting out main required systems and process that will 
be used in the operation of the planned infrastructure or services.  
  Economic viability. Sub-projects need to demonstrate they are economically sound and 
viable. 
Provisional List of Investments 
20. 
Inclusion in the provisional list of investments and / or in the AWPB does not constitute final approval 
to finance the investment from project funds. Sub-Component 2.2 investments will be financed by EIB 
under its Framework Loan modality and each investment will be subject to approval by EIB after the 
feasibility study. 
24 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
The provisional list of investments includes: 
  Post-Harvest Reference Centre (x1) to support export protocol negotiation for priority 
products and to conduct scientific trials for optimal post-harvest handling and treatment. 
Project support is expected to also cover technical assistance in negotiation of competitive 
export protocols and agreements with partner countries to create opportunities. Funding for 
such TA may include support from the China-IFAD South-South and Triangular Cooperation 
Facility for negotiation of trade protocols for priority commodities for the China market and 
elsewhere;  
  Export Quarantine Inspection Offices (up to 5) to deliver mandatory pre-export quarantine 
inspection and related services to exporters. Support to include development of suitable ICT 
tools to enable efficient operation of such services, including development of an “e-pyhto” 
system for issuance of secure digital phytosanitary certificates inline with the guidelines of the 
International Plant Protection Convention. The implementation of the digital solution will be 
directly managed by GDA 
  Plant Health Reference Laboratory (x1) to support producers and exporters in the priority VC 
to maintain competitiveness while complying with SPS/market access requirements. The 
Reference Lab specifically provides rapid and accurate diagnosis of pests and diseases, 
recording and maintaining data on pest occurrences, and detecting and tracking new and 
invasive pests. It will also be primary point of connection to identify relevant “best in class” 
international knowledge of suitable pest and disease management approaches for priority 
products and work with research stations to guide the testing and adaption of these to 
Cambodia industry needs. E.g. bio-control of pests in fruit/nut orchards. 
  Plant Health Research Stations (up to 3) will work closely with the Plant Health Reference 
Lab focusing on specific priority value chains (e.g. fruit, nuts) to support industry 
competitiveness of priority crops. They will be regional and focus on priority commodities 
relevant to their region not already served by other plant health research. Initial focus includes 
fruit/nut tree crops and horticulture where there are known gaps. E.g. low-chemical pest 
control in cashew/fruit orchards using biological agents. 
Implementation 
21. 
Technical leadership of Sub-Component 2.2 will be by MAFF-GDA through its Department for Plant 
Protection, Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary (DPPSP). Procurement will be by ASPIRE Secretariat. 
Component 3: Aggregating Farmers and integrate them into Value Chains 
11 
Table 5: Summary of Component 3 
Outcome 
Sub-Component 
Output 
Approach 
Increased 
capacity of 
producer 
organisations 
has enabled 
smallholders 
to meet market 
requirements 
for quality and 
scale 
3.1.1 Producer 
organisations / 
Agriculture 
Cooperatives (AC) 
established and 
strengthened 
3.2.1 Centres of 
excellence and 
Lead Farmers 
established and 
supported for 
development and 
dissemination of 
3.1.1 Producer organisations / 
Agriculture Cooperatives (AC) 
established and strengthened 
Capacity development 
and business planning 
by a service provider 
3.2.1 Centres of excellence and 
Lead Farmers established and 
supported for development and 
dissemination of improved 
agricultural, post-harvest and 
processing technologies 
Registration of ACs by 
PDAFF 
Pilot Centre of 
Excellence 
Potential for additional 
Centres of Excellence 
at regional level or in 
partnership with UAC 
25 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
improved 
agricultural, post-
harvest and 
processing 
technologies 
Lead Farmer network 
established in the 
graduated POs 
Component 3 assists smallholders to organise in formally registered Producer Organisations (POs) 
and to reach graduated PO status, with the capacity to coordinate production, post-harvest and 
marketing of produce and to negotiate contracts with agri-businesses. Component 3 supports 
preparation of Business Plans eligible for financing under Component 1. 
POs supported by Component 3 will be based on existing POs that need increased capacity. Many of 
these POs will be informal Business Clusters formed and supported by ASPIRE and / or AIMS. Other 
types of POs including registered ACs with limited capacity will be eligible for support. 
Registered POs will in most cases become Agriculture Cooperatives (AC) and Unions of Agriculture 
Cooperative (UAC). However, other types of legally registered PO are also eligible for support. 
In all cases, capacity building of a PO to reach graduated PO status should be accompanied by a 
recruitment drive to attract new members of the PO. Many informal POs are too small to be 
sustainable. The project should target a minimum of 200 members in any graduated PO. 
The project target is to form 300 graduated POs by the end of the project. This will be in addition to 
about 200 existing ACs and other POs that are eligible for financial support under Component 1. 
Component 3 also supports sharing of technical knowledge through Centres of Excellence and 
through networks of Lead Farmers linked to the POs. 
12 
Sub-Component 3.1 Structure and Capacity of Producer Organisations 
Process 
Sub-Component 3.1 is implemented through the following steps: 
Cluster mapping: The first step in the process is identification of the geographic clusters where 
ASPIRE-AT will focus. Criteria for identification of clusters are described in Section 0. Clusters may 
cross Provincial boundaries so PDAFFs will need to cooperate on identifying clusters and preparing 
cluster work-plans. 
Cluster work-plan: PDAFF will prepare a Cluster Work-Plan. The Cluster Work-Plan defines the tasks 
of the Service Provider in the cluster. If the Service Provider is already recruited, PDAFF must 
cooperate with the Service Provider to prepare the Cluster Work-Plan. 
The Cluster Work-Plan will include: 
  Number of existing POs, including Business Clusters, other informal groups and existing ACs, 
engaged in target value chain activities; 
  Number of graduated POs to be formed by consolidating the Business Clusters or other 
informal POs; 
  Number of existing ACs requiring strengthening to achieve Graduated PO status; 
  Number of existing ACs that have adequate capacity already and can be certified as 
Graduated PO, so that they can access Component 1 finance; 
  Number of smallholders to be supported in the graduated POs. 
26 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Registration of ACs 
PDAFF will facilitate existing informal POs to merge and to recruit new members so that they have a 
minimum of 150 members per PO (target should be at least 200 members wherever possible). 
PDAFF will register the consolidated POs as AC following mandated procedures. 
From Year 2, the project will also support formation of new Unions of Agriculture Cooperatives (UAC) 
where there is a sufficient number of graduated POs. Registration of UAC is the responsibility of 
MAFF-GDA through its Department of Agriculture Cooperatives. 
Capacity Development 
After the PO is registered, the Service Provider will provide a programme of capacity development. 
The capacity development curriculum will be developed by the first Service Provider recruited in Year 
1. Capacity Development will strengthen the capacity of the POs in the following key functions: 
  Business management and planning (including preparing business plans for support under 
Component 1), commercial negotiations and relationship management, investment and 
financial planning, operational management, contract fulfilment and brand development; 
  Engage in business relationships with agri-businesses (buyers, traders, processors, 
exporters) that will be supported under component 2; 
  Aggregation of agricultural products that are: safe (including traceability in key value chains 
such as vegetables and others based on agribusiness partner needs), and fulfil market 
demand in quality and quantity; 
  Provide services to their members, including technical advice and farm business 
management;  
  Add value to agricultural products through post-harvest, processing, packaging and storage 
facilities. 
  Sell products on domestic market and to agri-business supplying export markets; 
  Adopt and promote to their members new technologies including ICT enabled services, 
especially those supported under other ongoing/completed IFAD project 
  Develop/customise and promote the use of Management Information Systems for 
administrative and financial management of /POs aligned with the project MIS systems  
  Strengthen women’s voice and leadership within the POs, including meeting quotas for 
women’s representation, awareness raising and leadership skills training for women; 
  Strengthen administration, governance, inclusiveness (especially in terms of ID-Poor, women, 
youth and people form ethnic minorities), and Social, Environmental and Climate risk 
management. 
For each PO, the process will start with a baseline assessment using the PO Graduation Scorecard. 
The Servicer Provider will conduct the baseline assessment and will then work with the PO and 
PDAFF to develop a training plan appropriate to the needs of the PO. The training plan must be 
endorsed by the PO Board and by PDAFF. 
Business Plan 
22. 
The Service Provider will support the PO to develop a Business Plan. The contents of the Business 
Plan will include: 
  Priority value chain activities to be supported; 
  Market opportunities, including identification of partnerships with value chain agribusinesses 
and branding; 
  Technical assistance needs, and source of assistance; 
  Priority types of investment by farmers, with estimated number and cost; 
  Proposed income-generating investments by POs, with estimated cost; 
  Need for enabling market infrastructure, with estimated cost and sustainable O&M 
mechanisms; 
27 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Digital services that improve efficiency, effectiveness and transparency of proposed 
operations; 
  Total number of PO members benefiting from implementation of the Business Plan, with 
number of smallholders, women, IPs, youth and persons with disabilities; 
  Measures for economic empowerment of women and creating opportunities for youth; 
  Estimated employment generated by implementation of the Business Plan; 
  Environment, climate and social risk management. 
The Business Plan will be checked and endorsed by the PDAFF. This endorsement by PDAFF is a 
condition for accessing investment finance under Component 1. 
Graduated PO Status 
23. 
Following endorsement of the Business Plan, the Service Provider will repeat the PO Graduation 
Scorecard Assessment. If it is found that the PO meets the criteria for graduation, PDAFF will 
recommend to ASPIRE Secretariat that the PO can be considered as having achieved Graduated PO 
status. ASPIRE Secretariat will carry out on-site checks before approving Graduated PO status which 
is a condition for accessing investment finance under Component 1. 
Follow-Up Support 
24. 
After the PO achieves Graduated PO status and has an endorsed Business Plan, the PO can apply to 
ARDB for financing under Sub-Component 1.1 or to ASPIRE Secretariat for infrastructure financing 
under Sub-Component 2.2. 
The Service Provider will continue to provide follow-up support to POs during the period of 
implementation of the Business Plan (see below). 
Existing Registered ACs 
25. 
Existing registered ACs should not need the full programme of capacity development. PDAFF will 
assess existing registered ACs that want to participate in ASPIRE-AT. Some ACs may already meet 
Graduated PO criteria and have Business Plans. These AC may only need PDAFF to endorse their 
Business Plan and recommend them for Graduated PO status. Other existing ACs may be weaker 
and need either part or all of the capacity building programme. 
The Service Provider will conduct a baseline assessment using the PO Graduation Scorecard.  
1. 
2. 
3. 
If the PO meets all the graduation criteria, PDAFF will recommend to ASPIRE Secretariat that 
the AC can be considered as a Graduated PO. 
If the AC meets most of the graduation criteria, the Service Provider will discuss the findings 
with the AC Board and agree a work-plan so that the PO can achieve Graduated PO status 
quickly. 
If the AC is found to be a long way short of Graduated PO status, the Service Provider will 
work with the AC to develop a capacity building plan, similar to the one for a newly formed 
PO. 
Length of Support 
26. 
ASPIRE-AT will not continue to support Graduated POs through the whole life of the project. The 
Service Provider will provide capacity building and business planning support for a new AC in the first 
year of engagement followed by support to implementation of the investment plan in the second year. 
The service provider will continue to provide coaching support for two further years, so the length of 
engagement with the PO will be four years in total, after which it is expected that the PO will be fully 
self-sustaining. For an existing registered AC, engagement of the service provider should normally be 
for a two-year period. 
Cooperative Facilitators 
27. 
Sub-Component 3.1 will also support Cooperative Facilitators (CF) in newly-formed ACs. The CFs will 
be recruited by the ACs with priority for young people with good administrative, numeracy and 
computer skills. In the first year of employment the CFs will be trained by the service providers and 
28 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
will be paid a small salary from the project. The AC will pay 50% of the CF salary in the second year 
and 100% from year 3 onward. 
MIS for POs 
28. 
A pilot of customised MIS and accounting software for ACs will be conducted with up to 10 ACs that 
can demonstrate sufficient capacity to make use of this service. ARDB will be consulted on the 
selection and customisation of the solution. Based on the success of this pilot, further AC will be 
encouraged to include the deployment of the software in their loan financing proposals under Sub-
Component 1.1. Service costs of the software (including licence renewal and salaries of operators) 
will be the responsibility of the AC. 
Implementation 
29. 
The capacity building programme is implemented by the service provider in cooperation with PDAFF. 
Recruitment and management of the Service Provider is the responsibility of ASPIRE Secretariat. 
PDAFF is responsible for: 
Identification and mapping of the clusters; 
 
  Preparation of the Cluster Work-Plan in cooperation with the Service Provider; 
  Registration of ACs; 
  Endorsement of the Business Plan; 
  Recommend POs for Graduated PO status to ASPIRE Secretariat; 
  Cooperate with POs to recruit the Cooperative Facilitators; 
  Monitoring and reporting using the ASPIRE MIS. 
MAFF-GDA, through its Department of Agriculture Cooperatives, is responsible for registration of 
UAC.  
Sub-Component 3.2 Technical Advice and Centers of Excellence 
13 
Sub-Component 3.2 will support establishment of Centers of Excellence (CoE) for development and 
dissemination of improved agriculture techniques prioritized in key value chains partnership and 
activities supported along component 1 and 2, including to respond to identified standards/GAP. The 
purpose of CoE is to work in partnership with the private sector for development, promotion and 
demonstration of improved production and post-harvest technologies which may include: 
 
Improved, pest and disease tolerant and climate resilient cultivars;  
  Modern production techniques including Climate Smart Agriculture;  
  Pest and disease control techniques;  
  Enhanced crop planning and crop calendars;  
  Soil fertility management; Farm machinery, including innovative energy-efficient models; 
 
  Post-harvest, processing and storage techniques;  
  Early warning systems; and  
  Renewable energy technologies (RET).  
 Energy and water saving techniques;  
CoE should demonstrate a wide range of products and become a “neutral platform” to guide farmers’ 
investment choices. Female and young role models and those coming from ethnic minorities will be 
promoted. 
All CoE will be subject to the following criteria which must be verified by a feasibility study: 
  Well defined expected results in terms of adoption of new technology by Cambodian farmers;  
  An institutional plan including secured funding for operation and maintenance of the Centre; 
and  
  Buy-in from several private sector partners willing to co-invest, to demonstrate their products 
and to participate in operation of the Centre. 
29 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
One pilot Centre of Excellence will be developed in the first two years of the project. The pilot Centre 
of Excellence will be under management of MAFF-GDA. Two existing MAFF facilities will be 
considered for selection: 
  Agriculture Research Station at Banteay Daek, Kandal Province; 
  Conservation Agriculture Research for Development Centre (CARDEC) at Bos Khnor in 
Kampong Cham Province. 
After the first CoE has been successfully established, the project will consider proposals to establish 
additional Centres of Excellence at sub-national level through partnerships with PDAFFs, UACs and 
the private sector. 
The CoE will provide an opportunity for collaboration with the Cambodia Renewable Energy in 
Agriculture (CREA) project financed by GEF. Private RET providers will have the opportunity to 
promote their products in the CoE for farmers to try out and purchase.  
Lead Farmer Network 
30. 
Sub-Component 3.2 will also support establishment of a network of Lead Farmers in the graduated 
POs. Lead Farmers will act as input suppliers, last-mile service providers and as technical focal points 
for the PO. Women, youth and indigenous peoples will be prioritised to become Lead Farmers. The 
Lead Farmer will be linked to the Centres of Excellence through training visits and outreach activities. 
The project target is to establish Lead Farmers in 300 POs. 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
14 
 This section of the PIM: 
  Describes the different agencies that have a role in implementation of SAAMBAT 
  Describes the roles of key project leaders and staff 
  Defines reporting lines between the agencies 
15 
Programme Steering Committee 
There  is  one  Program  Steering  Committee  for  the  whole  Country  Strategic  Opportunities  Program 
(COSOP) which includes all the projects financed by IFAD in Cambodia.  
The purpose of the Program Steering Committee is to: 
  Ensure that projects in the IFAD Country Program contribute to the Strategic Objectives of the 
Country Strategic Opportunities Program (COSOP); 
  Discuss and agree the overall strategic direction of each program or project within the COSOP; 
Identify  challenges  faced  by  the  projects  and  programs,  and  recommend  solutions  to  the 
 
Program / Project Directors; 
  Facilitate exchange of information and mutual cooperation between programs and projects in 
the COSOP, and with projects financed by other partners; 
  Agree, report on and review strategic indicators. 
The members of the PSC are: 
  MEF, as representative of RGC. The PSC is chaired by a senior official of MEF; 
  MAFF, Ministry of Commerce (MoC), Ministry of Rural Development (MRD), Ministry of Water 
Resources  and  Meteorology  (MoWRAM),  Ministry  of  Environment  (MoE),  Supreme  National 
Economic Council (SNEC), and National Committee for Sub-National Democratic Development 
– Secretariat (NCDD-S) as Executing Agencies of programs and projects in the COSOP; 
  Other Ministries and  agencies that have  implementing responsibilities for COSOP  programs 
and projects, or are important partners for IFAD, including Ministry of Women’s Affairs (MoWA). 
IFAD; 
 
30 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  EIB; 
  EU through the Delegation to the Kingdom of Cambodia 
  Representative of the United Nations Country Team (UNCT) for Cambodia; 
  Development partners that have cooperation agreements or MOU with IFAD; 
  Representatives of farmer organisations (FO); 
  Representatives of the private sector. 
The Program Steering Committee meets as often as needed but at least one time per year. The PSC 
should meet in January to review the achievements of the previous year and to discuss plans for the 
following year. However, the PSC is not responsible to review and approve the AWPB of each program 
or project.  
Ministry of Economy and Finance 
16 
Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) represents the Government of the Kingdom of Cambodia 
(GoKC) to IFAD and is responsible for receiving and accounting for programme funds. 
MEF General Department of International Cooperation and Debt Management (GDICDM) supervises 
implementation of the COSOP, including ASPIRE-AT, through its Department of Multilateral 
Cooperation (DMC), Office of Multilateral Cooperation II (OMC 2).  
In accordance to the Standard Operating Procedures, MEF is responsible to:  
  Ensure inter-agency cooperation when required; 
  Fulfil the government fiduciary oversight and management responsibilities under the 
Programme; 
  Provide sufficient counterpart contribution funds in a timely manner to finance the Programme 
activities, including payment of government salaries; and 
  Timely processing of withdrawal applications, approval of procurement actions and other 
necessary documents in accordance with the Updated Standard Operating Procedure of 
government as promulgated by sub decree No. 74 ANK. BK dated May 22, 2012 (SOP), and 
its subsequent amendment. (or automatically updated by the Updated SOP, Sub Decree 
2019) 
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries 
17 
MAFF is the Project Executing Agency (EA). As Executing Agency, MAFF is responsible for the 
following functions: 
  Appoint the Project Director; 
  Appoint ASPIRE Secretariat to take on project management functions (i.e. to act as the 
Project Management Unit (PMU) for ASPIRE-AT; 
  Coordinate preparation of the AWPB and submitting it to IFAD and EIB for No Objection; 
  Manage Project Accounts; 
  Preparation of the project accounts and financial reporting; 
  Prepare Withdrawal Applications (WA) and submit to MEF for processing; 
  Procurement; 
  Coordinating with the MEF for appointment of a Project Auditor; 
  Project monitoring and evaluation (M&E); 
  Consolidation of the Project Six-Month Report and Annual Report; 
  Liaise with IFAD and EIB on issues relating to project implementation, including facilitation of 
IFAD and EIB Implementation Support Missions and Supervision Missions. 
Ministry of Women’s Affairs 
18 
Ministry of Women’s Affairs (MoWA) does not have a direct role in implementation of ASPIRE-AT, but 
has a role in implementation of the Gender Action Plan [to be completed…] 
General Directorate of Agriculture 
19 
MAFF-GDA is responsible to provide overall technical direction for ASPIRE-AT. Different departments 
of GDA will have lead technical responsibilities for certain project activities: 
31 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Department for Plant Protection, Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary (DPPSP) will have the lead 
technical role in implementation of Sub-Component 2.2 
  Department of Agricultural Cooperatives Promotion (DACP) is responsible for policy and 
technical guidance on formation and capacity development of Agriculture Cooperatives (AC), 
and is directly responsible for registration of Unions of Agriculture Cooperatives (UAC). 
ASPIRE Secretariat 
20 
ASPIRE Secretariat is appointed by MAFF to carry out the day-to-day duties of MAFF as the EA. This 
arrangement ensures continuity with the ASPIRE Programme. 
ASPIRE Secretariat is led by the Project Director and includes (1) officials of MAFF, who are 
seconded to work full-time in ASPIRE Secretariat during the project implementation period and who 
continue to receive their salaries as public servants; (2) contracted staff, who are mainly specialists in 
project administration, financial management and procurement functions, and whose salaries are 
considered as project operational costs; and (3) advisers, who generally have more technical roles 
and whose fees and salaries are considered as project investment costs. 
ASPIRE Secretariat will have the following core staff who are civil servants: 
  Project Manager (reporting to Project Director); 
  MIS Officer; 
  Gender Promotion Officer; 
  Environmental and Social Safeguards Officer; 
  Monitoring, Evaluation and Planning Officer; 
  Finance and Accounting Officer; 
  Knowledge Management and Communications Officer; 
  Procurement Officer; 
  Administration Officers (2 officers); 
  Head of Finance and Administration Section. 
ASPIRE Secretariat will have the following contracted staff: 
  Monitoring, Evaluation and Planning Specialist; 
  Knowledge Management and Communications Specialist; 
  Finance and Accounting Specialist (3 staff); 
  Cashier (2 staff); 
  Procurement Specialist (2 staff); 
  Administration Specialists (2 staff); 
  Support Staff (cleaner, 1 staff); 
  Drivers (9 staff). 
The following long-term advisers will work in ASPIRE Secretariat: 
  Chief Technical Adviser (international position); 
  Deputy Chief Technical Adviser; 
  Gender and Social Inclusion Adviser; 
  Social, Environment and Climate Change Adviser; 
  M&E and Planning Adviser; 
 
  Finance and Accounting Adviser; 
  Procurement Adviser. 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Adviser; 
The Project Manager is assigned to work full-time on implementation of ASPIRE-AT and is 
responsible to manage the staff and operations of the ASPIRE Secretariat. The Project Manager is 
responsible to coordinate with the Implementing Agencies.  
The general responsibilities of the Project Manager are as follows: 
  Responsible for the day to day activities of ASPIRE-AT implementation; 
32 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Ensures that ASPIRE-AT development objectives and goals are realized on time and within 
budget and is in line with the Project results framework; 
  Responsible for all procurement activities of ASPIRE Secretariat in accordance with the 
responsibilities defined in the Procurement Manual; 
  Approves and signs contracts and other important procurement documents within delegated 
authority as defined in the SOP Procurement Manual; 
  Ensures effective financial systems and procedures for accounting and financial management 
of the Project or TA activities are maintained; 
  Responsible for the employment and management of Project staff under ASPIRE Secretariat; 
  Supervises and maintains high level of performance by the Project and its staff; 
  Supervises and manages all contracting done by MAFF; 
  Maintains effective channels of communication with all stakeholders. 
  Ensures that all reports, papers and other information are made available in an orderly and 
timely manner. 
  Ensures that monitoring and evaluation activities generate the information necessary to 
support Project management. Furthermore, ensures that M&E is carried out following the 
ASPIRE-AT results-based framework; 
  Ensures that management actions are pro-active, adequate, and effective in responding to 
monitoring information and changing circumstances; 
  Receives instructions from and reports directly to the Project Director. 
  Holds only one Project manager position. 
Agriculture and Rural Development Bank 
21 
Agriculture and Rural Development Bank (ARDB) is the implementing agency for Sub-Component 
1.1: Investment in productive and resilient assets of POs and smallholders. ARDB will: 
  Operate one or more project sub-accounts [IFAD, EIB separate?]; 
 
  Apply amounts received as loan repayments to finance new loans under ASPIRE-AT until the 
Implement Sub-Component 1.1 activities; 
end of the project; 
  Report on project activities and results to ASPIRE Secretariat. 
ARDB will be assisted by one full-time Value Chain Financing Specialist who will be recruited by 
ARDB with participation from ASPIRE Secretariat. 
Small and Medium Enterprise Bank 
22 
Small and Medium Enterprise Bank (SME Bank) is the implementing agency for financial support to 
agri-businesses under Sub-Component 2.1: Strengthening private investment for agricultural market 
and trade development. 
SME Bank will: 
  Operate one or more project sub-accounts [IFAD, EIB separate?]; 
 
  Apply amounts received as loan repayments to finance new loans under ASPIRE-AT until the 
Implement Sub-Component 2.1; 
end of the project; 
  Report on project activities and results to ASPIRE Secretariat. 
Provincial Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries 
23 
Provincial Departments of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries are responsible for: 
  Conduct mapping of pro-poor value chains and producer organisations; 
  Conduct formation and registration of Agriculture Cooperatives;  
  Manage and coordinate networks of Lead Farmers including identifying training needs;  
  Cooperate with regional service providers for business development services to graduated 
  Project planning, monitoring and reporting at Provincial level. 
PDAFF does not operate a project sub-account, but receives and accounts for advances from 
ASPIRE Secretariat. 
33 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
The Director of PDAFF will be appointed as the Provincial Project Manager for ASPIRE-AT and will 
be supported by: 
  One M&E and Planning Officer; 
  One Agricultural Cooperative Officer. 
PDAFF will also be supported by one Provincial Management Adviser. 
24 
PROJECT PLANNING 
 This section of the PIM: 
  Describes the overall implementation plan of the project 
  Describes the process for setting annual targets 
  Describes the process for preparation of the Annual Workplan and Budget 
  Describes the process for submission and approval of Sub-Projects for EIB 
financing based on the AWPB 
Basis of Project Planning 
25 
Project planning is based on achieving the project results defined by the Project Logframe including 
the Mid-Term and Final targets for project outcomes and outputs. Project Planning should also take 
note of the output targets and expenditure targets in the Project Cost Tables. 
The Summary Project Implementation Plan table below shows approximate output targets by year as 
a basis for planning. 
Table 6: Summary Project Implementation Plan 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
2028 
Number of New Clusters Targeted 
5 
Number of Existing Formal POs 
Joining Project 
50 
5 
50 
6 
50 
50 
Number of New Formal POs 
Registered 
Number of New POs Reaching 
Graduation Status 
Number of Farmer Investments with 
ARDB Loan-Grant 
Number of PO Investments with 
ARDB Loan-Grant 
Number of POs with Infrastructure 
Investment 
50 
100 
100 
50 
50 
100 
100 
50 
1,000 
2,000 
3,000 
3,000 
1,000 
50 
100 
150 
150 
50 
50 
100 
100 
50 
Number of SME Supported 
10 
10 
10 
Number of SME with SME Bank Loan 
Implementation of Enabling 
Infrastructure Investments 
X 
5 
X 
5 
X 
34 
10 
5 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Implementation of Pilot Centre of 
Excellence 
X 
X 
X 
Cumulative Clusters 
5 
10 
16 
Cumulative POs Supported 
100 
250 
500 
Cumulative Graduated POs 
50 
150 
350 
16 
500 
500 
16 
500 
500 
16 
500 
500 
Cumulative Beneficiaries 
20,000  50,000  100,000  110,000  120,000  125,000 
Each year, the project reviews these targets and sets revised annual targets to keep the project on 
track to achieve the logframe targets. 
Annual targets are reflected in: 
  Cluster Workplans 
  Annual Workplan and Budget 
  Procurement Plan 
  Workplans of service providers 
 
Investments submitted for funding approval by EIB  
Preparation of AWPB 
Preparation of the ASPIRE-AT AWPB will begin in September of the previous year (i.e. preparation of 
AWPB for PY2 begins in September of PY1). The target is to send the AWPB to IFAD and EIB for No 
Objection in early December. 
September:  First  AWPB  Meeting  (ASPIRE  Secretariat,  implementing  agencies  and  MEF):  ASPIRE 
Secretariat sets output and expenditure targets for the following year, based on the logframe and the 
cost tables.  
October: Each implementing agency submits a draft AWPB. Implementing agencies are: 
  GDA 
  PDAFFs 
  ARDB 
  SME Bank. 
November: ASPIRE Secretariat checks the draft AWPB submissions for: 
  Compliance with agreed annual output targets; 
  Compliance with agreed expenditure targets; 
  Consistency with the Financing Agreement, Project Design Report, logframe, Cost Tables and 
PIM. 
The submission from each IA must include: 
  Summary of progress against output indicators, showing achievement expected up to the end 
of the current year, expected achievement during the next (AWPB) year, and targets defined in 
the PIM; 
  Summary of disbursement progress showing cumulative disbursement expected at the end of 
the current  year, planned disbursement by the end of the AWPB year, and  comparison with 
component disbursement profiles in the PIM. 
35 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
November:  ASPIRE  Secretariat  consolidates  these  figures  to  summarise  planned  progress  and 
disbursement for the project as a whole. 
Late November / early December: Second AWPB Meeting: ASPIRE Secretariat presents the completed 
draft AWPB for discussion and agreement. 
December: AWPB is submitted to MEF for review and endorsement. 
December: AWPB is submitted for No Objection to IFAD [and for information to EIB]. 
Work Plans for Service Providers 
Service Providers do not formally submit AWPB proposals, but implementing agencies should discuss 
with relevant service providers to ensure that the AWPB is compatible with the Service Provider 
contract, TOR and work-plan. Service Providers may be requested to adjust their work-plans to 
ensure delivery of the AWPB. 
EIB Investments 
[Investments to be financed by EIB are included in the AWPB. However, EIB will not issue No 
Objection to the AWPB and EIB investments are subject to a separate approval process. 
SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SAFEGUARDS AND CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION 
26 
 This section of the PIM: 
1.  Describes the framework for compliance with IFAD’s global standards for 
Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) and climate change adaptation. 
2.  Describes the EIB Environmental and Social Standards and the EIB Climate 
Strategy related to the project and requirements for compliance. 
3.  Summarises the requirements of the project Environmental, Social and Climate 
Management Framework and related documents 
27  Environmental, Social and Climate Safeguards Principles 
All project activities must comply with IFAD’s Environmental and Social Values and Principles. All 
components financed by the EIB shall comply with EIB Environmental and Social Standards12 and in-
line with EIB Climate Strategy13. All investments will need to be screened for compliance with these 
standards before financing of the investments can be approved. This includes productive assets for 
farmers and POs financed through ARDB; infrastructure under Sub-Component 1.2; investments by 
agri-businesses financed through SME Bank and public facilities financed under Sub-Components 2.2 
and 3.2.  
Assessments of IFAD Programmes’ impacts are governed by its 2020 SECAP14. This document 
contains minimum standards for the assessment of social, environmental and climate change risks to 
be applied in IFAD programmes and projects. 
12  EIB  (2018)  Environmental  and  Social  Standards  https://www.eib.org/en/publications/environmental-and-
social-standards  
13 EIB (2017 EIB Climate Strategy) https://www.eib.org/en/publications/eib-climate-strategy.htm  
14  IFAD  (2017):  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  –  Managing  risks  to  create 
opportunities. https://www.ifad.org/en/secap 
36 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
IFAD’s Social and Environmental Values and Principles 
 
 
 
 
 
Not knowingly finance projects that would contravene national laws.  
Not knowingly finance, directly or indirectly, activities mentioned in the IFAD exclusion list.  
Identify vulnerable people or groups who may be disproportionately affected by its projects and implement 
relevant mitigation measures.  
Promote the conservation, rehabilitation and sustainable use of natural resources and key ecosystems in an 
integrated manner.  
Recognize the importance of addressing both the causes and the consequences of climate change in the 
countries where IFAD operates.  
  Minimize adverse social and environmental impact.  
 
 
Address gender-based violence and discrimination and promote gender equality.  
Ensure stakeholder feedback, with special emphasis on the participation of, and benefits to, women, youth, 
people with disabilities and site-specific targeted groups.  
Improve the livelihoods of indigenous peoples and other marginalized groups.  
Avoid involuntary resettlement wherever possible.  
Promote sound agricultural and manufacturing processes.  
Undertake compliance monitoring.  
Ensure transparency and accountability throughout the life cycle of projects.  
 
 
 
 
 
  Mainstream social inclusion and environmental and climate sustainability into IFAD’s project cycle.  
 
 
Support borrowers/recipients/partners in achieving good international practices; and  
Focus on procurement processes to ensure that borrowers/recipients/partners require contractors to comply with 
SECAP. 
All IFAD projects are subject to an environmental, social and climate risk screening using the SECAP 
screening tool. Projects are assessed as being High, Substantial, Moderate or Low Risk. ASPIRE-AT 
has been assessed as Moderate Risk.  The climate risk category of the project is determined as 
substantial. 
Definition of Moderate Risk from SECAP Guideline 
A project should be classified as Moderate Risk when potential adverse risks and impacts on human populations or the environment 
are not likely to be significant. This may be because the project is not complex or large, does not involve activities with high potential 
for harming people or the environment, and is located away from environmentally or socially sensitive areas. The potential risks and 
impacts are: — Predictable and expected to be temporary or reversible; — Low in magnitude; — Site-specific, without the likelihood 
of impacts beyond the project life cycle; — Low probability of serious adverse effects to human health or the environment (e.g. they 
do not involve the use or disposal of toxic materials, or routine safety precautions are expected to be sufficient to prevent accidents); 
— The project’s risks and impacts can be easily mitigated in a predictable manner.  
Additionally, a project is classified as Moderate Risk when it finances one or more of the following activities: — Small dam or reservoir 
construction (between 5-9-metre high wall, and/or with a reservoir below 100,000 m3); — Construction of small-scale irrigation 
schemes rehabilitation/development (below 300 hectares per scheme); — New construction, rehabilitation or upgrade of rural roads 
(AADT below 400); and/or — Aquaculture or mariculture of less than 25 hectares on one site. 
All projects selected by EIB have to be acceptable in environmental and social terms. In this respect, 
EU policies and law form the basis of EIB’s environmental guidelines. The EIB’s Environmental and 
Social Standards cover ten main areas:  
  Assessment and management of environmental and social impacts and risks 
  Pollution prevention and abatement 
  EIB standards on biodiversity and ecosystems 
  EIB climate-related standards 
  Cultural heritage 
 
  Rights and interests of vulnerable groups 
  Labour standards 
  Occupational and public health, safety and security 
  Stakeholder engagement  
Involuntary resettlement 
37 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
The project must comply with national law and International Labour Organisation (ILO) standards for 
labour management. Contractors must be responsible to ensure occupational and community health 
and safety as part of their works contracts. 
28  Managing Environment and Social Risks 
Framework for Risk Management 
29 
The framework for environmental, climate and social risk management for ASPIRE-AT is the Royal 
Government of Cambodia’s (RGC) Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for internationally financed 
programmes/projects. This framework references compliance to RGC’s General Guidelines of the 
MEF and safeguard policies of co-financiers, in this case EIB’s Environmental and Social Standards, 
for components directly financed by EIB, and the International Fund for Agricultural Development’s 
(IFAD) Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) for those financed by 
IFAD.  
Environment, social and climate risk management in ASPIRE-AT is guided by a set of documents 
prepared during project preparation. These working documents are: 
  The Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF); 
  The Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plan (ESCMP); 
  The Indigenous People’s Plan (IPP); 
  The Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) Plan; 
  The Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHP). 
These documents are considered as forming a part of this PIM (they should be managed as a 
separate volume of the PIM). 
Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework (ESMF) 
30 
Most of the actual investments of ASPIRE-AT will be selected during project implementation. This 
includes investments for farmers and POs in Component 1 and investments for agri-businesses in 
Component 2. Some public facilities are pre-identified (trade infrastructure in Sub-Component 2.2 and 
Centres of Excellence in Sub-Component 3.2) but even in these cases, the investments, their 
locations and their technical designs need to be confirmed during project implementation. 
Therefore, an Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF) has been 
prepared to guide management of these risks. The ESCMF sets out the principles, rules, guidelines 
and procedures to assess all potential environmental and social risks and impacts of the Project. It 
recommends mitigation and avoidance mechanisms, including institutional capacities, monitoring 
arrangements and approximate costs. It is designed to be flexible and applicable to the Project 
activities throughout the implementation period, even though the Project activities may be subject to 
change. 
The ESCMF describes the steps required for screening and risk management for all investments. 
Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plan 
31 
The Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plan has been prepared as an annex to the 
ESCMF. The ESCMP is a matrix with the following contents: 
  Potential environmental, social and climate impacts of the project; 
  Types of investment / project activity that can trigger these risks; 
  Risk rating (e.g. high / substantial / moderate / low); 
  Recommended risk management measures; 
  Associated Public Consultation activities required; 
  Responsibilities;  
38 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Means of Verification; 
  Estimate of associated costs. 
Indigenous People’s Plan and Free, Prior and Informed Consent Plan 
32 
Indigenous People (IPs) participate in the value chains targeted by ASPIRE-AT and are amongst the 
intended target beneficiaries of the project. ASPIRE-AT targets that 1.5% of all beneficiaries will be 
IPs and this will be verified through project monitoring. IPs suffer additional disadvantages compared 
to farmers from the Khmer ethnic minority. For this reason, IPs receive priority for some project 
activities, particularly for financing packages through ARDB. 
The Indigenous People’s Plan (IPP) is a tool to ensure that the design and implementation of 
ASPIRE-AT will foster full respect for IPs’ identity, dignity, human rights, livelihood systems and 
cultural uniqueness, as defined by the IPs themselves. It: outlines the actions to minimize or 
compensate for any adverse impacts of projects; and identifies opportunities and actions to enhance 
the positive impacts of projects for IPs in a culturally appropriate manner.  
The IPP includes specific actions to be implemented by the project to maximise the benefits of the 
project to IPs and to avoid negative impacts. It includes (i) description of affected IPs and their 
locations; (ii) Summary of substantive rights and legal framework; (iii) summary of social and 
environmental assessment and mitigation measures; (iv) participation, consultation and FPIC 
processes; (v) appropriate benefits; (vi); capacity building; (vii) grievance redress; (vii) monitoring, 
reporting and evaluation; (ix) Institutional Arrangements; and (x) budget and financing.  
Any project activity affecting IPs must be subject to the Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) of 
the IP community. FPIC is the right of self-determination of indigenous peoples as recognized in the 
UNDRIP (article 23).  At IFAD, FPIC is considered as an operational instrument that empowers local 
and indigenous peoples’ communities, ensuring mutual respect and full and effective participation in 
decision-making on proposed investments that may affect their rights, their access to lands, territories 
and resources, and their livelihoods.15 
The ASPIRE-AT FPIC Plan sets out which project activities will require FPIC, the procedure to be 
followed and a format for an FIPIC agreement 
Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHMP) 
33 
The purpose of the CHMP is to manage risks and avoid negative impacts on cultural heritage arising 
from the project activities. Cultural heritage includes (i) tangible cultural heritage (assets and objects); 
(ii) immovable cultural heritage (e.g. buildings and ancient sites); (iii) moveable cultural heritage 
(moveable objects); (iv) intangible cultural heritage, which includes traditional arts, beliefs, 
ceremonies etc; (v) replicable cultural heritage; and (vi) non-replicable cultural heritage. 
The main objective and the scope of cultural heritage impact management as described in the CHMP 
are: 
 
Identifying the potential adverse impacts and risks relating to cultural heritage (both tangible 
and intangible) with each stage of the subproject by using the SECAP screening questions; 
  Categorising subproject impact and risks based on 4 categories (low, moderate, substantial 
and high); 
  Developing a stakeholder engagement plan and starting early public consultation meetings 
with relevant stakeholders to identify options to avoid potential adverse impacts and risks to 
cultural heritage, mainly for substantial and high-risk subprojects (screening potential impact 
or risks); 
  Assessing whether confidentiality of cultural heritage items may need to be included as part of 
information disclosure. 
15  https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/45407038/FPIC_call+to+action.pdf/025f9e41-a3c7-526e-c4ed-
1121ea857dee?t=1651070341888 
39 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
The CHMP defines the steps and procedures required to manage risks to cultural heritage following 
these principles. The CHMP must be implemented within the framework of the ESCMP. Where 
cultural heritage of IPs may be impacted, the CHMP and the IPP are implemented together. 
Environmental and Social Safeguards in Procurement Process   
Risk 
Rating 
Low 
Resource Efficiency and 
Pollution Prevention 
2.1 Could the project involve or lead 
to the release of pollutants to the 
environment due to routine or non-
routine circumstances with the 
potential for adverse local, regional, 
and/or transboundary impacts? 
2.3 Could the project involve or lead 
to engagement in areas of forestry, 
including the harvesting of natural 
forests, plantation development, 
and/or reforestation? 
2.6 Could the project involve inputs 
of fertilizers and other modifying 
agents? 
2.7 Could the project involve or lead 
to procurement, supply and/or 
result in the use of pesticides on 
crops, livestock, aquaculture or 
forestry? 
Low 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Risk 
Rating 
Moderate 
Cultural Heritage 
3.1 Could the project be located in 
areas that are considered to have 
archaeological (prehistoric), 
paleontological, historical, cultural, 
artistic, and religious values or 
contains features considered as 
critical cultural heritage? 
3.2 Could the project directly or 
indirectly affect indigenous peoples’ 
Moderate 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Minor 
Pollutants may possibly 
be released, either 
routinely or by accident, 
but treatment systems 
are proven and verified. 
Receiving environment 
has absorptive 
capacity.  
Negligible 
The project will not 
involve engagement of 
forestry in any form 
Minor 
The project only 
requires minimal 
amounts of fertilizer  
Minor 
The project only 
requires minimal 
amounts of pesticide.  
Consequence 
Minor 
The project is thought 
to be close to an area 
that is considered to 
have archaeological 
(prehistoric), 
paleontological, 
historical, cultural, 
artistic, and religious 
values or contains 
features considered as 
critical cultural heritage. 
The site has been 
comprehensively 
surveyed, and all 
tanglible and intangible 
cultural heritage is well 
known.  
Minor 
40 
Include in the technical 
specifications that the 
project will only use 
approved pesticides 
and respect WHO-FAO 
codes for safe labelling, 
packaging, handling, 
storage, application and 
disposals of pesticides. 
Ensure zero-
deforestation clauses 
are included in project 
contracts. 
Include a list of 
approved/certified 
chemicals in tender 
documents. 
Include in the technical 
specifications that the 
project will only use 
approved pesticides 
and respect WHO-FAO 
codes for safe labelling, 
packaging, handling, 
storage, application and 
disposals of pesticides. 
Include the list of 
approved pesticides in 
the tender documents. 
Guidance for SPOs 
In consultation with the 
Lead Implementing 
Agency, ensure 
whenever possible that 
bidder qualifications for 
contractors intervening 
in areas that have 
cultural heritage include 
previous experience in 
carrying out works in 
similar settings. 
In consultation with the 
lead implementing 
Minor impact to 
indigenous population. 
No damage to/or loss of 
access to indigenous 
land, assets, resources, 
and/or cultural heritage.  
agency, ensure 
whenever possible that:  
- Bidder qualification to 
include previous work 
experience in similar 
projects in the vicinity or 
with likelihood of 
presence of tangible 
heritage sites.  
- Technical 
specifications 
encourage use of local 
knowledge (intangible 
heritage). 
Risk 
Rating 
Moderate 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Minor 
The project operates in 
a sector, area, or value 
chain where workers 
are occasionally 
exposed to significant 
OSH risks, and where 
regulation is known to 
be effective.  
Provisions on OSH to 
be included in 
qualification and 
contract condition in 
consultation with the 
implementing agencies. 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
rights, lands, natural resources, 
territories, livelihoods, knowledge, 
social fabric, traditions, governance 
systems, and culture or heritage 
(tangible and intangible)? 
Labour and Working Conditions 
5.4 Could the project: (a) operate in 
a sector, area or value chain where 
producers and other agricultural 
workers are typically exposed to 
significant occupational and safety 
risks, and/or (b) promote or use 
technologies or practices that pose 
occupational safety and health 
(OSH) risks for farmers, other rural 
workers or rural populations in 
general? (Note: OSH risks in 
agriculture might include: 
dangerous machinery and tools; 
hazardous chemicals; toxic or 
allergenic agents; carcinogenic 
substances or agents; parasitic 
diseases; transmissible animal 
diseases; confined spaces; 
ergonomic hazards; extreme 
temperatures; and contact with 
dangerous and poisonous animals, 
reptiles and insects. Psychosocial 
hazards might include violence and 
harassment.) 
Community Health, Safety and 
Security 
6.5 Could the project involve or lead 
to transport, storage, and use 
and/or disposal of hazardous or 
dangerous materials (e.g. 
explosives, fuel and other 
chemicals during construction and 
operation)? 
Risk 
Rating 
Moderate 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Minor 
The project has only 
minor involvement with 
the transport, storage, 
and use and/or disposal 
of hazardous or 
dangerous materials, 
and regulation of 
hazardous materials is 
effective.  
Minor 
Minor changes to 
community dynamics. 
Resulting serious 
recorded cases of 
gender-based violence 
and/or sexual 
exploitation. Gender-
based violence 
protocols in place.  
Include in the technical 
specifications that the 
project will only use 
approved pesticides 
and respect WHO-FAO 
codes for safe labelling, 
packaging, handling, 
storage, application and 
disposals of pesticides. 
Include in the general 
clauses of the bidding 
documents of suppliers, 
subcontractors and 
service providers 
compliance with IFAD's 
policy on preventing 
and responding to 
sexual harassment, 
exploitation and sexual 
abuse and mandatory 
41 
Moderate 
6.7 Could the project lead to the 
potential for gender-based violence, 
including sexual harassment, 
exploitation and abuse, as a result 
of labour influx, land redistribution, 
or other actions that alter 
community dynamics? 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
6.8 Could the project lead to 
increases in traffic or alteration in 
traffic flow? 
Moderate 
references to security 
policies will be included 
in tender documents 
and concluded 
contracts. 
Applicable traffic rules 
and road safety 
measures in the rural 
road network will need 
to be adhered to and 
road signs installed as 
needed according to 
the national regulations. 
Moderate 
Moderate changes to 
traffic volumes or 
alterations to traffic 
flow. Risk of injury or 
death is reduced by 
good design and 
implementation of 
safety protocols. New 
construction, 
rehabilitation or 
upgrade of rural roads, 
with Annual Average 
Daily Traffic (AADT) 
below 400  
Financial intermediaries and 
direct investments 
8.1 Could the investment be 
granted to an institution that does 
not have an environmental and 
social policies and an associated 
environmental and social 
management system (ESMS) in 
place (transparent, publicly 
available)? 
Risk 
Rating 
Moderate 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Minor 
The institution has an 
ESMS in place. Reports 
are not publicly 
available.  
Agreements with the FI 
should include a 
requirement for a 
functional ESMS. 
The agreement clauses 
should include the 
submission by FIs, in a 
form acceptable to 
IFAD, of annual 
environmental and 
social reports on the 
implementation of the 
ESMS and on-lending 
operations. 
Agreements with the FI 
should include a 
requirement for a 
functional ESMS 
including capacity to 
effectively implement it. 
8.2 Could the investment be 
granted to an institution with 
insufficient capacities (i.e. 
unqualified personnel e.g. ES 
Officer) to implement the ESMS? 
Moderate 
Minor 
The institution employs 
an ES Officer, and 
employs field staff to 
implement the ESMS.  
IMPLEMENTATION RESPONSIBILITIES 
ASPIRE Secretariat 
34 
35 
ASPIRE Secretariat has overall responsibility for ensuring the implementation of the ESCMF, the 
ESCMP, the IPP, the FPIC Plan and the CHMP. ASPIRE Secretariat will appoint a Social, 
Environment and Climate Change Specialist to assist in implementing and monitoring these 
instruments. 
ASPIRE Secretariat will: 
  Manage the ESCMF, the ESCMP, the IPP, the FPIC Plan and the CHMP as components of 
this PIM, including updating the documents where necessary; 
  Develop specific screening formats for different project activities as necessary; 
42 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Ensure that all project implementing agencies are aware of their responsibilities to implement 
the ESCMP and other instruments; 
  Provide capacity building to project implementing agencies as necessary; 
  Monitor implementation of the ESCMP and other instruments; 
  Report to GoKC, IFAD and EIB on implementation. 
Responsibilities of Implementing Agencies 
36 
Each implementing agency including MAFF-GDA, ARDB, SME Bank and PDAFFs is responsible to 
implement the ESCMP and other instruments for project activities within its areas of responsibility. 
Service providers (e.g. capacity building service providers for POs in Component 3) must also be 
aware of the ESCMP and implement its procedures where relevant. 
The main responsibility for screening project activities for social, environmental and climate risks will 
be with: 
  ARDB, for investments in Sub-Component 1.1. ARDB will conduct social, environmental and 
climate risk screening as part of its screening and due diligence procedures; 
  SME Bank, for investments in Sub-Component 2.1. SME Bank will conduct social, 
environmental and climate risk screening as part of its screening and due diligence 
procedures; 
  Technical consultants engaged for feasibility study and design of infrastructure investments 
(sub-component 1.2), trade facilitation infrastructure facilities (sub-component 2.2) and 
Centres of Excellence (sub-component 3.2). For all these investments, social, environmental 
and climate risk screening and development of site-specific risk management plans must be 
part of the TORs of the consultants. 
Farmers, POs and Agri-Businesses 
37 
All farmers, POs and agri-businesses receiving project support must commit to avoid negative 
environmental, social and climate impacts. 
In the case of POs, capacity building for environmental, social and climate risk management 
(awareness, screening and risk management measures) will be part of the capacity building 
programme provided by the service provider in Component 3. 
Contractors 
38 
Site-specific Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plans will be developed for each 
infrastructure investment. These plans will become part of the contract between the project and the 
contractor. 
In addition, standard contract conditions will require contractors to comply with labour laws and 
standards, follow correct waste management procedures and avoid negative impacts on the 
environment or on the health and safety of the local community. 
GENDER ACTION PLAN 
39 
 This section of the PIM describes how gender mainstreaming principles will be 
implemented in ASPIRE-AT through a Gender Action Plan. 
ASPIRE-AT is a Gender Transformative Project.  
40 
A gender transformative project actively seeks to transform gendered power dynamics by addressing 
social norms, practices, attitudes, beliefs and value systems that represent structural barriers to 
women’s and girls’ inclusion and empowerment. 
43 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
ASPIRE-AT Gender Action Plan 
41 
As a Gender Transformative Project, ASPIRE-AT will adopt and implement a Gender Action Plan. 
The  Gender  Action  Plan  will  be  based  on  the  Gender  Strategy  included  in  the  ASPIRE-AT  Social 
Inclusion Strategy. 
The  Gender  Strategy  identifies  three  strategic  pathways  for  gender  equality  and  women’s 
empowerment will be followed: 
  Promote economic empowerment to enable rural women and men to have equal opportunities 
to participate in and benefit from profitable economic activities; 
  Enable  women  and  men  to  have  an  equal  voice  and  influence  in  rural  institutions  and 
organizations; and, 
  Achieve a more equitable balance of workloads and the sharing of economic and social benefits 
between women and men. 
The  Gender  Action  Plan  will  be  prepared  through  consultation  with  ASPIRE  Secretariat,  IFAD,  EIB, 
implementing agencies and stakeholders including representatives of farmer organisations.  
The MAFF Gender Focal Point will be invited to participate in preparation of the ASPIRE-AT Gender 
Action  Plan  and  ensure  alignment  with  the  gender  mainstreaming  policies,  strategies  and  plans  of 
MAFF. 
Ministry of Women’s Affairs will participate in preparation of the GAP in an advisory role. 
The Gender Action Plan will be reviewed by IFAD and the EIB during project supervision. The Gender 
Action Plan will be updated as needed during project implementation. 
The Gender Action Plan will also ensure contributions to the three IFAD Gender Policy objectives 
(promote economic empowerment; enable women and men to have equal voice and influence; 
achieve a more equitable balance in workloads and in the sharing of economic and social benefits). 
Implementation of the Gender Action Plan 
42 
The  following  arrangements  will  be  made  to  ensure  that  gender  is  taken  into  account  in  the 
implementation of ASPIRE-AT: 
  Setting quota for women as a percentage of beneficiaries 
  Carrying out information campaigns and outreach events targeting women 
  Budget allocation for specific gender-related activities 
  One person in the project management team will be responsible for gender and social inclusion 
issues (overseeing the implementation of the gender strategy, building the capacity of staff and 
helping  colleagues  to  address  considerations  related  to  gender  equality  and  women’s 
empowerment  in  their  operations,  including  knowledge  management,  M&E,  indicators  and 
measurement of results) 
  Use of female service providers 
  The studies undertaken by the project will include a gender perspective 
  Gender parity will be encouraged in the PMU 
  Responsibility for gender mainstreaming  will be included in the terms of reference of all key 
 
project staff and service providers 
In  all  its  activities,  compliance  with  IFAD's  policy  on  preventing  and  combating  sexual 
harassment,  exploitation  and  abuse  will  be  sought.  This  will  be  reflected  in  the  terms  of 
reference of all key project staff and service providers. 
  Data  disaggregated  by  sex  and  age  will  be  collected  and  analysed.  In  addition,  IFAD’s 
empowerment indicator will be monitored. 
Monitoring of the Gender Action Plan 
43 
The Gender Promotion Officer in ASPIRE Secretariat will be responsible for monitoring implementation 
of  the  Gender  Action  Plan  in  all  project  components,  sub-components  and  activities.  The  Gender 
Promotion Officer will be assisted by the Gender and Social Inclusion Adviser. 
44 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
The MAFF Gender Focal Point will be invited to participate in monitoring implementation of the ASPIRE-
AT Gender Action Plan. 
MoWA will conduct external monitoring of the Gender Action Plan. A small budget will be made available 
to MoWA for this purpose. 
44 
MECHANISM 
PROJECT TARGET GROUP ENGAGEMENT AND FEEDBACK, AND GRIEVANCE 
 This section of the PIM describes principles and procedures for stakeholder engagement 
in implementation of ASPIRE-AT including active participation of beneficiaries in planning, 
implementation  and  M&E.  The  section  describes  transparency  arrangements  including 
public release of project documents and management of issues and complaints raised by 
stakeholders. 
Feedback Mechanisms 
45 
The purpose of target group engagement and feedback mechanisms is to allow the target groups and 
their organizations to participate in a meaningful and continuous way in the planning, monitoring, 
implementation and evaluation of project interventions.  
Target group engagement and feedback processes will be centred on the supported POs and their 
members. Core elements embedded in the design to ensure target group priorities drive project 
investments, ensure regular feedback and lead to adjustment of interventions where necessary 
include: 
  PO capacity building so they graduate to become independent self-managing organizations 
engaged in the market and local development processes. This includes building their capacity 
to establish and manage networks and relationships, engage in local policy and decision-
making processes to represent their interests (e.g. with Commune Council, local value chain 
coordination groups such as multi-stakeholder platforms). Specialist Service Providers will 
deliver tailored packages of capacity development support to enable the POs to achieve 
graduation status and prepare business plans eligible for investment under Component 1; 
  POs and their members will determine for themselves their priorities for investment support 
from the project, with technical assistance from the Specialist Service Providers through the 
bespoke capacity building and business planning process above; 
  Establishing good governance within POs to ensure the POs represent the interests of their 
members, including capacity building of all members on good practices and tools for PO 
operation and governance to enhance confidence and transparency within the PO; 
  Ensure POs are inclusive in their membership, so that voices and interests of marginalized 
groups are also represented. While the project will primarily work with existing POs, such as 
those supported by ASPIRE and AIMS, the capacity strengthening process will also involve 
mobilization of additional group members from those interested but initially excluded from 
existing groups where opportunities exist to do so. This will be based on communication with 
existing members to highlight the advantages to the group of being larger and more dynamic 
and, therefore, able to maintain stronger relationship with buyers. Thus, it is in the interest of 
existing members to increase the size and inclusiveness of groups; 
  Cluster-level feedback across networks of POs: The project will build on the cluster 
development process initiated by ASPIRE and AIMS. These will involve periodic meetings 
between networks of POs and businesses involved in the supported VCs in an area, typically 
at the district or province cluster level. These multi-stakeholder industry meetings provide an 
important regular mechanism for the priorities and feedback from POs to influence project 
priorities and also the agenda of other support agencies and government authorities that will 
also participate in these open events. Building the capacity of POs to be able to effectively 
45 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
participate in these meetings and process is an important part of ensuring effective feedback 
and advocacy of the interests of the POs and their members; 
  Results-based contracts with service providers: Contract with specialist service providers 
supporting POs will include key performance measures linked to payments, including i) 
capacity outcomes and ii) PO satisfaction with the services provided.  
  Data, quantitative and qualitative, related to beneficiary engagement and feedback will be 
 
collected and analysed at three levels: 
Individual beneficiary level. The project MIS, as highlighted above, will capture individual 
farmer profiles and data on crops, revenues and expenditures updated annually on all 
members of POs. This provides a data rich environment to assess what is working and what 
is not for different groups or individuals. The farmer diaries and other tools will be adapted to 
allow individuals to provide feedback to the project on their emerging priorities and on the 
services received from the project to date. In addition, the project will use periodic household 
surveys that include satisfaction and IFAD empowerment indicators. 
PO-level feedback will be integrated into the regular tracking and backstopping process for PO 
capacity strengthen by the contracted Specialist Service Providers (Component 3). This is expected 
to include the use of standardized capacity assessment tools to be used by the POs themselves as 
part of the tailored capacity building package provided to each PO. These will be monitored annually 
by the Secretariat including feedback from the PO on the services received as part of the results—
based contract of the Specialist Service Providers.  
Cluster-level: Emerging priorities and feedback from networks of POs at the cluster level will be 
captured and reflected from the periodic cluster meetings between networks of POs and business and 
documented in regularly updated cluster development plans. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
46 
The Project will establish an accessible and transparent process for those affected by the Project to 
make complaints, report wrongdoing, or seek redress in compliance with the Revised IFAD Policy on 
Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations, and IFAD’s Policy on Preventing and 
Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) 2018.  
The project will establish confidential reporting mechanisms using dedicated accounts on social 
media, email, and a telephone hotline for reporting complaints. Existence and details of these 
reporting channels will be widely publicly promoted via Project communication materials and platforms 
and communicated directly to POs and their members through the capacity building processes. 
The Project will document and establish an independent process for reviewing and handling 
complaints received consistent with government regulations and IFAD policies. The Project will, as a 
minimum, produce 6 monthly reports on complaints and grievance redress included in their regular 
progress report. This will, as a minimum, include the number and types of complaints received, 
progress in dealing with each complaint and resulting resolution and actions taken. 
All contracts for Project personnel, contractors, service providers and third parties receiving Project 
funding must include: i) provisions prohibiting acts of sexual harassment or SEA; ii) provisions to 
establish the obligation to immediately report to MAFF and competent national authorities, on 
incidents of harassment and/or SEA in connection with the actions and activities established in the 
contract; iii) provisions to allow contract termination based on proven acts of sexual harassment 
and/or SEA. 
Complaints and concerns may be raised through one of the following channels: 
  Directly with project staff and consultants; 
  Through local authorities; 
  By telephone to ASPIRE Secretariat; 
  Through the ASPIRE website. 
46 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Contact numbers for ASPIRE Secretariat and details of how to communicate with the project through 
the website will be disseminated to stakeholders in the project areas. 
ASPIRE Secretariat will follow a formal procedure to record and investigate any issues or complaints 
raised. The procedure will be consistent with SOP Manual Section C Sub-section (viii), paragraph 43. 
The following procedure is followed: 
One staff member of ASPIRE Secretariat will be assigned to record and manage issues and 
complaints; 
All ASPIRE Secretariat staff members, implementing agencies and consultants must know that if an 
issue or complaint is raised, unless they can solve the problem immediately, they must notify the 
responsible staff member in ASPIRE Secretariat; 
The responsible staff member must keep a clear record including: 
  Date the complaint or issue was notified; 
  How the complaint or issue was notified; 
  Name and contact number of the person raising the issue or complaint, if known; 
  Details of the issue of complaint, including exact information such as dates, places etc if 
known; 
  After recording the issue or complaint, the responsible staff member reports to the Project 
Manager who decides what action to take; 
  All issues and complaints should be followed up. Findings and actions taken must be 
recorded by the responsible staff member. 
  The records of the issues and complaints procedure must be available for inspection by the 
IFAD supervision mission and for audit. 
In addition, project stakeholders have the right to raise grievances through other channels as 
described in the SOP Manual Section C Sub-section (viii), paragraph 43. Procurement related 
complaints are handled in accordance with SOP Manual Section G sub-section 5, paragraph 139. 
One advantage of an effective system for responding to issues and complaints internally is that 
stakeholders do not feel they need to refer issues and complaints to outside institutions. 
47 
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
  This  section  of  the  PIM  describes  the  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  arrangements  for 
ASPIRE-AT including: 
  Purpose of M&E and knowledge management; 
  Types of data collected; 
  M&E tools (methods of data collection); 
  M&E responsibilities; 
  How  new  knowledge  and  lessons  learned  from  ASPIRE-AT  implementation  is 
identified, documented and shared. 
48 
Basis of ASPIRE-AT M&E System 
The ASPIRE-AT M&E System complies with standards and guidelines from GoKC, from IFAD and from 
the EIB. In particular, it conforms with: 
  The IFAD Online Results Monitoring System (ORMS); 
  The Evaluation Manual prepared by IFAD’s Independent Office of Evaluation (IOE); 
 
  M&E requirements of RGC’s Standard Operating Procedures (SOP). 
IFAD Knowledge Management Strategy; and 
47 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
In line with IFAD’s global Development Effectiveness Framework, M&E and Knowledge Management 
in ASPIRE-AT will be guided by the following objectives: 
  Strengthening the focus on results through the project cycle; 
  Enhancing self-evaluation and learning for results; 
  Fostering and the use of evidence in project management. 
49 
Purpose of M&E and Knowledge Management 
M&E and Knowledge Management in ASPIRE-AT has the following purposes: 
  Measure  and  assess  progress  towards  the  Project  Development  Objective  and  the  project 
Outreach target; 
  Measure  and  demonstrate  the  results  (Outputs,  Outcomes  and  Impacts)  achieved  by  the 
project; 
  Ensure project management have full, accurate and timely information on progress including 
identifying challenges and formulating responses; 
  Ensuring IFAD project supervision has adequate information to assess project performance; 
  Measure Value for Money: cost of achieving the outputs. Where possible, Value for Money will 
also measure the cost of achieving outcomes; 
  Raise awareness of project achievements, share knowledge and support partnership building. 
Project Monitoring Data 
50 
The ASPIRE-AT M&E system measures the following types of data: 
  Type, quantity, location and cost of all project outputs; 
  Where relevant, number of direct beneficiaries of all project outputs, (number of smallholders, 
women, youth, persons with disabilities, IPs); 
  Supported POs and their main activities; 
  Data on PO leadership and staff; 
  PO sales contracts and enterprises, with results (volume and value of sales etc) and 
employment of labour by the PO; 
  Aggregate data on PO members (number of members, smallholders, women, youth, IPs, 
persons with disabilities, with number who are active in each targeted value chain); 
  Farm data on production of target value chain commodities (land, household labour, paid 
labour and cash inputs used; yield; sales quantity, sales value) – these data should be 
collected for a sample of farmers in each PO plus all farmers receiving individual grant 
financing; 
  Data on financing packages (loans and grants) including repayments, defaults etc. under 
Sub-Component 1.1 and Sub-Component 2.1; 
  Data on beneficiary contribution to investments under Sub-Components 1.1, 1.2 and 2.1; 
  Data on results of investments under Sub-Components 2.2 and 3.2 (for each capital 
investment, the data to be reported will be specified in the feasibility study report); 
Indicators in the project logframe. There are four levels of indicators: 
o 
o  Output Indicators 
o  Outcome Indicators 
o 
Impact Indicators 
o  Outreach indicator. 
  Additional indicators in the COSOP results framework; 
  Progress indicators including: 
o  Achievement against annual targets in the AWPB; 
  Additional qualitative information (that cannot be expressed in numbers). This includes: 
o  Beneficiary satisfaction: what are the views of the project beneficiaries on ASPIRE-
o 
AT process and outputs? 
Information on how the project outputs resulted in the observed outcomes (cause and 
effect); 
o  Lessons learned from project implementation; 
48 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
o  Opportunities identified (e.g. activities that are not in ASPIRE-AT design but could 
contribute effectively to the project objectives, if added to ASPIRE-AT or included in a 
future project). 
51 
Data Collection Tools 
ASPIRE-AT monitoring data is collected using the following tools: 
  Regular uploading of data to the management information system ASPIRE-AT MIS by service 
providers and implementing agencies; 
  Reporting by financial institutions (ARDB and SME Bank); 
  Reporting by Service Providers; 
  Data collected through mobile applications; 
  Outcome Survey. 
ASPIRE-AT MIS 
52 
ASPIRE-MIS will be an upgraded version of the existing ASPIRE-MIS. 
Types of data captures in ASPIRE-MIS are shown in the table below. 
Type of Data 
Entered by 
ASPIRE-MIS  ASPIRE-AT 
MIS 
53 
Outcome Survey 
Purpose and Indicators 
The primary purpose of the Outcome Survey is to measure progress against the Outreach, Objective 
level and Outcome level indicators in the Project Logframe. The Outcome Survey will also collect data 
needed for measurement of indicators in the COSOP Results Framework. The Outcome Survey will 
also collect background data to demonstrate the effectiveness of the ASPIRE-AT project approach and 
to improve knowledge for further development of IFAD Country Program strategy. 
Many of the indicators to be measured by  the Outcome Survey are IFAD Core Indicators (CI). Core 
indicators are defined in the IFAD Core Indicator Framework and the method for measurement of these 
indicators  is  given  in  IFAD’s  Core  Indicator  Measurement  Guidelines.  The  detailed  design  of  the 
Outcome Survey (sampling, survey instrument design, analysis) must comply with these guidelines for 
IFAD Core Indicators. 
The indicators to be measured by the Outcome Survey are shown in the following table. IFAD Core 
Indicator are indicated by CI, SF (Stakeholder Feedback) or IE (empowerment) followed by a number 
in the form x.x (e.g. CI 1.1) or x.x.x (e.g. CI 1.1.1). 
49 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Level 
Indicator 
Baseline 
Mid-
Term 
End 
Target 
Objective 
# of rural households with 
household income increased 
by at least 20% 
Number of household members 
Male, female, youth, IPs, 
persons with disabilities 
SF 2.1 Number of households 
satisfied with project supported 
services 
SF 2.2 Number of households 
reporting that they can 
influence decision-making of 
local authorities and project-
supported service providers 
IE 2.1 Individuals 
demonstrating an improvement 
in empowerment (IFAD 
empowerment index) 
Number of beneficiary 
households with labour 
productivity increasing in line 
with ADP targets (8% p.a.) 
n/a 
20,000 
50,000 
n/a 
BL 
BL 
70,000 
BL+25% 
50,000 
Outcome 
CI 2.2.1 Persons with new jobs 
/ employment opportunities 
n/a 
25,000 
CI 3.2.2 Number of households 
reporting adoption of 
environmentally sustainable 
and climate-resilient 
technologies and practices. 
CI 1.2.2  Households 
reporting adoption of 
new/improved inputs, 
technologies or practices 
CI 1.2.3  Households 
reporting reduced water 
shortage vis-à-vis production 
needs 
CI 2.2.6  Households 
reporting improved physical 
access to markets, processing 
and storage facilities 
50 
COSOP 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Sampling Strategy 
The Outcome Survey will consist of two randomly selected sub-samples which will be: 
  Smallholder households that are members of POs supported by the project; and 
 
ID-Poor households from the list of ID-Poor households in the geographic areas served by the 
POs. 
The ID-Poor households are selected as a proxy for households living by wage labour and therefore 
likely to benefit from employment opportunities created by the project. 
Sampling will be conducted on a rolling baseline basis. Each year in Project Years 1, 2 and 3, a 
random sample of Producer Organisations entering the project (i.e. beginning to receive project 
support) will be selected.  The sampling frame for smallholder households will be the membership list 
of the PO, excluding those members who are not smallholders. The sampling frame for ID-Poor 
households will be the list of ID-Poor households in the same Communes where the smallholder 
sample households live.  Some households may appear on both lists (i.e. if the smallholder PO 
member household has an ID-Poor card). If, in the final sample, any household appears in both the 
smallholder sample and the ID-Poor sample, an additional smallholder sample household will be 
drawn. 
Households sampled in Year 1 will be interviewed again in Year 3 prior to the project Mid-Term 
Review. All sample households will be interviewed again in Year 6 (the final year of the project).  
Survey Instrument 
One survey instrument will be used for baseline, mid-term and end-line surveys. The same survey 
instrument will be used for smallholder and ID-Poor sample households (though some modules in the 
survey instrument will not be relevant). 
The survey instrument will be developed in compliance with the guidance in IFAD’s Core Indicator 
Measurement Guidelines. 
Analysis and Reporting of Survey Results 
Data analysis and reporting of survey results will apply appropriate statistical methods to demonstrate 
the statistical significance of any changes observed. At a minimum, all statistics (e.g. average values 
obtained for an indicator) will be reported with a margin of error at 95% confidence level.  
  For example, the sample finds an average farm income of $1,000 per hectare for a target 
crop. The margin of error is calculated as $100. That means we are 95% certain that the 
“true” value for all farmers – not just those in the sample – is more than $900 and less than 
$1,100.  
Reporting and Knowledge Management 
The following methods are used to analyse and report the data collected by the ASPIRE-AT M&E 
system: 
  Project Website 
  Project Dashboard 
  Geographic Information System (GIS) 
  Semi-Annual and Annual Reports; 
  Value for Money Analysis 
  Updated Project Logframe; 
  Updated COSOP Results Framework; 
  Knowledge Products 
51 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
54 
Project Website 
ASPIRE-AT will continue to manage and update the ASPIRE website  https://aspirekh.org 
The purpose of the project website is to:  
  Present information about the purpose and design of ASPIRE-AT 
  Link to other websites related to the IFAD Country Program 
  Summarise progress 
  Highlight achievements 
 
  Download knowledge products 
  Find contact information 
  Submit complaints, if necessary. 
Include links to the MIS, the Project Dashboard, GIS etc 
55 
Project Dashboard 
The Project Dashboard is a summary of project progress. It is based on information in the MIS, financial 
reporting and IFAD Supervision Mission reports. The Project Dashboard includes: 
  Target areas, beneficiaries and activities 
  Progress to AWPB targets 
  Outputs 
  Outcomes (based on the Outcome Survey) 
  Updated Project Logframe 
  Disbursement by component 
  Performance Ratings, based on Supervision Mission reports. 
56 
Geographic Information System (GIS) 
The  Geographic  Information  System  (GIS)  will  analyse  and  present  data  using  maps  and  charts  to 
illustrate: 
  Locations of ASPIRE-AT Cluster areas, POs etc; 
  Number, location and type of beneficiaries 
  Characteristics of the Cluster areas 
  Outcome Indicators, by Cluster areas 
  Other geographic data that helps users to understand the progress and results of ASPIRE-AT. 
57 
Six-Month and Annual Reports 
Six-Month and Annual Reports are summary reports based on data collected. There should be no need 
to collect additional data specifically for the Six-Month and Annual Reports. Most data are in the MIS or 
are based on financial reports. The Six-Month report should include a short narrative section focussing 
on challenges and proposed solutions. The Annual Report should have a longer narrative section but 
there is no need for the narrative to repeat the information presented in tables. 
Each implementing agency is responsible to prepare a six-month and annual progress report. Minimum 
requirements for the six-month and annual progress reports are: 
  Activities completed 
  Outputs completed 
  Progress against AWPB targets 
  Disbursement (the six-month report should include an updated projection of disbursement up 
to the end of the year); 
  The Annual Report should include results of the Annual Outcome Survey (after PY3) 
  Challenges faced and proposed solutions. 
The Six Month and Annual Progress Reports shall contain the following information for EIB: 
52 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  A brief update on the EIB Technical Description, explaining the reasons for significant changes 
vs. initial scope; 
  Update  on  the  date  of  completion  of  each  of  the  main  project  activities  and  sub-projects, 
explaining reasons for any possible delay; 
  Update on the cost of the project, explaining reasons for any possible cost variations vs. initial 
budgeted cost; 
  A description of any major issue with impact on the environment; 
  Update of the procurement plan; 
  Update on the project’s demand or usage and comments; 
  Any  significant  issue  that  has  occurred  and  any  significant  risk  that  may  affect  the  project’s 
operation; 
  Any legal action concerning the project that may be on-going; 
  Non-confidential project-related pictures, if available. 
The Six-Month Report must be submitted to MEF, EIB and IFAD no later than 31 July each year. The 
Six-Month report  is  a summary factual report about  physical  implementation  of the project. The  Six-
Month Report is submitted together with the six-month Financial Progress Report.  
Post-Completion Report 
58 
The  following  information  on  project  completion  and  initial  operation  shall  be  provided  to  EIB 
approximately 15 months after completion. 
Project Post-Completion Report, including:  
  A  final  Technical  Description  of  the  project  as  completed,  explaining  the  reasons  for  any 
significant change compared to the Technical Description in A.1.; 
  The date of completion of each of the main project’s components, explaining reasons for any 
possible delay; 
  The  final  cost  of  the  project,  explaining  reasons  for  any  possible  cost  variations  vs.  initial 
budgeted cost; 
  Employment  effects  of  the  project:  person-days  required  during  implementation  as  well  as 
permanent new jobs created; 
  A description of any major issue with impact on the environment or social impacts; 
  Update on procurement procedures and explanation of deviations from the procurement plan; 
  Update on the project’s demand or usage and comments; 
  Any  significant  issue  that  has  occurred  and  any  significant  risk  that  may  affect  the  project’s 
operation; 
  Any legal action concerning the project that may be on going; 
  Non-confidential project-related pictures, if available. 
59 
Value for Money Analysis 
The purpose of Value for Money (VFM) Analysis is to analyse the costs of producing each type of output 
in the ASPIRE-AT logframe, including: 
  Cost per unit of output; 
  Cost per beneficiary; 
  Cost of achieving Outcome Indicators, based on the Outcome Survey from PY3 on. 
The Value for Money Analysis should not only present data on ASPIRE-AT but should compare: 
  Are ASPIRE-AT costs the same, higher or lower than costs of similar outputs in other projects? 
If they are higher or lower, what is the reason? 
  Can we learn which types of outputs contribute most cost-effectively to outcomes? 
VFM is based on information on outputs and costs in the MIS and on data from ASPIRE-AT financial 
reports. 
53 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
The VFM Analysis should be reported annually in the Annual Report. 
Updated Project Logframe 
Each  year,  the  Project  Logframe  (Annex  1)  is  updated  based  on  the  latest  available  information  on 
indicators at each level (Output, Outcome and Impact). 
The project logframe should be updated in preparation for the IFAD Supervision Mission each year. 
The Updated Project Logframe can be accessed on the Project Website and is annexed to the Project 
Annual Report. 
Updated COSOP Results Framework 
Each  year,  ASPIRE-AT  provides  data  on  the  contribution  made  by  ASPIRE-AT  to  achievement  of 
relevant indicators in the COSOP Results Framework. For the COSOP 2022-28, the relevant indicators 
are  those  listed  in  the  table  below.  Many  of  these  indicators  are  already  reported  for  ASPIRE-AT 
logframe.  
Table 7: List of COSOP indicators to be reported by ASPIRE-AT 
CI # 
Indicator 
ASPIRE-AT 
LF? 
Measurement 
CI 1 
People receiving services promoted or supported by the 
project 
Yes 
MIS 
CI 1.1.1  Persons provided with climate information services: By 
2024, 10,000 persons provided with climate information 
services (women 50%, Youth 20%, Indigenous 2.5%) 
No 
MIS 
CI 1.1.5  Persons in rural areas accessing financial services 
CI 1.1.7  Persons in rural areas trained in financial literacy and/or 
use of financial products and services 
No 
No 
MIS 
MIS 
CI 1.2.2  Households reporting adoption of new/improved inputs, 
No 
technologies or practices 
CI 1.2.3  Households reporting reduced water shortage vis-à-vis 
No 
production needs 
CI 2.1.1  Rural enterprises accessing business development 
services 
CI 2.2.1  Persons with new jobs /employment opportunities 
Yes 
Yes 
CI 2.2.2  Supported rural enterprises reporting an increase in profit 
Yes 
CI 2.2.3  Rural producers’ organisations engaged in formal 
Yes 
partnerships / agreements or contracts with public or 
private entities 
CI 2.2.6  Households reporting improved physical access to 
No 
markets, processing and storage facilities 
Outcome 
Survey 
Outcome 
Survey 
MIS 
Outcome 
Survey 
MIS 
MIS 
Outcome 
Survey 
54 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
CI 3.1.4    Land brought under climate-resilient practices: By 2027, 
No 
MIS 
10,000 ha of land brought under climate-resilient practices 
CI 3.2.2 
50,000 households reporting adoption of environmentally 
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and 
practices 
IE 2.1 
% of individuals demonstrating an improvement in 
empowerment 
Yes 
Yes 
Outcome 
Survey 
Outcome 
Survey 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
Households benefiting from productive infrastructure 
investments 
No 
MIS 
Households receiving project services achieving ASMP 
target levels of productivity of agriculture labour 
Identified rural producers’ organisations with business plan 
or strategy to strengthen market participation 
No of partnership promoted with private sector partners 
People, especially youth trained or benefitting from digital 
technologies to improve their incomes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Outcome 
Survey 
MIS 
MIS 
MIS 
These indicators with updated values should be reported in the ASPIRE-AT Annual Report. 
Knowledge Products 
ASPIRE-AT will support the production of a number of high-quality knowledge products. A knowledge 
product may be: 
  A document such as a report, research paper or policy brief; 
  Audio-visual materials such as video clips; 
  Knowledge products formatted for Internet dissemination. 
Knowledge products are based on the data and reports generated by the ASPIRE-AT M&E system and 
on strategic and policy studies. Before publishing as a knowledge product, the material should be: 
  Reviewed and improved by further data analysis, where needed; 
  Review the content for accuracy and consistency,  with review preferably by  an  independent 
expert; 
  Ensure the knowledge product makes a real contribution to knowledge (it does not just repeat 
information or findings that specialists working in agriculture development or rural development 
in Cambodia are already familiar with); 
  Present  the  knowledge  product  to  a  high  professional  standard  (document  editing,  video 
production etc). 
Knowledge products should be short and accessible: for a major report, it is better to prepare a short 
summary to a high standard, rather than publish the whole report. 
Knowledge products should be presented and discussed at workshop or seminar events where leaders 
and decision-makers of government, development partners and private sector are present. 
55 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
M&E Roles and Responsibilities 
ASPIRE Secretariat 
ASPIRE Secretariat has overall responsibility for monitoring and evaluation of ASPIRE-AT. Under the 
Project Director, the Project Manager is responsible for ensuring that the M&E Workplan is completed 
on time and to a high standard. The Project Manager is assisted by: 
  The M&E & Planning Officer; 
  The Senior M&E and Planning Specialist; 
  The ICT Specialist; 
  Short-term consultants, e.g. for development of the MIS and GIS systems. 
ASPIRE Secretariat will: 
  Prepare the annual M&E Work Plan in consultation with the implementing agencies; 
  Prepare, implement and manage the MIS and GIS systems; 
  Liaise with service providers to ensure they provide monitoring data as required by their TOR; 
  Contract a service provider to conduct the Outcome Survey; 
  Liaise  with  implementing  agencies  to  plan  preparation  of  the  Six-Month  Report  and  Annual 
Report; 
  Review  and  consolidate  the  Six-Month  Report  and  Annual  Report,  and  prepare  summary 
sections; 
  Prepare the Value for Money Analysis; 
  Maintain and update the project website and the Project Dashboard; 
  Update the Project Logframe; 
  Report on ASPIRE-AT contribution to relevant COSOP indicators; 
  Manage production of knowledge products. 
Financial Institutions (ARDB and SME Bank) 
ARDB and SME Bank will provide data to ASPIRE Secretariat on the financing packages they finance 
under Sub-Component 1.1 and Sub-Component 2.1. 
Data provided on each financing package will include: 
Identity of borrower; 
 
  Purpose of financing package; 
  Amount of financing package; 
  Repayment history 
  … 
Summary data will include: 
  Total loans disbursed 
  Total grants disbursed (paid into escrow accounts) 
  Repayments received 
  Total grants released to borrower  
  Loans outstanding 
  Loans in arrears 
  Loans fully repaid 
  Grants released to borrower 
  Line of credit balance 
PDAFF and Cooperative Facilitators 
PDAFF and Cooperative Facilitators have an important M&E function. They will work with the POs to 
collect and report data for the ASPIRE MIS on: 
56 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  PO membership 
  PO activities 
  PO results achieved 
  Farm-level data for a sample of farmers. 
Service Providers 
Service Providers for capacity development of POs (Sub-Component 3.1) have important M&E 
responsibilities. They must report to ASPIRE Secretariat on training and capacity building activities 
implemented, including number and type of participants disaggregated for women, youth, IPs and 
persons with disabilities. 
The Service Providers are also responsible for reporting against the PO Graduation Scorecard for 
each PO. 
60 
M&E Work-Plan 
An M&E Work-Plan will be prepared as part of the AWPB. 
The M&E Work-Plan identifies key M&E activities to be carried out during the year, including: 
  Type of activity; 
  Methodology; 
  Start Date and Completion Date; 
  Budget required. 
The M&E Adviser works with each Implementing Agency to assist them to prepare the M&E Work-Plan 
for their component / sub-component. 
ASPIRE Secretariat is responsible to monitor implementation of the M&E work-plan and liaise with 
implementing agencies to ensure that M&E activities are implemented on time and to a high standard. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND FLOW OF FUNDS 
61 
  This  section  of  the  PIM  specifies  the  rules  and  procedures  applying  to  financial 
management of ASPIRE-AT funds. It describes the project accounts and flow of funds. It 
defines  financing  percentages  for  each  category  of  expenditure.  The  section  describes 
financial  reporting  procedures,  requirements 
for  accounting  software  and  audit 
arrangements. 
Designated Accounts and Project Accounts 
62 
Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) and the ASPIRE-AT Secretariat (MAFF) shall open and 
maintain in the National Bank of Cambodia the following Bank Accounts: (i) One Designated Account 
in USD to receive the IFAD Loans, (ii) One Designated Account in USD to receive the IFAD Grant. 
MEF shall authorize the opening of the following USD Project Accounts for the IFAD Loan proceeds: 
Two Project Accounts at the ASPIRE Secretariat for receiving loan and grant; One Project Account for 
RGC contribution; and two account at the ARDB and SME banks respectively, to receive funds from 
the Designated Account(s) for Credit Line activities. 
EIB Loan Disbursement Procedures 
63 
[To be added later] 
Financial Management Procedures 
64 
ASPIRE AT Secretariat and the Implementing Agencies shall apply the updated Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOP), Financial Management Manual (FMM), Procurement Manual (PM) from ASPIRE, 
57 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
on the condition that these procedures are adequately adapted to fulfil the specific financial 
management requirements of ASPIRE AT while taking into consideration local circumstances and 
capacities in respect of the implementation of ASPIRE AT activities at subnational level.  .  ARDB and 
SME bank shall apply existing FM systems to carry out sub-component activities and are subject to 
financial reporting, auditing and financial management conditions under the sub-agreement with MEF.  
ARDB and SME Bank shall submit financial reports and audit report to MEF, ASIPRE AT Secretariat 
in accordance to procedures in ASPIRE AT’s Project Implementation Manual and Finance Manual. 
Staffing:  The Finance Management Unit (FMU) staff of ASPIRE Secretariat will be expected to stay 
with ASPIRE AT, FMU shall carry out all financial management tasks of the Project and shall perform 
its duties in close cooperation with the Department of Accounting and Finance (DAF) of MAFF; the 
FMU shall be staffed by sufficient number of officers (experience staff with ASPIRE is preferred); the 
officers shall be seconded from DAF and/or hired from outside MAFF.  
ARDB and SME Bank shall use existing FM staff for managing the line of credit activities. 
Accounting Systems, Policies, Procedures and Financial Reporting 
65 
ASPIRE AT FM system shall employ the current structure, policy and system of existing ASPIRE and 
continue to enhance to fulfil the design and activities of ASPIRE AT. Cash Basis accounting is applied 
through SAGE 50 Accounting System which is followed to RGC Accounting Standard stated in FMM. 
Each implementing agency will submit Monthly Financial Progress Reports to the ASPIRE AT 
Secretariat electronically. ASPIRE AT Secretariat will consolidate data received and will be the entry 
contact point with IFAD. ASPIRE Secretariat will prepare AWPB, Interim Financial Report (IFR), 
annual consolidated financial statements including data provided by all other implementing agencies. 
ASPIRE AT Secretariat and the Implementing Agencies shall apply cash basis accounting principles 
in accordance with the updated Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for externally financed 
projects/programmes in Cambodia, issued by MEF 
ASPIRE AT shall continue to use the current accounting software from phase 1 with customizations to 
tailor the need of FM of ASPIRE AT, the software can fit the IFAD IRF reporting requirements and 
shall be able to report different source of financings that use in the pool of Designated Account. 
ARDB and SME Bank shall use existing FM staff and system for managing the Line of Credit 
activities. 
Internal Control and Audit 
66 
Internal control:  Procedures and record maintenance at all levels have to be significantly 
strengthened by addressing the issues of non-availability of skilled finance staff, setting up of internal 
controls, setting up of effective monitoring and review, introduction of accounting software, 
preparation of a detailed section in the PIM on Financial Management with guidance notes.  
For the assurance of internal control and alignment with SOP and PIM, Internal Audit will be 
conducted by the Department of Internal Audit (MAFF). The internal audit report will be shared with 
ASPIRE AT Secretariat.  
ASPIRE internal control is designed to ensure the compliance with SOP and PIM, transparency, 
segregation of duty and safeguard of project assets. Seconded Finance Officer from MAFF will be 
assigned to oversee and review the financial transactions, reporting. 
ARDB and SME Bank shall employ the existing internal control system and provide the internal audit 
report to ASPIRE AT Secretariat and MEF. 
External Audit.  The annual financial statements for the Project shall be subject to annual audit by an 
external auditor to be appointed by MEF. The audit shall have to be performed with due diligence, in 
particular in respect of the effectiveness of the project internal control system, and the accuracy and 
58 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
completeness of the financial statements according to the TOR acceptable to IFAD. Project accounts 
at ARDB and SME Bank will be audited to ensure the completeness of financial reporting and control, 
conditions of the audit will be included in the Sub-Agreement between MEF and ARDB/SME Banks. 
67 
PROCUREMENT 
  This  section  of  the  PIM  specifies  the  rules  and  procedures  applying  to  procurement 
under  ASPIRE-AT.  It  describes  roles  and  responsibilities  for  procurement.  It  describes 
procedures for preparation and approval of procurement plans.  
Applicable regulations and Procurement Arrangements.  
68 
Procurement using IFAD funds will follow the Standard Operating Procedures on Procurement for All 
Externally Financed Projects/Programs in Cambodia (SOP) to the extent such are consistent with the 
IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. ASPIRE-AT Secretariat will be directly responsible for project 
procurement activities, except for activities under Sub-component 1.1 and 2.1.2 using IFAD financing 
via ARDB and SME Bank which will be responsible by the borrowers (POs, smallholders and agri-
businesses). There will be Subsidiary Financing Agreements between MEF and ARDB/SME Bank to 
manage the wholesale lines of credit and compensate deposited grant financed by ASPIRE AT under 
Sub-components 1.1. and 2.1.2. Procurement using EIB funds will comply with EIB’s Guide to 
Procurement.  
The project shall retain competent ASPIRE procurement staffs and specialist to continue their jobs for 
ASPIRE AT. A new procurement staff might be recruited for procurement activities using EIB’s 
financing. 
The initial 18-month Procurement Plan, and subsequently the annual procurement plans in 
consistence with the AWPBs shall be prepared and obtain IFAD no objection before proceeding with 
procurement activities. Similar goods or works should be bulked to sizable packages for procurement 
when taking into account implementation capacities of potential suppliers/ contractors. IFAD 
procurement plan template16 will be used for preparation and monitoring implementation progress of 
project procurement plans. The first 18-month procurement plan and subsequently annual 
procurement plan must include as a minimum: (i) A brief description of each procurement activity to 
be undertaken during the period; (ii) The estimate value of each procurement activity; (iii) The method 
of procurement or selection to be adopted for each procurement activity; and (iv) An indication as to 
whether IFAD shall carry out prior or post review in respect of every procurement activity.  
Procurement methods.  
69 
The following procurement methods are proposed be used: 
  Works and works-related Non-Consulting Services 
International  Competitive  Bidding  (ICB):  is  mandatory  for  contracts  estimated  to  cost 
USD3,000,000 or more; 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB): might be applied to contracts estimated to cost less 
than USD3,000,000 and more than USD100,000;  
Shopping: might be applied to contracts estimated to cost USD100,000 or less; and 
Direct Contracting: applies to the indicated contracts in the Procurement Plan, and all direct 
contracts  to  cost  more  than  USD5,000  shall  be  subject  to  IFAD’s  prior  review  and  no 
objection.  
IFAD  Procurement  Plan  Template 
16 
detail/asset/41917572  
can  be  accessible  at  https://www.ifad.org/en/document-
59 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Goods and goods-related Non-Consulting Services 
a. 
International  Competitive  Bidding  (ICB):  is  mandatory  for  contracts  estimated  to  cost  USD 
2,000,000 or more;  
b.  National  Competitive  Bidding  (NCB):  might  be  applied  to  contracts  estimated  to  cost  less  than 
USD 2,000,000 and more than USD100,000;   
c.  Shopping: might be applied to contracts estimated to cost USD100,000 or less; and 
d.  Direct  Contracting:  applies  to  the  indicated  contracts  in  the  Procurement  Plan,  and  all  direct 
contracts to cost more than USD5,000 shall be subject to IFAD’s prior review and no objection. 
  Consulting Services and related Non-Consulting Services 
Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS): is mandatory for contracts with firms estimated 
to cost USD200,000 or more; 
Quality  Cost  Based  Selection  (QCBS),  Fixed  Budget  Selection  (FBS)  or  Least  Cost 
Selection  (LCS):  might  be  applied  to  contracts  with  firms  estimated  to  cost  less  than 
USD200,000; 
Consultants  Qualification  Selection  (CQS):  might  be  applied  to  contracts  with  firms 
estimated to cost below USD65,000; 
Individual Consultants Selection (ICS): applies to contracts with individuals regardless of 
the value; 
Sole/Single  Source  Selection  (SSS):  applies  to  the  indicated  contracts  (with  firms  or 
individuals) in the Procurement Plan, and all SSS contracts to cost more than USD5,000 
shall be subject to IFAD’s prior review and no objection. 
Prior  review  requirements.  In  accordance  with  IFAD’s  Project  Procurement  Guidelines  and  IFAD’s 
Procurement  Handbook,  the  following  are  proposed  to  be  subject  to  IFAD’s  prior  review  and  no 
objection: 
  Procurement Plans submitted as part of Annual Work Plans and Budget and any subsequent 
upgrade of these plans; 
  Award of any contract for goods and goods-related non-consulting services estimated to cost 
USD150,000 or more; 
  Award of any contract for works and works-related non-consulting services estimated to cost 
USD200,000 or more; 
  Award of any contract for consulting services and related non-consulting services and/or 
Memorandums of Understanding/Agreement estimated to cost USD100,000 or more; 
  Award of any contract for an Individual Consultant estimated to cost USD25,000 or more; 
  Award of any Direct Contracting or Sole/Single Source Selection to cost more than 
USD5,000. A sufficiently detailed justification shall be submitted to IFAD and shall include the 
rationale for the choice of direct contracting/single source selection and the basis for 
recommending a particular contractor/service provider. 
The aforementioned thresholds may be modified by IFAD during the course of Project 
implementation. 
Requests for IFAD prior review and no objection, should be routed through IFAD’s web-based 
procurement management and tracking system, that currently is No Objection Tracking Utility System 
(NOTUS) and will be upgraded into a new end-to-end system in 2023. Data and information of all 
contracts including Memorandum of Agreements must be listed and updated regularly in the IFAD 
Client Portal - Contract Monitoring Tool (ICP-CMT). 
Procurement Using Credit Finance 
70 
Borrowers (producer organisations and farmers) will be directly responsible for procurement of items 
financed by loan and grant packages through ARDB in Component 1. Borrowers (agri-businesses) 
60 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
will be directly responsible for procurement of items financed by loans through SME Bank in 
Component 2. 
Producer Organisations will conduct a simple community-based procurement process to identify 
preferred suppliers for items purchased directly by the PO and for items purchased by farmers. The 
community-based procurement process will consist of the following steps: 
  Open advertising and request for quotations, with a minimum 15 days advertising period if the 
total value of the procurement is less than $10,000, or 20 days if the value is more than 
$10,000 and less than $100,000; 
  Public opening and announcement of quotations; 
  Selection of the most favourable quotation; 
  Record of quotations received and procurement decision (favoured supplier) to be submitted 
to the financing institution. 
In the case of financing to individual farmers, the farmer may opt to purchase from a different supplier 
if the price is less than the price quotation of the supplier recommended by the PO. 
Governance and Anti-corruption measures.  
71 
Project staff, beneficiaries, and all bidders, suppliers, contractors and consultants under IFAD-
financed contracts are expected to observe the highest standard of ethics and integrity during the 
procurement and execution of project activities. IFAD will not finance expenditures for goods, works or 
consulting services that have not been procured in accordance with IFAD Project Procurement 
Guideline and the Financing Agreement. In such cases, IFAD may, in addition, take other remedial 
action under the financing agreement, including cancellation of the amount in question from the loan 
account by declaring it ineligible. Even if the contract was awarded following IFAD’s “no objection” 
statement, IFAD may still declare mis-procurement if it concludes that this statement was issued on 
the basis of incomplete, inaccurate or misleading information furnished by the Borrower/Recipient.  
The Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption has been integrated into IFAD's legal framework 
(Project Procurement Guidelines17, General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing18, 
IFAD’s Code of Conduct19) and applies to all recipients of IFAD financing. In line with this, the 
implementing agencies will ensure that all project activities are implemented within a transparency 
framework. This framework will include measures to ensure that procurement activities are carried out 
in accordance with IFAD project procurement guidelines and the project implementation manual. 
Measures that form part of the framework for transparency include:  
Upload information on procurement plans, contract awards and resolution of 
procurement complaints on IAs/project websites;  
Annexes on Additional Provisions and Self-Certification Form to be included in bidding 
document/RFP and contract documents; 
Bidders and contractors signing the Self-Certification Forms on anticorruption, sexual 
harassment, sexual exploitation and abuse as a part of bids/proposals and contract 
documents; 
Debriefing and Protest procedures for all procurement activities based on the procedures 
laid down in the IFAD Procurement Handbook including the requirements to issue a 
Notice of Intent to Award and of a standstill period. 
Conduct prior and ex-post reviews to strengthen enforcement of the debarment system; 
IFAD’s direct supervision to address fiduciary compliance; 
Involvement of Project stakeholders (and especially farmers and their organisations) in 
planning, implementation and M&E of project activities. 
17https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-detail/asset/39438991 
18https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-detail/asset/39500875 
19https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-detail/asset/40186603 
61 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
ANNEXES 
  Project Logframe 
  Project Description for Use in Reports 
  Summary Project Description for Brochures 
  Adviser Terms of Reference 
o  Value Chain Financing Specialist (C1) 
o 
International Agribusiness Investment Specialist (C2) 
o  Senior National Agribusiness Investment Specialist (C2) 
o  National Agribusiness Specialists (C2) 
o  Agronomy and Post-Harvest Technical Specialist (C3) 
o  Producer Organisation Specialist (C3) 
o  Chief Technical Adviser (Sec) 
o  Deputy Chief Technical Adviser (Sec) 
o  Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist (Sec) 
o  Senior M&E and Planning Specialist (Sec) 
o 
o  Finance and Accounting Specialist (Sec) 
o  Procurement Specialist (Sec) 
o  Provincial Management Advisers (PDAFF) 
ICT Specialist (Sec) 
  Service Provider Terms of Reference 
o  Capacity Building of POs – Phase 1 
o  Engineering Services for PO Infrastructure (C1.2) 
o  Engineering Services for Enabling Environment Infrastructure and Pilot Centre of 
Excellence (C2.2 and C3.2) 
o  Service Provider for Outcome Survey  
  Scorecard for Graduated PO 
  Outline of PO Business Plan 
  Screening Checklist for Farmer Investment 
  Screening Checklist for PO Investment 
  Template for EIB Fund Allocation 
 
  Templates for Six-Month and Annual Reports 
  COSOP Results Framework 
  Social Inclusion Strategy 
  Gender Strategy 
  Monitoring and Evaluation Formats 
o  Reporting Formats for ARDB and SME Bank 
62 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Reporting Formats for ARDB and SME Bank 
Quarterly Reporting Format for ARDB 
Objective 
EXPANSION OF SERVICES 
Indicator 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Current  
Target 
Increase supply of credit and 
other financial services to 
ASPIRE AT smallholders and 
other Program Borrowers 
(ACS, SMEs etc.) 
Cumulative number of  and producer organisations in the 
ASPIRE AT program with loans, as of end of the reporting 
period. 
using Aspire AT Loan Funds 
using Leveraged Loan Funds (Not LOC) 
Farmers 
Female Farmers 
Young Farmers 
Indigenous People Farmers 
Farmers with Disabilities 
Producer Organisations 
Number of farmers and producer organisations in the ASPIRE 
AT program with loans, as of end of the reporting period. 
using Aspire AT Loan Funds 
using Leveraged Loan Funds (Not LOC) 
Farmers 
Female Farmers 
Young Farmers 
Indigenous People Farmers 
Farmers with Disabilities 
63 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Producer Organisations 
Cumulative number of loans disbursed to Farmers and 
producer organisations in the ASPIRE AT program as at the 
end of the reporting period.  
using Aspire AT Loan Funds 
using Leveraged Loan Funds (Not LOC) 
Farmers 
Female Farmers 
Young Farmers 
Indigenous People Farmers 
Farmers with Disabilities 
Producer Organisations 
Number of loans outsanding to Farmers, agribusinesses, Acs, 
and other producers and vendors in the ASPIRE AT program 
as at the end of the reporting period.  
using Aspire AT Loan Funds 
using Leveraged Loan Funds (Not LOC) 
Farmers 
Female Farmers 
Young Farmers 
Indigenous People Farmers 
Farmers with Disabilities 
Producer Organisations 
64 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
CREDIT HISTORY 
BUILDING 
Portfolio at risk (PAR) of portfolio to ASPIRE AT farmers and 
producer organisations (over 60 days)  
ASPIRE AT LOC 
Leveraged Loan Funds 
Volume of lending 
Value of outstanding loans to farmers and producer 
organisations in the ASPIRE AT program   
Cumulative value of loans disbursed to farmers and producer 
organisations in ASPIRE AT program 
65 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Quarterly Reporting Format for SME Bank 
Objective 
EXPANSION OF SERVICES 
Indicator 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Current 
Target 
Cumulative number of agribusiness and producer 
organisations in the ASPIRE AT program with loans, as 
of end of the reporting period. 
using Aspire AT Loan Funds 
using Leveraged Loan Funds (Not LOC) 
Increase supply of credit and other 
financial services to ASPIRE AT 
Program Borrowers (ACS, SMEs 
etc.) 
Producer Organisations 
Number of agribusiness and producer organisations in 
the ASPIRE AT program with loans, as at end of the 
reporting period. 
using Aspire AT Loan Funds 
using Leveraged Loan Funds (Not LOC) 
Producer Organisations 
Cumulative number of loans disbursed to  agribusinesses 
and producer organisations in the ASPIRE AT program 
as at the end of the reporting period.  
using Aspire AT Loan Funds 
using Leveraged Loan Funds (Not LOC) 
Producer Organisations 
66 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Number of loans outstanding to  agribusinesses and 
producer organisations in the ASPIRE AT program as at 
the end of the reporting period.  
Increase the participation of 
Cambodian lenders in Agriculture 
Sector 
CREDIT HISTORY BUILDING 
Third party Guarantees 
Volume of lending 
using Aspire AT Loan Funds 
using Leveraged Loan Funds (Not LOC) 
Producer Organisations 
Number of institutions with signed lending  agreements  
Portfolio at risk (PAR) of portfolio to ASPIRE AT SMEs, 
ACs and agribusinesses (over 30 days)  
ASPIRE AT LOC 
Leveraged Loan Funds 
# of Loans with guarantee 
Value of outstanding loans to Acs, agribusiness, and 
other SMEs in the ASPIRE AT program   
Cumulative value of loans disbursed to  agribusiness, 
ACs and other SMEs in ASPIRE AT program 
67 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
ANNEX 9:  INTEGRATED PROJECT RISK MATRIX (IPRM) 
The Integrated Project Risk Matrix is a tool that will help IFAD to consistently assess and monitor risks across all operations.  It provides the information needed to help clients 
adequately manage and, where possible, mitigate operational risks within a broader risk management framework. It is intended to identify those risks on which IFAD needs to focus 
management attention and resources. 
Risk Categories and Subcategories 
Country Context 
Political Commitment 
Risk: Change in GoKC commitment to agriculture development, for example if there is a change of government following the election due in mid-2023. 
However, based on understanding of the Cambodian political situation, the likelihood of major change of  policy towards agriculture is assessed as low. 
Mitigations: The project is strongly aligned with the agriculture sector policy of GoKC, which is expected to remain stable. 
Governance 
Risk: Private agribusiness unwilling to invest because of governance concerns, for example hidden transaction costs associated with agriculture processing and 
exporting. 
Mitigations: The project design assumes a willingness to invest consistent with past experience / observations. Through policy engagement, IFAD will continue 
to support GoKC to improve ease of doing business in the agriculture sector. 
Macroeconomic 
Risk: International economic recession reduces market opportunities. There is a risk that current economic trends lead to a reduction in demand for the 
export commodities targeted by the project, impacting on the viability of investments financed by the project 
Mitigation: (1) project will target domestic as well as export markets, with domestic demand for e.g. safe vegetables, backyard chicken less likely to be 
affected, and (2) feasibility study of individual investments will take into account market conditions at the time. Project will maintain flexibility so that 
production / marketing channels can be reoriented in case that trade conditions with specific partners deteriorate. 
Risk: Impact of international events on prices worsens Cambodia’s terms of trade. Cambodia imports all its fuel and fertiliser and most capital equipment, so 
increases in costs of these items are likely to harm Cambodia’s competitiveness. Conversely, increased food prices could favour Cambodia as a food exporting 
country, but this is difficult to predict.  
Mitigation: (1) monitor the situation and adjust strategy if it seems likely that some value chains become uncompetitive overall; and (2) assess viability of 
investments based on best available price information. The project inherently spreads risk by supporting a range of domestic and export value chains with 
different characteristics. 
Risk: Agriculture sector, particularly export markets, severely impacted by macroeconomic instability, perhaps due to external events 
Mitigations: Project will balance focus on export and domestic value chains, with domestic VC less vulnerable.  
Inherent  Residual 
L 
L 
L 
L 
M 
L 
M 
M 
Fragility and security 
L 
L 
68 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
Risk: Insecurity (for example, political conflict, criminal activity) posing a risk to project implementation. Despite its history as a fragile state, Cambodia has 
maintained good internal security over a long period (25 years) and so this category of risk is assessed as low. 
Mitigations:  IFAD team will monitor the situation closely and take necessary actions on time.  
Sector Strategies and Policies 
Policy alignment 
Risk: Change in government policy e.g. on agriculture trade, ACs etc 
Mitigations: Project aligned with current policy, and no major changes expected 
Policy development & implementation 
Risk: Key policies (trade, ACs, etc) not effectively implemented 
Mitigations: Project interventions are diverse and not over-dependent on a single aspect of policy. 
Environment and Climate Context  
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions 
Risk: Project directly finances or creates incentives that encourage or facilitate unsustainable environmental practices (e.g. inappropriate chemical use; 
encroachment on protected natural environment areas) 
Mitigations: Social, Environmental and Climate risk assessments applied to investments and appropriate criteria applied 
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts 
Risk: Prolonged droughts, intense flooding and changes in seasonality due to climate change will likely affect production of key crops rendering them non-
viable or uncompetitive.  
Mitigations: Assessment of climate risks per value chain and promotion of climate-smart varieties and production techniques 
Project Scope 
Project relevance  
Risk: Design assumptions on direction or pace of transition to market economy are flawed 
Cambodia’s transition to a market economy, including in the rural sectors, has been rapid in recent years. There is a low risk that severe exogenous shocks 
(related to world economic developments) could slow the transition, though likely not reverse it. 
Mitigations: Design assumptions are closely aligned with evidence and lessons learned from previous projects. Stakeholders including producers, POs and agri-
businesses as well as agriculture focused development agencies have been extensively consulted on the  project design and there is strong consensus around 
the key design assumptions in this regard. However, IFAD and GoKC will continue to monitor the situation.  
L 
L 
M 
M 
M 
L 
L 
L 
L 
L 
M 
L 
M 
L 
L 
L 
L 
L 
Risk: Insufficient scope exists for smallholder farmers in IFAD target group to compete in the market and earn adequate returns to land and labour. The 
transition to market agriculture is likely to favour larger producers in some sectors. The project design assumes that in key pro-poor value chains smallholder-
based production can continue to be competitive and can provide returns that are attractive compared to non-farm occupations. 
M 
L 
69 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
Mitigation: Project will prioritise pro-poor value chains where smallholders already produce successfully, particularly those where success has been 
demonstrated in previous projects. A set of criteria for targeting value chains is included in design and further studies will be conducted to validate the initial 
selection of value chains. 
Technical soundness  
Risk: Financing instruments (mixture of loans and grants) are not attractive for partner financial institutions (PFIs) to deliver.  
Market-based lending including in the agriculture sector is almost entirely based on land as collateral, with analysis of business plans and cash-flows by 
financing institutions being a secondary consideration. The project seeks to increase access to finance by developing, in partnership with banks and PFIs, 
financial products that do not depend on land as collateral. 
Mitigations: Financing instruments based on existing models, address key constraints including PFI risk, and have been discussed with potential PFIs. In 
particular ARDB has engaged in detailed discussions on the design of the blended grant and loan instruments in Component 1, and the planned combination 
of loans and credit guarantees in Component 2 has been discussed with SME Bank and CCGC. 
M 
M 
L 
L 
Risk: Financing instruments (mixture of loans and grants) are not attractive for agri-businesses, POs and farmers to invest. The project design assumes that 
farmers, POs and agribusinesses will be willing to borrow to invest at interest rates close to those available on the commercial market, supported by a grant 
element (Component 1) or credit guarantees (Component 2). Essentially, the assumption is that the key barrier, overcome by the financing instrument 
designs, is the need for land as collateral. 
M 
L 
Mitigations: A range of financing instruments have been trialed by previous projects, GoKC’s policy banks and private FIs. There is considerable evidence of 
farmer willingness to invest when credit is available on suitable terms (cost of credit under the project will be considerably below that offered for small loans 
by MFIs). There is scope to adjust the design and management of the financing instruments to increase the match to borrower needs. There is a remaining risk 
that the attractiveness of ASPIRE-AT finance could be reduced if other donor projects make finance available for the same market segments on more generous 
terms (e.g. FAO GCF project proposing zero-interest rate loans. IFAD will continue to discuss with GoKC and other stakeholders to mitigate this risk. 
Risk: Weak business planning capacity of POs and farmers leads to failed investments. Most existing POs at present have low business planning and 
investment analysis capacity, and farmers have limited financial literacy. Therefore, it is likely that a proportion of investments proposed for ASPIRE-AT 
financing will be financially non-viable or non-sustainable. 
Mitigation: The project will work with a service provider to assist preparation of business plans and conduct feasibility studies of investments. A clear set of 
criteria for approval of investments will be developed and ARDB will be responsible for screening against these criteria. This function of ARDB is congruent 
with (though somewhat expands) normal checks and due diligence conducted by ARDB, which has an incentive to avoid high risk investments. 
Risk: Public sector investments financed by the project not sustainable because of lack of institutional plans and / or operating budgets. A range of public 
sector infrastructure investments have been proposed for project financing. All these investments will require operation and  
H 
M 
Mitigations: Design establishes criteria for approval of investments. All major public sector investments will be subject to detailed feasibility study and 
preparation of an institutional plan 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation & Sustainability 
Implementation arrangements 
M 
M 
M 
M 
Risk: Insufficient project management capacity to successfully deliver project, given significant complexity and relatively “lean” resources allocated to project 
management at the request of GoKC. 
70 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
Mitigations: Project management responsibilities assigned to experienced ASPIRE Secretariat with demonstrated capacity. IFAD will continue to monitor the 
situation and work with GoKC to develop solutions if implementation arrangements appear insufficient. 
Risk : Partner Financial Institutions do not have capacity to process financing applications at the required volume (this has been an issue with previous projects 
including AIMS) 
Mitigation: Project will work with a skilled service provider to prepare financing applications and feasibilty studies, reducing the workload on the PFI. 
M&E arrangements 
Risk: Insufficient capacity to collect sufficient / reliable data on project outcomes and impacts 
Mitigations: Data collection based on established MIS used in ASPIRE and will collect data through the ACs 
Procurement 
Legal and regulatory framework 
Risk: There is no integrated system to monitor procurement values and records at the General Department of Public Procurement (PEFA 2021). The Law on 
Public Procurement provides the adoption of e-procurement at an appropriate time. Presently, no government agency uses e-procurement. 
Mitigations: Using NOTUS and ICP Contract Monitoring Tool for monitoring project procurement activities; Upload information on procurement plans, 
contract awards and resolution of procurement complaints on IAs/project websites. 
Accountability and transparency 
Risk: The Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) for 2021 remains below 30 (score at 23/100, ranked 157th out of 180 countries). 
Mitigations: Conduct prior and ex-post reviews to strengthen enforcement of the debarment system. 
Capability in public procurement 
Risk: Limited capacity and experience to conduct procurement activities at sub-national levels. Regular examinations for awarding professional procurement 
certifications are not yet established 
Mitigations: Retain competent ASPIRE-I procurement staff and specialists; Provide training and periodic coaching to project and sub-national project staff. 
Carry out coaching, on-the-job trainings and refresher trainings on procurement (IFAD project procurement guidelines and manual, ICP, NOTUS, and Standard 
Operating Procedures on Procurement for All Externally Financed Projects/Programs in Cambodia). 
Public procurement processes 
Risk: Procurement processes (planning, bidding, contract award and contract implementation) are often delayed. 
Mitigations: Launch recruitment processes of staff and key service providers, timed so that key staff and key service providers will be contracted in time after 
the project effectiveness date. Carry out coaching, on-the-job trainings and refresher trainings on procurement (IFAD project procurement guidelines and 
manual, ICP, NOTUS, and Standard Operating Procedures on Procurement for All Externally Financed Projects/Programs in Cambodia). The Secretariat monitor 
and update regularly implementation progress of the procurement plan with both planned and actual data. 
Financial Management 
Overall  
71 
M 
L 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
L 
M 
L 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
Risk: Delay in disbursement at start up. 
Mitigation: Retroactive financing is optional to GoKC to facilitate the start-up process. 
Risk: Financial Management system and FM staff capacity 
Mitigations:  
• Replicating ASPIRE I with the capacity building to provincial government staff, consider recruiting experienced ASPIRE I staff. 
• Utilizing the centralized ASPIRE’s FMIS, training to all finance staff. 
Risk: Line credit to Micro-Finance institutions 
Mitigation: Ensure line credit to ARDB and SME Bank will be monitored and audited during implementation. 
Environment, Social and Climate Impact 
Biodiversity conservation  
Risk: While project primarily supports existing agricultural areas, already under production status and managed by members of formal and/or informal 
producers’ organizations, it is possible that the project could create incentives to expand production into areas that are not under production and / or may be 
protected and / or of biodiversity importance. 
Mitigations: The project targeting strategy will systematically exclude interventions and activities involving habitats that are legally protected, officially 
proposed for protection, or recognized as protected by traditional local communities and/or authoritative sources (e.g. wetlands, National Park, Nature 
Conservancy, Indigenous Community Conserved Area, ICCA, etc.) 
Resource efficiency and pollution prevention 
Risk: The project is likely to involve inputs of fertilizers and other modifying agents, however the related risks are expected to be minor and dispersed. The 
project is likely to involve or lead to procurement, supply and/or result in the use of pesticides on crops, livestock, aquaculture or forestry. 
Mitigations: The project will involve inputs suppliers and producers’ organizations to promote safe and efficient use of fertilizers and modifying agents. Good 
Agricultural Practices (GAP) will be promoted for vegetable production in particular. The project will not directly procure pesticides, but the producers are 
likely to purchase and use pesticides such as fungicides in vegetable production. However, the impacts are expected to be minor, and the project will engage 
with agrochemical suppliers and producers’ organizations to promote safe use of pesticides and encourage producers in following GAP guidelines. 
Cultural heritage 
Risk: The project could possibly be located in areas that are considered to have archaeological (prehistoric), paleontological, historical, cultural, artistic, and 
religious values or contains features considered as critical cultural heritage.  
Mitigations: Do not approve projects to located in or around sacred forests and community groves and archaeological sites.  
Indigenous Peoples 
Risk: Depending on the selected target provinces, the project could be sited in areas where indigenous peoples are present (including the project area of 
influence). This implies the risk that project activities could negatively impact on interests, livelihoods or culture of indigenous peoples.  However, as the 
project supports activities by smallholder farmers and their producer organisations (rather than large-scale infrastructure investments, for example) this risk is 
considered to be only medium and reduced to low by appropriate mitigation measures. 
72 
M 
L 
M 
L 
M 
L 
M 
L 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
Mitigations: Where project is targeting the area where the indigenous people are present, stakeholders’ consultations and FPIC process will be adopted at an 
early stage of project interventions. The project will not affect indigenous peoples’ rights, lands, natural resources, territories, livelihoods, knowledge, social 
fabric, traditions, governance systems, and culture or heritage (tangible and intangible) either directly or indirectly. 
Community health and safety 
Risk: Projects could have minimal impact traffic accidents through the rehabilitation of the farm road. Project could have significant impact on the spread of 
COVID 19 in the community through the coordination meeting at the community level. The community can exposure to hazardous materials, or respiratory 
effects from air emissions if the agricultural inputs are not used properly.  
Mitigations: Road safety will be included in the construction package. Project will promote implementation of GAP and sustainable soil fertility management.  
Labour and working conditions 
Risk: Through its interventions under component 2, the project will support the emergence of entrepreneurs in the agro processing industry sector. This may 
include operations where producers and other agricultural workers are typically exposed to significant occupational and safety risks, such as shelling cashew 
nuts, or peeling mangoes.  
Mitigations:  These potential risks will be further screened during the detailed design.  
In any case, the project will ensure that the private partners involved in the project implementation will comply with national labor laws and international 
commitments in terms of workers’ safety, gender inequalities, discriminations, forced labor, working children, and other indecent working conditions. 
Physical and economic resettlement 
Risk: No activity from the project involves with physical and economic resettlement 
Mitigations:  
Greenhouse gas emissions 
The project is not expected to have a significant impact on greenhouse gas emissions. 
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and hazards 
Risk: the expected hazards in the project intervention area are assessed as “High” for river flood, coastal flood, urban flood, cyclone, extreme heat and 
wildfires. Water scarcity (agricultural droughts and/or dry spells) is assessed as Low. 
Mitigations: Selection of investments under Component 1 will be informed by a climate risk and vulnerability analysis, integration of adaptation measures into 
their design specifications and promotion of climate resilient practices and technologies. 
Stakeholders 
Stakeholder engagement/coordination 
Risk: Insufficient consultation / engagement with stakeholders on key project interventions 
Mitigations: Stakeholder engagement based on ACs, with governance benchmarks including consultation and engagement to be achieved as criteria for 
investments. 
73 
M 
L 
M 
L 
L 
L 
M 
M 
M 
L 
L 
L 
L 
L 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
Stakeholder grievances  
M 
L 
Risk: No effective channel established for investigation and redress of stakeholder grievances 
Mitigations: Multi-level grievance redress mechanism to be established and information made available to project affected persons through multiple channels 
(online, information leaflets, meetings). 
74 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
ANNEX 10: EXIT STRATEGY 
ASPIRE-AT  Exit  Strategy  has  the  objective  of  ensuring  that,  after  project  support  ends,  project  direct  impacts  on 
beneficiaries’  livelihoods  and  capacity  built  in  producer  organisations,  the  private  sector  and  public  services  can  be 
sustained.  
The requirements for this are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
For farmers, the key criteria  for sustainability of benefits will include secure access to markets, access to 
services  including  financial  services,  access  to  improved,  climate-resilient  and  sustainable  production 
technology  (including  access  to  future  technology  developments)  and  increased  climate  resilience  farm-
based livelihoods. 
For  producer  organisations,  sustainability  requires  capable  management  in  place  (staff  and  systems); 
equitable  and  profitable  partnerships  with  private  agri-businesses,  profitable  operation  of  enterprises 
including sufficient  income to cover PO operating  costs; access to credit and other financial services and 
access to technical knowledge. 
Enterprises supported by the project will be existing enterprises and the project will seek to ensure that the 
enterprises have enhanced capacity to invest, operate and add value in the target value chains, including 
through partnerships with POs. 
Public  services  supported  by  the  project  will  achieve  sustainability  through  sound  institutional  plans 
(prepared as a pre-condition for investment) and secure funding of operation and maintenance costs.  
Project interventions will be designed and implemented to create pathways to achieving sustainability in all these areas. 
Project support will be delivered through mechanisms that match market-based services as closely as possible, and will 
be scaled down during the project period, particularly after MTR.  
The financing instrument combining loans with “blocked deposit” grants in Component 1 is intended to act as a bridge 
to market-based financing through (1) demonstrating to farmers and POs the viability and profitability of borrowing to 
invest in productive assets, supported by increased financing literacy; (2) increasing the asset base of farmers and POs 
to increase their collateral available for further loans; and (3) increasing ARDB’s understanding of the target value chains 
and borrowers to increase their confidence to lend to this market segment. Digital solutions will support development 
of production, cash flow and credit history for smallholders and PO supporting bankable investment plans. In addition, 
the project will explorer with ARDB options to move to cash-flow based lending. 
Capacity building support to POs will assist them through formation / strengthening and one investment cycle, with 
follow-up coaching and support continuing for one to two years after the investment. POs will be supported to recruit 
administrative staff during the early part of this cycle and will take over payment of the staff from their own funds on a 
phased basis. Infrastructure grants to POs will be restricted to those that have not had this type of support previously, 
so as to give an early boost to newly created POs whilst avoiding creating expectations of repeated access to grants. 
Support for enterprises under Sub-Component 2.1 will be based around building partnerships and linkages with POs, 
with trade partners and with financial institutions. Financing will be through commercial partner financial institutions 
under  conditions  similar  to  those  available  in  the  market.  Sub-Component  2.1  will  also  have  a  demonstrative  “first 
mover” effect encouraging additional investors in the value chains. Hence, the transition to sustainability is inherent in 
the design of this sub-component. 
Sustainability of public service facilities financed by ASPIRE-AT (trade facilitation infrastructure under Sub-Component 
2.2,  and  Centres  of  Excellence  under  Sub-Component  3.2)  will  be  subject  to  preparation  and  validation  of  a  sound 
institutional  plan  in  each  case.  Institutional  plans  will  emphasize  the  importance  of  private  sector  partnerships  for 
sustainability and will pre-identify the revenues required for operation and maintenance of the facilities. Under EIB’s 
Framework Loan arrangements, submission of feasibility studies demonstrating compliance with these criteria will be a 
pre-condition for approval of financing.
75 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 11: Stakeholder Analysis 
Annex 11: Stakeholder Analysis 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
National 
Government 
Agencies 
MAFF 
Agriculture Forestry and 
Fisheries Sector 
Executing Agency 
Project Execution 
MAFF-GDA 
(1) Food security; (2) Quality 
and safety agriculture 
product; (3) Productivity 
improvement through 
diversification; (4) Increase 
agriculture Value Addition; 
and (5) Market assurance  
Component 2.2 
Strengthening 
the enabling 
environment for 
competitive 
agricultural value 
chains and trade 
MoWA 
Gender equality and women's 
empowerment 
Gender 
ARDB 
State-owned commercial 
bank specializing in 
agriculture sector.  
Implementing 
Upgrade critical public 
services and associated 
infrastructure to enable 
competitive export growth, 
with a focus on export-
oriented plant health and 
quarantine services. Also 
support a review of policies 
and regulations affecting the 
priority sectors and proposals 
for adjustment to strengthen 
competitiveness. 
Oversee Gender Action Plan 
and support a review of 
policies and regulations 
affecting Gender 
transformative in Agriculture 
Sector.   
Financing loans and grants to 
smallholders and POs under 
Component 1.1 
76 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 11: Stakeholder Analysis 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
SME Bank 
State-owned commercial 
bank specializing in SME 
sector. 
Implementing 
MoWRAM 
Water Resources – and 
Meteorology 
Support and 
complement 
Rural Development and 
Indigenous People  
Support and 
complement  
Commerce (domestic, import 
and export) 
Support and 
complement 
MRD 
MoC 
NCDD 
Financing loans to Agri-
businesses under Component 
2.1 
Management of public 
irrigation systems, climate 
information through CAISAR  
Rural roads and Indigenous 
People support Implementer 
of SAAMBAT 
Implementer of AIMS 
Business registration 
Promoting democratic 
development through 
decentralization and 
deconcentration reforms 
throughout Cambodia. 
Support and 
complement 
Implementation of TSSD AF 
and CAISAR 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-National 
Government 
PDAFF 
Agriculture Forestry and 
Fisheries Sector 
Implementing 
Provincial 
Administration
, District 
Subnational service delivery 
under the authority of the 
central level of governments. 
Support  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Formation and registration of 
ACs Project implementation 
support  
M&E 
Overall coordination support 
at subnational level 
77 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 11: Stakeholder Analysis 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Administration
, 
Commune 
Administration   
Public order and security; 
management of public 
services; public welfare; 
socioeconomic development; 
environment, natural 
resources, and culture; 
consultation with resident 
and community groups. 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
Support  
Local development planning 
and coordination at commune 
level  
 
Financing Agencies 
IFAD 
DP 
Financier 
Financing 
EIB 
DP 
Financier 
Financing 
Supervision 
EUD 
DP 
World Bank 
DP 
Partner 
Partner 
ADB 
DP 
Partner  
Supervision 
Complementary with EU 
country programme 
Financing Cambodia 
Agriculture Sector 
Development Project 
Agriculture Value Chain 
Competitiveness and Safety 
Project 
Financing partner for TSSD 
78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 11: Stakeholder Analysis 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
AfD/KWF 
DP 
Partner 
Financier of WAT4CAM 
 
 
 
Financier of RID4CAM 
USAID 
SDC 
DP 
DP 
Partner 
Partner 
Financier of Harvest and has 
MOU with IFAD 
Financier of CHAINS and 
others through, SWISS 
Contact, CARITAS and HERK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UN and Rome 
Based Agencies 
UNDP 
UN Agency 
Partner 
Value chain activities, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WFP 
UN / Rome-Based Agencyt 
Partner 
FAO 
UN / Rome-Based Agency 
Partner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate change response, and 
digital application  
Data systems and price 
information   
Food security and nutrition 
Setting up food control 
system and implement Public-
Social-Private Partnerships for 
Ecologically-Sound Agriculture 
and Resilient Livelihood in 
Northern Tonle Sap Basin 
(PEARL) project.  
Co-facilitator of TWG-AW 
79 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 11: Stakeholder Analysis 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Private Sector 
Agri-businesses 
MFIs/Commerc
ial banks 
(including AMK 
project under 
IFAD NSO 
facility)  
Farmer Apex 
Organisations 
FNN 
CFAP 
Private Financial 
Partners 
Retail financial partners of 
SME Bank 
Support and 
complement 
Support and 
complement 
Network of village-based 
farmer organizations that acts 
as an umbrella to represent 
and serve the interests of 
self-help associations, 
agricultural cooperatives, and 
provides technical assistances 
on capacity building. 
Network of village-based 
farmer organizations that acts 
as an umbrella to represent 
and serve the interests of 
self-help associations, 
agricultural cooperatives, and 
provides technical assistances 
on capacity building. 
Mapping FO; Networking of 
FO to country level; 
Representation of FO; Engage 
in policy dialogue and 
advocated for FO; promote 
stakeholder feedback.   
Mapping FO; Networking of 
FO to country level; 
Representation of FO; Engage 
in policy dialogue and 
advocated for FO; promote 
stakeholder feedback.   
Direct Role in 
Project 
Value Chain 
Investments 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
Investors, partners of POs etc.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Producer 
Organisations 
UAC 
Union Agriculture 
Cooperative  
Higher-level 
producer 
organisations 
Organise production and 
marketing 
Partner with private sector 
80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 11: Stakeholder Analysis 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
CACC 
AC 
BCs 
Investments 
A pioneer of Public Private 
Producer Partnership by 
transforming farmers to be 
entrepreneurs. 
Higher-level 
producer and 
buyer 
organisations 
Organise production and 
marketing 
Partner with private sector 
Investments 
Agriculture Cooperative and 
other type of registered 
farmer organization  
Producer 
Organisations 
Organise production and 
marketing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business cluster and other 
type of the un-registered 
producer group 
Informal 
Producer 
Organisations 
Beneficiaries 
Partner with private sector 
Investments 
Aggregate and add members 
to form ACs or other formal 
PO types 
Form Producer Organisations, 
invest for increased 
productivity, adopt climate 
resilient practices etc. 
 
 
 
Empower Cambodian youth 
to improve the quality of life 
in vulnerable communities 
through skill training activity 
Support and 
complement 
Complement through skill 
development fund and 
SAAMBAT activity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Farmers 
Youth 
Organization  
Indigenous People 
Organization 
Empower indigenous people 
to improve the quality of life.  
Support and 
complement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mapping IP Organization and 
networking them at the 
country level; Representation 
81 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 11: Stakeholder Analysis 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
voice of IP in policy dialogue; 
promote stakeholder 
feedback.   
People with 
Disabilities 
Organization  
Support People with 
Disabilities in agriculture 
sector.  
Support and 
complement 
Promote stakeholder 
feedback. 
 
82 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 14:  Project Procurement Risk Matrix  
Annex 12: SSTC Proposal  
Annex 9: SSTC Proposal 
Project proposal template 
The proposal should not exceed 3500 words, excluding annexes, pre-filled sections and other officially 
required documents. The word limit will be strictly enforced. 
1 – Title of the project 
2 – GRIPs ID 
3 - Project leader and 
contact details 
4 – Sponsoring 
division  
5 – Co-sponsoring 
divisions and contact 
details 
6 – Proposed value of 
project 
7 – Expected co-
financing 
8 – Focus 
country/countries  
9 – Recipient(s) and 
contact details 
10 – Categories of the 
Recipient(s) 
11 – Project duration 
12 – Selected strategic 
priorities 
Support to the Export-Led Agricultural Sector in Cambodia (SELAS) 
xxx 
Sakphouseth Meng, Country Programme Officer, APR. Email: 
m.sakphouseth@ifad.org 
Asian and the Pacific Division 
xxx 
USD300,000 
The SSTC project proposal is an integral part of Agriculture Services 
Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE - 
AT) which is under design with total investment of around USD 137 million. 
Available financing totals around USD 182 million. IFAD loan will finance 
USD 48 million (26% of the total budget); the Government of Cambodia will 
provide USD 17 million (9.3%); European Investment Bank (EIB) will 
contribute USD 60 million (32%); a proposed IFAD-China SSTC grant of USD 
0.3 million; USD 43 million from PFI contribution, USD 3 million from 
beneficiary and SME contribution and there is a funding gap of USD 11 
million. 
SSTC financing plays a critical role by i) establishing strong link with Chinese 
authorities and businesses for technical collaboration within the project for 
trade development with the priority Chinese market, and ii) financing 
specific activities which cannot be easily financed via the main loan-based 
financing of the overall programme. 
Cambodia 
The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) 
H.E Dr. Meas Pyseth 
Under Secretary of State  
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries  
No 200 Norodom Blvd., Sangkat Tonle Basak, Phnom Penh 
Email: pysethmeas1@gmail.com 
Phone: +855 12 759 440 
Developing Member State 
January 2023 – December 2024 
☒ Promote innovations in strengthening the productive, managerial, 
financial and marketing capacities of rural people 
☒ Pilot inclusive production and business models that generate higher 
incomes 
☒ Promote investments and trade 
83 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 14:  Project Procurement Risk Matrix  
13 – Selected thematic 
areas 
14 – National COVID-
19 context and 
rationale 
☐ Strengthening the capacities of farmers and their organizations to 
enhance resilience against disasters 
☒ Facilitating access to markets in conditions of specific barriers in a given 
context 
☐ Delivering up-to-date agriculture-related information to smallholder 
producers through digital services 
☒ Building trade capacities to enable smallholder producers to meet 
quality and sanitary standards of overseas markets 
Cambodia managed the COVID-19 pandemic well, with around 3,000 
deaths reported. About 81% of the population is vaccinated. The 
Government of the Kingdom of Cambodia (GoKC) has lifted most 
restrictions on travel and activities. However, the pandemic led to a near 
halt in international tourism arrivals and heavily impacted domestic retail 
services. Many migrant workers lost employment and returned to 
Cambodia during 2020, resulting in increased unemployment and reduced 
incomes from remittances. GDP growth was 2.2% in 2021 and is projected 
at 4.5% in 202220. Poverty headcount increased to 17.8% and to 22.8% in 
rural areas21 due to the pandemic. The government released social 
transfers, as support for ID Poor households through the national COVID-19 
cash transfer emergency programmes for the most-affected families. 
Cambodia did not face a crisis of food shortage at national level, but 
marginal and rural vulnerable groups have been affected in their daily 
income and food security. 
Cambodia’s agriculture sector has proved resilient during the COVID 
pandemic providing a reminder of the important role of agriculture and its 
sustained growth in ensuring food security and rural livelihoods, for both 
recovery and building back better.  
As it emerges from the COVID crisis, Cambodia faces new macro-economic 
challenges due to the interrelated risks of global trade recession and the 
impact on commodity prices of the war in Ukraine. As an open, trading 
economy with total exports equal to 61% of GDP in 2020, Cambodia is 
vulnerable to a slowdown in global demand. The agriculture sector is likely 
to experience significant impacts from increasing fuel costs and rising 
fertilizer costs. The Ukraine crisis has also led to increasing costs of 
foodstuffs, including grains and cooking oil.  
Agriculture sector growth, particularly based on increasing exports through 
formal channels and taking advantage of recent trade agreements, is a key 
element of GoKC’s strategy for post-pandemic recovery. However, there 
are still significant barriers to overcome, particularly in value chains (VCs) 
based on smallholder production, to achieve the scale and consistent 
quality of produce meeting the needs of export and domestic markets. 
Cambodia has a small but growing number of successful agri-businesses 
serving both domestic and export markets but growth of the sector 
(beyond the rice value chain) needs more capable, experienced and well-
capitalized firms and an associated enabling environment of public 
infrastructure and services critical to support the development of 
20 World Bank Cambodia Country Economic Update, December 2021 
21 Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey 2019-20 (Ministry of Planning, 2021) 
84 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 14:  Project Procurement Risk Matrix  
15 – Target 
beneficiaries 
internationally competitive Cambodian supply chains in priority sectors 
from which smallholders can earn a decent living. 
Within the overall ASPIRE-AT objectives, SSTC investments will specifically 
support public and private investment to increase the number and 
competitiveness of agri-businesses operating in priority value chains and 
the associated enabling public goods and services to support competitive 
export growth in order to provide market opportunities for smallholder 
producers and their POs 
The proposed project is in full alignment with IFAD Strategic Framework 
2016-2025, as it pursues the goal of increasing rural people’s productive 
capacities in a sustainable and resilient manner, increasing and improving 
their engagement in markets, while enabling them to better manage 
related risks, and strengthening the environmental sustainability and 
climate resilience of their economic activities. The project promotes 
delivering relevant, targeted and cost-effective development solutions and 
other resources to beneficiaries and partners across the globe. 
ASPRIRE-AT will provide services to around 125,000 rural households, or 
500,000 vulnerable people, whose income is less than 150% of the national 
poverty line: (i) smallholder farmers who are either poor or near-poor and 
vulnerable to falling into poverty due to climate, market or other shocks 
but who have productive potential and can take advantage of market 
opportunities; (ii) landless or land-poor households ready to take 
advantage of employment opportunities. Among these target beneficiaries, 
at least 20 000 people (45% are female and 20% youth) will be benefiting 
from SSTC facility as producers and workers in the targeted export product 
value chains (especially for fruits and nuts).  
On category (i) ASPIRE-AT will focus on smallholders who are already 
members of POs including approximately 2,000 Business Clusters (BCs)(of 
4,400 total) supported by ASPIRE and AIMS and considered to have 
potential to aggregate and graduate to the status of formal legal 
enterprises including Agriculture Cooperatives (AC) and Unions of AC (UAC). 
These BCs have already taken the first steps in organisation, aggregation 
and value chain partnership needed to overcome the barriers facing 
individual smallholders yet are too small, lack legal identity and business 
management capacity, so are not fully capable of managing investments or 
being enabled to negotiate the effective partnerships with larger agri-
enterprises which would enable them to sell to higher-value markets.  
Targeting of these BC is expected to result in about 500 high-capacity AC 
and about 35 UAC. Among them, at least 50AC and 5 UAC will be benefiting 
from SSTC facility.  
On category (ii), which is landless or land-poor households, typically engage 
in some agriculture production (including home gardens and small 
livestock) but earn their income primarily from casual, insecure wage 
labour, with little regulation of working conditions and no job security. 
Hence, households in this group will benefit from at least 10,000 new job 
opportunities, particularly for women and for youth, in agriculture 
production, post-harvest and processing. Among these the SSTC facility will 
specifically help create at least 1000 jobs in the targeted export product 
value chains.  
85 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 14:  Project Procurement Risk Matrix  
16 – Main objective 
ASPIRE-AT Development Objective is: Inclusive and sustainable agriculture 
sector growth based on exports and domestic markets has increased 
incomes of rural producers and workers. 
In support of this, the specific objectives of the SSTC grant is to “Facilitate 
export growth of smallholder produced high value agricultural products to 
high value markets, such as China and Europe.” 
The grant will specifically focus on: 
1.  Mobilizing 
international  expertise  and  networks 
for 
negotiating competitive  export protocols (e.g.  sanitary and 
phyto-sanitary) for priority produce between Cambodia and 
target importing countries, especially China 
17 – Main expected 
outcomes 
18 – Key activities 
/outputs by outcome 
2.  Trade  promotion  and  establishing 
linkages  between 
Cambodian  exporters  and  importers  of  priority  products  in 
target markets, especially China market.  
Within this the grant will prioritize technical assistance and other critical 
activities outlined below that cannot easily be financed through other 
sources which are predominately loan-based financing from IFAD and EIB.    
Main expected outcome is that “Business Partnerships and investments in 
trade infrastructure have increased market access and rural employment 
for the benefit of smallholder producers and rural people“. 
ASPIRE-AT has three interlinked components: Component 1 will support 
investments in productive assets for the agriculture cooperatives and other 
producer organisations (AC/PO) to improve their production/post-
harvest/logistics capacities to meet both export and domestic market 
demand. Component 2 will support the enabling environment to incentivize 
the private sector to access markets and catalyse their business 
investments. Component 3 will support technical assistance to nurture, 
aggregate/graduate existing groups, including the business clusters 
supported by ASPIRE and AIMS, into registered Agriculture Cooperatives 
(AC) to engage with the private sector in remunerative market 
opportunities facilitated under component 1 and 2.  
SSTC facility has clear technical and operational advantages in supporting 
Component 2: Business Partnership and Market Access with a focus on 
priority high-value export products including tropical fruit (fresh and 
processed) and nuts (e.g. cashew). 
Sub-component 2.1 - Strengthening private investment for agricultural 
market and trade development: 
  Market exposure and trade promotion to meet potential customers 
in target international markets and understand the specific market 
requirements, dynamics and competition.  
  Bespoke technical investment advice to businesses on issues 
including specific modern technologies and equipment, operational 
processes, supplier management systems, business planning and 
cash flow management, product standards and certification 
requirements and compliance for market access (including. sanitary 
and phyto-sanitary, MRL, food safety).   
  Facilitation of links to centres of industry-leading international 
knowledge and expertise, including through knowledge exchange 
visits, training and technical support for groups of agri-businesses 
in each priority value chain. The objective is to establish systematic 
86 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 14:  Project Procurement Risk Matrix  
linkages at the industry level to recognized leading centres of 
expertise that can support industry competitiveness now and into 
the future.  
Component 2.2 - Strengthening the enabling environment for competitive 
agricultural value chains and trade 
Technical assistance for: 
  Negotiation of competitive export protocols and agreements with 
partner countries to create market access opportunities, especially 
with China 
  Design and operation of the planned Post-Harvest Reference 
Centre (x1) and other priority public services and infrastructure to 
support export protocol negotiation for priority products and to 
conduct scientific trials for optimal post-harvest handling and 
treatment, plant health etc. 
19 – Use of financial 
resources 
# 
1 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
Description 
Cost  
($US million) 
SSTC  
($US million) 
Productive Assets for Producer Organisations 
Investment in productive assets of POs 
and smallholders 
Enabling market infrastructure for POs 
TA for design and execution of 
investments 
Component 1 sub-total 
2 
2.1 
Business Partnership and Market Access 
Strengthening private investment for 
agricultural market and trade 
development 
Strengthening the enabling environment 
for competitive agricultural markets and 
trade 
Component 2 sub-total 
2.2 
3 
3.1 
3.2 
Linking Farmers to Value Chains 
Structure and Capacity of Producer 
Organisations 
Technical Advice, Centers of Excellence 
and Supporting services for AC/PO 
Component 3 sub-total 
4 
Project Management and M&E 
Total Project Financing 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
0.3 
0 
0 
0 
0.1 
0.3 
20 – Rationale for 
recipient selection 
The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) of Cambodia is 
proposed to be the grant recipient without competitive process for the 
following reasons: 
- 
This project will invest in agriculture and focus on strengthening the 
sector of export-led agricultural products;  
-  MAFF is the primary government institution officially mandated for the 
agricultural development in Cambodia; 
-  MAFF has been playing a leading role in orienting and supporting the 
production and processing of fruits and grains in their transformation 
and graduation into export-let sectors; 
-  MAFF has been instrumental in breakthrough efforts for market access 
of mango and longan from Cambodia to China 
-  MAFF is the primary strategic partner for IFAD and its Country 
- 
Programme in Cambodia for decades; it has successfully implemented a 
good number of IFAD-assisted projects, 
The proposed grant-financed project will be an integrated part of the 
IFAD Country Programme in Cambodia and it is designed to be a retrofit 
to the upcoming ASPIRE AT, currently being designed, to be under 
MAFF’s implementation. 
87 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 14:  Project Procurement Risk Matrix  
21 – Country 
ownership and 
institutional 
implementation 
arrangements 
22 – Supervision and 
M&E arrangement 
The proposal is the result of long-time consultation and partnership 
between the GoKC and IFAD’s country programme in Cambodia, and as 
response to the request of the senior officials of MAFF on behalf of the 
government to IFAD regarding IFAD tailored assistance to promote the 
export-led high value agriculture sector, including tropical fruits and nuts, 
with a particular emphasis on the priority Chinese market. 
MAFF will be responsible for the implementation of the grant. The project 
management and coordination will be streamlined into the ongoing ASPIRE 
management structure and to be taken over by the ASPIRE AT’s 
management structure once it is effective. It will ensure the key functions 
in coordination, M&E and KM in order to support the quality 
implementation of the SSTC facility. 
MAFF will therefore be in charge of the overall project management, 
coordination and reporting while agencies and line departments of MAFF 
will undertake the majority of technical work at national and sub-national 
levels as well as mobilize its technical resources in support where relevant. 
MAFF will take the lead in maintaining its continued partnership with 
different ministries and agencies, such as the Chamber of Commerce, 
Cambodia Customs, GACC, the civil society and the private sector. The 
vertical structure of implementation will follow the current ASPIRE and the 
upcoming ASPIRE AT and it will be aligned with the emerging decentralised 
administrative structures. 
Supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD in partnership with the 
Government, as one of the projects under the IFAD Country Programme in 
Cambodia, as part of the ASPIRE AT Supervision mission and 
Implementation support.  
The IFAD’s direct supervision will mainly address issues as following: 
-  Development effectiveness and focus including implementation 
progress, outputs and outcomes under related components, 
targeting and outreach, gender equality and women 
participation, agricultural productivity, nutrition if relevant, 
adaptation to climate change, 
-  Sustainability and scaling up including institutions and policy 
engagement, partnership building, human and social capital 
and empowerment, quality of project target group engagement 
and feedback, responsiveness of service providers, 
environment and NRM, exit strategy, potential for scaling up; 
-  Project management including M&E, KM, financial management 
and fiduciary aspects, and procurement; 
-  Risks and opportunities, and 
- 
Innovations and knowledge management 
Implementation support will be provided by IFAD as follow-ups of its direct 
supervision and progress review where necessary, and as response to 
possible supports required by the project management. Support will be 
conducted on a demand-driven basis and in accordance with needs 
identified.  
Monitoring, Evaluation and reporting. will be based on a logframe 
approach, adapted to IFAD’s on-line Operational Results Measurement 
System (ORMS). The project will pursue the good practices of the IFAD 
88 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 14:  Project Procurement Risk Matrix  
Country Programme in Cambodia in M&E, KM and learning, continue to 
apply the proven M&E application and to generate various knowledge 
products. 
The project will apply a results-based management approach which 
establishes a solid linkage between planning (including resource allocation), 
implementation, monitoring and expected results. The Project Annual Work 
Plan and Budget (AWPB) will be a basis for implementation and should 
clearly describe the strategic direction of the project for the coming year by 
resenting a budget estimate, the expected results under each component 
and how these results would be achieved with risk analysis if any. The 
preparation of AWPBs will be jointly conducted by the project management 
as part of ASPIRE AT. Monitoring will focus on output-level results, while 
evaluation likely at the grant project end will address the expected 
outcomes. Reporting will be periodic, at least on semi-annual and annual 
basis, including physical and financial progress, and as per best practices in 
the IFAD Country Programme in Cambodia. 
Risk 
Levels 
High 
23 – Risks and 
mitigation measures 
Main Risks 
COVID-19 
uncertainty causes 
travel restrictions, 
including for 
exchange with 
Chinese experts 
and businesses 
Fast changing 
market dynamics 
and export price 
fluctuations 
High 
and 
medium 
Residual Risk 
Level 
Medium 
Medium 
Mitigations 
The project will 
make flexible 
planning, adopt 
and mobilize ICT 
instruments for 
virtual and 
remote 
implementation 
where possibly 
efficient. 
The project 
invests in 
enhanced 
productivity and 
reduced losses 
through the 
implementation 
of its component 
1 and fostering 
an enabling 
policy framework 
and improved 
technical support 
system for sector 
development, 
while increased 
price premium 
from processed 
89 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 14:  Project Procurement Risk Matrix  
Medium 
Low efficiency of 
integration into 
ongoing and 
upcoming projects 
products and on-
farm IGA will be 
promoted as 
diversification 
coping strategies 
for the fruit 
sector and 
households 
respectively. 
Integration of 
management 
teams, 
coordination in 
planning and 
implementation, 
and expand into 
production 
provinces that 
AIMS and ASPIRE 
are not covering. 
Medium and 
low 
Ambitious SSTC 
exchange agenda 
Medium  Recruitment of 
Low 
consultant 
advisor/facilitator 
to tailor planning 
and executions.  
Innovations promoted. The opportunities of innovative potential are 
present at technical level, the project mainly promotes the following three 
innovations: 
-  Cross-border 4Ps. The project will take advantage of the recent 
free trade agreement between Cambodia and China, and 
pursue the ongoing innovative approach of public-private-
producer partnership under the Country Programme in 
Cambodia but extend it to a cross-border dimension with public 
and private partners in China as export destination. 
-  Regional cooperation. The project promotes regional 
cooperation and exchanges in agri-sector policy framework, 
technical service support system and production and marketing 
of identified fruit value chains. The implementation will involve 
the synergy building between the Country programmes in 
Cambodia and China, stimulate technical exchanges, 
experience sharing and learning between IFAD-assisted 
projects under the two Country Programmes and exploring 
cooperation opportunities with and between the IFAD 
institutional partners in the two countries. 
-  Synergized public-private participation in export and trade 
promotion. The project aims to achieve a result-based 
90 
24  – Innovation 
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 14:  Project Procurement Risk Matrix  
participation in export and trade events with synergized 
contributions from the public and private actors and 
supporters, promoting the export of agricultural commodities 
as one of the country trademarks for Cambodia in an export 
market of great opportunities for both fresh and processed 
products 
Exporting of high value agricultural products, including fruits and nuts to 
China and other premium markets is a high priority of the Royal 
Government of Cambodia. Good practices and success stories will be 
recorded during implementation of the project for replication. The success 
of the grant will be sustained through the regular national budget support 
from Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Fisheries. The success will pave 
the way for Cambodia to scale up into other international markets.   
25 – Scaling up and 
sustainability  
26 – Additional 
information and/or 
documentation 
91 
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
1/11
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Overall Summary
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Project Budgeting
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Project Internal Controls
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Project External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Stakeholders
2/11
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
Change in GoKC commitment to agriculture development, for example if there is a
change of government following the election due in mid-2023. However, based on
understanding of the Cambodian political situation, the likelihood of major change
of policy towards agriculture is assessed as low.
Mitigations:
The project is strongly aligned with the agriculture sector policy of GoKC, which is
expected to remain stable.
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Governance
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Private agribusiness unwilling to invest because of governance concerns, for
example hidden transaction costs associated with agriculture processing and
exporting.
Mitigations:
The project design assumes a willingness to invest consistent with past experience
/ observations. Through policy engagement, IFAD will continue to support GoKC to
improve ease of doing business in the agriculture sector.
Macroeconomic
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
International economic recession reduces market opportunities. There is a risk that
current economic trends lead to a reduction in demand for the export commodities
targeted by the project, impacting on the viability of investments financed by the
project.
Mitigations:
(1) project will target domestic as well as export markets, with domestic demand for
e.g. safe vegetables, backyard chicken less likely to be affected, and (2) feasibility
study of individual investments will take into account market conditions at the time.
Project will maintain flexibility so that production / marketing channels can be
reoriented in case that trade conditions with specific partners deteriorate.
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Impact of international events on prices worsens Cambodia’s terms of trade.
Cambodia imports all its fuel and fertiliser and most capital equipment, so increases
in costs of these items are likely to harm Cambodia’s competitiveness. Conversely,
increased food prices could favour Cambodia as a food exporting country, but this
is difficult to predict.
Mitigations:
(1) monitor the situation and adjust strategy if it seems likely that some value chains
become uncompetitive overall; and (2) assess viability of investments based on
best available price information. The project inherently spreads risk by supporting a
range of domestic and export value chains with different characteristics.
3/11
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Agriculture sector, particularly export markets, severely impacted by
macroeconomic instability, perhaps due to external events
Mitigations:
Project will balance focus on export and domestic value chains, with domestic VC
less vulnerable
Fragility and Security
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Insecurity (for example, political conflict, criminal activity) posing a risk to project
implementation. Despite its history as a fragile state, Cambodia has maintained
good internal security over a long period (25 years) and so this category of risk is
assessed as low.
Mitigations:
IFAD team will monitor the situation closely and take necessary actions on time.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Change in government policy e.g. on agriculture trade, ACs etc.
Mitigations:
Project aligned with current policy, and no major changes expected.
Policy Development and Implementation
Risk:
Risk: Key policies (trade, ACs, etc) not effectively implemented.
Mitigations:
Project interventions are diverse and not over-dependent on a single aspect of
policy.
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
Project directly finances or creates incentives that encourage or facilitate
unsustainable environmental practices (e.g. inappropriate chemical use;
encroachment on protected natural environment areas).
Mitigations:
Social, Environmental and Climate risk assessments applied to investments and
appropriate criteria applied.
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Risk:
4/11
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Prolonged droughts, intense flooding and changes in seasonality due to climate
change will likely affect production of key crops rendering them non-viable or
uncompetitive.
Mitigations:
Assessment of climate risks per value chain and promotion of climate-smart
varieties and production techniques.
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Design assumptions on direction or pace of transition to market economy are
flawed 
Cambodia’s transition to a market economy, including in the rural sectors, has
been rapid in recent years. There is a low risk that severe exogenous shocks
(related to world economic developments) could slow the transition, though likely
not reverse it.
Mitigations:
Design assumptions are closely aligned with evidence and lessons learned from
previous projects. Stakeholders including producers, POs and agri-businesses as
well as agriculture focused development agencies have been extensively consulted
on the project design and there is strong consensus around the key design
assumptions in this regard. However, IFAD and GoKC will continue to monitor the
situation.
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Insufficient scope exists for smallholder farmers in IFAD target group to compete in
the market and earn adequate returns to land and labour. The transition to market
agriculture is likely to favour larger producers in some sectors. The project design
assumes that in key pro-poor value chains smallholder-based production can
continue to be competitive and can provide returns that are attractive compared to
non-farm occupations.
Mitigations:
Project will prioritise pro-poor value chains where smallholders already produce
successfully, particularly those where success has been demonstrated in previous
projects. A set of criteria for targeting value chains is included in design and further
studies will be conducted to validate the initial selection of value chains.
Technical Soundness
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Financing instruments (mixture of loans and grants) are not attractive for partner
financial institutions (PFIs) to deliver. 
Market-based lending including in the agriculture sector is almost entirely based on
land as collateral, with analysis of business plans and cash-flows by financing
institutions being a secondary consideration. The project seeks to increase access
to finance by developing, in partnership with banks and PFIs, financial products that
do not depend on land as collateral.
Mitigations:
Financing instruments based on existing models, address key constraints including
PFI risk, and have been discussed with potential PFIs. In particular ARDB has
engaged in detailed discussions on the design of the blended grant and loan
instruments in Component 1, and the planned combination of loans and credit
guarantees in Component 2 has been discussed with SME Bank and CCGC.
5/11
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Financing instruments (mixture of loans and grants) are not attractive for agri-
businesses, POs and farmers to invest. The project design assumes that farmers,
POs and agribusinesses will be willing to borrow to invest at interest rates close to
those available on the commercial market, supported by a grant element
(Component 1) or credit guarantees (Component 2). Essentially, the assumption is
that the key barrier, overcome by the financing instrument designs, is the need for
land as collateral
Mitigations:
A range of financing instruments have been trialed by previous projects, GoKC’s
policy banks and private FIs. There is considerable evidence of farmer willingness
to invest when credit is available on suitable terms (cost of credit under the project
will be considerably below that offered for small loans by MFIs). There is scope to
adjust the design and management of the financing instruments to increase the
match to borrower needs. There is a remaining risk that the attractiveness of
ASPIRE-AT finance could be reduced if other donor projects make finance
available for the same market segments on more generous terms (e.g. FAO GCF
project proposing zero-interest rate loans. IFAD will continue to discuss with GoKC
and other stakeholders to mitigate this risk
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Financing instruments (mixture of loans and grants) are not attractive for agri-
businesses, POs and farmers to invest. The project design assumes that farmers,
POs and agribusinesses will be willing to borrow to invest at interest rates close to
those available on the commercial market, supported by a grant element
(Component 1) or credit guarantees (Component 2). Essentially, the assumption is
that the key barrier, overcome by the financing instrument designs, is the need for
land as collateral.
Mitigations:
A range of financing instruments have been trialed by previous projects, GoKC’s
policy banks and private FIs. There is considerable evidence of farmer willingness
to invest when credit is available on suitable terms (cost of credit under the project
will be considerably below that offered for small loans by MFIs). There is scope to
adjust the design and management of the financing instruments to increase the
match to borrower needs. There is a remaining risk that the attractiveness of
ASPIRE-AT finance could be reduced if other donor projects make finance
available for the same market segments on more generous terms (e.g. FAO GCF
project proposing zero-interest rate loans. IFAD will continue to discuss with GoKC
and other stakeholders to mitigate this risk.
Risk:
High
Moderate
Weak business planning capacity of POs and farmers leads to failed investments.
Most existing POs at present have low business planning and investment analysis
capacity, and farmers have limited financial literacy. Therefore, it is likely that a
proportion of investments proposed for ASPIRE-AT financing will be financially non-
viable or non-sustainable.
Mitigations:
The project will work with a service provider to assist preparation of business plans
and conduct feasibility studies of investments. A clear set of criteria for approval of
investments will be developed and ARDB will be responsible for screening against
these criteria. This function of ARDB is congruent with (though somewhat expands)
normal checks and due diligence conducted by ARDB, which has an incentive to
avoid high risk investments.
6/11
Risk:
High
Moderate
Public sector investments financed by the project not sustainable because of lack
of institutional plans and / or operating budgets. A range of public sector
infrastructure investments have been proposed for project financing. All these
investments will require operation.
Mitigations:
Design establishes criteria for approval of investments. All major public sector
investments will be subject to detailed feasibility study and preparation of an
institutional plan.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Risk:
Insufficient project management capacity to successfully deliver project, given
significant complexity and relatively “lean” resources allocated to project
management at the request of GoKC.
Mitigations:
Project management responsibilities assigned to experienced ASPIRE Secretariat
with demonstrated capacity. IFAD will continue to monitor the situation and work
with GoKC to develop solutions if implementation arrangements appear
insufficient.
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Partner Financial Institutions do not have capacity to process financing applications
at the required volume (this has been an issue with previous projects including
AIMS).
Mitigations:
Project will work with a skilled service provider to prepare financing applications
and feasibilty studies, reducing the workload on the PFI.
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Risk:
Insufficient capacity to collect sufficient / reliable data on project outcomes and
impacts.
Mitigations:
Data collection based on established MIS used in ASPIRE and will collect data
through the ACs.
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
ASPIRE contracted staff and Adviser might not be retained for ASPIRE AT due to
the project transition. 
ARDB and SME Bank staff are new to IFAD project
7/11
Mitigations:
ASPIRE AT and start early with retroactive financing option. 
Even recruitment of new staff required, the project already has good procedures
and experience to recruit new staff for project. 
Training on anti-corruption policy to ARDB and SME Bank staff shall be required.
Project Budgeting
Risk:
PMU already has experience and good knowledge on preparation of AWPB, the
budget process also need to be prepared by the bank for line credits.
Mitigations:
Bank staff shall be trained on preparation of AWPB, budget and cash forecast.
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Risk:
ASPIRE already have experience with IFAD disbursement mechanism (Withdrawal
Application, IFR, ICP) and familiar with use of DA and project accounts. However
fund flow to project accounts of ARDB and SME Banks is new to ASPIRE.
Mitigations:
Fund flow to project accounts of ARDB and SME Banks need to be specified in the
Sub-Agreement to ensure the smooth flow of fund for Credit lines. 
IFR based disbursement is fully adapted with ASPIRE AT.
Project Internal Controls
Risk:
Current internal control and internal audit arrangement for ASPIRE are deemed to
be low risk. Project mostly complied with financial manual and SOP. Line credits
activities will be control by the bank internal control procedures.
Mitigations:
Ensure bank internal control is aligned with IFAD financial control requirement
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Risk:
Financial Manual and SOP shall be imposed for ASPIRE AT. Lesson learnt from
current ASPIRE can improve further in next phase. 
Successful real-time accounting software has been developed and enhanced in
few year that shall be used for ASPIRE AT
Mitigations:
Customization of Accounting software to adapt with next phase is recommended. 
IFR shall be fully adapted with ASPIRE AT.
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Project External Audit
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Financial Statement shall still be audited by private auditing firm under the
appointment of MEF. 
Line credit will be implemented independently by ARDB and SME bank and shall
be included in project audit.
8/11
Mitigations:
Project accounts at ARDB and SME Bank will be audited to ensure the
completeness of financial reporting and control, conditions of the audit will be
included in the Agreement between ASPIRE AT and ARDB/SME Banks.
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
There is no integrated system to monitor procurement values and records at the
General Department of Public Procurement (PEFA 2021). The Law on Public
Procurement provides the adoption of e-procurement at an appropriate time.
Presently, no government agency uses e-procurement.
Mitigations:
Using NOTUS and ICP Contract Monitoring Tool for monitoring project
procurement activities; Upload information on procurement plans, contract awards
and resolution of procurement complaints on IAs/project websites.
Accountability and Transparency
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
The Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) for 2021 remains below 30 (score at
23/100, ranked 157th out of 180 countries).
Mitigations:
Conduct prior and ex-post reviews to strengthen enforcement of the debarment
system.
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Limited capacity and experience to conduct procurement activities at sub-national
levels. Regular examinations for awarding professional procurement certifications
are not yet established.
Mitigations:
Retain competent ASPIRE-I procurement staff and specialists; Provide training and
periodic coaching to project and sub-national project staff. Carry out coaching, on-
the-job trainings and refresher trainings on procurement (IFAD project procurement
guidelines and manual, ICP, NOTUS, and Standard Operating Procedures on
Procurement for All Externally Financed Projects/Programs in Cambodia).
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Procurement processes (planning, bidding, contract award and contract
implementation) are often delayed.
Mitigations:
9/11
Launch recruitment processes of staff and key service providers, timed so that key
staff and key service providers will be contracted in time after the project
effectiveness date. Carry out coaching, on-the-job trainings and refresher trainings
on procurement (IFAD project procurement guidelines and manual, ICP, NOTUS,
and Standard Operating Procedures on Procurement for All Externally Financed
Projects/Programs in Cambodia). The Secretariat monitor and update regularly
implementation progress of the procurement plan with both planned and actual
data.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
While project primarily supports existing agricultural areas, already under
production status and managed by members of formal and/or informal producers’
organizations, it is possible that the project could create incentives to expand
production into areas that are not under production and / or may be protected and /
or of biodiversity importance.
Mitigations:
The project targeting strategy will systematically exclude interventions and activities
involving habitats that are legally protected, officially proposed for protection, or
recognized as protected by traditional local communities and/or authoritative
sources (e.g. wetlands, National Park, Nature Conservancy, Indigenous
Community Conserved Area, ICCA, etc.)
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The project is likely to involve inputs of fertilizers and other modifying agents,
however the related risks are expected to be minor and dispersed. The project is
likely to involve or lead to procurement, supply and/or result in the use of pesticides
on crops, livestock, aquaculture or forestry.
Mitigations:
The project will involve inputs suppliers and producers’ organizations to promote
safe and efficient use of fertilizers and modifying agents. Good Agricultural
Practices (GAP) will be promoted for vegetable production in particular. The project
will not directly procure pesticides, but the producers are likely to purchase and use
pesticides such as fungicides in vegetable production. However, the impacts are
expected to be minor, and the project will engage with agrochemical suppliers and
producers’ organizations to promote safe use of pesticides and encourage
producers in following GAP guidelines.
Cultural Heritage
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The project could possibly be located in areas that are considered to have
archaeological (prehistoric), paleontological, historical, cultural, artistic, and
religious values or contains features considered as critical cultural heritage.
Mitigations:
Do not approve projects to located in or around sacred forests and community
groves and archaeological sites.
Indigenous People
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
10/11
Depending on the selected target provinces, the project could be sited in areas
where indigenous peoples are present (including the project area of influence).
This implies the risk that project activities could negatively impact on interests,
livelihoods or culture of indigenous peoples. However, as the project supports
activities by smallholder farmers and their producer organisations (rather than large-
scale infrastructure investments, for example) this risk is considered to be only
medium and reduced to low by appropriate mitigation measures.
Mitigations:
Where project is targeting the area where the indigenous people are present,
stakeholders’ consultations and FPIC process will be adopted at an early stage of
project interventions. The project will not affect indigenous peoples’ rights, lands,
natural resources, territories, livelihoods, knowledge, social fabric, traditions,
governance systems, and culture or heritage (tangible and intangible) either directly
or indirectly.
Labour and Working Conditions
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Through its interventions under component 2, the project will support the
emergence of entrepreneurs in the agro processing industry sector. This may
include operations where producers and other agricultural workers are typically
exposed to significant occupational and safety risks, such as shelling cashew nuts,
or peeling mangoes.
Mitigations:
These potential risks will be further screened during the detailed design. 
In any case, the project will ensure that the private partners involved in the project
implementation will comply with national labor laws and international commitments
in terms of workers’ safety, gender inequalities, discriminations, forced labor,
working children, and other indecent working conditions.
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Projects could have minimal impact traffic accidents through the rehabilitation of the
farm road. Project could have significant impact on the spread of COVID 19 in the
community through the coordination meeting at the community level. The
community can exposure to hazardous materials, or respiratory effects from air
emissions if the agricultural inputs are not used properly.
Mitigations:
Road safety will be included in the construction package. Project will promote
implementation of GAP and sustainable soil fertility management.
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
No activity from the project involves with physical and economic resettlement.
Mitigations:
n/a
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
The project is not expected to have a significant impact on greenhouse gas
emissions.
11/11
Mitigations:
n/a
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Risk:
the expected hazards in the project intervention area are assessed as “High” for
river flood, coastal flood, urban flood, cyclone, extreme heat and wildfires. Water
scarcity (agricultural droughts and/or dry spells) is assessed as Low.
Mitigations:
Selection of investments under Component 1 will be informed by a climate risk and
vulnerability analysis, integration of adaptation measures into their design
specifications and promotion of climate resilient practices and technologies.
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Insufficient consultation / engagement with stakeholders on key project
interventions.
Mitigations:
Stakeholder engagement based on ACs, with governance benchmarks including
consultation and engagement to be achieved as criteria for investments.
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
No effective channel established for investigation and redress of stakeholder
grievances.
Mitigations:
Multi-level grievance redress mechanism to be established and information made
available to project affected persons through multiple channels (online, information
leaflets, meetings).
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
ASPIRE AT 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
ANNEX 10: EXIT STRATEGY 
ASPIRE-AT  Exit  Strategy  has  the  objective  of  ensuring  that,  after  project  support  ends,  project  direct  impacts  on 
beneficiaries’  livelihoods  and  capacity  built  in  producer  organisations,  the  private  sector  and  public  services  can  be 
sustained.  
The requirements for this are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
For farmers, the key criteria  for sustainability of benefits will include secure access to markets, access to 
services  including  financial  services,  access  to  improved,  climate-resilient  and  sustainable  production 
technology  (including  access  to  future  technology  developments)  and  increased  climate  resilience  farm-
based livelihoods. 
For  producer  organisations,  sustainability  requires  capable  management  in  place  (staff  and  systems); 
equitable  and  profitable  partnerships  with  private  agri-businesses,  profitable  operation  of  enterprises 
including sufficient  income to cover PO operating  costs; access to credit and other financial services and 
access to technical knowledge. 
Enterprises supported by the project will be existing enterprises and the project will seek to ensure that the 
enterprises have enhanced capacity to invest, operate and add value in the target value chains, including 
through partnerships with POs. 
Public  services  supported  by  the  project  will  achieve  sustainability  through  sound  institutional  plans 
(prepared as a pre-condition for investment) and secure funding of operation and maintenance costs.  
Project interventions will be designed and implemented to create pathways to achieving sustainability in all these areas. 
Project support will be delivered through mechanisms that match market-based services as closely as possible, and will 
be scaled down during the project period, particularly after MTR.  
The financing instrument combining loans with “blocked deposit” grants in Component 1 is intended to act as a bridge 
to market-based financing through (1) demonstrating to farmers and POs the viability and profitability of borrowing to 
invest in productive assets, supported by increased financing literacy; (2) increasing the asset base of farmers and POs 
to increase their collateral available for further loans; and (3) increasing ARDB’s understanding of the target value chains 
and borrowers to increase their confidence to lend to this market segment. Digital solutions will support development 
of production, cash flow and credit history for smallholders and PO supporting bankable investment plans. In addition, 
the project will explorer with ARDB options to move to cash-flow based lending. 
Capacity building support to POs will assist them through formation / strengthening and one investment cycle, with 
follow-up coaching and support continuing for one to two years after the investment. POs will be supported to recruit 
administrative staff during the early part of this cycle and will take over payment of the staff from their own funds on a 
phased basis. Infrastructure grants to POs will be restricted to those that have not had this type of support previously, 
so as to give an early boost to newly created POs whilst avoiding creating expectations of repeated access to grants. 
Support for enterprises under Sub-Component 2.1 will be based around building partnerships and linkages with POs, 
with trade partners and with financial institutions. Financing will be through commercial  partner financial institutions 
under  conditions  similar  to  those  available  in  the  market.  Sub-Component  2.1  will  also  have  a  demonstrative  “first 
mover” effect encouraging additional investors in the value chains. Hence, the transition to sustainability is inherent in 
the design of this sub-component. 
Sustainability of public service facilities financed by ASPIRE-AT (trade facilitation infrastructure under Sub-Component 
2.2,  and  Centres  of  Excellence  under  Sub-Component  3.2)  will  be  subject  to  preparation  and  validation  of  a  sound 
institutional  plan  in  each  case.  Institutional  plans  will  emphasize  the  importance  of  private  sector  partnerships  for 
sustainability and will pre-identify the revenues required for operation and maintenance of the facilities. Under EIB’s 
Framework Loan arrangements, submission of feasibility studies demonstrating compliance with these criteria will be a 
pre-condition for approval of financing.
155 
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
 Gender Transformative
 Youth Sensitive
1/2
 Nutrition Sensitive
 Persons with Disabilities
 Indigenous Peoples
 Climate Finance
 Adaptive Capacity
Situation
analysis
 National gender policies,
 National youth policies,
strategies and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems
and opportunities, by gender
strategies and actors
 Main youth groups
 Challenges and
opportunities by youth
group
 National nutrition
policies, strategies and
actors
 Key nutrition problems
and underlying causes, by
group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
 National policies,
strategies and actors
 Main groupings among
PwDs
 Context-based barriers
and opportunities for PwDs
 International standards,
national policies, strategies
and key IPs' organizations
 Main IPs communities,
demographic, social, cultural
and political characteristics
 Important livelihoods
constraints and opportunities
for IPs and their cultural
heritage
Theory of
change
Logframe
indicators
 Gender policy objectives
 Pathways to youth
(empowerment, voice,
workload)
socioeconomic
empowerment
 Gender transformative
 Youth employment
pathways
 Policy engagement on
included in project
objectives/activities
GEWE
 Outreach disaggregated
 Outreach
by sex, youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Women are > 40% of
outreach beneficiaries
 IFAD empowerment index
(IE.2.1)
disaggregated by sex,
youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Persons with new
jobs/employment
opportunities (CI 2.2.1)
Human
and
financial
resources
 Staff with gender TORs
 Funds for gender
 Staff with youth TORs
 Funds for youth
activities
 Funds for IFAD
empowerment index in M&E
budget
activities
 Nutrition pathways
 Causal linkage between
problems, outcomes and
impacts
 Pathways to PwDs’
 Pathways to IPs'
socioeconomic empowerment
using a twin-track approach
socioeconomic
empowerment
 Outreach disaggregated
by sex, youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Targeted support to
improve nutrition (CI 1.1.8)
Outcome level CIs
 CI 1.2.8 MDDW
 CI 1.2.9 KAP
 Staff or partner with
nutrition TORs
 Funds for nutrition
activities
 Outreach disaggregated
by sex, youth, disability and
IPs (if appropriate)
 Outreach indicator
disaggregated by sex, youth
and IPs
 IPs are > 30% of target
beneficiaries
 Staff with disability
inclusion-specific TORs
 Funds for disability
inclusion-related activities
(including accessibility)
 Staff with IPs-specific
TORs
 Funds for IPs related
activities, including FPIC
$14,357,000
$0
$14,357,000
IFAD
Adaptation
Finance
IFAD
Mitigation
Finance
Total IFAD
Climate-
focused
Finance
ECG
Remarks
Gender
Nutrition
Youth
Persons with Disabilities
Indigenous Peoples
☐ No social inclusion themes
2/2
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 11 Stakeholder Analysis
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 11: Stakeholder Analysis 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
National 
Government 
Agencies 
MAFF 
Agriculture Forestry and 
Fisheries Sector 
Executing Agency 
Project Execution 
MAFF-GDA 
(1) Food security; (2) Quality 
and safety agriculture 
product; (3) Productivity 
improvement through 
diversification; (4) Increase 
agriculture Value Addition; 
and (5) Market assurance  
Component 2.2 
Strengthening 
the enabling 
environment for 
competitive 
agricultural value 
chains and trade 
MoWA 
Gender equality and women's 
empowerment 
Gender 
ARDB 
State-owned commercial 
bank specializing in 
agriculture sector.  
Implementing 
Upgrade critical public 
services and associated 
infrastructure to enable 
competitive export growth, 
with a focus on export-
oriented plant health and 
quarantine services. Also 
support a review of policies 
and regulations affecting the 
priority sectors and proposals 
for adjustment to strengthen 
competitiveness. 
Oversee Gender Action Plan 
and support a review of 
policies and regulations 
affecting Gender 
transformative in Agriculture 
Sector.   
Financing loans and grants to 
smallholders and POs under 
Component 1.1 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
SME Bank 
State-owned commercial 
bank specializing in SME 
sector. 
Implementing 
MoWRAM 
Water Resources – and 
Meteorology 
Support and 
complement 
Rural Development and 
Indigenous People  
Support and 
complement  
Commerce (domestic, import 
and export) 
Support and 
complement 
MRD 
MoC 
NCDD 
Financing loans to Agri-
businesses under Component 
2.1 
Management of public 
irrigation systems, climate 
information through CAISAR  
Rural roads and Indigenous 
People support Implementer 
of SAAMBAT 
Implementer of AIMS 
Business registration 
Promoting democratic 
development through 
decentralization and 
deconcentration reforms 
throughout Cambodia. 
Support and 
complement 
Implementation of TSSD AF 
and CAISAR 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-National 
Government 
PDAFF 
Agriculture Forestry and 
Fisheries Sector 
Implementing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Formation and registration of 
ACs Project implementation 
support  
M&E 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
Provincial 
Administration
, District 
Administration
, 
Commune 
Administration   
Subnational service delivery 
under the authority of the 
central level of governments. 
Support  
Overall coordination support 
at subnational level 
Support  
Local development planning 
and coordination at commune 
level  
Public order and security; 
management of public 
services; public welfare; 
socioeconomic development; 
environment, natural 
resources, and culture; 
consultation with resident 
and community groups. 
 
 
Financing Agencies 
IFAD 
DP 
Financier 
Financing 
EIB 
DP 
Financier 
Financing 
Supervision 
EUD 
DP 
World Bank 
DP 
Partner 
Partner 
Supervision 
Complementary with EU 
country programme 
Financing Cambodia 
Agriculture Sector 
Development Project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
ADB 
DP 
Partner  
Agriculture Value Chain 
Competitiveness and Safety 
Project 
Financing partner for TSSD 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AfD/KWF 
DP 
Partner 
Financier of WAT4CAM 
 
 
 
Financier of RID4CAM 
USAID 
SDC 
DP 
DP 
Partner 
Partner 
Financier of Harvest and has 
MOU with IFAD 
Financier of CHAINS and 
others through, SWISS 
Contact, CARITAS and HERK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UN and Rome 
Based Agencies 
UNDP 
UN Agency 
Partner 
Value chain activities, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WFP 
UN / Rome-Based Agencyt 
Partner 
FAO 
UN / Rome-Based Agency 
Partner 
Climate change response, and 
digital application  
Data systems and price 
information   
Food security and nutrition 
Setting up food control 
system and implement Public-
Social-Private Partnerships for 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
Ecologically-Sound Agriculture 
and Resilient Livelihood in 
Northern Tonle Sap Basin 
(PEARL) project.  
Co-facilitator of TWG-AW 
Private Sector 
Agri-businesses 
Value Chain 
Investments 
Investors, partners of POs etc.   
 
 
 
 
 
MFIs/Commerc
ial banks 
(including AMK 
project under 
IFAD NSO 
facility)  
Farmer Apex 
Organisations 
FNN 
CFAP 
Private Financial 
Partners 
Retail financial partners of 
SME Bank 
Network of village-based 
farmer organizations that acts 
as an umbrella to represent 
and serve the interests of 
self-help associations, 
agricultural cooperatives, and 
provides technical assistances 
on capacity building. 
Network of village-based 
farmer organizations that acts 
as an umbrella to represent 
and serve the interests of 
Support and 
complement 
Mapping FO; Networking of 
FO to country level; 
Representation of FO; Engage 
in policy dialogue and 
advocated for FO; promote 
stakeholder feedback.   
Support and 
complement 
Mapping FO; Networking of 
FO to country level; 
Representation of FO; Engage 
in policy dialogue and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
self-help associations, 
agricultural cooperatives, and 
provides technical assistances 
on capacity building. 
advocated for FO; promote 
stakeholder feedback.   
Producer 
Organisations 
UAC 
Union Agriculture 
Cooperative  
Higher-level 
producer 
organisations 
Organise production and 
marketing 
Partner with private sector 
Investments 
CACC 
AC 
BCs 
Farmers 
A pioneer of Public Private 
Producer Partnership by 
transforming farmers to be 
entrepreneurs. 
Higher-level 
producer and 
buyer 
organisations 
Organise production and 
marketing 
Partner with private sector 
Investments 
Agriculture Cooperative and 
other type of registered 
farmer organization  
Producer 
Organisations 
Organise production and 
marketing 
Business cluster and other 
type of the un-registered 
producer group 
Informal 
Producer 
Organisations 
Beneficiaries 
Partner with private sector 
Investments 
Aggregate and add members 
to form ACs or other formal 
PO types 
Form Producer Organisations, 
invest for increased 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type 
Agency 
Mandate / main focus 
Direct Role in 
Project 
Relevant related activities 
Most Relevant Pathways of Change 
Increase 
Produc-
tivity 
Increase 
Employ-
ment 
Increase 
climate 
resilience 
Increase 
Access to 
Finance 
Expand 
Market 
Governance 
and enabling 
environment 
productivity, adopt climate 
resilient practices etc. 
Youth 
Organization  
Empower Cambodian youth 
to improve the quality of life 
in vulnerable communities 
through skill training activity 
Support and 
complement 
Complement through skill 
development fund and 
SAAMBAT activity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indigenous People 
Organization 
Empower indigenous people 
to improve the quality of life.  
Support and 
complement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mapping IP Organization and 
networking them at the 
country level; Representation 
voice of IP in policy dialogue; 
promote stakeholder 
feedback.   
People with 
Disabilities 
Organization  
Support People with 
Disabilities in agriculture 
sector.  
Support and 
complement 
Promote stakeholder 
feedback. 
 
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 12 Sstc Proposal
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 12: SSTC Proposal  
nex 9: SSTC Proposal 
Project proposal template 
The proposal should not exceed 3500 words, excluding annexes, pre-filled sections and other officially 
required documents. The word limit will be strictly enforced. 
1 – Title of the project 
2 – GRIPs ID 
3 - Project leader and 
contact details 
4 – Sponsoring 
division  
5 – Co-sponsoring 
divisions and contact 
details 
6 – Proposed value of 
project 
7 – Expected co-
financing 
8 – Focus 
country/countries  
9 – Recipient(s) and 
contact details 
10 – Categories of the 
Recipient(s) 
11 – Project duration 
12 – Selected strategic 
priorities 
13 – Selected thematic 
areas 
Support to the Export-Led Agricultural Sector in Cambodia (SELAS) 
tbc 
Sakphouseth Meng, Country Programme Officer, APR. Email: 
m.sakphouseth@ifad.org 
Asian and the Pacific Division 
tbc 
US$300,000 
The SSTC project proposal is an integral part of Agriculture Services 
Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade (ASPIRE - 
AT) which is under design with total investment of around US$ 137 million. 
Available financing totals around USD 182 million. IFAD loan will finance 
USD 48 million (26% of the total budget); the Government of Cambodia will 
provide USD 17 million (9.3%); European Investment Bank (EIB) will 
contribute USD 60 million (32%); a proposed IFAD-China SSTC grant of USD 
0.3 million; USD 43 million from PFI contribution, USD 3 million from 
beneficiary and SME contribution and there is a funding gap of USD 11 
million. 
SSTC financing plays a critical role by i) establishing strong link with Chinese 
authorities and businesses for technical collaboration within the project for 
trade development with the priority Chinese market, and ii) financing 
specific activities which cannot be easily financed via the main loan-based 
financing of the overall programme. 
Cambodia 
The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) 
H.E Dr. Meas Pyseth 
Under Secretary of State  
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries  
No 200 Norodom Blvd., Sangkat Tonle Basak, Phnom Penh 
Email: pysethmeas1@gmail.com 
Phone: +855 12 759 440 
Developing Member State 
January 2023 – December 2024 
☒ Promote innovations in strengthening the productive, managerial, 
financial and marketing capacities of rural people 
☒ Pilot inclusive production and business models that generate higher 
incomes 
☒ Promote investments and trade 
☐ Strengthening the capacities of farmers and their organizations to 
enhance resilience against disasters 
14 – National COVID-
19 context and 
rationale 
☒ Facilitating access to markets in conditions of specific barriers in a given 
context 
☐ Delivering up-to-date agriculture-related information to smallholder 
producers through digital services 
☒ Building trade capacities to enable smallholder producers to meet 
quality and sanitary standards of overseas markets 
Cambodia managed the COVID-19 pandemic well, with around 3,000 
deaths reported. About 81% of the population is vaccinated. The 
Government of the Kingdom of Cambodia (GoKC) has lifted most 
restrictions on travel and activities. However, the pandemic led to a near 
halt in international tourism arrivals and heavily impacted domestic retail 
services. Many migrant workers lost employment and returned to 
Cambodia during 2020, resulting in increased unemployment and reduced 
incomes from remittances. GDP growth was 2.2% in 2021 and is projected 
at 4.5% in 20221. Poverty headcount increased to 17.8% and to 22.8% in 
rural areas2 due to the pandemic. The government released social 
transfers, as support for ID Poor households through the national COVID-19 
cash transfer emergency programmes for the most-affected families. 
Cambodia did not face a crisis of food shortage at national level, but 
marginal and rural vulnerable groups have been affected in their daily 
income and food security. 
Cambodia’s agriculture sector has proved resilient during the COVID 
pandemic providing a reminder of the important role of agriculture and its 
sustained growth in ensuring food security and rural livelihoods, for both 
recovery and building back better.  
As it emerges from the COVID crisis, Cambodia faces new macro-economic 
challenges due to the interrelated risks of global trade recession and the 
impact on commodity prices of the war in Ukraine. As an open, trading 
economy with total exports equal to 61% of GDP in 2020, Cambodia is 
vulnerable to a slowdown in global demand. The agriculture sector is likely 
to experience significant impacts from increasing fuel costs and rising 
fertilizer costs. The Ukraine crisis has also led to increasing costs of 
foodstuffs, including grains and cooking oil.  
Agriculture sector growth, particularly based on increasing exports through 
formal channels and taking advantage of recent trade agreements, is a key 
element of GoKC’s strategy for post-pandemic recovery. However, there 
are still significant barriers to overcome, particularly in value chains (VCs) 
based on smallholder production, to achieve the scale and consistent 
quality of produce meeting the needs of export and domestic markets. 
Cambodia has a small but growing number of successful agri-businesses 
serving both domestic and export markets but growth of the sector 
(beyond the rice value chain) needs more capable, experienced and well-
capitalized firms and an associated enabling environment of public 
infrastructure and services critical to support the development of 
internationally competitive Cambodian supply chains in priority sectors 
from which smallholders can earn a decent living. 
Within the overall ASPIRE-AT objectives, SSTC investments will specifically 
support public and private investment to increase the number and 
1 World Bank Cambodia Country Economic Update, December 2021 
2 Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey 2019-20 (Ministry of Planning, 2021) 
competitiveness of agri-businesses operating in priority value chains and 
the associated enabling public goods and services to support competitive 
export growth in order to provide market opportunities for smallholder 
producers and their POs 
The proposed project is in full alignment with IFAD Strategic Framework 
2016-2025, as it pursues the goal of increasing rural people’s productive 
capacities in a sustainable and resilient manner, increasing and improving 
their engagement in markets, while enabling them to better manage 
related risks, and strengthening the environmental sustainability and 
climate resilience of their economic activities. The project promotes 
delivering relevant, targeted and cost-effective development solutions and 
other resources to beneficiaries and partners across the globe. 
ASPRIRE-AT will provide services to around 125,000 rural households, or 
500,000 vulnerable people, whose income is less than 150% of the national 
poverty line: (i) smallholder farmers who are either poor or near-poor and 
vulnerable to falling into poverty due to climate, market or other shocks 
but who have productive potential and can take advantage of market 
opportunities; (ii) landless or land-poor households ready to take 
advantage of employment opportunities. Among these target beneficiaries, 
at least 20 000 people (45% are female and 20% youth) will be benefiting 
from SSTC facility as producers and workers in the targeted export product 
value chains (especially for fruits and nuts).  
On category (i) ASPIRE-AT will focus on smallholders who are already 
members of POs including approximately 2,000 Business Clusters (BCs)(of 
4,400 total) supported by ASPIRE and AIMS and considered to have 
potential to aggregate and graduate to the status of formal legal 
enterprises including Agriculture Cooperatives (AC) and Unions of AC (UAC). 
These BCs have already taken the first steps in organisation, aggregation 
and value chain partnership needed to overcome the barriers facing 
individual smallholders yet are too small, lack legal identity and business 
management capacity, so are not fully capable of managing investments or 
being enabled to negotiate the effective partnerships with larger agri-
enterprises which would enable them to sell to higher-value markets.  
Targeting of these BC is expected to result in about 500 high-capacity AC 
and about 35 UAC. Among them, at least 50AC and 5 UAC will be benefiting 
from SSTC facility.  
On category (ii), which is landless or land-poor households, typically engage 
in some agriculture production (including home gardens and small 
livestock) but earn their income primarily from casual, insecure wage 
labour, with little regulation of working conditions and no job security. 
Hence, households in this group will benefit from at least 10,000 new job 
opportunities, particularly for women and for youth, in agriculture 
production, post-harvest and processing. Among these the SSTC facility will 
specifically help create at least 1000 jobs in the targeted export product 
value chains.  
ASPIRE-AT Development Objective is: Inclusive and sustainable agriculture 
sector growth based on exports and domestic markets has increased 
incomes of rural producers and workers. 
In support of this, the specific objectives of the SSTC grant is to “Facilitate 
export growth of smallholder produced high value agricultural products to 
high value markets, such as China and Europe.” 
15 – Target 
beneficiaries 
16 – Main objective 
The grant will specifically focus on: 
1.  Mobilizing 
international  expertise  and  networks 
for 
negotiating competitive export protocols (e.g.  sanitary and 
phyto-sanitary) for priority produce between Cambodia and 
target importing countries, especially China 
17 – Main expected 
outcomes 
18 – Key activities 
/outputs by outcome 
2.  Trade  promotion  and  establishing 
linkages  between 
Cambodian  exporters  and  importers  of  priority  products  in 
target markets, especially China market.  
Within this the grant will prioritize technical assistance and other critical 
activities outlined below that cannot easily be financed through other 
sources which are predominately loan-based financing from IFAD and EIB.    
Main expected outcome is that “Business Partnerships and investments in 
trade infrastructure have increased market access and rural employment 
for the benefit of smallholder producers and rural people“. 
ASPIRE-AT has three interlinked components: Component 1 will support 
investments in productive assets for the agriculture cooperatives and other 
producer organisations (AC/PO) to improve their production/post-
harvest/logistics capacities to meet both export and domestic market 
demand. Component 2 will support the enabling environment to incentivize 
the private sector to access markets and catalyse their business 
investments. Component 3 will support technical assistance to nurture, 
aggregate/graduate existing groups, including the business clusters 
supported by ASPIRE and AIMS, into registered Agriculture Cooperatives 
(AC) to engage with the private sector in remunerative market 
opportunities facilitated under component 1 and 2.  
SSTC facility has clear technical and operational advantages in supporting 
Component 2: Business Partnership and Market Access with a focus on 
priority high-value export products including tropical fruit (fresh and 
processed) and nuts (e.g. cashew). 
Sub-component 2.1 - Strengthening private investment for agricultural 
market and trade development: 
  Market exposure and trade promotion to meet potential customers 
in target international markets and understand the specific market 
requirements, dynamics and competition.  
  Bespoke technical investment advice to businesses on issues 
including specific modern technologies and equipment, operational 
processes, supplier management systems, business planning and 
cash flow management, product standards and certification 
requirements and compliance for market access (including. sanitary 
and phyto-sanitary, MRL, food safety).   
  Facilitation of links to centres of industry-leading international 
knowledge and expertise, including through knowledge exchange 
visits, training and technical support for groups of agri-businesses 
in each priority value chain. The objective is to establish systematic 
linkages at the industry level to recognized leading centres of 
expertise that can support industry competitiveness now and into 
the future.  
Component 2.2 - Strengthening the enabling environment for competitive 
agricultural value chains and trade 
Technical assistance for: 
  Negotiation of competitive export protocols and agreements with 
partner countries to create market access opportunities, especially 
with China 
  Design and operation of the planned Post-Harvest Reference 
Centre (x1) and other priority public services and infrastructure to 
support export protocol negotiation for priority products and to 
conduct scientific trials for optimal post-harvest handling and 
treatment, plant health etc. 
19 – Use of financial 
resources 
# 
1 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
Description 
Cost  
($US million) 
SSTC  
($US million) 
Productive Assets for Producer Organisations 
Investment in productive assets of POs 
and smallholders 
Enabling market infrastructure for POs 
TA for design and execution of 
investments 
Component 1 sub-total 
2 
2.1 
Business Partnership and Market Access 
Strengthening private investment for 
agricultural market and trade 
development 
Strengthening the enabling environment 
for competitive agricultural markets and 
trade 
Component 2 sub-total 
2.2 
3 
3.1 
3.2 
Linking Farmers to Value Chains 
Structure and Capacity of Producer 
Organisations 
Technical Advice, Centers of Excellence 
and Supporting services for AC/PO 
Component 3 sub-total 
4 
Project Management and M&E 
Total Project Financing 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
0.3 
0 
0 
0 
0.1 
0.3 
20 – Rationale for 
recipient selection 
21 – Country 
ownership and 
institutional 
implementation 
arrangements 
The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) of Cambodia is 
proposed to be the grant recipient without competitive process for the 
following reasons: 
- 
This project will invest in agriculture and focus on strengthening the 
sector of export-led agricultural products;  
-  MAFF is the primary government institution officially mandated for the 
agricultural development in Cambodia; 
-  MAFF has been playing a leading role in orienting and supporting the 
production and processing of fruits and grains in their transformation 
and graduation into export-let sectors; 
-  MAFF has been instrumental in breakthrough efforts for market access 
of mango and longan from Cambodia to China 
-  MAFF is the primary strategic partner for IFAD and its Country 
- 
Programme in Cambodia for decades; it has successfully implemented a 
good number of IFAD-assisted projects, 
The proposed grant-financed project will be an integrated part of the 
IFAD Country Programme in Cambodia and it is designed to be a retrofit 
to the upcoming ASPIRE AT, currently being designed, to be under 
MAFF’s implementation. 
The proposal is the result of long-time consultation and partnership 
between the GoKC and IFAD’s country programme in Cambodia, and as 
response to the request of the senior officials of MAFF on behalf of the 
government to IFAD regarding IFAD tailored assistance to promote the 
22 – Supervision and 
M&E arrangement 
export-led high value agriculture sector, including tropical fruits and nuts, 
with a particular emphasis on the priority Chinese market. 
MAFF will be responsible for the implementation of the grant. The project 
management and coordination will be streamlined into the ongoing ASPIRE 
management structure and to be taken over by the ASPIRE AT’s 
management structure once it is effective. It will ensure the key functions 
in coordination, M&E and KM in order to support the quality 
implementation of the SSTC facility. 
MAFF will therefore be in charge of the overall project management, 
coordination and reporting while agencies and line departments of MAFF 
will undertake the majority of technical work at national and sub-national 
levels as well as mobilize its technical resources in support where relevant. 
MAFF will take the lead in maintaining its continued partnership with 
different ministries and agencies, such as the Chamber of Commerce, 
Cambodia Customs, GACC, the civil society and the private sector. The 
vertical structure of implementation will follow the current ASPIRE and the 
upcoming ASPIRE AT and it will be aligned with the emerging decentralised 
administrative structures. 
Supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD in partnership with the 
Government, as one of the projects under the IFAD Country Programme in 
Cambodia, as part of the ASPIRE AT Supervision mission and 
Implementation support.  
The IFAD’s direct supervision will mainly address issues as following: 
-  Development effectiveness and focus including implementation 
progress, outputs and outcomes under related components, 
targeting and outreach, gender equality and women 
participation, agricultural productivity, nutrition if relevant, 
adaptation to climate change, 
-  Sustainability and scaling up including institutions and policy 
engagement, partnership building, human and social capital 
and empowerment, quality of project target group engagement 
and feedback, responsiveness of service providers, 
environment and NRM, exit strategy, potential for scaling up; 
-  Project management including M&E, KM, financial management 
and fiduciary aspects, and procurement; 
-  Risks and opportunities, and 
- 
Innovations and knowledge management 
Implementation support will be provided by IFAD as follow-ups of its direct 
supervision and progress review where necessary, and as response to 
possible supports required by the project management. Support will be 
conducted on a demand-driven basis and in accordance with needs 
identified.  
Monitoring, Evaluation and reporting. will be based on a logframe 
approach, adapted to IFAD’s on-line Operational Results Measurement 
System (ORMS). The project will pursue the good practices of the IFAD 
Country Programme in Cambodia in M&E, KM and learning, continue to 
apply the proven M&E application and to generate various knowledge 
products. 
The project will apply a results-based management approach which 
establishes a solid linkage between planning (including resource allocation), 
implementation, monitoring and expected results. The Project Annual Work 
Plan and Budget (AWPB) will be a basis for implementation and should 
clearly describe the strategic direction of the project for the coming year by 
resenting a budget estimate, the expected results under each component 
and how these results would be achieved with risk analysis if any. The 
preparation of AWPBs will be jointly conducted by the project management 
as part of ASPIRE AT. Monitoring will focus on output-level results, while 
evaluation likely at the grant project end will address the expected 
outcomes. Reporting will be periodic, at least on semi-annual and annual 
basis, including physical and financial progress, and as per best practices in 
the IFAD Country Programme in Cambodia. 
Risk 
Levels 
High 
23 – Risks and 
mitigation measures 
Main Risks 
COVID-19 
uncertainty causes 
travel restrictions, 
including for 
exchange with 
Chinese experts 
and businesses 
Fast changing 
market dynamics 
and export price 
fluctuations 
High 
and 
medium 
Residual Risk 
Level 
Medium 
Medium 
Mitigations 
The project will 
make flexible 
planning, adopt 
and mobilize ICT 
instruments for 
virtual and 
remote 
implementation 
where possibly 
efficient. 
The project 
invests in 
enhanced 
productivity and 
reduced losses 
through the 
implementation 
of its component 
1 and fostering 
an enabling 
policy framework 
and improved 
technical support 
system for sector 
development, 
while increased 
price premium 
from processed 
products and on-
farm IGA will be 
promoted as 
Medium 
Low efficiency of 
integration into 
ongoing and 
upcoming projects 
Medium and 
low 
diversification 
coping strategies 
for the fruit 
sector and 
households 
respectively. 
Integration of 
management 
teams, 
coordination in 
planning and 
implementation, 
and expand into 
production 
provinces that 
AIMS and ASPIRE 
are not covering. 
Ambitious SSTC 
exchange agenda 
Medium  Recruitment of 
Low 
consultant 
advisor/facilitator 
to tailor planning 
and executions.  
Innovations promoted. The opportunities of innovative potential are 
present at technical level, the project mainly promotes the following three 
innovations: 
-  Cross-border 4Ps. The project will take advantage of the recent 
free trade agreement between Cambodia and China, and 
pursue the ongoing innovative approach of public-private-
producer partnership under the Country Programme in 
Cambodia but extend it to a cross-border dimension with public 
and private partners in China as export destination. 
-  Regional cooperation. The project promotes regional 
cooperation and exchanges in agri-sector policy framework, 
technical service support system and production and marketing 
of identified fruit value chains. The implementation will involve 
the synergy building between the Country programmes in 
Cambodia and China, stimulate technical exchanges, 
experience sharing and learning between IFAD-assisted 
projects under the two Country Programmes and exploring 
cooperation opportunities with and between the IFAD 
institutional partners in the two countries. 
-  Synergized public-private participation in export and trade 
promotion. The project aims to achieve a result-based 
participation in export and trade events with synergized 
contributions from the public and private actors and 
supporters, promoting the export of agricultural commodities 
as one of the country trademarks for Cambodia in an export 
24  – Innovation 
market of great opportunities for both fresh and processed 
products 
Exporting of high value agricultural products, including fruits and nuts to 
China and other premium markets is a high priority of the Royal 
Government of Cambodia. Good practices and success stories will be 
recorded during implementation of the project for replication. The success 
of the grant will be sustained through the regular national budget support 
from Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Fisheries. The success will pave 
the way for Cambodia to scale up into other international markets.   
25 – Scaling up and 
sustainability  
26 – Additional 
information and/or 
documentation 
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 13 Project Diagramme
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 13:  Project Diagramme  
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex: Aspireat Climate Risk Analysis
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
ASPIRE-AT 
CLIMATE RISK ANALYSIS 
Contents 
DETAILED CLIMATE RISK ANALYSIS 
Contents  
1. Climate trends .................................................................................................. 1 
Introduction ...................................................................................................... 1 
Observed changes.............................................................................................. 2 
Seasonal historical trends ................................................................................... 3 
Future projection ............................................................................................... 5 
2. Climate hazards, losses, and damages ................................................................. 7 
Risk Indexes and Hazard Types ........................................................................... 7 
Frequencies and Intensities of the hazards and the damages ................................... 7 
Flood ............................................................................................................ 7 
Heatwaves ..................................................................................................... 8 
Drought ........................................................................................................ 8 
Cyclones........................................................................................................ 9 
Losses and Damages (past and projected) ............................................................ 9 
Agriculture sector ........................................................................................... 9 
Forestry sector ............................................................................................... 9 
Coastal area ................................................................................................ 10 
Human health .............................................................................................. 10 
3. Exposure to climate hazards ............................................................................. 10 
4. Susceptibility to climate hazards........................................................................ 13 
Population distribution ...................................................................................... 13 
Dependency on climate sensitive sectors ............................................................ 13 
Poverty, inequality, and undernourishment: ........................................................ 14 
Lack of irrigation and flood controlling infrastructure ............................................ 14 
Highly concentrated rainfall ............................................................................... 15 
Geomorphology of the country: ......................................................................... 15 
Other properties: ............................................................................................. 15 
5. Climate adaptive capacity ................................................................................. 17 
Dissemination of real-time weather data and forecasts to people ........................... 17 
Early action plan for preparedness and emergency response ................................. 17 
Government and non-government support of social and economic resources ........... 19 
People’s own adaptation strategies ..................................................................... 20 
Economic  means  of  the  population  to  support/adjust/adapt/recover  from  climate 
hazards .......................................................................................................... 20 
6. Vulnerability to climate hazards ......................................................................... 22 
The Cambodian Vulnerability Index .................................................................... 22 
7. Selection of commodities and value chains based on identified climate risks and impacts
......................................................................................................................... 23 
8. Impacts and mitigation measures ...................................................................... 24 
Commodities: .................................................................................................. 25 
A.  Cassava ................................................................................................. 25 
B.  Cashew nuts........................................................................................... 30 
C.  Fruits: Mango ......................................................................................... 31 
Fruits: Banana ............................................................................................. 32 
D. 
Vegetables .......................................................................................... 33 
E.  Poultry .................................................................................................. 33 
Overall Impacts ............................................................................................... 34 
Environmental impacts (of project): ................................................................ 34 
Mitigation and adaptation strategies to potential negative impacts:..................... 34 
Impacts of climate change: ............................................................................ 35 
Strategies to minimize negative impacts: ........................................................ 35 
Infrastructure: ................................................................................................. 35 
Project impacts on climate change: ................................................................. 35 
Measures to address negative impacts: ........................................................... 35 
Potential climate change impacts on the project: .............................................. 35 
Measures to minimize the negative impacts: .................................................... 35 
References ......................................................................................................... 40 
List of Figures 
List of Figures 
Figure 1: Observed Average Annual Mean-Temperature (1901-2020) .......................... 1 
Figure 2: Observed Average Annual Precipitation (1901-2020) ................................... 1 
Figure 3: Monthly Climatology (1991-2020) ............................................................. 2 
Figure 4: Mean temperature trends per decade ......................................................... 3 
Figure 5: Annual precipitation trends per decade ....................................................... 3 
Figure 6: Seasonal historical climatology .................................................................. 4 
Figure 7: Projected mean temperature and precipitation; multi-model ensemble ........... 6 
Figure 8: Boxplots showing the historical and projected conditions of heatwaves and 
droughts .............................................................................................................. 9 
Figure 9: Level of different climate hazards in each province of Cambodia .................. 12 
Figure 10: Structure of the National Committee for Disaster Management (NCDM) ...... 19 
Figure 11: Composite Vulnerability Index (2019) of communes of Cambodia .............. 22 
Figure 12: Illustration of the concept of climate risk to project .................................. 24 
Figure 13: Cassava farm ...................................................................................... 25 
Figure 14: Land suitability map for Cassava. The dark green area is highly suitable for 
Cassava while the dark red is highly unsuitable ....................................................... 26 
Figure 15: National crop-production trends (1980-2020) compared to the base year 
1995 ................................................................................................................. 27 
Figure 16: Predicted national crop-production trends (2022-2050) (a) without irrigation 
(b) with full irrigation, and with a median risk level compared to the base year 2022 ... 28 
Figure 17: Recorded annual production quantities of Cassava and the occurrence of 
extreme climate events ........................................................................................ 29 
I 
Figure 18: Cashew farming ................................................................................... 30 
Figure 19: Province wise cassava production area in Cambodia (hectares) ................. 31 
Figure 20: Land suitability map for Cashew nut. The dark green area is highly suitable 
for Cashew while the dark red is highly unsuitable ................................................... 31 
Figure 22: Land suitability map for mango. The dark green area is highly suitable for 
mango while the dark red is highly unsuitable ......................................................... 32 
Figure 20: Province wise banana production area in Cambodia (hectares) .................. 33 
Figure 21: Province wise poultry keeping in Cambodia (numbers) ............................. 34 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Projected anomaly (changes °C) for maximum, minimum, and average daily 
temperatures in Cambodia for 2040–2059 and 2080–2099, from the reference period of 
1986–2005 for all RCPs. The table is showing the median of the CCKP model ensemble 
and the 10–90th percentiles in brackets .................................................................... 5 
Table 2: Hazard types and their level based on the ThinkHazard tool ........................... 7 
Table 3: Estimated number of people in Cambodia affected by an extreme river flood* in 
the historic period 1971–2004 and the future period 2035–2044 ................................. 8 
Table 4: Cambodia 2011 floods quick facts ............................................................... 8 
Table 5: Some key statistics that shows Cambodia’s vulnerability to Climate Change ... 16 
Table 6: Proportion of climate change expenditure to total spending and GDP ............. 19 
Table 7: Recommended project activities and targets .............................................. 23 
Table 8: Priority Value Chains and Typical Investments ............................................ 24 
Table 9: Value chains and project activities, impacts and the recommendations .......... 37 
II 
ASPIRE-AT 
CLIMATE RISK ANALYSIS 
1. Climate trends 
1. 
Introduction 
Cambodia  has  a  tropical  climate  and  two  distinct  seasons:  rainy  season  from  May  to 
October and a dry season from November to April. The maximum temperature can reach 
higher than 32 °C during the summer while it remains between 25 to 27 °C for rest of the 
times of the year (World Bank, 2022). Current average annual temperature is 28 °C, with 
an average maximum temperature of 38 °C in April, and an average minimum temperature 
of 17 °C in January (Thoeun, 2015). 
Figure 1: Observed Average Annual Mean-Temperature (1901-2020) 
Source: World Bank, 2022 
Inter annual climate variability because of the El Niño Southern Oscillation1 causes high 
fluctuations  in  annual  precipitation  in  Cambodia.  High  precipitation  occurs  in  the  rainy 
season (May to October) accounting for almost 80 – 90% of annual precipitation; the rate 
being higher in coastal and highland areas and lower in inland areas. Remaining 10 – 20% 
occurs  during  the  dry  season  (November  to  April).  The  annual  average  precipitation  is 
usually 1400 – 2000 mm. (World Bank, 2022). The average annual rainfall is 1400 mm in 
the central low land regions and may reach 4000 mm in certain coastal zones or in highland 
areas (Thoeun, 2015). 
Figure 2: Observed Average Annual Precipitation (1901-2020) 
Source: World Bank, 2022 
The monthly minimum, mean and maximum temperature and precipitation for Cambodia 
from  1991  to  2020  is  presented  in  the  figure  below.  The  figure  3  shows  that  the 
temperature rises to its highest in April, just before the beginning of the rainy season. The 
precipitation is highest in September when temperature is average (around 28 °C), and 
the temperature starts falling along with the fall in amount of precipitation. 
1  El  Niño–Southern  Oscillation (ENSO) 
in winds and sea  surface 
temperatures over the tropical eastern Pacific Ocean, affecting the climate of much of the tropics and subtropics 
irregular  periodic  variation 
is  an 
1 
Figure 3: Monthly Climatology (1991-2020) 
2. 
Observed changes 
Source: World Bank, 2022 
According to the World Bank’s climate change knowledge portal (World Bank, 2022) 0.18℃ 
of temperature increase has been observed per decade, since the 1960s. The increase in 
temperature has been rapid and significant during the dry season i.e., between November 
and April, increasing by 0.20℃ to 0.23℃ per decade whereas during the rainy season, i.e., 
from May to October, the increase is not as significant, increasing by 0.13℃ to 0.16℃ per 
decade.  Also,  according  to  Thoeun  (2015)  an  annual  temperature  rises  of  0.023 °C  per 
year has been observed since 1950. 
2 
Source: World Bank, 2022 
Figure 4: Mean temperature trends per decade 
Source: Thoeun, 2015 
World  Bank  (2022)  states  that  no  statistically  significant  changes  in  precipitation  was 
observed in Cambodia over the 20th century, but some areas experienced higher amount 
of rainfall. The years of strong El Niño had correlation with moderate and severe drought. 
However,  analysis  by  Thoeun  (2015)  using  the  Providing  Regional  Climate  for  Impact 
Studies  (PRECIS)  downscaling  system,  the  average  annual  rainfall  from  1951  to  2002 
showed a rate of change of −0.184% per year with a p-Value of 0.04895. 
Source: World Bank, 2022 
Figure 5: Annual precipitation trends per decade 
Source: Thoeun, 2015 
3. 
Seasonal historical trends 
Analysis by Thoeun (2015) using the PRECIS system show that the rate of change of mean 
temperature is most rapid during the months of December, January, and February (DJF) 
in the drier seasons i.e., 0.021 °C per year (p-Value 0.00014); the rate of change for the 
months of March, April and May (MAM) was 0.019 °C per (p-Value 1e−0.5); the rate of 
change during June, July and August was 0.038 °C per year (p-Value 0.00622), and the 
rate of change during September, October and November was 0.012 °C per year (p-Value 
0.00015). Similarly for precipitation, the rate of change is most rapid during the months 
of December, January, and February (DJF) in the drier seasons i.e., −0.773% per year (p-
Value 0.03784); the rate of change for the months of March, April and May (MAM) was 
−0.205% per year (p-Value 0.29031); the rate of change during June, July and August 
was  −0.066%  per  year  (p-Value  0.57394);  and  the  rate  of  change  during  September, 
October and November was −0.386% per year (p-Value 0.01248). 
3 
Figure 6: Seasonal historical climatology 
Source: Thoeun, 2015 
4 
4. 
Future projection 
The  projected  changes  in  temperature  and  precipitation  in  Cambodia  are  based  on  the 
Climate  Risk  Country  profile  for  Cambodia  from  The  World  Bank  and  The  Asian 
Development Bank (Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia, 2021) which utilize the Coupled Model 
Intercomparison  Project  Phase  5  (CMIP5)  models  and  provide  estimates  of  the  future 
climatology under four emission scenarios called Representative Concentration Pathways 
(RCPs):  RCP2.6,  RCP4.5,  RCP6.0,  and  RCP8.5.  All  models  show  an  increasing  trend  in 
future temperature, but varying levels of warming based on each emission scenarios. The 
table  (below)  shows  the  projected  changes  for  minimum,  maximum  and  average  daily 
temperatures for two different time periods for Cambodia.  
The increase rate is likely to be high in low altitude areas such as in the Central and in the 
North-East regions of Cambodia (0.036 °C per year) and is likely to be low in the high-
altitude areas such as in the South-West region (0.013 °C per year) according to Thoeun 
(2015) where PRECIS models were employed to predict the changes. 
It should also be noted that “monthly/annual average temperatures are most commonly 
used for general estimation of climate change, but the daily maximum and minimum can 
explain more about how daily life might change in a region, affecting key variables such 
as  the  viability  of  ecosystems,  health  impacts,  productivity  of  labour,  and  the  yield  of 
crops, which are often disproportionately influenced by temperature extremes.”  
Table 1: Projected anomaly (changes °C) for maximum, minimum, and average daily 
temperatures in Cambodia for 2040–2059 and 2080–2099, from the reference period of 
1986–2005 for all RCPs. The table is showing the median of the CCKP model ensemble 
and the 10–90th percentiles in brackets 
Source: Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia (2021) 
Under RCP2.6, the mean temperature is likely to reach 28.33 °C and under RCP8.5, it is 
likely  to  reach  28.70  °C  by  2040.  Similarly,  the  average  precipitation  is  likely  to  reach 
1810.35 mm and 1787.45 mm under RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 by the year 2040. 
5 
Figure 7: Projected mean temperature and precipitation; multi-model ensemble 
Source: World Bank, 2022 
According  to  the  analysis  by  Thoeun  (2015),  for  scenario  A2  of  the  PRECIS  model,  the 
average  annual  rainfall  is  likely  to  reach  higher  than  2000 mm  in  2037  and  is  likely  to 
reach over 2000 mm and 2500 mm in 2059 and 2074 respectively. For scenario B2, the 
average annual rainfall is likely to reach higher than 2000 mm in 2090 and 2097. The wet 
season is likely to experience the most significant increase in rainfall, which is an indication 
of  the  increase  of  the  severity  of  flooding  as  80  –  90%  of  annual  rainfall  already  occur 
during  the  wet  season  currently.  The  increase  in  rainfall  in  the  lowland  areas  and 
agricultural  plains  is  predicted  to  be  higher  than  in  highland  and  coastal  areas  (GSSD, 
2015; Thoeun, 2015). 
6 
2. Climate hazards, losses, and damages 
5. 
Risk Indexes and Hazard Types 
Based  on  the  Climate  Risk  Country  Profile,  Cambodia  (Climate  Risk  Profile:  Cambodia, 
2021), the 2019 Inform Risk Index puts Cambodia at 55 out of 191 countries mentioning 
that the country is highly exposed to the flood hazard: mainly riverine and flash floods. A 
severe drought occurred lately in 2015 – 2017 which is also of a significant concern though 
not as high as the flood hazard. However, exposure to tropical cyclones is limited. Also, 
according to the ThinkHazard tool2, the flood hazard for Cambodia in general is high for 
all flood types: river flood, coastal flood as well as urban flood. Hazard levels for each of 
the  hazards  listed  out  in  ThinkHazard  tool  are  presented  in  table  2.  The  levels  can  be 
‘high’, ‘medium’, ‘low’ and ‘very low’. 
Table 2: Hazard types and their level based on the ThinkHazard tool 
SN 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Hazard Type 
River flood  
Urban flood 
Coastal flood 
Landslide 
Cyclone 
Extreme heat 
Wildfire 
Earthquake  
Tsunami 
Water scarcity 
Volcano 
Hazard Level 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Very Low 
Cambodia was the 12th most vulnerable countries worldwide based on the Global Climate 
Risk Index (1999 – 2108) and was among the ‘very high’ impacted countries according to 
the World Risk Index (2019) where the risk was calculated as a product of exposure and 
vulnerability (NDC, 2020). 
6. 
Frequencies and Intensities of the hazards and the damages 
Flood 
7. 
“As of 2010, assuming protection for up to a 1 in 25-year event, the population annually 
affected by flooding in Cambodia is estimated at 90,000 people and expected annual urban 
damage is estimated at $105 million. Economic development and climate change are both 
expected to increase these figures. The climate change component can be isolated and by 
2030 is expected to increase the annually affected population by 70,000 people, and urban 
damage by $226 million under the RCP8.5 emissions pathway (AQUEDUCT Scenario B).” 
(Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia, 2021) 
When an  extreme river flood3 occurs in Cambodia, 25% of the population gets affected 
(Wilner et al., 2018) making it one of the world’s most flood exposed countries. A World 
Bank study estimates that 19% of the population will be exposed to the flood event by 
2050 (Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia, 2021). 
2 https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/44-cambodia  
3 Extreme river flood is defined as being in the 90th percentile in terms of numbers of people affected. Figures 
in table 3 represent an average of all four RCPs and assume present day population distributions. Source: Climate 
Risk Profile: Cambodia (2021) 
7 
Table 3: Estimated number of people in Cambodia affected by an extreme river flood* in 
the historic period 1971–2004 and the future period 2035–2044 
Estimate 
Population Exposed to 
Extreme Flood (1971–
2004) 
Population Exposed to 
Extreme Flood (2035–
2044) 
Increase in Affected 
Population 
16.7 Percentile 
Median 
83.3 Percentile 
4,035,515 
4,239,603 
4,369,511 
4,219,445 
4,413,765 
4,567,258 
183,930 
174,162 
197,747 
A big flood in the Mekong River hit Cambodia in 2011 where preliminary damage and loss 
assessment by the Asian Development Bank (2012) reported that the damage caused by 
the flood in the Mekong River in 2011 surpassed the damage caused by the floods in 1996 
and 2000. Eighteen out of 24 provinces and more than 1.7 million people were affected. 
The  reported  impacts  and  the  damages  incurred,  by  such  an  event  as  an  example,  are 
presented in the table 4. 
Table 4: Cambodia 2011 floods quick facts 
Fatalities: 250 
Provinces affected: 18 out of 24 
Households affected: 354,217 (More than 1.7 million people) 
Households evacuated: 51,950 
Infrastructure Damaged: 
-  National /Provincial Roads – 363 km & 177 bridges /culverts damaged (overall 925 km 
affected) 
Rural Roads – 1,842 km needing priority repairs (overall 4,470 km affected) 
Irrigation – 329 schemes partly damaged (includes damage to 54 km of canals and 122 
km of reservoir embankment) 
Rural Water Supply – 77,544 wells and 579 community ponds contaminated (affecting 
more than 456,000 families) 
1,396 schools and 115 health centers 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Rice fields damaged: around 10%, of which 6.6% fully destroyed 
Source: Asian Development Bank, 2012 
Heatwaves 
8. 
As  elsewhere  around  the  world  heatwaves  are  becoming  more  and  more  common  in 
Cambodia. Based on Climate Risk country profile for Cambodia an average of 64 days per 
year  in  Cambodia  the  maximum  temperature  surpasses  35°C  and  the  frequency  and 
intensity  of  heatwaves  has  increased  in  the  recent  decades.  A  heat  index  greater  than 
35°C  –  “which  represents  the  combination  of  temperature  and  humidity  to  produce 
conditions  dangerous  for  human  health”  –  is  set  to  increase  under  all  RCP  emissions 
scenarios by 2090s. “There is sufficient existing data to infer that Cambodia also faces a 
transition to a state of permanent heat stress as a result of temperatures which regularly 
surpass levels safe for humans and biodiversity” (Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia, 2021). 
Drought 
9. 
The return period of droughts in Southeast Asia region will decrease, meaning that drought 
events (of a certain intensity) are likely to occur within shorter interval of time than they 
used  to  occur.  Meteorological  drought  (precipitation  deficit)  and  hydrological  drought 
(deficit of surface and subsurface water flow) are the two main kinds of drought that are 
likely to affect Cambodia. (Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia, 2021). 
Cambodia  at  the  present  has  an  annual  median  probability  of  severe  meteorological 
drought  of  around  4%  with  standardized  precipitation  evaporation  index  (SEPI)  of  less 
than – 2. This annual median probability of the severe drought is likely to increase from 
4% to 5-9% under different RCP emission scenarios. 
8 
(a) Box plots showing historical (1986–
2005) and projected (2080–2099) average 
annual frequency of days with Heat Index 
>35°C 
(b) Boxplots showing the annual 
probability of experiencing a ‘severe 
drought’ in Cambodia (−2 SPEI Index) in 
2080–2099 under four emissions 
pathways 
Source: Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia (2021) 
Figure 8: Boxplots showing the historical and projected conditions of heatwaves and 
droughts 
Cyclones 
10. 
The interaction between cyclones and climate hazards is very complex which is not well 
studied till date. The cyclone induced storms in the areas with raised sea level is likely to 
enhance  the  damage  and  the  windspeed  and  precipitation  intensity  will  likely  increase. 
Global  modelling  on  the  impacts  of  climate  change  on  cyclone  frequency  and  intensity 
hints at reduced frequency but increased intensity of the most extreme events as well as 
their frequency. Coastal zones of Cambodia are exposed to cyclones and tsunamis but at 
lower  levels.  The  country’s  southwestern  region  is  likely  to  face  increased  overall  risks 
because of the sea level rise if adaptation actions are not enhanced. (Climate Risk Profile: 
Cambodia, 2021). 
To  summarize  the  climate  hazard,  flood  occurs  very  frequently  and  has  the  highest 
likelihood  of  occurrence  every  year  affecting  a  high  amount  of  population  and  storm 
hazards  are  seen  occurring  frequently  in  the  recent  years  in  Cambodia  (Climate  Risk 
Profile: Cambodia, 2021).  
11. 
Losses and Damages (past and projected) 
Agriculture sector 
12. 
Based on the updated nationally determined contributions (NDC, 2020), flood contributed 
to about 62% and drought contributed to about 36% of losses in agricultural production 
based on the data from the past 20 years. Mekong River and Tonle Sap Lake cause most 
of the flooding during the monsoon season. The wet-season rice yield may fall up to 70% 
of the current production levels until 2080 under the SRES-A2 high emission scenario and 
dry-season rice yield may decrease by 40%. There is not sufficient data on the impacts on 
climatic hazards on ASPIRE AT targeted commodities.  
Forestry sector 
13. 
Based  on  the  NDC,  2020  document,  forests  in  Northeast  and  Southwest  regions  face  a 
wate  deficit  period  of  four  to  six  months  currently  which  is  likely  to  reach  up  to  eight 
months or even more. This will impact more than four million hectares of forests in the 
lowlands. A decrease in such a huge quantity of forests will have multiple impacts on the 
climate,  forest  dependent  population  and  environment  again  (increased  emissions, 
micronutrients available from the forest products and landslides for example). 
9 
Coastal area 
14. 
Cambodia  has  more  than  400  kilometres  of  coastline  which  is  at  a  high  risk  of  coastal 
floods  and  sea  level  rise.  Under  existing  adaptation  infrastructures,  30,700  people  are 
likely to be affected annually because of floods due to the likely sea level rises under high 
emissions  scenarios  between  2070  and  2100.  Similarly,  additional  69,800  population  - 
from the estimated 89,700 population annually affected in 2010 - are likely to be at a risk 
annually by 2030 because of river floods exacerbated by climate change. (NDC, 2020) 
One metre of sea level rise will inundate 25,800 ha of coastal area and two metre of rise 
will inundate 38,000 ha of coastal area permanently based on the analysis of the impacts 
of sea level rise on coastal areas (NDC, 2020). 
Human health 
15. 
Overall average temperature as well as heat index is projected to rise in Cambodia under 
different  emission  scenarios.  The  heat  index  greater  than  35°C  which  is  dangerous  for 
human health is set to rise for al RCP emission scenarios (Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia, 
2021). Those conditions will negatively impact more vulnerable populations. Changes in 
temperature and variable precipitation is found to have generated suitable conditions for 
microbial growth, their transmission, reproduction, and this “can lead to the changes in 
seasonal  and  geographic  distribution  of  vector-borne  and  water-borne  diseases”  (NDC, 
2020). Though the quantitative damage on human health has not been assessed for each 
of those climate hazards, the vulnerable population, such as child and elder population will 
face large negative impacts of such hazards which will cost large sums of money for the 
state to protect its population from health hazards that are likely to occur in the future. 
Cambodia  Disaster  Damage  &  Loss  Information  System  (CamDi)4  provides  detail 
information on the historical losses and damages that occurred because of climate hazards 
on a temporal as well as spatial basis. 
3. Exposure to climate hazards 
Exposure  refers  to  “the  nature  and  degree  to  which  a  system  is  exposed  to  significant 
climate variations” according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 
Exposure is a necessary determinant of risk/hazard but not sufficient alone. If an area is 
exposed  to  a  risk  but  has  enough  means  to  avoid  the  loss  that  may  occur,  it  is  not 
vulnerable. However,  exposure is a necessity for the vulnerability to an extreme event. 
(Cardona et al., 2012). So, exposure alone to various climate hazards does not necessarily 
mean that the vulnerability of the country is high; the vulnerability also depends on the 
ability of the exposed elements to move away from such hazards or to be able to minimize 
the losses. 
Maps (figure 9) from the ThinkHazard tool show that whole Cambodia is exposed to a high 
level of flood risk with a risk of coastal flood on a few southern provinces and river flood 
on 23 provinces. The risk of urban flood is also high. In the same way, the whole country 
is exposed to a high level of cyclones and wildfire hazard. The overall hazard level is also 
high for landslides and extreme heat with different levels of hazards for different provinces. 
The  north-western  part  is  exposed  to  a  high  level  of  extreme  heat  while  the  remaining 
part of the country is exposed to moderate level of extreme heat. 
The levels of earthquake, tsunami, and water scarcity hazards are low and that of volcano 
is very low. The water scarcity hazard does not describe agricultural, meteorological, or 
hydrological drought but does so for the lack of availability of freshwater resources to meet 
4 http://camdi.ncdm.gov.kh/DesInventar/profiletab.jsp  
10 
annual water demand. Hence the exposure to water scarcity hazard might have been low 
for the country.  
11 
Figure 9: Level of different climate hazards in each province of Cambodia 
Source: Think Hazard (2022) 
12 
4. Susceptibility to climate hazards 
As one of the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) most of the sectors in Cambodia are highly 
susceptible to climate change and other related hazards.  Agriculture, forestry, fisheries, 
water resources etc which are climate-sensitive sectors are the foundation of Cambodian 
economic growth. Cambodia’s high dependence on those sectors which support a majority 
of livelihood activities makes it highly susceptible to climate change and related climate 
hazards (World Bank, 2022). As an example, as the country is highly vulnerable to floods, 
the livelihood of fishing dependent population is highly susceptible to this hazard. 
16. 
Population distribution 
The Second National Communication (SNC) to the UNFCCC (GSSD, 2015) mentions that 
the  percentage  of  Cambodians  living  in  rural  areas  is  more  than  80.  Out  of  the  total 
population, 30 percent live around the Tonle Sap Lake, 7 percent live in the coastal areas 
and approximately 52 percent live in the central plains of the country which are sensitive 
to  the  most  frequent  flood  hazards  while  only  11  percent  live  in  the  mountains  and 
highland areas. 
According to the World Bank, seventy six percent of 16.5 million people (in 2019) reside 
in rural areas and agriculture and fisheries are the main economic sectors Cambodians are 
highly dependent, with 25 percent GDP contribution and 49 percent employment of the 
working labour force. (World Bank, 2022). 
Since most of the population live in the rural areas with limited resources and with a high 
dependence  on  climate  sensitive  agricultural  and  fisheries  sectors,  a  majority  of  the 
population is sensitive to climate change. In the same way a high proportion of people live 
in the vicinity of the lakes and the lower plains as well as coastal areas, they are more 
susceptible to precipitation related extreme events such as flood and sea level rise. 
Nguyen  and  Sean  (2021),  for  example,  reported  that  farmers  who  faced  more  climate 
change impacts in the Lower Mekong Region saw more family members migrating out from 
the villages. Also, Jacobson et al. (2019) did a study in three locations in North-Western 
Cambodia and found out that migration occurs in around 45 percent of the households, 
and more than half of such migration is climate related. This shows that people in rural 
areas  are  unable  to  cope  with  the  impacts  and  hence  tend  to  leave  the  place  they  are 
staying at. 
17. 
Dependency on climate sensitive sectors 
According  to  the  updated  NDC  (2020),  31  percent  of  Cambodia’s  working  population 
comprises of skilled fishery, agricultural and forestry workers. Seventy six percent of 16.5 
million  people  (2019)  reside  in  rural  areas  and  agriculture  and  fisheries  are  the  main 
economic sectors they are highly dependent on, with 25 percent GDP contribution and 49 
percent employment of the working labour force. (World Bank, 2022). Economic Review 
of Cambodia in 2011 states that agriculture, fisheries and forestry accounted for 32% of 
GDP (GSSD, 2015). As those main sectors are sensitive to the changes in temperature, 
precipitation  as  well  as  other  climatic  events,  it  makes  the  livelihood  as  well  as  the 
ecosystems  of  Cambodia  highly  susceptible  to  the  changes  in  climate,  mostly  showing 
negative impacts. 
13 
18. 
Poverty, inequality, and undernourishment: 
The poverty rate as well as undernourishment rate in Cambodia is as high as 15 percent 
(NDC, 2020). The Climate Risk Country Profile for Cambodia also mention that the national 
poverty rate is 13 percent and the population that is undernourished is 14.5 percent (Table 
5). (Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia, 2021) 
Rice occupies 83 percent of the total harvested area (3.22 million ha) while corn, cassava, 
soyabean and mug bean combined occupies around 13 percent (GSSD, 2015). This depicts 
the lack of diversity in food intake and hence the lack of diversity in nutrients’ uptake in a 
typical Cambodian meal. 
By 2050, Cambodia’s GDP is likely to be affected as nearly as 10 percent as a result of the 
more  severe  floods  and  droughts  attributable  to  the  projected  changes  in  climate.  The 
impacts  are  likely  to  exacerbate  wealth  and  income  inequality  issues  and  are  likely  to 
impede poverty alleviation efforts. (Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia, 2021) 
Poorest  groups  of  the  population  are  likely  to  disproportionately  face  the  negative 
consequence of climate change because these are the groups of people who are mainly 
dependent  on  the  climate  sensitive  sectors  such  as  agriculture  and  fisheries  and  labor 
working for their livelihood. Poverty reduction in the recent years had become rapid but 
climate change as well as the unexpected global pandemics like COVID-19 are likely to 
halt  such  progress.  And  again,  such inequalities  are  a  barrier  to  effectively  address  the 
climate  change  impacts.  So,  it  creates  a  vicious  cycle  that  it  produces  a  sequence  of 
reciprocal cause and effect on one another making it hard to address both of the issues. 
A report by Asian Development Bank in 2016 suggests that the GDP growth is likely not 
inclusive and hence may be increasing inequality and the poverty reduction is mainly on 
urban areas with much slower progress in rural areas thus making the population of rural 
more sensitive to the projected climate changes. (Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia, 2021) 
19. 
Lack of irrigation and flood controlling infrastructure 
Agriculture  is  predominantly  dependent  on  rainfall  [more  than  85  percent  of  rice 
production is rainfall dependent (Kim et al., 2018)] with no systematic irrigation system 
in case of water scarcity and usually on land with only low to moderate fertility making it 
highly dependent on weather conditions. Approximately 70 percent of the nutritional needs 
is fulfilled by rice which is Cambodia’s primary staple food but the major rice growing areas 
of  the  Mekong  and  Tonle  Sap  basin  are  affected  by  floods  yearly  and  often  to  extreme 
flooding which have become more frequent in the recent years. One million Cambodians 
are dependent on inland fisheries for their livelihoods with inland fisheries directly affected 
by seasonal floods and droughts that make this population vulnerable to changing climate 
conditions.  (GSSD,  2015).  The  project  targeted  commodities  are  mostly  dependent  on 
rainfall.  The  community  during  the  consultation  meetings  reported  there  is  up  to  40% 
decrease in production due to fluctuation of rainfall. The farmers have to replant cassava 
again because of the irregularity in rainfall pattern.  
Hence, during the periods of long droughts there is lack of systematic irrigation facilities 
required for the agricultural crops while during the extreme flood events there is lack of 
infrastructural  mechanisms  that  can  reduce  the  damages  likely  to  be  caused  by  such 
floods. Also, the uncertainty of frequency and intensity of expected extreme events makes 
it  difficult  to  plan  and  implement  the  required  damage  control  mechanisms  or 
infrastructures in a country with a low economy and hence increases the susceptibility to 
the climate hazards. 
14 
20. 
Highly concentrated rainfall 
The wet season (May to October) experiences most of the rainfall in Cambodia accounting 
for almost 80 – 90% of annual precipitation; the rate being higher in coastal and highland 
areas  and  lower  in  inland  areas.  Remaining  10  –  20%  occurs  during  the  dry  season 
(November  to  April)  (World  Bank,  2022).  Under  certain  scenarios,  B2  scenario  of  the 
PRECIS modelling, the wet season is likely to experience the most significant increase in 
rainfall  (Thoeun,  2015)  which  indicates  that  the  severity  of  flooding  events  is  likely  to 
increase during the wet season as 80 – 90% of annual rainfall already occur during the 
wet  season  currently.  This  has  been  negatively  impacting  the  production  of  cassava, 
cashew  nuts  and  vegetables.  Moreover,  it  is  likely  to  further  exacerbate  the  negative 
consequences of flooding events. 
21. 
Geomorphology of the country: 
The Tonle Sap covers almost 10 percent of country’s surface area during the peak of the 
Southwest Monsoon season. Its surface area can increase by up to 600 percent between 
dry and monsoon seasons, and water levels changing by 7 to 8 meters (Fujii, et al., 2003 
in UNDRR, 2019). The  Mekong River is the biggest  river  which shows  large fluctuations 
seasonally  or  annually  and  approximately  80  percent  of  the  population  lives  along  the 
Mekong River. Kandal, Kampong Cham, Kratie, Prey Veng, Stung Treng, Svay Rieng, and 
Takeo provinces are highly affected by the flood in the Mekong while other provinces are 
affected by the flash floods in tributaries around the Tonle Sap Lake. (World Bank, 2022). 
“Without action, the population exposed to an extreme river flood could grow by around 4 
million by the 2040s, however human development factors such as the damming of the 
Mekong River as well as the large-scale dams built on its tributaries, may alter future flood 
dynamics.” (Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia, 2021) Also according to the same document, 
upstream  dam  construction  on  the  Mekong  River  and  deforestation  in  its  watershed 
threatens  productivity  of  the  Tonle  Sap  Lake  and  hence  its  fishery  sector  which  pose  a 
significant threat to the nourishment and livelihood of fishery dependent rural and poor 
population. 
22. 
Other properties: 
Below are a few other properties that makes Cambodia more susceptible to the climate 
hazards, currently as well as in the future - 
Based on the exposure and vulnerability of children to climate and environmental shocks, 
UNICEF, United Nations Children's Fund, reports that the Cambodian children are at the 
‘very high risk’ of climate change impacts, ranking Cambodia as 46 out of 163 countries 
worldwide; lower the rank higher the risk (UNICEF, 2021). Since the young population is 
at  very  high  risk  of  changes  in  climate,  it  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  there  will  be  an 
imbalance in the future demographic distribution if such risks continue to increase. 
A sea level rise of 18 cm and 25 cm was projected by 2100 based on SRESB1 and SRESA2 
by  the  IPCC  4th  Assessment  Report  and  the  coastline  of  435  km  along  with  low  lying 
farming areas would see salinity because of sea water intrusion and cause damage to the 
farmed crops (Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan (2014-2023), 2013). 
The  table  5  also  shows  a  few  indicators  numerically  which  depicts  the  sensitivity  of 
livelihoods and infrastructure to climatic changes in Cambodia. 
15 
Table 5: Some key statistics that shows Cambodia’s vulnerability to Climate Change 
Source: Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia (2021) 
16 
5. Climate adaptive capacity 
Adaptive capacity to climate change signifies the ability of a system to adjust or to avoid 
a climate hazard, or to recover after experiencing the hazard caused by climate change. 
The  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  in  Cambodia,  Status  report  2019  reports  that  “the  risk 
indicators measuring lack of coping capacity are high as (7 out of 10), and they measure 
the  resilience  of  infrastructure,  access  to  healthcare  and  risk  governance  among  other 
factors” (UNDRR, 2019). However, a lot of strategies are in place and a lot of efforts are 
being made to increase the adaptive capacity. 
Preparedness,  response,  and  recovery  are  the  three  main  phases  of  disaster  risk 
management  which  helps  to  minimize  the  risk,  the  losses,  and  damages,  and  helps  to 
improve the  situation  after  occurrence  of hazards (ADB, ND). A National Committee for 
Disaster  Management5  which  is  working  since  1995  is  one  of  such  institutions  that  is 
entitled to doing such activities in the country. This maintains database systems and early 
warning  systems  to  protect  the  people  from  predicted  hazards  by  providing  real-time 
information which helps to reduce the loss and damages that might occur because of such 
hazards. 
23. 
Dissemination of real-time weather data and forecasts to people 
Cambodia has implemented a good early warning system, EWS 12946 that sends a voice 
message  to  the  phones  of  registered  users  whenever  a  climate  event  such  as  flood  is 
predicted  or detected.  More than 128 thousand users have  registered to get such early 
warning notification and more than 2.6 million such warnings have already been sent since 
its  beginning  according  to  the  website  accessed  on  08  July  2022.  The  process  of  its 
operation  and  more  information  about  the  early  warning  systems  is  accessible  here: 
http://ews1294.com/en/home/ 
Another web platform, Platform for Real-time Impact and Situation Monitoring (PRISM) 7, 
also  exist  that  assesses  the  potential  risk  and  impact  of  climate  hazards  on  the  most 
vulnerable communities. It integrates various sources of information, from remote sensing 
sources like satellites to field data, early warning systems and socio-economic vulnerability 
to prioritize and help those who are most in need.  
24. 
Early action plan for preparedness and emergency response 
A  National  Committee  for  Disaster  Management  (NCDM)  chaired  by  the  Prime  minister, 
which  includes  ministers  from  each  government  agencies,  the  Royal  Cambodian  Armed 
Forces, Civil Aviation Authority and the Red Cross was established in 1995 and still exists 
with  an  aim  “to  lead  the  disaster  management  in  the  kingdom  of  Cambodia”.8  Its 
responsibilities and functions are as follows: 
(i)  To  coordinate  with  the  line  ministries,  UN  agencies,  IOs,  NGOs,  International 
Communities,  National  Associations,  and  Local  Donors  in  order  to  appeal  for  aid  for 
Emergency Response and Rehabilitation. 
(ii) To make recommendations to the Government on issue and policies relating to disaster 
preparedness and emergency responses. 
5 http://www.ncdm.gov.kh/  
6 http://ews1294.com/en/home/  
7 https://www.prism-kh.info/about  
8 The NCDM website shows error in their ‘about’ section and this information is used from an ADB report which 
is Not dated. 
17 
(iii) To disseminate information and strengthen coordination on disaster management from 
national down to community level, including the necessary capacity development. 
(iv)  To  recommend  to  the  Government  on  the  needs  for  adequate  disaster  prevention, 
emergency response, and rehabilitation (e.g., funds, human resources, equipment etc.). 
Establishment  of  NDCM  and  preparation  of  disaster  risk  reduction  action  plans  clearly 
shows  the  systematic  efforts  of  the  Cambodian  government  in  disaster  risk  reduction. 
Following are the DRR Plans, Policies, Strategies and Action Plans prepared in order to get 
better prepared to face and to mitigate the impacts of disasters: [Adopted from Eng, 2016 
+ some additions] 
-  Sub-decree  No.  30  ANKR.BK,  dated  April  09,  2002  on  the  Organization  and 
Functioning of the National and Sub-National Committees for Disaster Management 
-  Sub-decree  No.  61  ANKR.BK,  dated  June  29,  2006  on  the  establishment  of  the 
Commune Committee for Disaster Management (CCDM) 
-  Direction No. 315 NCDM, dated July 21, 2010 on the establishment of the Village 
Disaster Management Team (VDMT) for the implementation of Community Based 
Disaster Risk Management 
Law on Disaster Management has been enacted by National Assembly on the 30th 
of June 2015. 
- 
-  National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2009-2013 and 2014-2018 (NSDP) 
-  National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction 2014-2018 (drafted & adopted by 
2014) 
-  Strategic National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction (SNAP) 2008-2013 
-  National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction (NAP) 2014-2018 
-  Cambodia endorsed the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA) in 2005 that provides 
a systematic and strategic approach to reduction of vulnerability and risk to 
disasters. 
-  National Adaptation Plan Process in Cambodia, 2017 
-  National Adaptation Program of Action to Climate Change (NAPA), 2006 
18 
Source: National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction (NAP-DRR), 2013 
Figure 10: Structure of the National Committee for Disaster Management (NCDM) 
25. 
Government and non-government support of social and economic resources 
National  Adaptation  Plan  Process  in  Cambodia  (GGSD,  2017)  mentions  three  types  of 
funding for adaptation actions in Cambodia: Public funding, External Financing, and Private 
Sector Funding. Allocation from national budget for climate expenditure in 2009 was USD 
21.7  million  while  it  increased  to  USD  52.7  million  in  2014.  Table  6  the  proportion  of 
climate change expenditure to total spending and to Gross Domestic Product (GDP). 
Table 6: Proportion of climate change expenditure to total spending and GDP 
Source: National Adaptation Plan Process in Cambodia, 2017 
19 
A  number  of  programs  and  projects  to  enhance  the  adaptive  capacity  of  Cambodian 
population  has  been  implemented  with  a  combined  effort  of  the  Royal  Kingdom  of 
Cambodia and various organizations such as the World Bank, Asian Development Bank, 
European Union, United Nations, International Fund for Agricultural Development and so 
on. The following list is from an ADB project report (ADB, ND): 
a. Ketsana Emergency Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Project (KERRP) 
b. Emergency Food Assistance Project 
c. Flood Damage Emergency Reconstruction Project 
d. ADB’s Integrated Technical Assistances 
e. Mekong River Commission 
f. The European Commission (EU) Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection (ECHO) 
g. Water Resources Management Sector Development Program (WRMSDP) 
h. Rural Roads Improvement Project (RRIP) 
i. Provincial Roads Improvement Project (PRIP) 
j. Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR) 
Majority of private sector funding are mitigation oriented. However, private sector 
contributed to USD 185 million over the period 2009-2011 for climate related projects. 
(GGSD, 2017) 
26. 
People’s own adaptation strategies 
Farmers  have  tried  different  practices  to  deal  with  the  changing  climatic  events  and 
intensifying  hazards.  For  e.g.,  to  cope  with  the  water  stress  some  farmers  in  Kampong 
Speu  province  used  drought  resistant  crops  and  were  satisfied  with  the  results  they 
obtained. Similarly, they have changed the cropping calendar (from two to four weeks), 
they have changed the varieties of crops they used to plant, started using machinery and 
changed  the  area  of  cultivation  wherever  possible.  To  adapt  to  the  declining  soil 
productivity, they have started composting and crop residue retention in their farmlands.  
(Shrestha et. al., 2018) 
For coping with the security of their body during extreme  events, in Kratie province for 
example, children in the villages were taught how to swim, and almost every household 
owned or made sure that they had access to a boat in case of floods. Intercropping and 
diversification of crops was another strategy farmers have practiced (Henningsen et. al., 
2020). 
Economic means of the population to support/adjust/adapt/recover from climate 
27. 
hazards 
The poverty rate in Cambodia has plummeted from 48 percent in 2007 to 14 percent in 
2014  because  of  its  economic  growth  but  its  vulnerability  to  climate  change  has  many 
threats on this development (UNDRR, 2019 (a)). This at least signifies that the economic 
status has become stronger over time which helps people to adjust their activities to the 
projected  changes in climate and also to  recover  from the shocks and hazards to some 
extent  they  may  suffer.  But  the  problem  again  is  that its  economic  growth  is  likely  not 
inclusive and may be increasing inequality, and the poverty reduction is mainly on urban 
20 
areas  with  much  slower  progress  in  rural  areas  (Climate  Risk  Profile:  Cambodia,  2021) 
making  the  rural  population  less  adaptive  than  the  urban  population  to  the  projected 
climate  changes.  Since  projects  usually  target  rural  and  poor  population,  the  overall 
economic  growth  may  not  provide  a  clear  picture  on  whether  the  adaptive  capacity  in 
terms of economic status of rural population has increased or not.   
A  SWOT  (Strength,  Weakness,  Opportunities  and  Threats)  analysis  of  the  country’s 
response  capacity  to  climate  change  presented  on  Cambodia  Climate  Change  Strategic 
Plan 2014-2023 (2013) is as follows: 
“Strengths 
Weaknesses 
• The Kingdom of Cambodia has high economic 
growth 
• Interest in knowledge and information 
related to climate change 
• High interest in sustainable development 
• Rich natural resource base 
• Presence of government policies on economic 
development 
• Relevant ministries have developed their 
Sectoral Climate Change Strategic Plans 
• Stakeholder support to climate change 
response including government agencies, 
international community and civil society 
• Increased awareness on climate change 
• Policy on environment and health 
• Gradual improvement of infrastructure. 
• Weak knowledge and science-based decision 
making 
• Lack of clear procedure for integration of climate 
change in the national development plans 
• Limited capacity of the national institutions 
responsible for climate change and limited 
participation of stakeholders 
• Out-dated information to address climate impacts 
• Limited human resources 
• Climate change planning is not a common practice 
• Limited knowledge, research and technology 
• Limited financial resources 
• Low adaptive capacity among citizens 
Opportunities 
Threats 
• Increasing global climate change funds 
• Establishment of national knowledge and 
information structure 
• Development of the national sustainable 
development plan 
• Political commitment and support to climate 
change 
• Improved livelihoods 
• Global efforts in addressing climate change 
• Existing programs such as Cambodia Climate 
Change Alliance and Strategic Program for 
Climate Resilience 
• Development partners’ support to the RGC in 
addressing climate change 
• Skills and vocational development programs 
• 43% of total communes are highly vulnerable 
• Low understanding of climate change and response 
options 
• Other policies and priorities are competing with 
policy on climate change 
• Key economic sectors faced with the risks of 
climate change impacts 
• Limited capacity for climate change responses 
• More frequent climate extreme events 
• Lack of resilience to natural disasters” 
21 
6. Vulnerability to climate hazards 
IPCC definition of vulnerability is “the propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected 
[which]  encompasses  a  variety  of  concepts  and  elements  including  sensitivity  or 
susceptibility to harm and lack of capacity to cope and adapt”. Vulnerability is the function 
of  exposure,  sensitivity,  and  adaptive  capacity.  Understanding  of  how  vulnerability  is 
produced, how it increases is necessary to manage a risk properly. (Cardona et al., 2012). 
Vulnerability to climate hazards depends on the ability of the exposed elements to move 
away  from  such  hazards  or  to  be  able  to  minimize  the  losses.  “High  vulnerability  (and 
exposure)  is  generally  the  outcome  of  skewed  development  processes,  such  as  those 
associated  with  environmental  mismanagement,  demographic  changes,  rapid  and 
unplanned  urbanization  in  hazardous  areas,  failed  governance,  and  the  scarcity  of 
livelihood options for the poor” (Cardona et al., 2012). The Climate Change Data Portal of 
the  National  Council  for  Sustainable  Development  (NCSD)9  of  Cambodia  presents  the 
vulnerability assessments in detail, both on temporal as well as spatial basis. 
28. 
The Cambodian Vulnerability Index 
Cambodia  has  developed  a  commune  level  composite  vulnerability  index  (VI)  based  on 
multiple  data  from  the  commune  database  following  the  National  Monitoring  and 
Evaluation 
for  climate  change:  Tracking  Adaptation  and  Measuring 
Development (TAMD) in Cambodia. The composite VI is an average of three values of the 
vulnerability indices of three climate hazards: flood, drought, and storm. (NCSD, 2022). 
framework 
Source: The National Council for Sustainable Development (2022) 
Figure 11: Composite Vulnerability Index (2019) of communes of Cambodia 
Figure  shows  a  scattered  distribution  of  vulnerability  levels  throughout  Cambodia,  but 
communes on the Southwestern part seem least vulnerable to in the composite vulnerable 
index.  
9 https://ncsd.moe.gov.kh/dcc/data-portal 
22 
7. Selection of commodities and value chains based on identified climate 
risks and impacts 
The primary tentative list of the commodities and provinces are listed below. The ASPIRE 
team  together  with  design  team  assessed  this  based  on  the  indicators  like  production 
potential,  commercialization,  and  agro-climatic  conditions  etc.  The  Project  will  work  to 
identify other provinces suitable for the value chains.  
Table 7: Recommended project activities and targets 
SN  Major Project 
Target Provinces  
Activities  
A 
Value chain Commodities  
Commodities  
Target provinces  
1 
Cassava 
(1) Steung Treng, (2) Ratanakiri, (3) Ordor Meanchey, (4) Tbuong Khmum, 
(5) Kratie, (6) Battambang (7) Banteay Meanchey, (8) Kampong Thom and 
(9) Preah Vihear 
2 
Nuts (Cashew 
(1) Kampong Thom, (2) Steung Treng, (3) Ratanakiri, (4) Kratie, (5) Preah 
Vihear 
3 
4 
5 
Fresh fruits (Longan, 
Mango, Banana etc) 
Vegetables (mostly: leafy 
mustard, cucumber, 
cabbage, chines kale, 
tamato, longbean,xxx) 
Traditional Breed Poultry  
(Native chicken) 
(1) Battambang, (2) Kampong Speu, (3) Pailin 
(1) Battambang, (2) Siem Reap, (3) Kampong Cham, (4) Kandal, (5) Takeo 
(1) Kandal, (2) Siem Reap (3) Takeo, (4) Kampong Chhnang, (5) 
Battambnag (6) Kampong Cham 
B 
Infrastructure works  
 Connection road, loading sites, processing/marketing infrastructure, lab, 
quarantine and research services  
23 
8. Impacts and mitigation measures 
There are a number of negative as well as positive impacts on various sectors that may 
arise from project implementation. In the same way, the project also faces risks that may 
arise from different climatic, environmental, and socio-economic factors. The process of 
climate risks assessment is based on the illustration from “Climate Change 2014: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability – IPCC, 2014”, shown in figure 12. 
Source: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability – IPCC (2014) 
Figure 12: Illustration of the concept of climate risk to project 
Also,  implementation  of  any  development  project  creates  both  types  of  impacts  on  the 
community  and  the  environment  of  the  project  area  and  beyond.  Both  negative  and 
positive impacts occur as a result of project implementation. Each project implementing 
institution  aims  for  the  sustainability  of  the  project  and  its  outcomes  and  strives  for 
maximizing the beneficial impacts and for minimizing the potential adverse impacts. 
ASPIRE-AT  project  with  its  goal  of  ‘decreasing  the  vulnerability  and  increasing  climate 
resilience  of  the  Cambodian  rural  households  through  inclusive  and  environmentally 
sustainable  growth  in  agriculture  sector’  targets  following  value  chains  that  will  be 
promoted in the project site.  
Table 8: Priority Value Chains and Typical Investments10 
Value Chain 
Vegetable 
Native chicken 
Cassava 
Import substitution 
Typical investments 
Economic impact 
Import substitution  Greenhouse, water management, post-
harvest handling. 
Production facilities, slaughter and 
packing 
Disease free planting material 
Cassava 
Improved soil management 
Export 
10 ASPIRE AT final design AM 
24 
Cashew 
Fresh fruit 
Processed fruit 
Export 
Export 
Export 
Post-harvest and processing 
Post-harvest, treatment, packing etc 
Processing 
Here,  project  invests  in  two  major  activities:  (1)  promotion  of  the  production  of 
commodities and (2) physical infrastructure for production facilitation and value addition 
to the commodities. Since the impacts of these two separate activities will be unique it is 
wise to describe them separately.  
Negative environmental impacts may arise during the process of commodity production as 
well  as  during  the  construction  of  infrastructures  if  proper  care  is  not  taken.  Similarly, 
construction  of  infrastructures  may  contribute  to  climate  change,  mainly  by  emitting 
greenhouse gases, especially if such infrastructures are large. In the same way, climate 
change mainly creates negative impacts on project activities, both on commodities and on 
infrastructures. The project aims to minimize negative environmental as well as climate 
change  impacts  by  recommending  specific  actions  or  set  of  actions  during  project 
implementation. Also, it aims to take proactive actions to minimize the negative impacts 
of climate change, both on commodities production and on physical infrastructures. The 
potential impacts  and  measures  to  mitigate  the  risks  arising  from  negative  impacts  are 
discussed in the following sections for commodities and infrastructure separately. 
29. 
Commodities: 
A.  Cassava 
Figure 13: Cassava farm 
its 
General 
description: 
Cassava grows well in marginal 
soils  and  is  one  of  the  most 
drought  tolerant  crops  (Clifton 
and  Keogh,  2016)  and 
is 
cultivated 
tubers. 
for 
Cambodia  is  the  tenth  largest 
producer  of  Cassava  in  the 
world  and  fourth  largest  in 
Asia11. 
It  has  a  national 
cassava  policy  (2020-2025) 
which was prepared in 2020, to 
promote  the  production  and 
market  of  cassava  within  the 
country 
in 
international markets. 
also 
and 
Photo: Nirajan Khadka  
Land  suitability  map:  Areas  except  plain  lands  where  water  table  is  high  is  good  for 
Cassava cultivation in Cambodia. Areas surrounding the Tonle Sap  and Mekong are not 
suitable  as  flood  inundates  the  area  regularly  and  the  tubers  get  rot  because  of  that. 
11 https://www.undp.org/cambodia/press-releases/new-cassava-policy-transform-production-crucial-crop  
25 
Especially the hilly areas around the North-Eastern part of the country are more suitable 
for its cultivation, figure 14. 
Figure 14: Land suitability map for Cassava. The dark green area is highly suitable for 
Cassava while the dark red is highly unsuitable 
Historical production trends: The annual production quantities of agriculture crops and 
livestock is provided by the FAO (2022). However, among crops targeted by ASPIRE-AT, 
only data for Cassava is available. Inclusion of other crops whenever feasible would help 
project designers. 
The trend shows that Cassava production was almost stable until 2002 and it has started 
increasing  continuously  after  that  date.  Production  has  become  the  highest  in  2011, 
slightly decreased in 2012 and has again become stable since then. One of the key reasons 
of increasing production is the increase in Cassava farming area. 
26 
Figure 15: National crop-production trends (1980-2020) compared to the base year 
1995 
Source: FAO (2022) 
Projected production trends:  The Climate Adaptation in Rural Development (CARD) 
Assessment Tool by the IFAD (2019)12 provides information about the effects of climate 
change on production of major crops based on peer reviewed modelling results.  
12 
assessment-tool  
https://www.ifad.org/en/web/knowledge/-/publication/climate-adaptation-in-rural-development-card-
27 
Source: Climate Adaptation in Rural Development (CARD) Assessment Tool, (IFAD, 
2019) 
Figure 16: Predicted national crop-production trends (2022-2050) (a) without irrigation 
(b) with full irrigation, and with a median risk level compared to the base year 2022 
The figures (16) show that the production of casava will decrease for more than 14 percent 
without irrigation facilities and will decrease for around 10 percent even if full irrigation is 
available, by 2050 compared to the production in 2022, with the median risk scenario of 
climate change if the current trend of  climate change continues as it is. The production 
projections for other crops targeted by the project are not available in the tool. 
Observed production trends vs extreme climate hazards:  The historical production 
trend is available only for Cassava among the crops targeted by this project, in the FAO 
statistics (FAO, 2022).  The years  of  occurrence of natural hazards is available from the 
Climate  Risk  Country  Profile  for  Cambodia  (2021).  Visual  checks  between  the  cassava 
production and extreme climate events whose data is available (drought, flood, epidemic, 
and storm) do not show that the occurrence of these climate extreme events has highly 
impacted  the  production  of  Cassava.  However,  statistical  significance  has  not  been 
checked.  Availability  of  the  magnitude  of  the  extreme  climate  events  as  well  as  the 
production trends of other crops would help to check the impacts of extreme climate events 
on the production of each of the crops with statistical significance. 
28 
Source: Production quantity (FAO, 2022); Natural Hazard Statistics (Climate Risk 
Profile, Cambodia, 2021) 
Figure 17: Recorded annual production quantities of Cassava and the occurrence of 
extreme climate events 
To conclude, Cassava is a good selection by the project considering the water availability, 
drought, increase in temperature, and the soil type of the farmland. Casava farming fully 
depends on rainfall. As CARD depicts, the overall production will decrease for more than 
14 percent without irrigation facilities and will decrease for around 10 percent even if full 
irrigation is available, by 2050 compared to the production in 2022. Unpredictable timing, 
pattern and intensity of rainfall is a major problem that farmers are facing. They need an 
updated cassava farming calendar and a system suitable for the rural farmers to get early 
weather information. For the sustainability, a key challenge is the monocropping. This not 
only impacts on the soil quality and local biodiversity but also prone to disease and pest 
outburst. As far as possible, project should promote intercropping of legumes and other 
suitable crops. The farmers should get information on integrated pest management, and 
29 
relevant  capacity  building  and  exposures  should  be  provided.  Flood  is  another  major 
climate threats to cassava. The project support should be for areas suitable for the cassava 
and less susceptible for flood. For the flood prone areas, support can be made for fruits or 
cashew nuts.  
B.  Cashew nuts 
 Figure 18: Cashew farming 
General 
Description: 
Tropical  and  warm 
the 
climates  are 
best  conditions  for 
growing  Cashew.  
Reliable data about 
the  production  of 
Cashew  nuts  was 
not  available 
for 
earlier 
Cambodia 
but  was  estimated 
to 
around 
30,000  to  50,000 
2008 
in 
tons 
(Cashew 
nuts 
sector 
profile, 
2010).  Currently, 
the  government  is 
planning to prepare 
a  national  policy  on  Cashew  nuts  with  objectives  to  strengthen  Cambodia’s  capacity  to 
grow,  process,  store  export  cashew  nuts.13  According  to  unofficial  sources,  “currently, 
more than 500,000 hectares of Cambodia’s land is dedicated to cashew cultivation across 
10 provinces.” 14 
Photo: Nirajan Khadka 
be 
Production  area  and  land  suitability  map:  Figure  19  shows  the  total  Cashew 
production  area  by  province  in  2019  and  the  map  (figure  20)  shows  land  area  that  is 
suitable for cashew plantation. 
13 https://www.khmersme.gov.kh/en/news/rush-cashew-policy-work-official/  
14 https://cambodianess.com/article/cambodia-to-approve-the-national-policy-on-cashew-nuts-by-2022  
30 
Source: National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning 
(2019) 
Figure 19: Province wise cassava production area in Cambodia (hectares) 
Figure 20: Land suitability map for Cashew nut. The dark green area is highly suitable 
for Cashew while the dark red is highly unsuitable 
To conclude, monocropping is one of the threats for cashew nut as well similar to cassava. 
It makes susceptible and increase the loss from disease and pest. The farmers shared that 
the  production  sometimes  goes  far  below,  up  to  50%  down,  due  to  disease  and  pest 
outburst. There is also a practice of maize and other crops intercropping with cashew nuts 
which needs to be promoted. A big threat for the environment and local biodiversity is the 
increasing trend of chemical inputs. It was noticed that even the IPs who were traditionally 
using  organic  seeds  and  organic  inputs  are  diverting  to  use  chemicals.  The  average 
farmers are spraying chemical pesticides thrice a  month.  The use  of  chemical is mostly 
influenced  by  the  local  suppliers  in  rural  areas.  The  project  should  work  to  aware  and 
capacitate farmers on negative impacts of chemical use and regulate the supply and use 
of  it.  The  pattern  and  intensity  of  precipitation  has  also  negatively  impacted  on  the 
production, quality and harvesting of cashew nuts. The farmers also reported damage by 
the storm which was relatively low. The old trees are more vulnerable to the wind. The 
Project should encourage farmers to remove old trees and replace those by new ones.  
C.  Fruits: Mango 
General Description: More than 500 varieties of mangoes are known worldwide. Even 
though the exact number of mango species planted in Cambodia is unknown, it is one of 
the most popular fruits. Data show that Battambang is the province with largest area of 
mango plantation while Koch Kong is the one with lowest mango plantation area (figure 
21). Map (figure 21) of the land suitability shows that the least favorable area for mango 
in Cambodia is the coastal area. 
31 
Source: National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning 
(2019) 
Figure 22: Province wise mango production area in Cambodia (hectares) 
Land suitability map 
Figure  21:  Land  suitability  map  for  mango.  The  dark  green  area  is  highly  suitable  for 
mango while the dark red is highly unsuitable 
The  intercropping  is  also  needed  for  mango  plantation.  The  change  in  precipitation  has 
impacted the quality and quantity of mango production. There is a practice of hormones 
use for multiple time, up to thrice a year, mango production. The use of chemical inputs 
also increasing. These needs to be regulated and farmers should be aware on its negative 
impact. The risk of flood is also for mango but relatively lower than that of vegetable and 
cashew farming. There was also some damage by the wind but minimal.  
Fruits: Banana 
30. 
Banana is also one of the most popular crops in Cambodia. According to the agriculture 
survey in 2019 shows that an estimated 154 thousand tonnes of banana was harvested 
from 8,375 hectares. Banana plantation covers 10,870 hectares area of land according to 
the report. 
32 
Figure 22: Province wise banana production area in Cambodia (hectares) 
Major threats for the banana are flood, wind, heavy  rainfall, and disease and pest.  The 
project should screen the areas for banana support to avoid flood prone areas. Windbreak 
plantation should encourage for the banana farm. The temporary support for the banana 
during  the  windy  days  also  reduces  the  damage.  IPM  should  be  promoted  and  use  of 
chemical inputs needs to be regulated.  
D.  Vegetables 
The  description  is  adapted  from  the  Cambodia  Inter-Censal  Agriculture  Survey  2019 
(CIAS19). Leafy, stem vegetables (amaranth, green garlic, and trakun/water convolvulus) 
and fruit bearing vegetables (chili, cucumber,  eggplant, ivy gourd, pumpkin, small bell, 
snake gourd, and squash/winter squash), root, bulb and tuberous vegetables, leguminous 
green vegetables are grown throughout Cambodia. “Pumpkin was grown on approximately 
22 thousand households in Cambodia with area planted estimated at 4,544 hectares and 
area harvested estimated at 3,270. Similarly, cucumber was grown on approximately 21 
thousand households in Cambodia with area planted estimated at 2,289 hectares and area 
harvested estimated at 1,820 hectares. The total production for cucumbers was 23,348 
tons.” 
Water deficiency, unpredictable precipitation, pest/disease, and flood are the key risk of 
the vegetable farming. The project should encourage efficient water use technologies to 
maximize the benefit from available water. Protected vegetable farming using net houses 
and  efficient  water  technologies  reduces  impacts  of  climate  risks.  Integrated  pest 
management needs to be widely promoted. The screening tool annexed in ESCMP should 
be  used  to  avoid  highly  flood  prone  area  for  the  vegetable  farming  under  the  Project 
support.  The  use  of  bio-inputs  should  be  encouraged  and  support  should  be  made  to 
regulate chemical use and aware the communities.  
E.  Poultry 
“Natural chickens and natural ducks were the most common poultry raised by agricultural 
households, with an estimated 23.6 million natural chickens and 7.0 million natural ducks. 
The  majority  of  household  agricultural  holdings  who  reported  raising  poultry,  raised 
between 1 and 49 birds” (Cambodia Inter-Censal Agriculture Survey, 2019). 
33 
Figure 23: Province wise poultry keeping in Cambodia (numbers) 
Source: Cambodia Inter-Censal Agriculture Survey, 2019  
Previous  chapters  demonstrate  the  existing  and  projected  climate  risks  as  well  as  the 
vulnerability  of  livelihood  and  ecosystems  to  climate  change.  The  temporal  and  spatial 
distribution  of  such  climate  risks  is  not  uniform  throughout  the  country.  Similarly,  the 
vulnerability is not uniform either, because of the varying levels of exposure, sensitivity, 
and adaptive capacity in different locations. Hence, it is necessary to plan beforehand and 
to take proactive actions on how such risks can be avoided or their damages be minimized. 
Apart  from  infrastructures  and  systems  that  reduce  the  risk  of  the  value  chain 
commodities, creating facilities that increases the value of the produced commodities also 
help to increase the adaptive capacity of producers. For example, creating drying and safe 
storage facilities for nuts increases the value of nuts which ultimately helps to increase the 
economic status of the producers which in turn helps to increase their adaptive capacity. 
31. 
Overall Impacts 
Environmental impacts (of project): 
32. 
Promoting the production of abovementioned commodities in the project area may have 
different socioeconomic and environmental impacts. Promotion of only one species in an 
area, for example, may decrease the farmers’ income diversification opportunity and this 
may be risky. For example, the price of cassava is highly volatile in international markets 
(National  Cassava  Policy,  2020)  and  farmers’  income  dependency  on  cassava  only  puts 
them  at  greater  risk.  Also,  there  is  a  higher  risk  of  crop  failure  when  monocropping  is 
done. This practice again results in loss of biodiversity and hence the ecosystem imbalance 
may occur. Unmonitored fertilizer and pesticide use with an aim of increasing production 
may harm the soil, water, and even human health. In the same way, planting crops in an 
area without noting their habitat suitability may become counterproductive as the crops 
may  not  give  expected  production  or  even  may  not  survive  thereby  wasting  time  and 
resource investment. 
Mitigation and adaptation strategies to potential negative impacts:  
33. 
The Project recommends intercropping wherever possible so as to diversify income sources 
as well as to enhance biodiversity in the project area. National Cassava Policy (2020) also 
mentions the necessity of effective protection measures against rampant use of chemical 
fertilizers and other agricultural inputs arising because of the lack of knowledge. Potential 
negative  impacts  of  each  activity  and  measures  to  avoid  them  are  listed  in  the  table 
(below). 
34 
Impacts of climate change: 
34. 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries are highly climate sensitive factors (World Bank, 2022). 
Erratic rainfall patterns in a country with almost rain fed crop production systems pose a 
high  risk  to  production  of  crops.  If  early  information  (of  changing  temperature  and 
precipitation patterns) is not available to the farmers, it further aggravates the situation. 
As a project with an aim of uplifting livelihoods of rural farmers, ASPIRE-AT is vulnerable 
to several similar climate change impacts. Commodity specific impacts and strategies to 
minimize the adverse impacts are presented in the following sections. 
Strategies to minimize negative impacts: 
35. 
Impacts of shift in rainfall in rain fed agricultural systems, for example, can be minimized 
by  shifting  the  plantation  periods.  But  for  that,  location  specific  seasonal  crop  calendar 
and  early  information  should  be  made  available  to  the  farmers.  Similarly,  promoting 
drought tolerant species may help cope with water stress and droughts. 
36. 
Infrastructure: 
Project impacts on climate change: 
37. 
Infrastructure  for  Climate  Action  Report  by  United  Nations  Office  for  Project  Services 
(UNOPS)  “highlights  how  infrastructure  is  responsible  for  79  per  cent  of  all  greenhouse 
gas emissions and 88 per cent of all adaptation costs” (Thacker et al., 2021). ASPIRE-AT 
invests  in  some  infrastructure  development  that  helps  in  systematic  collection  and 
processing of the commodities that adds value to the commodity and ensures long term 
storage and use.  However,  only minor infrastructures such  as  collection and processing 
centers, community buildings, irrigation canals, water storage ponds and warehouses are 
targeted  which  do  not  emit  significantly  large  amount  of  climate  warming  greenhouse 
gases.  
Measures to address negative impacts: 
38. 
Infrastructures  are  indeed  needed  for  the  development,  but  they  should  be  built  in 
sustainable ways that help to achieve the net zero targets and should be resilient (Thacker 
et al., 2021). Since ASPIRE-AT invests only on small scale infrastructures it is unlikely that 
the  project  implementation  emits  substantially  large  amount  of  GHGs.  However,  care 
should  be  taken  to  minimize  the  emissions  no  matter  the  scale  of  infrastructure 
construction.  This  will  be  taken  care  since  the  beginning  of  project  implementation  and 
such measures are listed in table 9. 
Potential climate change impacts on the project: 
39. 
Cambodia was the 12th most vulnerable countries worldwide based on the Global Climate 
Risk Index (1999 – 2108) and was among the ‘very high’ impacted countries according to 
the World Risk Index (2019) where the risk was calculated as a product of exposure and 
vulnerability (NDC, 2020). Also, the level of hazard is high for floods, landslides, cyclones, 
extreme heat, and wildfires based on the ThinkHazard tool. The magnitude of observed as 
well  as  projected  loss  and  damages  are  already  discussed  on  the  section  above.  Data 
shows that floods occur almost every year and sweep away roads and bridges. Similarly, 
flood may damage collection centers, community buildings and warehouses. This shows 
that  a  lot  of  events  occurring  as  a  result  of  climate  change  will  negatively  impact 
infrastructures that add value to the products from the project sites. 
Measures to minimize the negative impacts: 
40. 
Proper site selection is one of the best strategies to protect infrastructures from extreme 
climatic events such as floods and landslides in order to avoid such risks. The infrastructure 
that the project aims to invest in will be made in those areas with least possible exposure 
to hazards and with materials resistant to the impacts of changing climate. 
35 
Table 9 summarizes the activities and recommendations for addressing environmental and 
climate change risks and vulnerability of commodities and people in the targeted areas of 
project: 
36 
Table 9: Value chains and project activities, impacts and the recommendations 
SN  Supply chain / activity  Potential impacts on Environment 
Risk 
significance 
Mitigation/Adaptation measures 
1 
Cassava,  
Cashew Nuts,  
Fruits 
i) Target to increase production may 
demand additional land and create 
pressure to forest and natural 
resources 
ii) monocropping reduces local 
biodiversity, decrease soil quality, 
increase the chance and impacts of 
disease and pest outburst, 
iii) increase use of chemical inputs 
affects soil health, biodiversity and 
pollute ground water and other water 
resources, affects human and 
livestock health, 
iv)  increase water use creates more 
pressure to ground water,  
v) increase use of hybrid seed 
replacing local/indigenous organic 
seeds impacts on local biodiversity 
and soil health, demands more water 
and chemical inputs, 
vi) application of excessive hormones 
in mango farming decreases the soil 
health and local biodiversity. 
vii) Improper and intensive 
agriculture practices may cause soil 
erosion 
Medium 
i) Project's work will be confined only in agricultural land, attention will be paid 
for zero forest encroachment and deforestation, 
ii) Some farmers are practicing intercropping like legumes, maize, shade loving 
crops; promote and encourage fellow farmers to use it. Encourage integrated 
land use management and good agriculture practices. Maintain crop rotation as 
far as possible. Remove old and dying trees to maintain farm health 
iii) Work together with authorised department to regulate chemical inputs use, 
aware farmers on the negative impacts of chemical use and the benefits of 
organic inputs, promote use of organic inputs, retain farmers who are 
practicing organic farming since long, increase production and access to 
organic inputs. Promote market for organic products, create environment for 
additional incentives/price for organic product. Enforce pesticide testing in 
market. Training farmers on good agriculture practice and Integrated Pest 
Management. Regular soil testing to inform fertilizer application.  Onsite 
technical support to regulate chemical use. 
iv) promote water efficient use technology like drip/sprinkle irrigation, 
rainwater harvesting tank, water conservation/storage ponds. 
v) Encourage farmers to use local/indigenous seeds, capacitate to select and 
store those seeds. Ensure adequate market for organic seeds.  
vi) Regulate use of external hormones. 
vii) green manure, inter crop, rotation of crops, low tillage field preparation 
37 
2 
Vegetable 
i) Increase use of chemical inputs, 
3 
Native poultry  
4 
Infrastructure  
ii) Increasing trend of using hybrid 
seeds, 
iii) improper agriculture practice may 
degrade soil quality and also 
accelerate soil erosion  
iv) additional pressure to ground 
water and water resources  
i) Improper waste management 
leading to pollution 
ii) overuse of vaccination and 
antibiotics also leading to health 
problem,  
iii) increase number and impact of 
parasites/diseases and pests  
i) increase waste and chemical 
pollution ii) increase water use 
resulting pressure to water 
resourcesiii) potential of forest 
encroachment and natural resource 
depletioniv) improper design 
accelerating soil erosion or landslides  
Low  
Low  
i) Work together with department to regulate chemical inputs use, aware 
farmers on the negative impacts of chemical use, promote use of organic 
inputs, increase assess of organic inputs. Enforce pesticide testing in market. 
Training farmers on good agriculture practice and Integrated Pest 
Management. Regular soil testing to inform fertilizer application. 
ii) encourage local seed production, screening, storage and marketing. 
Promote local products varieties. 
iii) Green manure, inter crop, rotation of crops, low tillage field preparation 
iv) Protected agriculture. Water efficient use technologies: drip and sprinkle 
irrigation, rain water harvesting, water storage tanks.  
i) proper mechanism to collect waste and encourage to make bio-compost, 
ii) regulate use of vaccination and medicines, 
iii) Motivate to maintain hygiene, provide onsite support, regular meetings to 
share the updates and issues if any, proper dissemination of information use  
ASPIRE has introduced biosafety measures and production techniques that 
have proven to reduce native chicken mortality. This chicken raising model has 
received positive reviews and should be further disseminated under ASPIRE-
AT. 
i) Adequate provisions of waste management, use of organic waste for bio-
compost, recycle and reuse inorganic waste as far as possible,ii) Provision of 
water storage tanks, rain water harvesting, wise use of water, iii) No any 
infrastructure in forest area, use permissible natural resources with prior 
consultation with responsible authority and local communities,iv) climate proof 
design, use of local materials and indigenous techniques, plantation in exposed 
soils 
38 
SN  Commodity   Climate risk to supply chain  
Risk 
significance 
Solution measures  
1 
Cassava,  
Cashew Nuts,  
Fruits, 
Vegetable 
i) Change or unpredictable rain pattern and 
intense rainfall decrease in production and quality, 
Medium to 
High 
ii) Drought; water stress and impact on 
productivity due to increased heat 
iii) Land damage and impact on production by 
flood, 
iv) Crops damage due to storm, there were 
relatively low damage reported from farmers for 
cassava, cashew nuts and mango; however, 
impact could be large for the vegetable and 
banana 
v) increase number and intensity/impact of 
disease and pest, 
vi) unpredictable rainfall during harvesting time 
increase damage and decrease price 
2 
Native 
Chicken 
vii) Obstruction on road and transportation due to 
heavy rainfall and soil erosion 
i) Increase in mortality and production decline due 
to heat stress, 
Low  
ii) Increase impacts and number of diseases, 
iii) obstruction in transportation to the market. 
i) and ii) prepare participatory seasonal crop calendar analysing recent shift 
in rainfall pattern, work to provide early information on the climate, proper 
plantation techniques to best utilize rainfall water, selection of drought 
tolerant species. 
iii) Promote good agriculture practices and climate smart technologies, plant 
grass and trees with good root network in potential flood risk areas, 
intercropping, 
iv) Hedge row plantation and maintain trees in the wind side of farmland, for 
banana: proper moulding, provision of supports 
v) Intercropping, crop rotation, capacitate on integrated pest management, 
good agriculture practices, onsite support to identify and suggest for the 
control measures, regulate seeds, promote quality organic seeds,  
vi and vii) Early climate information, proper storage and drying facility, 
i) proper selection of breed as per the locality that helps to adjust with 
temperature, poultry house with proper air circulation, adequate water 
supply, 
ii) good management practice, maintain hygiene, regulations and easy access 
of medicine, provision of proper monitoring,  
3 
Infrastructure   Flood 
Medium to 
high 
iii) Provision of meat storage and processing  
i)Screening for site selection, avoid flood prone areas. Only climate proof 
infrastructure.  
39 
References 
“Cambodia Inter-Censal Agriculture Survey 2019 (CIAS19).” 2019. National Institute of 
Statistics, Ministry of Planning in collaboration with Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries. 
“National Cassava Policy 2020-2025.” 2020. Ministry of Commerce General Directorate of 
Trade Promotion Trade Policy Department, Royal Government of Cambodia. 
ADB. 2012. “Flood Damage Emergency Reconstruction Project; Preliminary Damage and Loss 
Assessment.” Asian Development Bank. https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-
documents/46009-001-cam-oth-01.pdf.  
ADB. n.d. “DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT IN CAMBODIA.” Asian Development Bank. 
Cardona, O.D., M.K. van Aalst, J. Birkmann, M. Fordham, G. McGregor, R. Perez, R.S. 
Pulwarty, E.L.F. Schipper, and B.T. Sinh, 2012: Determinants of risk: exposure and 
vulnerability. In: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate 
Change Adaptation [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. 
Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. A 
Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA, pp. 65-108. 
Clifton, P., and J. Keogh. 2016. “Starch.” In Encyclopedia of Food and Health, 146–51. 
Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-384947-2.00661-9.  
Climate Risk Profile: Cambodia (2021): The World Bank Group and Asian Development Bank. 
Eng, Hou Taing. 2016. “Country Report of Cambodia Disaster Risk Reduction.” New Delhi, 
March 13. 
FAO. 2022. “FAOSTAT.” 2022. https://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#home  
Fujii, Hideto, Henrik Garsdal, Peter Ward, Masaki Ishii, Kanehiro Morishita, and Thomas Boivin. 
2003. “Hydrological Roles of the Cambodian Floodplain of the Mekong River.” International 
Journal of River Basin Management 1 (3): 253–66. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15715124.2003.9635211.  
GSSD 2015. Cambodia’s Second National Communication under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. General Secretariat, National Council for Sustainable 
Development/Ministry of Environment, Kingdom of Cambodia, Phnom Penh. 
GSSD 2017. National Adaptation Plan Process i n Cambodia . General Secretariat of  National 
Council for Sustainable Development/Ministry of Environment, Kingdom of Cambodia, Phnom 
Penh. 
Henningsen, Savuti, Natasha Pauli, and Chanchhaya Chhom. 2020. “Seasonal Livelihoods and 
Adaptation Strategies for an Uncertain Environmental Future: Results from Participatory 
Research in Kratie Province, Cambodia.” In Climate-Induced Disasters in the Asia-Pacific 
Region: Response, Recovery, Adaptation, edited by Andreas Neef and Natasha Pauli, 22:135–
65. Community, Environment and Disaster Risk Management. Emerald Publishing Limited. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/S2040-726220200000022006.  
IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and 
Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, 
M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. 
40 
Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L.White (eds.)]. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1132 pp.  
Jacobson, Chris, Stacy Crevello, Chanthan Chea, and Ben Jarihani. 2019. “When Is Migration a 
Maladaptive Response to Climate Change?” Regional Environmental Change 19 (1): 101–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-018-1387-6.  
Kim, Jeonghyun, Hojeong Park, Jong Ahn Chun, and Sanai Li. 2018. “Adaptation Strategies 
under Climate Change for Sustainable Agricultural Productivity in Cambodia.” Sustainability 10 
(12): 4537. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10124537.  
NCSD. 2022. “The National Council for Sustainable Development.” 2022. 
https://ncsd.moe.gov.kh/dcc/data-portal.  
NDC. 2020. “Cambodia’s Updated Nationally Determined Contribution.” Ministry of 
Environment, the Kingdom of Cambodia. 
Nguyen, Thi Phuoc Lai, and Chanmony Sean. 2021. “Do Climate Uncertainties Trigger Farmers’ 
out-Migration in the Lower Mekong Region?” Current Research in Environmental Sustainability 
3: 100087. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crsust.2021.100087.  
Shrestha, Rajendra, Nani Raut, Lwin Swe, and Thida Tieng. 2018. “Climate Change Adaptation 
Strategies in Agriculture: Cases from Southeast Asia.” Sustainable Agriculture Research 7 (3): 
p39. https://doi.org/10.5539/sar.v7n3p39.  
Thacker S, Adshead D, Fantini C, Palmer R, Ghosal R, Adeoti T, Morgan G, Stratton-Short S. 
2021. Infrastructure for climate action. UNOPS, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Thoeun, Heng Chan. 2015. “Observed and Projected Changes in Temperature and Rainfall in 
Cambodia.” Weather and Climate Extremes, SI: IGBP APN, 7 (March): 61–71. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wace.2015.02.001.  
UNDRR. 2019 (a). “Cambodia Steps up Fight against Climate Change.” 2019. 
https://www.undrr.org/news/cambodia-steps-fight-against-climate-change.  
UNDRR. 2019 (a). “Disaster Risk Reduction in Cambodia: Status Report (2019).” Bangkok, 
Thailand: United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR), Regional Office for Asia 
and the Pacific. 
UNICEF. 2021. “The Climate Crisis Is a Child Rights Crisis: Introducing the Children’s Climate 
Risk Index.” New York: United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund. 
Willner, Sven N., Anders Levermann, Fang Zhao, and Katja Frieler. 2018. “Adaptation Required 
to Preserve Future High-End River Flood Risk at Present Levels.” Science Advances. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aao1914.  
World Bank. 2022. “Climate Change Knowledge Portal.” 2022. 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/.  
41 
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex: Aspireat Indigenous Peoples Plan
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Indigenous Peoples Plan- For Agriculture Services Programme for  
Inclusive Rural Economy and Agriculture (ASPIRE-AT) - in Cambodia 
Executive summary of the indigenous people’s plan: 
The indigenous peoples plan has been developed together with the ESCMF for the International 
Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  and  European  Investment  Bank  (EIB)  supported 
project  ‘Agriculture  Services  Programme  for  Inclusive  Rural  Economy  and  Agricultural  Trade 
(ASPIRE-AT)’. The Project has goal to reduce rural poverty and vulnerability and increase climate 
resilience  of  Cambodian  rural  households  through  inclusive  and  environmentally  sustainable 
growth in agriculture sector’. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) will be 
the  lead  implementing  agency  of  the  Project.  The  Project  will  be  national  in  scope.  The  IPP 
includes general description of the project, the project area and components/ activities that may 
lead to impacts on indigenous peoples, A description of affected indigenous people(s) and their 
locations,  Summary  of  substantive  rights  and  legal  framework,  Summary  of  social  and 
environmental  assessment  and  mitigation  measures  ,  Participation,  consultation  and  FPIC 
processes, Appropriate benefits, Capacity building, Grievance redress, Monitoring, reporting and 
evaluation, Institutional Arrangements and Budget and financing. 
A. Description of the project:  
The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) will finance an Agriculture Services 
Programme  for  an  Inclusive  Rural  Economy  and  Agricultural  Trade  Project  (ASPIRE-AT)  in 
Cambodia. The Project will also be co-financed with the European Investment Bank (EIB) and 
the European Union (EU).  
The  projects  seeks  to  investment  in  activities  that  will  benefit  smallholder  farmers  and  rural 
workers from inclusive and sustainable agriculture sector growth based on exports and domestic 
markets.  This  objective  will  be  achieved  through  three  interlinked  components.  Component  1 
will support investments in productive assets for Agriculture Cooperatives (ACs) and Producer 
Organizations (POs) to improve their production/post-harvest/logistics capacities to meet both 
export  and  domestic  market  demand.  Component  2  will  support  the  enabling  environment  to 
incentivize  the  private  sector  to  access  markets  and  catalyse  their  business  investments. 
Component 3 will support technical assistance to nurture, aggregate/graduate existing groups, 
including the Business Clusters that supported by the Cs supported by the ongoing Agriculture 
Services  Programme  for  an  Inclusive  Rural  Economy  and  ASPIRE  and  AIMS,  into  registered 
Agriculture Cooperatives to engage with the private sector in remunerative market opportunities 
facilitated  under  Component  1  and  2.  In  addition,  the  ASPIRE-AT  program  will  build  also  the 
road  within  the  communities  where  can  promote  the  farmers  to  bring  their  products  to  the 
collection or laboratory centres. Due to the ASPIRE-AT program will implement throughout the 
countries,  some  provinces  consisting  of  IPs  and  other  some  consisting  of  ancient  assets  or 
cultural properties or cultural heritage. 
ASPIRE AT will specifically target rural women, youth, people from ethnic minorities and persons 
with disabilities. The project aims to be gender transformative. 
Priority  value  chains  for  the  project,  subject  to  further  validation  during  the  full  design,  may 
include: (i) export-oriented, will include premium traceable rice, fresh fruits (longan, speciality 
banana [not Cavendish], durian, coconut), processed fruits and nuts (mango, longan, cashew), 
cassava, and (ii) domestic-oriented (but with import substitution effects and potential for future 
export), will include vegetables and traditional breed poultry.  
Therefore,  it  is  imporatnt  for  Programme  to  develop  the  IPP  in  order  to  identifies  risks,  and 
impacts for aovidance and mitigation measure for ensuring mutual respect and full and effective 
participation in decision-making on proposed investments that may affect them, especially for 
the    the  protection  of  negative  impact  on  IPs  rights,  their  access  to  lands,  territories  and 
resources, and their livelihoods as well as their culture, believe, culture properties and heritage 
are  highly  taking  into  consideration  based  on  the  IFAD  Policy  Enagegment  with  Indigenosu 
Peoples and  IFAD  on How to do seeking free,  prior and informed consent in IFAD investment 
project and others the commitment of IFAD from the Global Meeting of the Indgienous Peoples’ 
Forum at IFAD.  
Geographical  location:  The  project  will  be  implemented  througout  the  country  which  the 
project management team will be discussed and implement the IPP, if  the project activities fall 
in areas that are home/community to indigenous peoples.  
B. Description of indigenous peoples  
of 
the 
(i) Description of the community or communities constituting the affected peoples 
By using the indigenous mother tongue 
languages  for  identification,  there  are 
indigenous  groups  in  Cambodia  with  a 
population  of  171,193,  equivalent  to 
1.34% 
total  Cambodian 
population 
in  2008  and  183,831, 
total 
to  1.25%  of 
equivalent 
Cambodian  population  in  2013  (the 
growth rate of 0.51% per year). Of the 
indigenous  groups,  there  are  only  6 
groups, each having more than 10,000 
people  and  they  are  Tampuan,  Pnong, 
Kreung,  Kuy,  Jarai,  and  Prev,  which 
account  for  a  total  of  88%  of  the  22 
in  almost  all 
indigenous  peoples.  Although  the 
provinces/capital, the vast majority of them live in only six provinces: Ratanak Kiri, Mondul Kiri, 
Kratie, Stung Treng, Kampong Thom and Preah Vihear, accounting for 92.4% of the indigenous 
peoples in 2013.1 Here they constitute approximately 450–600 communities.2  
indigenous  peoples  nowadays 
total 
live 
the 
22 
There are 53% of the total IP aged between 15 – 59 years old (the ages that can have a career 
or involve in economic activities). 86.6% of the IP, who aged above 15 years old, has a job of 
which 0.1% are employers, 4.6% are employees (has salary), 38% are self-employ and 57.3% 
are worked without salary/wage. The majority of the IPs (93.3%) are working in the agriculture 
sector, 5.1% are working in the services sector and 1.6% are working in the industrial sector. 
95.1% of the IP are working with private local companies.  
IPs remain amongst the most vulnerable in Cambodia and lack behind on most economic and 
social indicators, while struggling to keep their cultures, languages and community structures 
alive.  Indigenous  communities  are  conflicts  over  land  with  an  increase  in  land  concessions, 
mining, illegal logging as well as major development projects as hydro power plants, encroaching 
on their traditional lands, livelihoods and hence, cultures. Even though there are relevant laws 
to  ensure  indigenous  communal  land  titling,  the  enforcement  is  lacking  behind  and  conflicts 
between the concessioners and communities is common. Indigenous environmental and human 
rights  defenders  increasingly  report  incidences  of  threats  and  harassments.  In  addition, 
indigenous communities face challenges of access to public education and health provision, due 
to  distance  to  facilities,  communication  complications  and  discriminatory  attitudes  amongst 
service providers. 
(ii) An identification of any vulnerable groups within the affected peoples (e.g. up contacted 
and voluntarily isolated peoples, women, and girls, the disabled and elderly and others.  
1 MOP (2021). The National Report on Demographic and Socio-economic Situation of Indigenous Peoples in Cambodia 
2 Baird, I.G. 2013. ‘Indigenous Peoples’ and land: Comparing communal land titling and its implications in Cambodia and Laos. Asia 
Pac. Viewpoint 2013, 54, 269–281.  
  Indigenous Yong 
The indigenous peoples are young population, with the populaiton aged under 15 years old was 
41.7%  in  2008  and  decreased  to  37.4%  in  2013.  However,  the  working-age  indigenous 
population also increased between 2008 and  2013, with an annual growth rate  of 1.23%. By 
age group in 2008, children under the age of 5 accounted for 13.6%, children 5-17 years of age 
accounted for 34.4%, the 18-35 years of age accounted for 28.8%, the middle aged from 36 
to59 years old accounted for 17.8%, and the elderly aged 60 years old and above accounted for 
5.4% of the total indigenous population. In 2013, the percentage distribution of these age groups 
varied slightly. 
  Indigenous Women 
The  percentage  of  indigenous  women  is  quite  similar  to  that  of  the  general  population  of 
Cambodia and is not significantly changed (50.9% in 2008 and 51.1% in 2013). In terms of sex 
ratio by age group, the sex ratio of indigenous peoples is greatere than 100 for young peoples, 
and gradually declining as the age groups increase. 
The indigenous families are larger in size than the average family size of the total Cambodian 
populationes,  with  an  average  of  5.3  members  per  family  in  2008  and  4.9  in  2013.  Female 
headed  families  accounted  for  14%  in  2008  and  22%  in  2013,  and  about  18%  of  indigenous 
families  were  families,  with  one  indigenous  spouse  and  the  other  spouse  belonging  to  other 
majority or minority ethnic groups. 
  Gender Context 
Within the IP villages, the roles and responsibilities of men and women vary depending on the 
season and the demands for harvesting, child rearing, household chores and ownership.  During 
rice planting and harvesting, the men will be predominantly participating yet women additionally 
support this activity.  Child rearing is a maternal role, which is a route cause in women’s inability 
to attend events as it is seen as an all-encompassing duty for many years.  Household chores of 
collecting firewood and water are tasks that young women do for several hours a day beginning 
at  4:30am.  This  is  another  predisposed  situation  where  young  women  are  given  strenuous 
activities, which reduces their participation in other potentially capacity building, educational and 
informative meetings. Ownership of land is a difficult concept to explain in Cambodia in general, 
but IP cultural changes are in a state of great flux.  Therefore, ownership is more diverse, where 
previous strong matrilineal IP influence meant women’s position of power included ownership of 
property and the home. Secondary to that, was the use of love huts which provided a separate 
raised hut for teenage boys and girls to visit at night. This additionally gave power to the women 
in choice and preference.  These scenarios are all but gone; depending on the village distance 
from towns, and their ability to not be diffused into the prevailing culture of patriarchal norms.  
Most of the new views of male ownership have taken hold, yet women are typically the managers 
of household money.  
The practical needs and strategic interests that IP communities have are a broad spectrum of 
similar topics of social justice and human rights. The differences between the two genders are 
in the disparity of women’s need for greater access compared to the men. Men in general have 
more mobility from the home. Attaining education is something that is more often done by young 
men compared to young women. Although post-secondary school is where a vast majority finish 
their studies, it is still a visible gender imbalance where girls are burdened by other duties and 
are expected to watch the boys go to school if they want to. This area is changing for the better 
slowly, but still should be noted to be a strategic interest for the purposes of measuring a gender 
power analysis of the IP communities.      
Men and women have different decision-making powers depending on the social circles they are 
within.  There  are  far  more  men  involved  in  the  political  sphere  the  higher  you  go  up  the 
jurisdictional level. Village Chiefs are almost always men, including Commune Chiefs. Above this 
echelon are Khmer male governmental officials who the IP men work with and partake in the 
customary roles of Khmer men. Khmer culture is male dominated, and this in turn is reinforced 
by  IP  men  additionally  following  suit.  The  remaining  cultural  context  of  life  at  home  and 
community involvement in decisions that affect both women and men are more decided by men 
due their increased connections and participation with the outside world. 
The  situational  and  power  analysis  for  these  IP  communities  indicates  that  interventions 
targeting women, both young and adult, bring about a more fulsome perspective of the needs, 
health  and  well-being  of  the  communities.  Women  have  historically  played  a  greater 
substantiated  role  in  these  villages,  and  are  an  untapped  resource  of  knowledge  that  can 
contribute  to  the  overall  wellbeing  of  all  members  of  these  societies.  The  more  informed  and 
skilled women may become, upon their interest and opportunity, the more they will be able to 
support the network of IP voices that are rising in the plight against interlopers and Economic 
Land Concessions (ELCs). The increased visibility of women in the public realm can begin to open 
a  dialogue  about  certain  demands  that  may  have  been  overlooked  through  only  a  male’s 
perspective. 3 
  Indigenouse peoples with disability  
Disability data shows that nearly 1.5% of the indigenous population has some kind ofdisability, 
of which nearly 70% are disabled after birth and most are disabled in seeing and in movement. 
C. Summary of substantive rights and legal framework 
Cambodia, the legislative framework for the protection of the rights of Indigenous Peoples (IPs), 
including enhancing sustainable land management, and the imposition of tighter restrictions on 
land  clearing  for  speculation  in  order  to  maintain,  and  to  protect  and  preserve  Indigenous 
Peoples’ rich has been continually developed. In particular, there has been legislative recognition 
of Collective Land Rights, and traditional methods of land use and management. Key legislative 
instruments include: 
1.  The Cambodian Constitution (Article 31; guarantees all Cambodians' the same rights 
regardless of race, colour, language and religious belief, 
2.  Convention on Biological Diversity (1992), 
3.  The Forestry Law (2002) also recognizes the practice of shifting cultivation with 
registered land, and ensures traditional use rights through a Community Forestry 
Management Plan 
4.  Sub-decree on the Registration and Right to Use of Land of Indigenous Communities in 
Cambodia 2009   
5.  The National Policy for the Development of Indigenous Peoples 2009,  
6.  UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples4, and; 
7.  The Land Law (2001) which recognizes the Right of Indigenous Community to collective 
ownership of their lands, which also includes a right to access interim measures for 
protection of indigenous lands until formal land titling can occur. It also explicitly 
recognizes the practice of the shifting cultivation.  
“Most  of  the  legal,  regulation,  and  policies  of  Cambodia  are  good  enough  in  terms  of  the 
acknowledgement of the indigenous peoples' culture as well as the harmonization in the country 
context. However, there are still a few issues that need to be address such as the concept of the 
territory, special treatment for indigenous peoples. As the indigenous people are the vulnerable 
groups and faced to be disappeared, all the laws and its additional regulation must have a specific 
part  to  deal  or  address  the  indigenous  people  issues  in  accordance  with  integration  of  the 
UNDRIP.  To  make  sure  that  this  would  happen,  there  must  be  a  team  or  agency  that  would 
specifically advocate to the draft of all the Legal, regulation, and policies once they developed.” 5 
The Cambodia Assessment Report (CAR) stated a finding that that there is an existing prevailing 
political environment including a stated political will of relevant high level government entities 
to  take  into  account  inclusive  rights  of  indigenous  peoples  (IPs)  in  the  development  of  legal 
frameworks,  regulations  and  policies,  as  well  as  in  the  National  Strategic  Development  Plan 
3 (Mr. Yin Sopheap). Assessment Report Legal, Policy, and Administrative Evaluation of Indigenous Peoples in Cambodia April 2016 
4 voted By Royal Cambodian Government in 2007 
5 CPR 
(NSDP)  and  Joint  Monitoring  Indicators  (JMI)  from  2014  to  2018  by  mandated  government 
institutions6.). 
For  instance,  the  2009  National  Policy  on  the  Development  of  Indigenous  Peoples  (NPDIP) 
prepared by the Department of Ethnic Minority Development (DEMD) from the Ministry of Rural 
Development  (MRD)  contained  comprehensive  frameworks  which  are  also  referred  to  in  the 
National  Strategic  Development  Plan  (NSDP)  under  section  4.100.  These  include  Chapter  IV 
which importantly lists Key Priority Policies and Actions 2014-2018 of the Rural Development in 
order to achieve RGC’s priority policies, Ministry of Rural Development (MRD) will: Construct an 
ethnic minority development and conservation center in Mondul Kiri. In addition under the table 
4.5:  Key  Indicators  of  Ministry  of  Rural  Development,  specific  numbers  of  ethnic  minority 
communities whose identities have been recognized as individual Communities, identified from 
2012 to 2018, this started from 80, and finalised in 250 communities. Also included in the NSDP 
is, in section 4.62 (pages 130) which deals with priority policies and land reform and clearance 
of  mines  and  Unexploded  Ordinance  (UXO):  RGC  will  intensify  land  reforms,  focusing  on 
strengthening  the  management,  organization,  utilization  and  distribution  of  lands  that  will 
contribute to reducing poverty, ensuring food security, protecting the environment and natural 
resources,  and  socio-economic  development,  within  a  market  framework.  In  the  NSDP,  the 
recommendations conclude that the RGC will focus on the following priorities:  
1.  Further promoting the formulation of a comprehensive land policy entitled “White Paper 
on Land” which already done and included the indigenous peoples land rights. 
2.  Promoting  the  preparation  of  Law  on  Land  Management  and  Urbanization  and  Law  on 
Agricultural Land.  
3.  Accelerating  land  registration  and  issuance  of  land  titles  including  for  state 
lands,  private  lands  and  indigenous  community  lands  through  regular  land 
registration process. In this connection there is specific yearly indicator for 10 
communities  collective  land  registration  in  Join  Monitoring  Indicator  (JMI7) 
while MAFF commit for 32 Community Forestry annual applications.     
More  broadly,  the  current  NSDP  does  not  adequately  prioritise  and  promote  IP  rights  issues, 
specifically with regard to land tenure, official recognition, and specialized health and education 
schemes.  This  is  a  key  point  which  needs  to  be  considered  for  the  development  of  any 
subsequent NSDP, and will feature throughout Road Map activities. 
Relevant government entities which implement indigenous inclusion remain particularly weak. 
In addition, other limitations and exclusionary attitudes are noticeable features which have led 
to systematic discrimination against traditional ways of life and traditional land occupation. This 
has led to shortcomings in terms of properly respecting IP’s rights articulated through National 
legislative instruments and the UNDRIP itself. This has been further weakened due to the Royal 
Government of Cambodia (RGC) of the 5th Legislature having strategies for the transformation 
of the Cambodian economy for growth and sustainable development, which conflict with these 
other  frameworks.  Reasons  for  this  tension  include  the  following  key  issues  identified  in  the 
evaluation: 
There  is  very  limited  national  budget  allocation  to  implement  the  indicators  of  the  NSDP, 
especially for the implementation of the National Policy on Indigenous Peoples for development. 
For instance, there is no specific budget to implement the indicator for the implementation of 
the NSDP under section 4.100, Chapter IV: Key Priority Policies and Actions 2014-2018 of the 
Rural  Development  in  order  to  Construct  an  ethnic  minority  development  and  conservation 
centre  in  Mondulkiri.  Other  examples,  include  the  indicator  for  Number  of  ethnic  minority 
communities  whose  identities  have  been  recognized    it  was  stated  that  there  will  be  190 
indigenous peoples communities (IPC) recognized by MRD in 2016. Until now there have only 
been 117 IPC that have been recognized by MRD. Furthermore, without the technical 
and financial support from NGOs and Donors, not even this smaller number would have 
been recognized;  
6  Ministry  of  Rural  Development  (MRD),  Ministry  of  Land  Management,  Urban  Planning  and  Construction  (MLMUPC),  Ministry  of  Interior  (MOI),  Ministry  of 
agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF), and Ministry of Environment (MOE) 
7 As attached in the reference doc 
The  new  Draft  Law  on  Agricultural  Land  (DLAL)  being  formalised  in  July  2016  is  proposing 
limitations and restrictions on the Indigenous peoples shifting cultivation practice over specific 
land  in  the  name  of  modernization  of  agriculture  and  for  the  development  of  cash  crop,  or 
permanent farming techniques. This directly contradicts IPs customary land tenure, and conflicts 
with the existing Land Law (articles 16, 23, 26). There are also other challenges which need to 
be  met  in  relation  to  existing  and  proposed  legal  frameworks  contained  in  the  Forestry  Law, 
Protected  Areas  Law,  Fishery  law,  and  the  Environment  Code  (pending),  which  also  limit  the 
rights of the indigenous peoples. The new DLAL is being jointly drafted by the Working Group of 
the General Directorate of Agriculture (GDA), Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries with 
the close  cooperation of the Food and Agriculture  Organization (FAO). The background of the 
development of this draft law is within the context of changes in Cambodia and the progress of 
the  country  through  its  transformation  into  becoming  a  “low  to  middle  income  country”,  and 
because  Cambodia  has  been  integrated  into  the  ASEAN  economy  which  in  turn  requires  the 
linkage of its national development to the region, and more broadly to the world. In addition, 
the Royal Governments have stated policies and strategies which have been developed with the 
aim to ensure sustainable use and improvement of agricultural land for all agricultural land users. 
Various stakeholders have been involved in the draft law’s design through a consultative process 
since 2011. A second draft was included an additional consultation process on 28-29 May 2016 
(Sihanoukville) 18-19 July 2016 (Kratie), 12-13 July 2016 (Battambang). There will be another 
consultation round in October 2016. This DLAL has 13 Chapters and 114 Articles.  
The evaluation found that there is a legal expertise team who are knowledgeable on 
indigenous people’s culture and rights that is supported by NGOForum to facilitate the 
process of consultation with relevant stakeholders for input and comment, however, 
critically,  there  are  only  limited  numbers  of  indigenous  people’s  representative  / 
leaders  themselves  who  have  the  capacity  to  fully  participate  to  provide  input  and 
commentary for the consultation process.  
The Cambodian Prime Minister made comment in the public statement in 2014 (as in the quote 
of  video  clip)  to  the  effect  that  in  order  to  improve  economic  growth  and  sustainable 
development there is a need to transform away from shifting cultivation to permanent farming, 
and  also  to  eliminate  resin  tree  collection  practices  in  favour  of  large  scale  rubber  collection 
practices, indicating a fundamental misunderstanding which may catalyse a lack of political will 
There  are  other  major  challenges  which  stem  from  the  inconsistency  of  national  legal 
instruments. For instance, the concept of territory identified in the Country Assessment report, 
is consistent with the 2001 Land Law, the 2002 Forestry Law and the 2008 Protected Area Law, 
the 1993 Cambodian Constitution, and the principles of UNDRIP. However, if we look at Sub-
Decree 83 (SD#83 on Indigenous Peoples Land Registration, article 6) it is not aligned with the 
Land Law (article 16, 23, 26) and (Forestry law article 37). There is a major inconsistency with 
respect to the size limitation of spiritual and burial land. In practice, differences in understanding 
of  the  concept  of  “territory”  between  indigenous  peoples  and  government  officers,  and  the 
misinterpretation of legal frameworks, is a fundamental problem which leads to land ownership 
conflicts and the non-recognition of customary land tenure. There is another critical weakness 
pertaining to customary land tenure which can be found in Cambodian Law. There are provisions 
in  the  Land  Law,  article  23,  which  provides  that  prior  to  their  formal  legal  status  being 
determined  under  the  Law  on  Communities,  Indigenous  people’s  groups  actually  existing  at 
present,  shall  continue  to  manage  their  community  and  immovable  property(s)  according  to 
their traditional customs and shall be subject to the provisions of the law. However, SD#83 is 
inconsistent with Article 23 of the Land Law. SD#83 authorises the provincial authority to issue 
Interim Protection Measures, only once IPs submit their communal land title (CLT) application. 
Therefore,  they  are  afforded  no  protection  pursuant  to  SD#83,  unless  they  have  formally 
submitted their CLT application.8 
8 Substantive advice paper Legal, Policy, and Administrative Measure to Implementation the UNDRIP in Cambodia-July 2016 by Ms. 
Yun Mane 
The Constitution of the Kingdom of Cambodia 
There  is  no  specific  reference  to  Indigenous  Peoples  in  the  Constitution  of  the  Kingdom  of 
Cambodia, however Article 31 of the Constitution of 1993 guarantees that “Every Khmer citizen 
shall be equal before the law, enjoying the same rights and freedom and obligations regardless 
of race, color, sex, language, religious beliefs, political tendency, national origin, social status, 
wealth  or  other  status”.9  In  the  debate  on  the  Constitution  in  the  National  Assembly,  the 
representatives discussed the definition of Khmer citizens. It was agreed that the term included 
some Cambodian ethnic minorities, such as the hill-tribe people known as Khmer Leu and the 
Khmer Islam.10 In relation to international declarations, the Constitution Article 31, provides that 
“The Kingdom of Cambodia shall recognize and respect the human rights as stipulated in the 
United  Nations  Charter,  the  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights,  the  covenants  and 
conventions related to human rights, women’s and children’s rights.”  
The Land Law 2001 
During  the  Khmer  Rouge  of  1975–1979,  the  majority  of  property  ownership  regimes  were 
destroyed. The Land Law 2001 was to resolve this, by generating a structure of land security to 
both the civilian population as well as to foreign investors.11 As such, the Land Law annulled all 
past  claims  to  land,  declaring  that  “any  regime  of  ownership  of  immovable  property  prior  to 
1979  shall  not  be  recognized”  (Art.  7).12  Implicitly,  this  rule  effectively  invalidated  the 
Indigenous land tenure systems and ancestral rights that existed pre-Khmer Rouge. By 2001, 
land governance was entirely positioned in the hands of the state.13 
The Land Law was the first law that legally recognised the right of Indigenous communities to 
collective ownership of land.  
The rights to land and property in Cambodia are governed by this law, which is primarily based 
on  the  provisions  of  the  1993  Constitution.  It  defines  the  scope  of  ownership  of  immovable 
properties,  such  as  land,  trees  and  fixed  structures.  The  Land  Law,  Article  5,  states  that  “No 
person  may  be  deprived  of  his  ownership,  unless  it  is  in  the  public  interest.  Any  ownership 
deprivation shall be carried out in accordance with the governing procedures provided by law 
and regulations, and after the payment of fair and just compensation in advance.” The Land Law 
grants  collective  land  ownership  rights  to  indigenous  communities.  Article  26  states  that 
ownership of immovable properties is granted by the state to indigenous peoples as collective 
ownership.  This  collective  ownership  includes  all  of  the  rights  and  protections  as  enjoyed  by 
private  owners.  The  exercise  of  collective  ownership  rights  is  subject  to  the  responsibility  of 
traditional authorities and decision-making mechanisms of the indigenous community, according 
to their customs and subject to the laws of general enforcement related to immovable property 
such as the law on environmental protection (Article 26). 
The  Ministry of  Land Management, Urban  Planning and Construction (MLMUPC) is responsible 
for receiving the land registration application. Mechanisms for dealing with land conflict issues 
are discussed at an inter-ministerial level and issues related to land application and/or conflict 
are submitted to an inter-ministerial working group comprised the Ministry of Interior, Councils 
of Ministers, MEF, Ministry of Environment (MOE), Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, 
MRD, and other relevant ministries.  
9 RGC. 1993.Constitution of the Kingdom of Cambodia of 1993, officially promulgated as of 2008. Accessed online March 2022 
https://pressocm.gov.kh/en/archives/9539 
10 International Center for Ethnic Studies (ICES) and Minority Rights Group International, London.1995. Minorities in Cambodia. 
ICES, London.  
11 Keating, N. B. 2013. Kuy alterities: The struggle to conceptualise and claim Indigenous land rights in neoliberal Cambodia. Asia 
Pacific Viewpoint, Vol. 54, No. 3, December 2013 ISSN 1360-7456, pp309–322  
12 RGC. 2001. Land Law, Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC), 2001. 
13 Keating, N. B. 2013. Kuy alterities: The struggle to conceptualise and claim Indigenous land rights in neoliberal Cambodia. Asia 
Pacific Viewpoint, Vol. 54, No. 3, December 2013 ISSN 1360-7456, pp309–322  
In Article 23, an indigenous community is defined as “a group of people that resides in Cambodia 
whose members have manifested ethnic, social, cultural and economic unity and who practice a 
traditional lifestyle, and who cultivate the lands in their possession according to the customary 
rules of collective use.” In Cambodia, the IPs policy was formalized by the MRD in 2009. The 
policy clearly states that all relevant ministries shall recognize that IPs has its own culture and 
tradition, and have full rights and privileges related to their culture and traditions. The culture 
and tradition consist of the community land occupation, actual land that they currently use, land 
for their funeral purposes, land for agriculture farming, land for their belief systems, and land 
for  their  benefit.  Therefore,  IPs  have  full  rights  and  privilege  to  protect  their  collective  and 
privately-  and  community-held  lands.  Any  project  with  the  potential  to  involve  involuntary 
resettlement  impacts  among  IPs  will  need  to  collect  detailed  information  on  their  land-use, 
economic  activities,  and  social  organizations,  in  order  that  a  culturally  appropriate  IPDP  is 
formulated with full and meaningful consultation of affected indigenous peoples. All development 
projects must refer to this law. Article 28 establishes that “no authority outside the community 
may acquire any rights to immovable properties belonging to an indigenous community”.14  
In article 265 stated about where an infringement an infringement [is] committed against land 
rights of indigenous communities by an authority who is responsible for the management of the 
zone in which the immovable property is located, [the authority] shall be fined.  
Law on Forestry 
The Forestry Law 2002 also refers to indigenous communities – yet with some  
contradictions to the Land Law, amongst others related to definitions as well as the right  
to use versus own the forests within State boundaries.  
The Law on Forestry of 2002 contains several articles which relate to Indigenous Peoples. Article 
11 stipulates that the classification, registration and setting of boundaries for all forests within 
the  Permanent  Forest  Estates  are  to  be  coordinate  with  concerned  local  communities  and 
concerned authorities in order to assist in registration of land property of Indigenous community 
and preparation of the national land use map. Article 15 state that concessionaires shall have 
the  right  to  manage  and  conduct  Forest  Products  &  By-products  harvesting  operations  within 
their  concession,  while  ensuring  that  the  operation  does  not  interfere  with  the  following:  1) 
Customary user rights taking place on land property of indigenous community that is registered 
with the state consistent with the Land law; and 2) Customary access and user rights practiced 
by  communities  residing  within,  or  adjacent  to  forest  concessions.  Article  44  addresses 
customary user rights of forest products and by-products for local communities operating under 
a Community Forest Agreement and provides a legal basis for Indigenous communities, to use 
and  manage  forests  through  community  forestry.  Article  45  recognizes  the  religious  forest  of 
local communities, living within or near the forest, as serving religious, cultural or conservation 
purposes. Furthermore, it is prohibited to harvest any spirit trees, thus they may be specially 
marked and shall be identified in a Community Forest Management Plan. Article 76 stipulates 
that forest offences are criminal offences.15 
Policy on registration and rights of used of land of indigenous communities on 24 
April 2009 and Sub-degree on registration and rights of used of land of indigenous 
communities on 09 June 2009: are provide the indigenous communities with legal rights 
over land tenure to ensure collective land tenure security and to protect collective ownership 
14 RGC. 2001. Land Law, Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC), 2001. 
15 RGC. 2003. Law on Forestry, Kingdom of Cambodia. Forest Administration 2003. Accessed online Jan 2022. 
http://extwprlegs1.fao.org/docs/pdf/cam50411.pdf 
by preserving the identity, culture, good custom, livelihood and traditions of each indigenous 
communities.   
The Protected Areas Law of 2008 
The Protected Areas Law of 2008 deals with forests set aside for conservation such as national 
parks,  wildlife  sanctuaries,  natural  heritage  sites  etc.,  in  which  development  is  prohibited  or 
limited  for  ecological  or  cultural  conservation.  Specific  protected  area  zones  include  1)  Core 
zones of high conservation value, access to the core zone is prohibited except for officials and 
researchers with prior permission; 2) Conservation zone which are management areas of high 
conservation value, is this zone small-scale community uses of NTFPs to  support  local  ethnic 
minorities’  livelihood  may  be  allowed  under  strict  control,  provided  that  they  do  not  present 
serious adverse impacts on biodiversity within the zone; 3) Sustainable use zones, which are 
management  areas  of  high  economic  value,  including  for  local  communities  and  Indigenous 
Peoples  livelihood  improvement,  in  this  zone  development  may  be  permitted  by  the  RGC;  4) 
Community zones which are management areas for socio-economic development of  the  local 
communities and IP and may contain existing residential  lands, paddy field and field garden or 
rotational farming. The law specifically prohibits the felling of trees within protected areas. The 
law  guarantees  the  rights  of  IP  and  the  public  to  participate in the decision-making, 
on the sustainable management and conservation of biodiversity (Art. 4). The law encourages 
local and IP communities to participate fully in the provision of the protected area management, 
conservation, and development (Art. 21). Article 22 state that the RGC recognizes and secures 
access to traditional uses, local customs, beliefs, and religions of the local communities, and IP 
residing  within  and  adjacent  to  the  protected  areas.  Further,  the  access  to  traditional 
uses of natural resource  and  customary  practices  of  local  and  Indigenous  communities  on  a 
family scale may be allowed within sustainable use zone and conservation zone following specific 
guidelines provided by the MoE.16 
Despite  the  legal  recognition  of  Indigenous  customary  use  and  access  rights,  the  Special 
Rapporteur  on  the  situation  of  human  rights,  received  consistent  information  that  many 
Indigenous and local communities living within, or adjacent to, environmentally protected areas 
have  restricted  access  to  their  traditional  land.  Local  authorities  are  reported  to  deny  IP  this 
right,  which  sometimes  lead  to  tensions  and  criminal  action  against  community  leaders  or 
activists.17 Data from Global Forest Watch shows that between 2001 and 2020, Cambodia lost 
779,000ha of tree cover in protected areas, equivalent to a 14% decrease since 2000.18 As of 
2012, MoI had approved 113 ELCs inside protected areas.19  
National Policy on the indigenous people’s development  
The National Policy on the Development of Indigenous Peoples was approved by the  
plenary of the Cambodian Council of Ministers in 2009 and includes ten chapters on  
important areas for indigenous peoples, including culture, education, health,   
environment, land and agriculture and water source, infrastructures, justice, tourism,  
industry, mine and energy. The Department of Indigenous Peoples' Development in the  
Ministry of Rural Development is the implementing agency. on 24 April 2009, stated that  
the indigenous peoples practice different cultures, traditions, customs, beliefs and  
languages according to their particular group. As for the main occupations to make their  
living are shifting cultivation based on their tradition by slashing and burning forests for  
16 RGC. 2008. Protected Areas Law, No NS/ RKM//0208/007. Accessed online Jan 2022. 
http://www.cambodiainvestment.gov.kh/law-on-nature-protection-area-protected-areas-law_080104_080104.html 
17 Human Rights Council. 2020. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Cambodia. 2020. A/HRC/45/51 
18 Global Forest Watch. “Tree cover loss in Cambodia”. Accessed on 11/03/2022 from www.globalforestwatch.org. 
19 ADHOC. 2012. The Report of Land and Housing Rights 2011, 2012; Human Rights Council, Report of the Special Ra- pporteur on 
the Situation of Human Rights in Cambodia, 24 September 2012. Accessed online Jan 2022: www.ohchr.org/Documents/HR- 
Bodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session21/A-HRC- -21-63-Add1_en.pdf.  
rotation  farming,  collection  of  forest  by  products,  hunting,  fishing  and  livestock...etc.  Their 
livelihoods  depend  entirely  on  the  natural  environment.  They  face  hardship  and  shortages  of 
roads and means of transportation. In terms of the health sector, the indigenous peoples are 
vulnerable  people.  While  talking  about  the  education  sector,  their  educational  level  is  very 
limited.  Therefore,  their  living  standards  are  also  low.  In  regards  to  the  Royal  Government's 
long-standing vision "to realize Cambodia with social solidarity, advanced education and vibrant 
culture,  without  poverty,  illiteracy  and  poor  health"  and  based  on  the  Cambodian  millennium 
development goals, particularly the first goal "to reduce extreme poverty and starvation" and 
the  second  goal  "to  realize  overall  fundamental  education",  this  "National  Policy  on  the 
Development of Indigenous Peoples" has the following goals: 
 
 
Indigenous peoples shall have a living standard beyond starvation and extreme poverty. 
Indigenous  peoples  shall  be  provided  for  at  least  nine  years  of  fundamental  education 
and shall be provided for appropriate vocational skill training courses according to their 
needs and based on the geographical areas in which they live. 
Indigenous peoples have been provided for good healthcare services. 
 
  The cultures of indigenous peoples have been carefully protected and safeguarded. 
In order to achieve the above-mentioned goals and to ensure good development management, 
the  Royal  Government  has  general  and  sectoral  policies  for  indigenous  peoples  whereby  the 
main sectors include: culture, environment, land, agriculture, water resources, infrastructure, 
justice, tourism and etc.  
List of the activities that are prohibited until the delimitation, demarcation and titling  
No.  Prohibited Activities  
1 
Displacement over the ancestral land includes spiritual/burial place/ residential  
/Reservation land or and cultural heritage of IPs.  
Indigenous  peoples  and  their  members  have  the  right  to  be  protected  from 
forced displacement from their territories caused by violence. In case of being 
displaced  by  violence,  they  have  the  right  to  receive  special  attention  by  the 
State while they are displaced.  The forced displacement of indigenous or tribal 
villages,  groups  of  families,  communities  or  peoples  from  their  lands  due  to 
armed violence, implies in many cases the loss of their socio-cultural integrity 
and their habitat. 
2 
The project should not the exploration of exploitation of  
natural resources that are located in territories of IPs which have  
not been delimited, demarcated or titled, without effective  
consultations with and the informed consent.  
D. Summary of social and environmental assessment and mitigation measures 
In order to minimise and avoid the impact on the indigenous people’s communities over their 
rights,  lands,  territories,  resources,  traditional  livelihoods  and  cultural  heritage  during  the 
subproject  implementation,  the  screening  tools  for  potential  risks  from  proposed  subprojects 
which are using the Social, Environment, Climate Assessment Procedure (SECAP) questions and 
indigenous  screening  tools  to  identify  potential  adverse  impacts  and  risk  relating  to  social, 
environment and cultural. The screening tools to be used to minimize or avoid the impact on the 
indigenous  peoples  social/culture/environment  shall  be  done  during  the  subproject  selection, 
designing and implementation phase to make sure that the subproject or project implementation 
will be no negative impact to IPs lands, territories, resources, traditional livelihoods and cultural 
heritage. Beside of screening to be used for minimizing the impact on the IPs, there is requires 
to include the training program on the FPIC principles as stated in How to Seek the FPIC and 
IFAD  Policy  Engagement  with  IPs  and  also  IPs  situation.  The  training  program  will  require  to 
provide the PMU and project stakeholders at all levels to make sure that they will understand 
about the IPs rights/how to seek the FPIC and IFAD policy engagement with IPs and properties 
available in the subproject areas. 
Refer to screening checklist and ESCMF results in related to social and environmental assessment 
and mitigation measures.  
E. Participation, consultation and FPIC processes 
In line with the FPIC Implementation Plan, ASPIRE-AT PMU and implementation partners shall 
consider the cultural appropriate consultation based on the FPIC principles and process to under 
with the affected indigenous peoples through the following processes  
  Establish a mechanism for continuous dialogue and engagement of indigenous peoples with 
their indigenous languages  
  Share  objective  and  scope  of  the  project  with  the  representatives  identified  by  the 
 
communities and identify project component(s) requiring FPIC. 
Inform  them  on  the  actors  financing  and  implementing  the  project  and  their  respective 
responsibilities.  
  Provide clear and transparent information on the benefits and risks of the project. 
  Share the findings of the sociocultural, land tenure and environmental assessment. 
  Participatory methodologies and consultation and consent processes, it is recommended 
that the promoter and financing entities of the projects consider formalizing consent an 
agreement. 
F. Appropriate benefits 
As already proposed in the ASPIRE-AT objectives and planned and under the IFAD guidance, the 
programme shall ensure that indigenous peoples receive equitable social and economic benefits 
that are culturally appropriate, including a description of the consultation and consent processes 
that  led  to  the  determined  benefit-sharing  arrangements  as  well  as  to  enhance  IFAD’s 
development  effectiveness  in  its  engagement  with  indigenous  peoples’  communities  in  rural 
areas, and especially to empower them to overcome poverty by building upon their identity and 
culture, and response. 
G. Capacity support 
In responded to program objectives and also to enhance IFAD’s development effectiveness in its 
engagement  with  indigenous  peoples’  communities  in  rural  areas,  and  especially  to  empower 
them to overcome poverty by building upon their identity and culture, and response, there are 
key  needs  and  capacity  building  that  proposed  for  the  programme  to  be  consider  with  the 
following: 
Capacity Building For: Project Management Team, Project Partners and Target Group 
on  IFAD  Policy  Engagement  with  indigenous  peoples  and  How  to  Seek  the  Free  Prior 
Information Consent as well as IPs legal framework  
Improving seed that IPs are maintaining which adopted with the climate resilience and 
especially promote the good agricultural practices as far as possible etc. 
Improving community’s awareness and preparedness to climate change risk mitigation 
and adaptation 
Capacity  building  and  training  for  the  project  implementation  units  to  ensure  that 
indigenous peoples will be disaggregation and benefit from the project 
Building  the  meaning  engagement  between  IPs  and  Project  Management  Team  and 
Project Partners  
Interpreters, general logistics of the process and consultations in conducting FPIC in all 
targeted communities. 
H. Grievance redress 
The  grievance  redress  mechanism  under  the  programme,  first  shall  consider  the  internal 
indigenous  communities’  mechanism  (customary  rule  and  practice)  by  traditional  elders  and 
indigenous  community  committee  and  used  their  own  indigenous  people’s  language  with 
appropriated timeframe and well written documented (encourage for audio/video) that already 
exist, then can be further to commune council/district authority and other concerned and the 
other  involvement  third-party/external  mediation.  This  shall  consider  to  create  the  grievance 
redress committee composed by the indigenous community leader, chief of village, commune 
council as well the project implementation team.  
I. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation 
In connection with ESCMP’s M & E proposed, the appropriate monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
systems should be set up includes appropriate indicators to measure success in the livelihoods 
of targeted indigenous peoples. In M&E systems should include such indicators wherever they 
are appropriate. Indicators on how to measure well-being, poverty and sustainability in a way 
that  is  relevant  to  indigenous  peoples  can  be  identified  based  on  ongoing  work  in  other 
organizations  to  complement  conventional  project  outcome  and  impact  indicators.  M&E 
mechanisms should be participatory and adapted to capture indigenous peoples’ perceptions and 
perspectives. This can be achieved through independent M&E studies among indigenous peoples 
on their opinions and perceptions on the progress of plans and programmes. Participatory M&E 
should be part of normal project operations and should serve as a steering mechanism to identify 
problems and appropriate adaptive measures. Special care must be taken to facilitate easy and 
timely  access  to  M&E  results  by  communities  themselves.  Successes  should  be  documented, 
applying rigorous and appropriate evaluation methods, including participatory methods, and will 
be disseminated in-country and to IFAD’s partners.20  
Note:  The  appropriate  M  &  E  tool  of  ASPIRE-AT  under  the  IPs  target  community  is  highly 
recommended  to  use  the  sample  system  and  with  specific  IPs  Data  Disaggregation  and 
indigenous  people’s  languages  by  follow  the  commitments  under  the  principles  of  FPIC  with 
direct participation of indigenous peoples. 
J. Institutional Arrangements 
The  Project  Executing  Agency  will  be  MAFF  which  will  assign  project  management 
responsibilities to the existing ASPIRE Secretariat, ensuring the FPIC implementation plan and 
also the IPP plan will be implemented, if the project fall under the area of IPs target especially 
for the capacity building.  
ASPIRE  AT  Secretariat  responsibilities  will  include  (1)  project  planning  and  reporting;  (2) 
project  financial  management  and  procurement;  (3)  monitoring  and  evaluation;  (4)  social, 
environment  and  climate  change  risk  management;  (5)  guide  implementation  of  the  Gender 
Transformative Approach; and (5) mainstream adoption of digital technology in all components. 
Ministry  of  Environment:  In  order  to  provide  the  legal  protection  support  for  the 
protected/conservation area on spiritual forest/ burial place.  
Ministry/Provincial Department of Culture and Fine Art: Provide the Protecting the cultural 
heritage/cultural conservation area (Mountain/forest), traditional identity etc.   
Ministry/Department of Rural Development: Contribution to support on the policy for the 
development with the indigenous peoples.  
Ministry of Interior: Obtain the legal entity or legal protection on IPs community and ensuring 
the security of their land and territory for the sustainable used and management. Also provide 
intervention and ensuring the securing of cultural assets  
Ministry/Department  of  Land:  Provide  the  technical  support  on  the  land  demarcation  and 
certificated if need for legal recognition over the indigenous collective land title.  
Provincial/District/Commune:  Ensure the technical support on the process of consultation 
and participation of the indigenous communities within the project.  
Indigenous  Community  Traditional  Elder:  Ensure  the  process  consultation  will  be  done 
based their traditional way as collective decision making and provide safeguard for protecting 
their land, cultural and environmental.  
Indigenous Community Committee:  Ensure the process consultation will be done based their 
traditional way as collective decision making and fulfilment of the project support and implement 
also avoidance any affected area.  
20 IFAD Policy on IFAD Engagement  
K. Budget and financing 
The following appropriately costed plan will be mainstreaming into the AWPB, with itemized 
budget sufficient to satisfactorily undertake the activities described. 
Activity 
Social, Environment and Climate safeguard specialist 
(Mainstreamed in project design) 
Facilitator supporting the FPIC processes in IFAD 
funded Project  
Capacity  Building  For:  Project  Management  Team, 
Project  Partners  and  Target  Group  on  IFAD  Policy 
Engagement with indigenous peoples and How to Seek 
the  Free  Prior  Information  Consent  as  well  as  legal 
framework. 
Improving seed that IPs are maintaining which adopted 
with the climate resilience and especially  promote the 
good agricultural practices as far as possible etc. 
Improving  community’s  awareness  and  preparedness 
to climate change risk mitigation and adaptation 
Capacity  building  and 
the  project 
implementation units to ensure that indigenous peoples 
will be disaggregation and benefit from the project 
Building  the  meaning  engagement  between  IPs  and 
Project Management Team and Project Partners  
Interpreters,  general  logistics  of  the  process  and 
consultations in conducting FPIC in all targeted 
communities. 
Monitoring  and  Evaluation  meetings  and  reporting 
meetings to community 
Contingency  
training 
for 
TOTAL 
Total budget 
(USD) 
72,000 USD 
60,000 USD 
20, 000 USD 
Notes 
3000 USD x 
24 months  
2500 USD x 
24 months  
Four times 
50,000 USD 
50,000 USD 
10,000 USD  
20,000 USD 
50,000 USD 
20,000 USD 
10, 000 USD  
362,000.00 USD  
Note: The IPP will be implemented as part of project implementation. However, in no case shall 
project  activities  that  may  adversely  affect  indigenous  peoples  take  place  before  the 
corresponding  activities  in  the  IPP  are  implemented.  Where  other  project  documents  already 
develop  and  address  issues  listed in  the  above  sections,  citation  to  the  relevant  document(s) 
shall suffice. 
For  an  IPPF,  the  above  outline  would  be  modified  to  include  the  procedures  for  screening, 
assessment and development of specific IPP(s) once the project components, subprojects and/or 
activities  have  been  fully  defined.  The  procedures  would  generally  replace  section  E  above; 
however, the IPPF would still seek to identify types of anticipated potential adverse social and 
environmental impacts.
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex: Aspireat Fpic
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Free, Prior and Informed Consent Implementation Plan (FPIC) 
1.  Project Background:  
The  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  will  finance  an  Agriculture 
Services  Programme  for  an  Inclusive  Rural  Economy  and  Agricultural  Trade  Project 
(ASPIRE-AT)  in  Cambodia.  The  Project  will  also  be  co-financed  with  the  European 
Investment Bank (EIB) and the European Union (EU).  
The  projects  seeks  to  investment  in  activities  that  will  benefit  smallholder  farmers  and 
rural workers from inclusive and sustainable agriculture sector growth based on exports 
and  domestic  markets.  This  objective  will  be  achieved  through  three  interlinked 
components. Component 1 will support investments in productive assets  for Agriculture 
Cooperatives (ACs) and Producer Organizations (POs) to improve their production/post-
harvest/logistics capacities to meet both export and domestic market demand. Component 
2 will support the enabling environment to incentivize the private sector to access markets 
and catalyse their business investments. Component 3 will support technical assistance to 
nurture,  aggregate/graduate  existing  groups,  including  the  Business  Clusters  that 
supported  by  the  Cs  supported  by  the  ongoing  Agriculture  Services  Programme  for  an 
Inclusive Rural Economy and ASPIRE and AIMS, into registered Agriculture Cooperatives 
to engage with the private sector in remunerative market opportunities facilitated under 
Component 1 and 2. (See attached Project Concept Note on detailed information on each 
component). 
ASPIRE AT will specifically target rural women, youth, people from ethnic minorities and 
persons with disabilities. The project aims to be gender transformative. 
Priority value chains for the project, subject to further validation during the full design, 
may include: (i) export-oriented, will include premium traceable rice, fresh fruits (longan, 
speciality banana [not Cavendish], durian, coconut), processed  fruits and nuts (mango, 
longan, cashew), cassava, and (ii) domestic-oriented (but with import substitution effects 
and potential for future export), will include vegetables and traditional breed poultry.  
Objectives of the FPIC Implementation Plan: 
Accordance the IFAD Policy Enagegment with Indigenosu Peoples and IFAD on How to do 
seeking free, prior and informed consent in IFAD investment project and the commitment 
of IFAD from the Fifth Global Meeting of the Indgienous Peoples’ Forum at IFAD in 2021 
into the praticial action, FPIC implementation plan proposed with the following objectives 
if the project activities fall in areas that are home/community to indigenous peoples: 
1.  To  provide  practical  suggestions  and  guidelines  to  project  managers,  project  design 
teams and implementing partners to help in design and implement programmes and 
projects.  
2.  Provide tools for project design and implementation based on best practices collected 
at the field level. They guide teams on how to implement specific recommendations of 
IFAD’s operational policies, standard project requirements and financing tools. 
3.  To  ensure  that  the  principle  of  the  Free,  Prior  and  Informed  Consent  (FPIC)  is  cully 
understood  and  systematiclly  applied  in  IFAD-supported  interventions,  taking  inoto 
account indigenous peoples’ vision, needs, pratics, and self-determined development. 
The FPIC process should also be propperly documented.  
4.  To imporve the collaboration tweent IFAD and Indigenous Peopels’ respresentatives at 
the country level.  
Guidance and Legal Frameworks for FPIC 
IFAD is among the first international financial institutions to adopt FPIC as an operational 
principle in its policy documents, including its policies on Improving Access to Land and 
Tenure Security (2008); Engagement with Indigenous Peoples (2009) and as a criterion 
for project approval, Environment and Natural Resource Management (2011), and Social, 
Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (2014).  IFAD-funded  projects  are 
people-centred, and, for IFAD, FPIC is not only a safeguard principle, rather a proactive 
approach to identify development pathways with local communities and build ownership 
on  project  initiatives.  In  IFAD-funded  projects  and  programmes,  the  borrowing 
government  (or  grant  recipient)  is  responsible  for  seeking  and  obtaining  FPIC.  FPIC  is 
methodologically solicited through consultation and the participation of communities and 
local institutions at specific stages of the project cycle1.   
Cambodia’s  laws,  regulations,  and  policies  recognize  and  protect  the  land,2  natural 
resources, and rights of indigenous communities as collective and private. The article 31 
of  the  Constitution  guarantees  the  equal  rights  of  all  citizens  of  the  nation  without 
discrimination and other relevant legislation include: the land law 2001 (articles 23 to 28 
and  265),  the  forestry  law  in  2002  (articles  39,  40  and  41),  protected  area  law  2008 
(articles 21 and 22), as well as others sub-degree and policies specifically on the rights of 
IPs  to  land  registrations  and  access  to  the  natural  resources.  Also  Royal  of  Cambodia 
Government  adopted  the  UN  Declaration  on  the  Rights  of  Indigenous  Peoples  without 
reservation in 2007, which the government shall contribute to the full realization of the 
provisions of this Declaration through the mobilization, inter alia, of financial cooperation 
and technical assistance. Ways and means of ensuring participation of indigenous peoples 
on issues affecting them shall be established.3 Especially in relation to the article 23 of the 
UNDRIP stated that indigenous peoples have the right to determine and develop priorities 
and strategies for exercising their right to development. In particular, indigenous peoples 
have the right to be actively involved in developing and determining health, housing and 
other  economic  and  social  programmes  affecting  them  and,  as  far  as  possible,  to 
administer such programmes through their own institutions. 
WHAT IS FPIC?  
Free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) is the right of self-determination of indigenous 
peoples  as  recognized  in  the  UNDRIP  (article  23).    At  IFAD,  FPIC  is  considered  as  an 
operational  instrument  that  empowers  local  and  indigenous  peoples’  communities, 
ensuring  mutual  respect  and  full  and  effective  participation  in  decision-making  on 
proposed investments that may affect their  rights, their access to lands, territories and 
resources, and their livelihoods.4 
FPIC  is  solicited  through  consultations  in  good  faith  with  the  representative  institutions 
endorsed by communities. It ensures that they participate in decision making processes 
concerning a given development project (IFAD, 2015). 
1 See IFAD ( 2015). How To Do: Seeking free, prior and informed consent in IFAD investment projects. 
2 Land territory is fundamental for IPs 
3 See UNDRIP (2007) Article 41  
4  https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/45407038/FPIC_call+to+action.pdf/025f9e41-a3c7-526e-c4ed-
1121ea857dee?t=1651070341888 
Consent should be sought in a way that is “free, prior and informed” 5: 
  Free implies no coercion, intimidation or manipulation. 
  Prior implies that consent has been sought sufficiently in advance of any decision 
point or commencement of activities and respect is shown to time requirements of 
indigenous consultation/consensus processes. 
  Informed  implies  that  information  provided  covers  all  relevant  issues  to  make 
decision maker fully enlightened (at least) the following aspects: 
o  The  nature,  size,  pace,  duration,  reversibility  and  scope  of  the  proposed 
project/activity; 
o  The rationale or purpose of the project/activity; 
o  The geographical areas that will be affected; 
o  A  preliminary  assessment  of  the  likely  economic,  social,  cultural  and 
environmental impact, including potential risks and fair and equitable benefit-
sharing; 
o  Personnel likely to be involved in the execution of the proposed project/activity; 
o  Procedures that the project or activity may entail. 
  Consent is the expected outcome of the consultation, participation and collective 
decision-making  process  by  the  local  communities.  It  is  the  mutual  agreement 
reached, documented and recognized by all parties. Consultation and participation 
are  crucial  components  of  a  consent  process  and  require  time  and  an  effective 
system  for  communicating  among  interest  holders.  Consultation  should  be 
undertaken in good faith, and local communities must be able to participate through 
their  own  freely  chosen  representatives  and  customary  or  other  institutions.  In 
general, communities would first consent to discuss the idea of the project that will 
affect  their  and,  territories  and  resources.  They  would  further  participate  in  the 
consultation process leading to consent by contributing to the design of the project, 
including its implementation and monitoring mechanisms. 
Depending on the nature of the project, consent may be required for: 
o  The overall project (e.g. the construction of an irrigation system); 
o  A  component  and  specific  activity  of  a  project  (e.g.  if  a  project  has  one 
component on irrigation and one on microfinance, consent would be need for 
the component that affects the land and used rights of the communities).  
Why we need to seek FPIC? 
It is imporant for the project managers, project design teams and implementing partners 
understand  and  seek  FPIC  in  order  to  help  in  design  and  implement  programmes  and 
projects  reputational,  operational  and  fiduciary  risks  that  the  projects  carrying  out 
activities  that  may  affect  the  land,  resources  and  rights,  culture  and  livelihood  of  the 
indigenous communities. 
There are many advantages to seeking FPIC: 
a.  FPIC improves the relevance and quality of investments; 
b.  Community ownership of the investment and its results and sustainability 
are enhanced; 
c.  Partnership  between  local  communities,  government  institutions  and 
financing organizations is strengthened; 
d.  The recognition and support of local communities' aspirations for their own 
development minimizes or prevents conflicts with other resource users; and, 
e.  FPIC  minimizes  reputational,  operational  and  fiduciary  risks  for  the 
government, company or donor carrying out activities that may affect the 
land, resources and rights, and livelihood of the local communities. 
f.  Promotes self-driven development. 
5 United Nations Development Group (UNDG), Guidelines on Indigenous Peoples’ Issues, 2009:30 
Who? 
Indigenous peoples should specify which representative institutions are entitled to express 
consent  on  behalf  of  the  affected  peoples  or  communities.  In  free,  prior  and  informed 
consent processes, indigenous peoples, United Nations agencies and governments should 
ensure a gender balance and take into account the views of children and youth as relevant. 
How? 
Information  should  be  accurate  and  provided  in  a  form  that  is  accessible  and 
understandable, including in a language that the indigenous peoples will fully understand. 
The format in which information is distributed should take into account the oral traditions 
of indigenous peoples and their languages. 
Where and when to seek FPIC 
In IFAD-funded projects and programmes, the borrowing government (or grant recipient) 
is responsible for seeking and obtaining FPIC. FPIC is methodologically solicited through 
consultation and the participation of communities and local institutions at specific stages 
of  the  project  cycle.    In  this  connection,  ASPIRE-AT,  Project  Management  Unit  is 
responsible for seeking FPIC with the following principle and guideline.  
Free,  prior  and  informed  consent  should  be  sought  sufficiently  in  advance  of 
commencement or authorization of activities, taking into account indigenous peoples’ own 
decision-making  processes,  in  phases  of  assessment,  planning,  implementation, 
monitoring, evaluation and closure of a project. 
FPIC  is  not  so  much  a  safeguard  principle,  rather  a  proactive  approach  to  identify 
development pathways  with local communities  and it is  applied in two scenarios (IFAD, 
2015): 
 
 
Investment projects that may have an impact on the land access and use rights 
of rural communities; 
Projects targeting indigenous peoples or rural areas that are home to indigenous 
and tribal peoples and ethnic minorities. 
The first scenario refers to the type of investment project and the second to the type of 
project area and target groups.  
Based on the above two scenarios, FPIC needs to be sought either during project design 
or during project implementation, depending on when project activities and/or benefiting 
communities can be clearly identified Table below outlines the FPIC requirement according 
to these two criteria. 
Table 1.   FPIC requirements based on project type and areas of intervention 
  Location 
  Project  likely  to 
land 
and/or 
rights  of 
affect 
access 
use 
communities 
 
 
  Agricultural 
and 
rural  development 
projects unlikely to 
affect  land  rights 
(agricultural 
and 
technologies 
production, 
value 
chain  development, 
social infrastructure) 
 
  Project  supporting 
demand-driven 
to 
services 
individuals 
(rural 
finance,  small  and 
medium-sized 
enterprise 
development) 
  Rural 
areas 
without indigenous 
peoples  
  YES 
 
  Rural areas with 
some indigenous 
peoples 
communities. 
  YES 
 
 
 
Indigenous 
peoples  territories 
or tribal areas 
  YES 
Source:  IFAD, 2015 
  NO 
  NO 
  On  a  case-by-case 
  NO 
basis 
  YES 
  YES 
  As for the case of ASPIRE-AT, in view of project type, it is an agricultural and rural 
development project that is unlikely to affect land rights. It is also a project that 
supports  demand  driven  services  to  individuals.  Regarding  the  areas  of 
intervention, in project, there are rural areas with some indigenous peoples. It is 
noted that the Government of Cambodia uses official the term “Indigenous Peoples” 
instead  of  “Ethnic  Minority”.  Scoping  the  FPIC  requirements  to  project  type  and 
areas of interventions, it is recognised that FPIC will be sought for the indigenous 
peoples. 
  Based on the scenarios, typology of projects and areas of interventions described 
in the previous section, FPIC needs to  be solicited either before project approval 
(design  phase)  or  during  the  implementation  phase,  depending  on  the  nature  of 
the project and at what stage of the project cycle specific benefiting communities 
are identified, together with specific investment and activities to be undertaken in 
each community. 
Table 2. When to seek FPIC in project Cycle 
When to seek FPIC? 
Scenarios 
During Design Phase 
When  beneficiary  communities  are  identified  at  design 
stage  together  with  the  specific  investment/activities  to 
be undertaken in each community 
During 
Phase 
Implementation 
When  either  the  communities  and/or  the  specific 
investment/activities are not identifiable at project design 
phase 
Source:  IFAD, 2015 
In the context of the ASPIRE-AT, the FPIC, together with the ESCMF, is developed following 
a design mission during the design and updated phase.   
The FPIC process requires the following steps: 
1.Socio-Cultural and Land Assessments 
Decisions and follow up actions regarding ASPIRE-AT would be impeded in the absence of 
adequate  information  on  the  sociocultural  and  land  tenure  aspects  of  the  proposed 
schemes. Therefore, it would be essential to carry out assessments on the sociocultural 
and land tenure conditions of the proposed schemes in the project area as a priority activity 
by  the  beginning  of  ASPIRE-AT  implementation  and  before  any  investment  is  made  at 
community level.  The socio-cultural and land tenure assessments will establish: 
  The community stakeholders, landowners and users in the project area (including 
transient resident populations such as pastoralists, as well as neighbors) who might 
be affected and who can gain more rights through careful scheme design based on 
FPIC process, and who have the right to give or withhold consent; 
  Customary  laws,  informal  rules  and  organizing  practices,  and  claims  on  land 
ownership, occupation and use; 
  Types of livelihoods and resources communities depend upon; 
  Land  use  mapping  indicating  existing  land  use  and  land  use  as  proposed  by  the 
communities  to  accommodate  the  project,  and  as  agreed  with  the  commune 
administrations; 
Institutions, governance systems and decision-making roles; 
 
  Existing  dimensions  of  traditional  leadership  (roles  and  status)  and  traditional 
mutual support and solidarity/reciprocity mechanisms etc.; 
  Social, economic, cultural and spiritual relations with lands and territories; and, 
  Possible  consequences  for  local  communities  resulting  from  the  change  on  the 
status of land, territories and resources emerging from the proposed schemes. 
Participatory mapping can be a useful tool in the preparation of the socio-cultural and land 
tenure  assessment.  A  critical  dimension  will  be  rights  of  transient  populations,  such  as 
pastoralists, who access land and natural resources for some months in a year, yet must 
be included in the FPIC process. 
2.Identification of Decision-Making Institutions and Representatives 
In  line  with  the  existing  customary  system  of  the  indigenous  community,  and  the 
Government  of  Cambodia's  decentralization  policy,  the  key  institutional  actors  involved 
with  issues  of  resettlement,  property  and  land  rights,  access  to  resources,  etc,  are  the 
local governments at village, commune, district and provincial levels and the indigenous 
community traditional elder and community committees.  
3.Consultations  leading  to  FPIC  on  the  proposed  project/specific  components 
/activities 
 Subsequent to the socio-cultural and land tenure assessments and the identification of 
key decision-making institutions, consultations will be held with the scheme communities 
during implementation – when individual scheme ESIAs and designs are being updated or 
prepared, as the case may be.  Consultations will be conducted by the ASPIRE-AT, or by 
an independent facilitator/advisor hired by these offices6. 
The use of participatory mapping will be instrumental for the consultation process leading 
to  FPIC.  This  is  because  of  the  advantages  of  participatory  mapping  and  accompanying 
participatory enquiry techniques allow the assessment of ownership, occupation and use 
of  land  territories  and  resources  as  well  as  the  social  dynamics  (eg.  movements  and 
relationships among the different social groups) and right holders.  
Given  that  the  schemes  are  initiated  by  the  communities  and  proposed  to  indigenous 
elders/community committees, the consultations will:  
  Confirm that the scheme is a community-driven initiative; 
  Share  the  objective  and  scope  of  the  proposed  scheme  with  the  communities 
directly or communities' representatives (existing or elected by the communities in 
the process); 
6 For a sample of terms of reference for facilitators supporting the FPIC process in IFAD-funded projects, see 
Annex  3  of  IFAD  How  to  do  Note  on  Seeking    Free  Prior  and  Informed  Consent  in  IFAD  Investment  Projects 
https://www.ifad.org/topic/consent/overview  
  Clearly  inform  the  communities'  representatives  on  the  actors  financing  and 
implementing the project and their respective responsibilities; 
  Provide clear and transparent information on the benefits and risks of the project; 
  Share the findings of the socio-cultural, land tenure and environmental assessment 
and reality check/confirmation of findings; 
  Engage  selected  community  members  or  communities'  representatives  in  the 
resources and social mapping activities, in order to assess ownership, occupation 
and  use  of  land  territories  and  resources  as  well  as  the  social  dynamics 
(relationships among the different social groups); 
  Share the objective and scope of the mapping exercise with the communities; 
  Ensure  inclusive  participation  -  men,  women,  young  people,  the  elderly, 
representatives of different communities present on the same land and territory, 
and  neighboring  villages  -  and  provide  for  multiple  maps  by  the  different 
communities; 
  Share the maps with all stakeholders and actors; and, 
  Formalize ownership of the land use maps by the communities that have developed 
them. 
It is important that: 
  Where there is universal consent to the proposed scheme, communities’ consent is 
formalized  through  a  consent  agreement  between  the  communities  and  the 
ASPIRE-AT. The consent agreement will be the outcome of the collective decision-
making  process  by  the  local  communities.  The  process  will  be  adequately 
documented; 
  Where  there  are  doubts  on  consent,  or  where  concerns  are  raised  during 
consultations, these doubts and concerns are  documented, and the communities 
are requested to propose means/solutions to overcome concerns; 
  Feedback  is  provided  to  the  scheme  design  engineers  and  project  staff  on 
concerns/doubts raised by the communities; 
  Feedback  is  provided  to  the  communities  on  how  their  concerns  have  been 
accommodated in the scheme design. 
The usual practice for  IFAD-funded projects is to use independent, qualified7 facilitators 
supporting the FPIC process. The selection of suitable facilitators for the FPIC process is 
critical  to  the  success  of  the  process.  In  the  selection  process,  consideration  should  be 
given  to  the  cultural  context  the  facilitator  will  work  in,  to  language  skills,  ethnicity, 
gender, experience in consultation and participatory processes, age (eg. elders prefer to 
speak to their own indigenous leagues), technical knowledge of the proposed project and 
knowledge of IFAD policies and FPIC requirements.   
4.Formalise the Consent Agreement 
Once project activities and project sites requiring FPCI agreement are identified, this will 
be formalised in a written form in Khmer and also recorded in the video in the indigenous 
languages.  The effective time the consent agreement would be formalised will be agreed 
upon during the consultation process and needs to be formalised before any investment is 
made. 
The  consent  agreement  will  be  prepared  by  the  PMU  Office.  The  format  for  a  consent 
agreement would, among others, include: 
  Project activities on which consent is provided 
7 Minimum requirement for the facilitator is rights sensitivity and knowledge of the cultural context they will operate, together with technical 
knowledge of the issues under consideration. The facilitator must be neutral, trustworthy and mutually accountable to IFAD, the borrower 
government and the community (HTDN-IFAD, 2015). 
  Respective expectations 
  Proposed project duration, expected results and activities 
  Participatory monitoring and verification plan and procedures 
Identification of grievances procedures and mechanisms 
 
  Terms of withdrawal of consent 
  Record of process through means and languages accessible to all stakeholders and 
parties involved. 
The  FPIC  Agreement  and  record  of  process  will  be  made  available  through  means  and 
languages  that  are  accessible  to  all  stakeholders  and  parties  involved.    The  FPIC 
Implementation Plan will be included in the Annex to the ASPIERE-AT and will be confirmed 
and/or  revised  at  the  beginning  of  project  implementation  phase  (during  start-up 
workshop, beginning of consultations leading to FPCI, beginning of participatory mapping 
exercise). 
5. Assess FPIC Implementation 
In order to assess FPIC implementation, the appropriate indicators for measuring progress 
towards and/or attainment of agreed terms will be defined and linked with a timeframe in 
the FPIC agreement. Subsequent workshops and stakeholders’ reviews of the FPIC plan 
may  also  amend  the  various  indicators  to  be  established  in  the  FPIC  agreement.  Joint 
supervision missions assessing project progress will also assess implementation of FPIC 
agreements  on  regular  basis.8  Whenever  possible,  supervision  and  evaluation  missions 
would include experts of relevance. 
Table A.4.3:  Summarised ASPIRE-AT FPIC Implementation Plan  
Description/Activity 
Responsible 
Timeframe 
Conduct sociocultural and land 
tenure assessment: 
1.1. Identify:  
•  Customary laws, informal rules and 
organizing practices on land 
ownership 
•  Institutions and governance systems 
•  Types of livelihoods 
•  Mutual support and solidarity 
mechanisms  
•  Community stakeholders, land users 
and assess who has the right to give 
or withhold the consent 
1.2. Assess:  
•  Consequences from the proposed 
project that may result in the change 
of the status of the lands, territories 
and resources 
IFAD Policy on Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, 2009:16 
8
PMU and IFAD (who 
may hire consultants to 
carry out the scheme 
specific socio-
cultural/land tenure 
assessments 
This has been 
done during the 
mission in end of 
June and earlier 
of July 2022 
Description/Activity 
Identify decision-making institutions 
and representatives  
•  Conduct preliminary consultations 
with the community and explain the 
nature of the proposed project  
•  Allow time for communities to discuss 
and decide on their representatives 
for the consultation process leading 
to FPIC 
•  Clarify responsibilities of 
representatives  
•  Agree on the process leading to FPIC 
•  Identify signatory parties for the 
consent agreement 
Conduct consultation leading to FPIC 
on the proposed project/specific 
component/activities 
•  Share objective and scope of the 
project with the representatives 
identified by the communities and 
identify project component(s) 
requiring FPIC 
•  Inform them on the actors financing 
and implementing the project and 
their respective responsibilities  
•  Provide clear and transparent 
information on the benefits and risks 
of the project 
•  Share the findings of the 
sociocultural, land tenure and 
environmental assessment 
•  Formalize consent agreement 
Formalize the consent agreement 
1.3. Formalize the consent agreement 
(written or in other form if so 
requested by the community) 
1.4. The format for a consent 
agreement would include: 
•  Respective expectations  
•  Proposed project duration, expected 
results and activities 
•  Participatory monitoring and 
verification plan and procedures  
•  Identification of grievances 
procedures and mechanisms  
•  Terms of withdrawal of consent  
1.5. Record of process through means 
and languages accessible to all 
stakeholders and parties involved 
1.6. Annex the FPIC agreement and 
documented process to the PDR 
Responsible 
Timeframe 
PMU and IFAD 
consultant supported 
by IFAD as part of 
project implementation 
support, as required. 
This has been 
done during the 
mission in end of 
June and earlier 
of July 2022  
PMU and IFAD 
consultant supported 
by IFAD as part of 
project implementation 
support, as required. 
At the beginning 
of programme 
implementation 
phase and before 
individual 
scheme 
construction 
PMU and IFAD 
consultant supported 
by IFAD as part of 
project implementation 
support, as required. 
Programme 
implementation 
phase. 
Timing 
agreed  upon  the 
during 
consultation 
process 
and 
before  individual 
scheme 
construction 
begins 
Assess FPIC implementation 
1.7. Assess FPIC implementation as part 
of the M&E exercise during the 
project life.  
and 
IFAD 
PMT, 
consultant 
supported 
by  IFAD  as  part  of 
project  implementation 
Programme 
implementation 
phase  -  before 
individual 
Description/Activity 
Responsible 
Timeframe 
1.8. Appropriate indicators for measuring 
progress towards and/or attainment 
of agreed terms will be defined and 
linked with a timeframe in the FPIC 
agreement 
required 
support,  as 
through 
join 
supervision  missions 
and CTM.  
scheme 
construction 
begins 
throughout 
project cycle 
and 
the 
6.Loan Agreement 
FPIC requirements will be included in the Loan Agreement as a condition to disbursement 
for  programme  implementation.    The  loan  agreement  should  be  simplifying  the 
requirements (consider without colleterial within IPs land with low interest and should be 
understandable in indigenous languages).  
7.Disclosure 
IFAD’s  Policy  on  the  Disclosure  of  Documents  enables  project  design  documents  to  be 
disclosed prior to the  Executive Board  session  at which the project is  to be  considered.  
Thus, this FPIC Implementation Plan will be disclosed together with the Programme Design 
Report  (PDR),  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework  (ESMF),  and  other 
documents to be submitted to the Executive Board.   
8.Documenting the FPIC Process 
FPIC process will be documented through minutes of consultations, mapping documents 
prepared by the communities, videos and audio where feasible, and FPIC agreements/ 
formalisation documents, also keep records of consultations undertaken:  
their roles or accountability links to their communities;  
  how participants were selected;  
 
  how they were invited;  
  which consultations they participated in;  
  what documentation/information they received beforehand and in which language;  
  who participated;  
  what was discussed. 
Document FPIC agreements: Often FPIC is expressed as an agreement between the 
designated project management unit and the concerned local communities. These 
agreements should clearly articulate: what has been agreed (e.g. issues, commitments, 
time frames, budgets, roles, responsibilities); who entered into the agreement (clearly 
identifying the individuals involved as well as their title and role); and what mechanisms 
have been set up to maintain dialogue and address disagreements. 
Sample of FPIC-Consent-Need to be translate by Khmer or USE IPs bilingual language   
FREE PIROR INFORMED CONSENT-FORM 
To engage in indigenous people’s community-in implementation the project 
Date: ___________________ 
Name of community/IPs Group: ………………………………………………………………………… 
Target Area:………………… …………………………………………………………………………………… 
Project Name: …………………………………………………………………….…………………………….. 
The objectives: 
Expected:  
Key Activity:  
Context of FPIC (agreement)  
This is rules of the agreement through FPIC, aims to ensure the benefit and to clarify 
provisions that most prone to abuse misrepresentation, graft and corruption. In addition, 
the rules require the participation of the indigenous leaders on the project team must 
explain the memorandum of agreement to the community in a language the speak and 
understandable.  
Grievance  redress  mechanism:  (This  should  be  undertaking  the  discussion  and  define 
clear role and responsibility with the group before action)  
Step1: with the traditional elders/community committee  
Step2: commune council/district/provincial authority 
Step3: Third party/independent mediator  
These contents have been read in indigenous people’s language and understandable by 
all parties before mutual agreement signing.  
Name:                                                      Signature:  
Position: Collective leader/traditional leader/community committee 
Contact: 
Project Team 
Name:                                                      Signature:  
Other Relevant info: (e.g., any role or position) 
Contact:  
REFERENCES 
IFAD 
1.  IFAD (April 2022). POLICY BRIEF: Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC), 
Indigenous Peoples-driven development pathways 
2.  IFAD (2021). Fifth Global Meeting of the Indgienous Peoples’ Forum at IFAD.  
3.  IFAD ( 2015). How To Do: Seeking free, prior and informed consent in IFAD 
investment projects. 
4.  IFAD (2009). The Policy Engagement with Indigenous Peoples.  
Asia Indigenous Peoples Pact (AIPP) 
1.  Training Manual for indigenous peoples on Free, Piror and Informed Consent,2014 
2.  FREE, PRIOR, AND INFORMED CONSENT PROTOCOL,2020  
Cambodia
Agriculture Services Programme for an Inclusive Rural Economy and Agricultural Trade
Project Design Report
Annex: ESCMF
Document Date:
09/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003433
6221-KH
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND CLIMATE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK (ESCMF) 
Contents 
1. 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................. 1 
Project Description .............................................................................................................................. 1 
Objective and methodology of ESCMF ................................................................................................... 3 
ESCMF Objectives ............................................................................................................................... 3 
ESCMF methodology ........................................................................................................................... 4 
2.  Reference Framework ................................................................................................................... 5 
National Policies ................................................................................................................................... 5 
IFAD Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures ............................................................ 10 
EIB Environmental and Social Standards ............................................................................................. 12 
International Labour Organisation (ILO) Conventions ............................................................................ 14 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) .............................................................................................. 15 
Environmental and Social Baseline ...................................................................................................... 16 
3. Potential impacts  ............................................................................................................................19 
4. 
ESCMF Procedures .......................................................................................................................26 
5. 
Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plan .......................................................................28 
6. Institutional arrangements and capacity building .................................................................................30 
Institutional arrangements and roles and responsibility ......................................................................... 30 
Capacity Building .............................................................................................................................. 31 
7. 
Stakeholder engagement, information disclosure and grievance redress .............................................33 
Stakeholder engagement ................................................................................................................... 33 
Information disclosure ....................................................................................................................... 33 
Grievance redress ............................................................................................................................. 33 
IFAD Complaints Procedure ................................................................................................................ 35 
8.  Cost and budgetary consideration ..................................................................................................37 
Annexes .............................................................................................................................................38 
Annex I. ESCMP ............................................................................................................................... 38 
Annex II. Stakeholder consultation ..................................................................................................... 53 
Annex III: Screening Checklist ........................................................................................................... 57 
Annex IV: Subproject category ........................................................................................................... 64 
Annex V: IEE screening questions ....................................................................................................... 65 
Annex VI: Safeguard report outlook .................................................................................................... 67 
Annex VII: Grievance sample form ..................................................................................................... 68 
Annex VIII: IP screening checklist ...................................................................................................... 69 
List of Figures  
Figure 1  SECAP procedures....................................................................................................................... 12 
Figure 2 ESCMF procedures ....................................................................................................................... 26 
Figure 3 Institutional setup ........................................................................................................................ 30 
List of Tables 
Table 1 Priority Value Chains and Typical Investments .................................................................................... 3 
Table 2 Framework reference....................................................................................................................... 5 
Table 3: IFAD and EIB's Standards ............................................................................................................. 12 
Table 4: Baseline ..................................................................................................................................... 16 
Table 5: Potential impacts ......................................................................................................................... 23 
Table 6 Screening steps ............................................................................................................................ 27 
Table 7 Tentative Breakdown of project level costs for ESCMF implementation ................................................. 37 
I 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
1.  Introduction  
This Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF) has been developed 
for  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  and  European  Investment 
Bank (EIB) supported project ‘Agriculture Services Programme for Inclusive Rural Economy 
and  Agricultural  Trade  (ASPIRE-AT)’.  The  Project  has  goal  to  reduce  rural  poverty  and 
vulnerability and increase climate resilience of Cambodian rural households through inclusive 
and  environmentally  sustainable  growth  in  agriculture  sector’.  The  Ministry  of  Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) will be the lead implementing agency of the Project. The Project 
will be national in scope.  
The Project design mission assessed impact of climate change to the project as substantial. 
Since the specific activities, size and locations haven’t finalized yet; the mission proposed to 
develop  ESCMF  following  the  Social,  Environmental,  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures 
(SECAP) guidelines. The ESCMF sets out the principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to 
assess all potential environmental and social risks and impacts of the Project. It recommends 
mitigation  and  avoidance  mechanisms,  including  institutional  capacities,  monitoring 
arrangements and approximate costs. It is designed to be flexible and applicable to the Project 
activities throughout the implementation period, even though the  Project activities may  be 
subject to change. 
Project Description  
Project  cost:  The  total  cost  of  ASPIRE  AT  is  estimated  as  $US 133  million,  excluding 
beneficiary contributions and Government of the Kingdom of Cambodia (GoKC) contributions 
in kind, over seven years 2023-2029. This cost will be financed by i) IFAD loan on blend terms 
of  $US 33.9  million;  ii)  IFAD  loan  on  BRAM  terms  of  $US 14  million;  iii)  Grant  funding  of 
$US 0.3 from IFAD South-South Technical Cooperation Fund; iv) EIB loan financing of $US 60 
million; v) GoKC counterpart funding in cash of $US 17 million; vi) Funding gap of $US 7.8 
million.  
Components:  The  Project  Development  Objective  (PDO)  is  ‘inclusive  and  sustainable 
agriculture sector growth based on exports and domestic markets has increased incomes of 
rural producers and workers.’ 
The key indicators for the PDO will be the number of rural households with income increased 
by at least 20% (target, 50,000 households) and IFAD mandatory indicators for beneficiary 
satisfaction  and  empowerment.  The  PDO  will  be  achieved  through  three  intermediate 
outcomes:  i)  Smallholders’  and  Producer  Organisations’  (POs)  Investments  in  productive 
assets have increased their productivity and competitiveness in domestic and exports-based 
value chains; ii) POs’ partnerships with agribusinesses have been enhanced and their market 
access improved; and iii) Smallholders have been organised and coordinated in Agriculture 
Cooperatives  and  other  POs  and  have  been  enabled  to  produce  in  response  to  market 
requirements for type, volume and quality standards. 
Component 1 will support investments in productive assets for the Agriculture Cooperatives 
(ACs)  and  other  POs  to  improve  their  production,  handling,  processing  and  marketing  of 
commodities in the targeted value chains to meet both export and domestic market demand.  
The project will finance investments by graduated POs, and their members. Each graduated 
PO,  in  consultation  with  its  members  will  develop  a  Business  Plan  identifying  the  eligible 
investments  to  be  financed.  Farmers  and  POs  can  access  to  finance  primarily  through 
Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  Bank  (ARDB)  to  enhance  their  productive  assets.  The 
graduated  POs  that  have  not  previously  benefitted  from  grant  finance  from  GoKC  or 
development partner projects will get support for market infrastructures. Examples of eligible 
1 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
investments include: a) access roads, b) loading areas, c) collection and handling facilities, 
and d) multi-purpose buildings for the PO.  
Expected Results: Component 1 is expected to benefit around 100,000 distinct smallholder 
households, including: a) sub-Component 1.1. will finance  loans and  grants to around 300 
POs  with  60,000  members,  plus  direct  investments  by  around  10,000  smallholders.  It  is 
assumed  that  about  60%  of  the  smallholder  borrowers  will  also  be  beneficiaries  of  PO 
investments. b) sub-Component 1.2 will finance around 300 infrastructure installations linked 
to POs/ACs or UACs with around 60,000 members, of which 40% are assumed to also have 
PO-level  financing  under  Component  1.1  and  60%  (36,000  households)  are  additional  to 
Component 1.1. 
Component 2  will  support  public  and  private  investment  to  increase  the  number  and 
competitiveness  of  agri-businesses  operating  in  priority  value  chains  and  the  associated 
enabling  public  goods  and  services  to  support  competitive  export  growth.  The  outcome  of 
Component  2  will  be:  Business  Partnerships  and  investments  in  trade  infrastructure  have 
increased market access and rural employment.  Cambodia has a small but growing number 
of successful agri-businesses serving domestic and export markets. Yet growth of the sector 
(beyond the rice value chain) needs more capable and well-capitalized firms and an associated 
enabling environment of public infrastructure and services critical to support the development 
of internationally competitive Cambodian value chains for priority products.  
The  priority  public  services  and  infrastructure  to  be  supported  with  investment  in 
infrastructure  and  capacity  strengthening  include  One  Post-Harvest  Reference  Centre  to 
support  export  protocol  negotiation  for  priority  products  and  to  conduct  scientific  trials  for 
optimal post-harvest handling and treatment,  up to 5 Export Quarantine Inspection Offices 
to deliver mandatory pre-export quarantine inspection and related services to exporters, one 
Plant Health Reference Laboratory to support producers and exporters in the priority VC to 
maintain competitiveness while complying with SPS/market access requirements and up to 3 
Plant  Health  Research  Stations  that  will  work  closely  with  the  Plant  Health  Reference  Lab 
focusing on specific priority value chains (e.g. fruit, nuts) to support industry competitiveness 
of priority crops.  
Expected  Results:  Investment  oriented  technical  support  is  expected  to  benefit  around  40 
agri-businesses across at least five value chains. Financing for investment by agri-business is 
expected  to  benefit  around  15  businesses  with  around  30,000  smallholders  in  their  supply 
networks ultimately benefiting from greater demand and access to premium and high value 
markets.  The  investments  in  upgrading  the  public  services  for  export  and  trade  facilitation 
will benefit all current and future smallholders and agri-businesses serving export markets. 
Component  3  will  support  technical  assistance  to  nurture,  aggregate/graduate  existing 
groups, including the BCs supported by ASPIRE1 and AIMS2, into registered ACs to engage 
with the private sector in remunerative market opportunities facilitated under component 1 
and  2.  The  assignment  of  activities  and  outputs  to  components  is  provisional  and  may  be 
revised at final design. The Outcome of Component 3 will be “Increased capacity of producer 
organisations has enabled smallholders to meet market requirements for quality and scale”. 
Component 3 will support POs to organise themselves to improve their business relationships 
with value chains actors. 
1 https://aspirekh.org/ 
2 https://aimsmoc.com/  
2 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Expected Results: By the end of the project there will be around 100,000 smallholder farmers 
enrolled in around 500 ACs/POs in the target value chains, with some of the ACs being further 
aggregated  in  UACs.  ACs/POs  will  be  self-sustaining,  profitable  and  able  to  mobilise 
investment  finance  from  private  and  State  financial  service  providers.  The  ACs/POs  will  be 
inclusive,  supportive  of  women’s  economic  empowerment  and  will  generate  employment 
opportunities 
land-poor  rural  households.  ACs/POs  will  support  adoption  of 
environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices. 
for 
Geographic Targeting: ASPIRE-AT will be national in scope, meaning that in principle, eligible 
beneficiaries organised in producer organisations in the targeted pro-poor value chains can 
qualify for  support.  Geographic targeting will be  required primarily for intensive support to 
capacity  development  of  POs  under  Component  3  and  will  be  based  on  the  areas  where 
production  of  the  target  commodities  is  located.  To  maximise  efficiency  and  impact,  areas 
representing clusters of production activities in the target value chains will be prioritised for 
capacity building support for producer organisations. 
Selected value chains and investments: selected value chains are: (i) vegetables, both leafy and 
non-leafy  species  including  chilli,  (ii)  native  chicken  (ii)  cassava,  both  for  multiplication  of 
clean, disease-free planting material and cassava root tuber production, (iii) cashew nuts, (iv) 
fresh  fruits  including longan,  mango,  etc;  and  (v)  processed  fruits  (e.g.  dried  mango  etc). 
Developing  these  value  chains  contribute  directly  to  the  double  objective  of  import 
substitution and export of quality products to the EU and other remunerative markets. 
Table 1 Priority Value Chains and Typical Investments 
Value Chain 
Economic impact 
Typical investments 
Vegetable 
Import substitution 
Greenhouse, water management, post-harvest handling. 
Backyard chicken 
Import substitution 
Production facilities, slaughter and packing 
Cassava 
Export 
Disease  free  planting  material;  Organic  cassava;  Improved  soil 
management 
Cashew 
Fresh fruit 
Processed fruit 
Export 
Export 
Export 
Post-harvest and processing 
Post-harvest, treatment, packing etc 
Processing 
Objective and methodology of ESCMF 
ESCMF Objectives  
This  ESCMF  serves  to  anticipate  and  manage  the  main  Environmental,  Climate  and  Social 
(ECS) risks and impacts associated with the Project when these risks and impacts cannot be 
determined until the programme details have been fully identified.  
Specifically, the ESCMF entails:  
  Desktop  review  of  key  Programme  information  and  relevant  publicly  available 
information.  
  Definition  of  the  Reference  Framework  of  applicable  standards,  frameworks  and 
guidelines relevant to the Programme.  
  Development of environmental and socio-economic country baselines, 
  Analysis of the Project activities and identification of potential Environmental, Climate, 
and Social risks and impacts they may have.  
3 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
  Development of  recommendations for the avoidance and mitigation of the identified 
 
risks and impacts.  
Identification  of  appropriate  indicators  and  monitoring  arrangements  to  track  the 
effectiveness of the recommended mitigation measures.  
  Development of a stakeholder engagement and community participation mechanism, 
which  describes  the  form  and  scope  of  community  consultations  which  need  to  be 
conducted as part of the Programme activities. This comprises arrangements to obtain 
Free,  Prior  and  Informed  Consent  (FPIC)  from  affected  communities,  wherever 
relevant.  
  Development  of  a  Programme-level  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan 
(ESCMP),  which  contains  potential  impacts,  including  mitigation  measures,  capacity 
and  awareness  building  requirements,  grievance  mechanisms  and  monitoring 
arrangements.   
ESCMF methodology 
Following a design mission, IFAD commissioned a SECAP mission3 to finalize SECAP review 
note  including  in-depth  climate  risk  assessment  and  prepare  ESCMF  and  other  necessary 
plans. The mission reviewed current ASPIRE and available ASPIRE-AT documents, consulted 
commune to national level government agencies and stakeholders, visited ASPIRE beneficiary 
and targeted ASPIRE-AT farmers and their farmlands (annex II).  
This ESCMF has been prepared in line with the relevant IFAD and EIB safeguard policies on 
environmental  and  social  management,  Cambodian  national  regulations  as  well  as  other 
applicable standards. To make the uniformity with in the country projects; ESCMFs, related 
checklists,  and  safeguard  reports  of  other  projects  were  thoroughly  reviewed  and 
consultations  were  made  with  the  project  management  and  technical  team  members.  The 
effort  is  made  to  make  coherence  with  recently  prepared  ESCMF  of  Sustainable  Assets  for 
Agricultural  Markets,  Business,  and  Trade  (SAAMBAT)  Project.  SAAMBAT  is  also  funded  by 
IFAD and EIB and having uniformity in similar projects helps them to exchange learnings and 
ease the implementation works. 
3 The IFAD fielded a SECAP mission from July 2 to 17 in the country. The mission comprises of Mr. Nirajan Khadka, 
Team Leader-Environment and Climate Specialist, Mrs. Yun Mane, Indigenous People Specialist, and Mr. Kim Serang 
Bouy, Social Safeguard Specialist.   
4 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
2.  Reference Framework 
The Project has to respect and follow related national legislations and international standards, 
frameworks and guidelines in order to maximize benefit to the targeted beneficiaries while 
mitigating  potential  negative  social,  environmental  and  climate  impacts.  The  applicable 
“Reference Framework” comprises most of the relevant standards, framework and guidelines 
applicable to the Project.  
Table 2 Framework reference 
Reference 
Relevance 
National  policies,  legislation 
and commitments 
All relevant national policies, legislation and commitments need to be respected. 
This  includes  national  laws,  ratified  international  treaties,  or  development  plans 
and commitments such as the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). 
IFAD  Social,  Environmental 
and  Climate  Assessment 
Procedures (SECAP) 
IFAD’s  SECAP  need  to  be  applied  and  considered  throughout  the  project 
implementation cycle. 
Environmental 
and 
Safeguards 
EIB 
Social 
requirements 
Labour 
International 
Organisation (ILO) standards 
Sustainable 
Goals (SDGs) 
Development 
National Policies 
Being  the  main  financial  institution  of  the  Project,  the  EIB’s  environmental  and 
social requirements and policies need to be applied throughout the Programme. 
The ILO standards needs to be followed in relevant works 
The  SDGs  are  considered  the  most  important  sustainability  framework.  All 
Programme countries have ratified the SDGs and committed to making efforts for 
their  achievement,  so  Programme  activities  also  need  to  be  aligned  with  this 
framework. 
Cambodia’s  current  Constitution,  which  was  confirmed  in  1993  by  the  GoKC,  identifies 
environmental  issues  that  are  to  be  considered  during  project  development  and 
implementation. Specifically, Article 59 of the Constitution states that: The state shall  protect 
the  environment and  balance the  abundant natural resources and establish a precise plan 
of management of land, water,  air,  win,  geology, ecological systems, mines, energy, petrol 
and  gas,  rock  and  sand,  gems  forests  and  forestry,  products,  wildlife,  fish  and  aquatic 
resources. The Ministry of Environment was established to implement this provision. 
The  Law  on  Environmental  Protection  and  Natural  Resource  Management 
(NS/RKM/1296/36), which  was  issued  in  1996, is  the  primary law governing  environmental 
management  in  Cambodia.  The  law  requires  the  RCG  to  prepare  national  and  regional 
environmental  plans,  which  are  expected  to  cover  a  wide  range  of  issues,  including 
environmental assessment, pollution prevention and control, public participation and project 
disclosure. 
As  required  by  the  Law on  Environmental Protection  and Natural Resource Management, a 
National Environment Strategy and Action Plan (NESAP) is being developed. The  NESAP  will 
identify  priority  policy  tools  and  financing  options  for  sustainable  natural  resource 
management  and  environmental  protection.  It  will  guide  government  ministries,  private 
sector,  civil  society,  and  development  organizations  to  mainstream  environmental 
5 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
considerations  in  policies,  plans,  and  investments.  The  final draft  NESAP  is  expected  to  be 
produced in late-2016 and will require endorsement by the National Council for Sustainable 
Development and then approval by the Council of Ministers. 
Following  the  issuance  of  the  Law  on  Environmental  Protection  and  Natural  Resource 
Management,  the  Ministry  of  Environment passed  regulations (also  referred  to  as  sub- 
decrees) to provide further protection for the environment, including: 
  Sub-decree No.27 on water pollution control, issued on 6 April 1999; 
  Sub-decree No.36 solid waste management, issued on 27 April 1999; 
  Sub-decree No.42 on air pollution and noise disturbance, issued on 10 July 2000; 
  Sub-decree No.72 on environmental impact assessment process, issued on 11 August 
1999; and 
  Law on the management and exploitation of mines resources, adopted on 13 July 2001. 
For consideration of other applicable environmental standards and criteria, such as ambient 
air  quality,  vibration,  noise,  contaminated  soil,  and  workplace  and  community  safety  the 
protocols of the Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines of the World Bank (2007) apply. 
A range of national environmental policy documents also exist within  Cambodia such as the 
National Environmental Action Plan (1998-2002) and the National Biodiversity Strategy  and 
Action Plan (NBSAP) of 2002. 
Law  on  Nature  Reserves.  The  Royal  Decree  on  Protected  Natural  Areas  was  issued  in 
November  1993.  The  regulation  provides  protection  for  the  environment,  land,  forests, 
wetlands and coastal zones. The regulation covers 23 natural protected areas in Cambodia, 
representing 18% of the total land area of the country or 2.2 million hectares. The Ministry 
of Environment is responsible for implementing this law. 
In 2008, Cambodia introduced the Protected Area Law No. NS/RKM/0208/007 which defines 
the  National  Parks  (IUCN  Category  II),  Wildlife  Sanctuaries  (IUCN  Category  IV),  Protected 
Landscapes (IUCN Category V), Multiple-Use Areas (IUCN Category VIII), and Ramsar sites 
which includes two sites in IUCN Categories IV and VIII. The 2008 Protected Areas Law defines 
the framework of management, conservation  and development of protected areas and aims 
to  ensure  the  management,  conservation  of  biodiversity,  and  sustainable  use  of  natural 
resources in protected areas. The law reinforces the Ministry of Environment’s responsibility 
to administer and manage protected areas.  
Under this law, chapter VI article 21 and 22, also stated the involvement and access rights of 
communities  and  indigenous  peoples  in  relation  to  participate  fully  in  the  provision  of  and 
access  to  information  relevant  to  the  protected  area  management,  conservation  and 
development and the State recognizes and secures access to traditional uses, local customs, 
beliefs, and religions of the local communities, and indigenous ethnic minority groups residing 
within and adjacent to the protected 
Law on Historical Monuments. All national monuments in Cambodia are protected by the 
Law on the Protection of Cultural and National Heritage, which was promulgated in 1996. This 
is supplemented by the” decision on the Definition of 3 Zones to Protect Temple Surrounding 
areas in all Provinces and Municipalities Except Angkor Wat “(1996). The law protects a range 
of cultural heritage sites, including small temples and ancient structures in Cambodia.   
6 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
The  Labor  Law  was  issued  in  March  1997  to  govern  relations  between  employers  and 
workers.  It  governs  all  employment  contracts  to  be  performed  within  the  territory  of  the 
Kingdom of Cambodia. 
Law  on  social  security  schemes  were  issued  in  2002.  This  law  seeks  to  set-up  a  social 
security  scheme.  It  includes  references  to:  i)  a  pension  scheme,  which  provides  old  age 
benefits, invalidity benefit and survivors' benefit; and ii) an occupational risk scheme, which is 
in charge of providing employment injury and occupational disease benefit. 
Occupational Health and Safety. The First Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) Master 
Plan (2009-2013) was developed by the Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training with technical 
support  from  the  International  Labor  Organization  (ILO).  It  contains  the   following priority 
areas: strengthening  national OSH  systems; improving  safety and  health  inspections  and 
compliance; promoting OSH activities by employers’ and workers’ organizations; implementing 
special programs for hazardous occupations; extending OSH  protection to small  enterprises, 
and informal and rural workplaces; and promoting collaborative actions with hazardous child 
labor and human immunodeficiency virus infection and acquired immune deficiency syndrome 
(HIV/AIDS) projects and activities. 
The  1993  Constitution  of  Cambodia  has  established  two  governing  principles  pertaining  to 
land acquisition. Article 44 states that: All persons, individually or collectively, shall have 
the rights to ownership. Only Khmer legal entities and citizens of Khmer nationality shall have 
the  right  to  own  land.  Legal  private  ownership  shall  be  protected  by  law.  The  rights  to 
confiscate  properties  from  any  persons  shall  be  exercised  only  in  the  public  interest  as 
provided for under the law and shall require fair and just compensation in advance. 
Article  9  (second  paragraph)  of  the  Law  on  the  Commune/Sangkat  Administrative 
Management states that “the Commune/Sangkat (C/S) is a body representing citizens in its 
Commune/Sangkat and has missions to serve the general interests of its Commune/Sangkat.”  
The  Inter-Ministerial  Prakas  No  2423  BRK,  dated  03  July  2007  on  C/S  Development  Plan, 
Article 9 states:  
“Civil  society  organizations  may  participate  in the  Development  Plan  and  shall  be 
responsible for:  
 
 
Representing the interests of local communities; and  
Specific stakeholder’s groups like women, youth, the poor, ethnic minorities4.  
C/S Council (local people) must ensure that Indigenous People or representatives of 
them are able to take part in the decision-making process on the projects that affect 
to them”.   
The 2001 Land Law. The rights to land and property in Cambodia are governed by the 2001 
Land Law, which is primarily based on the provisions of the 1993 Constitution. It defines the 
scope of  ownership of immovable properties,  such as land, trees and  fixed structures.  The 
Land Law, Article 5, states that “No person may be deprived of his ownership, unless it is in 
the  public  interest.  Any  ownership  deprivation  shall  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the 
4  These  stakeholders  are  referred  to  in  this  ESCMF  as  “different  populations,”  including  ethnic  minorities  and 
vulnerable groups – women and female/male youth and children, men, the elderly and disabled, etc. 
7 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
governing procedures provided by law and regulations, and after the payment of fair and just 
compensation in advance.”  
The Land Law grants collective land ownership rights to indigenous communities. Article 26 
states that ownership of immovable properties is granted by the state to indigenous peoples 
as collective ownership. This collective ownership includes all of the rights and protections as 
enjoyed  by  private  owners.  The  exercise  of  collective  ownership  rights  is  subject  to  the 
responsibility  of  traditional  authorities  and  decision-making  mechanisms  of  the  indigenous 
community, according to their customs and subject to the laws of general enforcement related 
to immovable property such as the law on environmental protection (Article 26). 
The Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction (MLMUPC) is responsible 
for receiving the land registration application. Mechanisms for dealing with land conflict issues 
are discussed at an inter-ministerial level and issues related to land application and/or conflict 
are  submitted  to  an  inter-ministerial  working  group  comprised  the  Ministry  of  Interior, 
Councils of Ministers, MEF, Ministry of Environment (MOE), Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry 
and Fisheries, MRD, and other relevant ministries.  
In  Article  23,  an  indigenous  community  is  defined  as  “a  group  of  people  that  resides  in 
Cambodia whose members have manifested ethnic, social, cultural and economic unity and 
who practice a traditional lifestyle, and who cultivate the lands in their possession according 
to the customary rules of collective use.” In Cambodia, the IPs policy was formalized by the 
MRD in 2009. The policy clearly states that all relevant ministries shall recognize that IPs has 
its own culture and tradition, and have full rights and privileges related to their culture and 
traditions.  The  culture  and  tradition  consist  of  the  community  land  occupation,  actual  land 
that they currently use, land for their funeral purposes, land for agriculture farming, land for 
their belief systems, and land for their benefit. Therefore, IPs have full rights and privilege to 
protect  their  collective  and  privately-  and  community-held  lands.  Any  project  with  the 
potential to involve involuntary resettlement impacts among IPs will need to collect detailed 
information on their land-use, economic activities, and social organizations, in order that a 
culturally  appropriate  IPDP  is  formulated  with  full  and  meaningful  consultation  of  affected 
indigenous peoples. All development projects must refer to this law. 
In  article  265  stated  about  where  an  infringement  an  infringement  [is]  committed  against 
land rights of indigenous communities by an authority who is responsible for the management 
of the zone in which the immovable property is located, [the authority] shall be fined.  
The Forestry Law (2002), article 11 stated about MAFF shall classify and registered and 
set boundaries for all forest with the permanent forest state by carry out the coordinate with 
concerned local communities, concerns authorities and Ministry of Land Management Urban 
Planning  and  Construction  in  order  to  assist  in  registration  of  land  property  of  indigenous 
community and preparation of the national land used map.   
Policy on registration and rights of used of land of indigenous communities on 24 April 2009 
and Sub-degree on registration and rights of used of land of indigenous communities on 09 
June 2009 are provide the indigenous communities with legal rights over land tenure to ensure 
collective land tenure security and to protect collective ownership by preserving the identity, 
culture, good custom, livelihood and traditions of each indigenous communities.   
8 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
National Policy on the indigenous people’s development on 24 April 2009, stated that 
the indigenous peoples practice different cultures, traditions, customs, beliefs and languages 
according  to  their  particular  group.  As  for  the  main  occupations  to  make  their  living  are 
shifting  cultivation  based  on  their  tradition  by  slashing  and  burning  forests  for  rotation 
farming, collection of forest by products, hunting, fishing and livestock...etc. Their livelihoods 
depend entirely on the natural environment. They face hardship and shortages of roads and 
means of transportation. In terms of the health sector, the indigenous peoples are vulnerable 
people.  While  talking  about  the  education  sector,  their  educational  level  is  very  limited. 
Therefore,  their  living  standards  are  also  low.  In  regards  to  the  Royal  Government's  long-
standing vision "to realize Cambodia with social solidarity, advanced  education and vibrant 
culture, without poverty, illiteracy and poor health" and based on the Cambodian millennium 
development goals, particularly the first goal "to reduce extreme poverty and starvation" and 
the  second  goal  "to  realize  overall  fundamental  education",  this  "National  Policy  on  the 
Development of Indigenous Peoples" has the following goals: 
Indigenous  peoples  shall  have  a  living  standard  beyond  starvation  and  extreme 
• 
poverty. 
• 
Indigenous peoples shall be provided for at least nine years of fundamental education 
and shall be provided for appropriate vocational skill training courses according to their needs 
and based on the geographical areas in which they live. 
• 
• 
Indigenous peoples have been provided for good healthcare services. 
The cultures of indigenous peoples have been carefully protected and safeguarded. 
In  order  to  achieve  the  above-mentioned  goals  and  to  ensure  good  development 
management, the Royal Government has general and sectoral policies for indigenous peoples 
whereby the main sectors include: culture, environment, land, agriculture, water resources, 
infrastructure, justice, tourism and etc.  
Sub-Decree No. 19 on Social Land Concession (March 2003) discusses the law in relation to 
a social land concession. This sub-decree has 8 provisions and 33 articles. The purpose of this 
sub-decree  is  to  define  the  criteria,  procedures  and  mechanism  for  granting  of  social  land 
concessions for residential use and or family farming. In this sub-decree, it is clearly defined 
that  a  social  land  concession  is  a  legal  mechanism  to  transfer  private  state  land  for  social 
purposes to the poor who lack land for residential and or family framing purposes.  
Circular No 02 which addresses illegal encroachment of state lands was issued 26 February 
2007: This Circular identifies the procedure for confiscation and taking back all kinds of forest 
lands following the order No. 01 dated 10 May 2006  on preventing all types  of forest land 
clearance for properties. 
MEF Circular No. 006 (2 April 2014) addresses the Resettlement Implementation Procedure 
for  development  projects.  This  circular  provides  clear  instructions  for  the  administrative 
management, roles and responsibilities of all relevant implementing agencies and provinces 
when implementing resettlement for development projects. 
The  Law  on  Expropriation  (2010)  provides  principles,  mechanisms  and  procedures  of 
expropriation  and  defines  fair  and  just  compensation  for  construction,  rehabilitation,  and 
9 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
physical  infrastructure  expansion  projects  to  be  implemented  in  the  public  and/or  national 
interest and development of Cambodia. The Expropriation Law is largely consistent with the 
main principles of the World Bank’s Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12). 
Traditional private land ownership was abolished during the Khmer Rouge period (1975-1979) 
and  was  not  re-introduced  until  the  late  1980s.  Determining  ownership  and  obtaining 
documentation to prove ownership is a cumbersome and time-consuming process which many 
landholders have not pursued. The boundaries of public land remain unclearly defined and it 
can be difficult to distinguish between public and private land. This blurring between public 
and private land is particularly acute with regard to ROW for roads and irrigation channels. In 
1999, the RGC decreed that ROW for national roads would vary between 50 meter (m) and 
60 m widths. The width of other ROW varies depending upon the type of road carriageway 
and alignment. 
The  RGC  General  Department  of  Resettlement  (secretariat  of  Inter-Ministerial 
Resettlement  Committee  [IRC])  is  charged  with  determining  entitlements,  valuation  of 
affected assets and in fixing compensation rates. It is important to note that there are gaps 
between  Cambodian  expropriation  law  and  the  Bank’s  policy  on  Involuntary  Resettlement, 
including: 
  Expropriation  Law  defines  fair  and  just  compensation  for  any  construction, 
rehabilitation, and expansion of physical infrastructure projects in the public or national 
interest and development. 
  Expropriation Law does not detail the process and procedures of resettlement induced 
by physical infrastructure projects, land acquisition, voluntary land and asset donation, 
and post relocation support. 
  Even  though  the  Expropriation  Law  outlines  a  complaint  and  dispute  resolution 
mechanism  for  project  affected  households  (PAH)  in  articles  under  Chapter  3: 
Expropriation  Mechanism  and  Chapter  4:  Expropriation  Procedures,  there  are  no 
specific measures or actions articulated to support vulnerable groups of PAHs.  
  There  are  no  provisions  regarding  monitoring  and  public  disclosure  requirements 
described in the Expropriation Law.  
Measures  to  address  these  gaps  shall  be  mutually  agreed  and  adopted  by  RGC  and  the 
Development Partners in the event significant gaps exist between Cambodian Laws and the 
partners’ Policies. 
IFAD Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures  
The programme will apply IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
(SECAP). The sixteen values and principles of SECAP are: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Not knowingly finance projects that would contravene national laws.  
Not knowingly finance, directly or indirectly, activities mentioned in the IFAD exclusion 
list.  
Identify  vulnerable  people  or  groups  who  may  be  disproportionately  affected  by  its 
projects and implement relevant mitigation measures.  
Promote the conservation, rehabilitation and sustainable use of natural resources and 
key ecosystems in an integrated manner.  
Recognize  the  importance  of  addressing  both  the  causes  and  the  consequences  of 
climate change in the countries where IFAD operates.  
10 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
vi.  Minimize adverse social and environmental impact.  
vii. 
viii. 
Address gender-based violence and discrimination and promote gender equality.  
Ensure  stakeholder  feedback,  with  special  emphasis  on  the  participation  of,  and 
benefits to, women, youth, people with disabilities and site-specific targeted groups.  
Improve the livelihoods of indigenous peoples and other marginalized groups.  
ix. 
Avoid involuntary resettlement wherever possible.  
x. 
Promote sound agricultural and manufacturing processes.  
xi. 
Undertake compliance monitoring.  
xii. 
Ensure transparency and accountability throughout the life cycle of projects.  
xiii. 
xiv.  Mainstream social inclusion and environmental and climate sustainability into IFAD’s 
xv. 
xvi. 
project cycle.  
Support borrowers/recipients/partners in achieving good international practices; and  
Focus on procurement processes to ensure that borrowers/recipients/partners require 
contractors to comply with SECAP. 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedure (SECAP) 
Assessments of IFAD Programmes’ impacts are governed by its 2021 SECAP. This document 
contains minimum standards for the assessment of social, environmental and climate change 
risks to be applied in IFAD programmes and projects. The actions it requires per step of the 
Programme cycle, depending on the Programme categorisation are visualised in Figure 1. This 
ESCMF is developed as part of the requirements noted for Step 2: Early Design. 
11 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Figure 1  SECAP procedures 
EIB Environmental and Social Standards 
The EIB Group Environmental and Social Policy provides the overarching framework for the 
Group’s  commitments  and  a  vision  for  the  critical  decade  up  to  2030,  placing  sustainable 
finance at the centre of everything the EIB does. To honour its sustainability commitments, 
the  EIB  has  adopted  a  set  of  11  environmental  and  social  standards  that  establish  the 
requirements the promoter and the project must meet throughout the EIB project life cycle. 
Here is a summary of these standards. 
Table 3: IFAD and EIB's Standards 
Descriptions  
Standards  
IFAD 
EIB 
IFAD 
Standard  1: 
Biodiversity 
Conservation  
EIB  Standard 
4: 
Biodiversity 
and Ecosystem 
Avoid or, if avoidance is not possible, minimize and mitigate potential adverse 
social and environmental impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem services 
through: 
Maintain and conserve biodiversity; 
Preserve the integrity of ecosystems; 
Maintain and enhance the benefits of ecosystem services; 
Adopt the use of a precautionary approach to biodiversity conservation and 
ensure opportunities for environmentally sustainable development; 
Ensure the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits from the utilization of 
genetic resources; and 
Respect, preserve, and maintain knowledge, innovations and practices of 
indigenous peoples, and local communities relevant to the conservation and 
sustainable use of biodiversity and their customary use of biological 
resources. 
Protection and conservation of biodiversity and 
ecosystems, and maintaining their ecological functions and 
processes; 
Achieve a “no loss” of biodiversity and — where required — 
a net positive impact; 
Sustainable management and use of living natural 
resources; and 
Engage with traditional and indigenous communities as key 
stakeholders in protecting and managing biodiversity and 
natural resources, while respecting their rights to their 
land, culture and spirituality. 
12 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Standards  
IFAD 
standard  2  & 
EIB  standard 
3: 
Resource 
efficiency  and 
Pollution 
Preventions  
IFAD 
standard  2  & 
EIB  standard 
10: 
Cultural 
Heritage 
IFAD 
Standard  4: 
Indigenous 
People  
EIB  Standard 
7: 
Vulnerable 
groups, 
Indigenous 
Peoples 
Gender 
and 
IFAD 
Standard 
5:Labour  and 
Working 
Conditions EIB 
Standard 
8:Labour 
Rights  
IFAD 
Standard  6: 
Community 
Health 
Safety   
and 
EIB  Standard 
9: 
Health,  Safety 
and Security 
Descriptions  
IFAD 
EIB 
Avoid, minimize and manage the risks and impacts associated with hazardous 
substances and materials, including pesticides; 
Avoid or minimize project-related emissions of short- and long-lived climate-
change-related pollutants; 
Promote sustainable use of resources, including energy, land and water; and 
Identify, where feasible, project-related opportunities for resource-use 
efficiency. 
Recognises the importance of resource efficiency to relieve 
pressure on the environment and curb climate change; 
Encourages the identification, design and use of 
technologies, processes and services best suited to achieve 
environmental quality objectives; 
Strengthens the approach and requirements for projects 
involving existing activities, facilities, modifications and/or 
extensions 
Preserve and safeguard Cultural Heritage; 
Ensure that effective and active measures are taken to prevent IFAD-
supported projects from altering, damaging, or removing any tangible or 
intangible Cultural Heritage; 
Promote the equitable sharing of benefits from the use of Cultural Heritage; 
and 
Promote meaningful consultation on matters relating to Cultural Heritage. 
Promote indigenous peoples ability to determine and develop priorities and 
strategies for exercising their right to development; 
Ensure that programming is designed in partnership with indigenous peoples , 
with their full effective and meaningful consultation and participation, with the 
objective of seeking their free, prior and informed consent (FPIC); 
Ensure indigenous peoples obtain fair and equitable benefits and 
opportunities from supported activities in a culturally appropriate and 
inclusive manner; and 
Recognize and respect the rights of indigenous peoples to their lands, 
territories, waters and coastal seas and other resources that they have 
traditionally owned or otherwise occupied and used. 
Recognises the central role of cultural heritage as a source 
of valuable historical and scientific information, an asset 
for economic and social development and an integral part 
of people’s cultural 
rights, identity and practices; 
Identify and assess project risks and potential impacts 
affecting tangible and intangible cultural heritage, and 
covers the management and monitoring of related 
mitigation measures; and  
Emphasises the need for a chance find procedure outlining 
the 
actions to be taken if previously unknown cultural heritage 
is encountered. 
Address inequalities and other factors contributing to 
vulnerability, marginalisation and/or discrimination; 
promotes gender equality as a basic human right crucial 
for sustainable development; 
outlines the promoter’s responsibilities for assessing, 
managing and monitoring project impacts, risks and 
opportunities related to Indigenous Peoples and vulnerable 
persons/groups. 
Promote direct action to foster decent rural employment;Promote, respect 
and realize fundamental principles and rights at work through:- Preventing 
discrimination and promoting equal opportunity of workers;- Supporting 
freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective 
bargaining; and- Preventing the use of child labour and forced labour;Protect 
and promote the safety and health of workers;Ensure projects comply with 
national employment and labour laws and international commitments; 
andLeave no one behind by protecting and supporting workers in 
disadvantaged and vulnerable situations, including a special focus, as 
appropriate, on women workers, young workers, migrant workers, workers in 
the informal economy and workers with disabilities. 
ensure that promoters of EIB projects comply with the core 
labour standards of the International Labour Organization 
and with national labour and employment laws;Sets the 
need for a workers’ grievance mechanism;defines 
standards to protect migrant workers and workers affected 
by collective dismissals;Requires the establishment, 
maintenance and improvement of worker-management 
relationships and terms and conditions of 
employment;defines the assessment requirements that are 
needed for the promoter’s own workforce, third-party 
workers and supply chain workers. 
Anticipate and avoid adverse impacts on the health and safety of project-
affected communities during the project life cycle from both routine and 
nonroutine circumstances; 
ensure that measures are taken to avoid or minimize community exposure to 
hazardous materials that be used during project activities; 
promote quality and safety, and considerations relating to climate change, in 
the design and construction of infrastructure, including dams; 
avoid or minimize community exposure to project-related traffic and road 
safety risks; 
minimize community exposure to diseases; 
ensure that projects abide by the principles of “do no harm to nutrition”; 
avoid risks of project-related gender-based violence, including risks of sexual 
harassment, sexual exploitation and abuse, and human trafficking to project-
affected people and communities; 
avoid or minimize adverse impacts on ecosystems services that may arise 
from project activities; 
have in place effective measures to address emergency events; and 
ensure that the safeguarding of personnel and property is carried out in a 
manner that avoids or minimizes risks to the project-affected communities. 
outlines the promoters’ and workers’ responsibilities to 
safeguard the health, safety and 
security of workers and affected people and communities; 
establishes the importance of putting in 
place a well-defined health and safety management 
system, endowed with appropriate resources and 
expertise; 
reinforces requirements to prevent gender-based violence 
and introduces 
impact and risk assessment requirements for new areas 
such as traffic and road safety, natural hazards 
(including those triggering technological disasters) and 
pandemics and epidemics.  
IFAD 
Standard  7: 
Physical 
and 
Economic 
resettlement  
EIB  Standard 
6: 
Avoid involuntary resettlement or, when unavoidable, minimize involuntary 
resettlement by exploring feasible alternative project designs and sites; 
Avoid forced eviction; 
Ensure that resettlement activities are planned and implemented 
collaboratively, with meaningful participation of those affected; 
Enhance and restore the livelihoods of all displaced people who may be 
affected by project/programme activities; and 
avoid involuntary resettlement in the first instance, and 
minimise and define the appropriate mitigation measures 
that should be in place to counter the adverse impacts of 
involuntary resettlement; 
aims to assist all affected persons so they can improve or 
at least restore their socioeconomic and cultural conditions. 
13 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Standards  
IFAD 
EIB 
Involuntary 
resettlement  
Provide explicit guidance to borrower/recipient/partner on the conditions that 
need to be met regarding involuntary resettlement issues. 
Descriptions  
IFAD 
Standard 
8:Financial 
intermediaries 
and 
direct 
investmentsEI
B  Standard 
11:Intermedia
ted finance 
IFAD 
standard  9  & 
EIB  standard 
5: 
Climate 
Change 
EIB  standard 
1: 
Environmental 
Social 
and 
Impacts 
and 
Risks   
Promote sound environmental, social and climate practices and sound human 
resources management within financial intermediaries (Fis) and direct 
investees;Ensure FIs and direct investees will assess and manage 
environmental and social risks and impacts of subprojects;Promote good 
environmental and social management practices by direct investees and in 
the subprojects financed by FIs. 
sets out the requirements and processes that financial 
intermediaries must have in place to assess, manage, 
monitor and report on the environmental, climate and 
social impacts and risks associatedwith the sub-projects it 
finances, as appropriate to the nature of intermediated 
financing. 
and 
risks 
other 
disaster 
international 
Ensure  alignment  of  IFAD-supported  projects  with  targets  and  priorities  of 
countries’  Nationally  Determined  Contributions  and  the  goals  of  the  Paris 
frameworks; 
Agreement 
Ensure that proposed activities are screened and assessed for climate change 
and 
projects; 
Apply the SECAP risk mitigation hierarchy principle of applying a hierarchy of 
risk 
design; 
Strengthen  the  climate  resilience  of  communities  and  their  adaptive  capacity 
to address risks of climate change impacts and climate-related disasters; and 
Increase the ability of communities to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate 
change,  and  foster  climate  resilience  and  low  GHG-emitting  projects  that  do 
not threaten without compromising food production. 
management 
measures 
impacts 
project 
both 
and 
and 
to 
of 
in 
In  line  with  the  EIB’s  enhanced  climate  action  and 
environmental  sustainability  ambitions  and  its  2021-2025 
Climate  Bank  Roadmap,  this  standard  promotes  the 
alignment  of  projects  supported  by  the  EIB  with  the  goals 
and  principles  of  the  Paris  Agreement  and  the  EU 
Sustainable  Finance  Action  Plan.  It  does  so  by  stipulating 
that  promoters  must  explicitly  address  and  incorporate 
climate  change  mitigation  and  adaptation  considerations 
into the decision-making process for EIB-supported projects 
throughout  the  project  cycle,  by  assessing  and minimising 
greenhouse gas emissions and physical climate risk. 
promotes an integrated approach to impact and risk assessment and management by ensuring that environmental, climate, social and human 
rights considerations are taken into account and addressed at every step of the project. The standard sets out the promoter’s responsibilities 
for assessing, managing, monitoring and reporting on the potential environmental, climate and social impacts and risks associ ated with the 
project  and  for  maximising  positive  outcomes  throughout  the  project.  This  is  essential  to  achieve  the  environmental,  climate  and  social 
outcomes in line with the EIB Group Environmental and Social Policy and the EIB Environmental and Social Standards. 
EIB  standard 
2: 
Stakeholder 
consultation  
 Inclusive and systematic approach to engaging  constructively with stakeholders. It acknowledges stakeholder engagement as essential for 
the  effective  assessment, management  and  monitoring  of  environmental,  climate  and  social impacts  and  risks,  and  to  ensure  projects  are 
sustainable and deliver better outcomes. This standard outlines the promoter’s responsibilities for implementing continuous and transparent 
engagement with project stakeholders. 
International Labour Organisation (ILO) Conventions 
International  labour  standards  are  legal  instruments  drawn  up  by  the  ILO's  constituents 
(governments, employers and workers) which set out basic principles and rights at work. The 
standards  are  either  Conventions  (also  called  Protocols),  which  are  legally  binding 
international  treaties  that  may  be  ratified  by  member  states,  or  Recommendations,  which 
serve as non-binding guidelines.  
  The  ILO  Governing  Body  has  identified  eight  “fundamental”  Conventions.  The 
conventions are as follows:  
  Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, 1948 (No. 
87)  
  Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949 (No. 98)  
  Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29) (and its 2014 Protocol)  
  Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, 1957 (No. 105)  
  Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138)  Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 
1999 (No. 182)  
  Equal Remuneration Convention, 1951 (No. 100)  
  Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111).  
Project  owners  need  to  ensure  that  the  requirements  of  the  ILO  Conventions  are  followed 
throughout the project lifecycle, integrated into their management systems, and appropriately 
monitored and reported on to stakeholders. 
14 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
The  SDGs  are  17  goals,  sub-divided  into  a  total  of  169  targets,  which  describe  minimum 
objectives for sustainability to be implemented by the international community by 2030. The 
SDGs were adopted by the United Nations in September 2015 as a follow-up framework for 
the  previous  Millennium  Development  Goals.  Achieving  the  SDGs  is  expected  to  require 
contributions by all sectors and stakeholders; hence the Project’s activities should be aligned 
with the provisions it contains as well 
15 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environmental and Social Baseline  
The  indicators  for  the  environmental  and  socio-economic  baselines  for  Cambodia  are 
presented in the table 4.  The latest available values of each of the indicators and the previous 
available  values  are  presented  to  check  the  latest  trend  of  each  of  those  indicators  in  the 
project area using the data from the World Bank data portal5. 
The  indicators  for  environmental  baselines  are  categorized  as  ‘energy/climate’,  ‘land’,  and 
‘biodiversity.’  Data  show  that  the  use  of  fossil  fuels  has  increased,  and  the  production  of 
renewable electricity has sharply decreased (by 32 percent from 2014 to 2015). This has led 
to an increase in emission of carbon dioxide and total greenhouse gases. The forest area has 
slightly  decreased  recently,  the  agricultural  land  and  total  arable  land  is  stable  but  the 
fertilizer  consumption  for  agriculture  has  increased.  The  threatened  species  of  plants  and 
animals are accessed only in 2018 and hence comparison is not possible. 
The  indicators  for  socio  economic  baselines  are  categorized  as  ‘economy’,  ‘agriculture’, 
‘development’, ‘education’, and ‘labour force.’ The total population shows an increasing trend. 
Net foreign direct investment has decreased recently, and GDP per capita and other economic 
indicators are increasing. Percentage of employment in agriculture for both male and female 
has  decreased  but  value  addition  from  agriculture,  forestry  and  fisheries  combined  shows 
increasing trend. Similarly, food and livestock production indices and total cereal production 
shows increasing trend. Water stress level6 is constant while population with electricity access 
and  women’s  participation  in  decision  making7  has  increased.  Adult  literacy  rate  seems 
increasing and government expenditure on education also seems significant rise lately. But 
the youth and total unemployment percent also shows rising trend. 
Table 4: Baseline 
Indicator (unit) 
Last value 
Year 
Previous data 
Year 
Evolution 
 (%) 
Environmental baselines 
Energy/climate 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions (kt) 
16180  2019  14580 
2018  9.89 
Total greenhouse gas emission (MtCO2e) 
71.77  2019  70.41 
2018  1.89 
Renewable  electricity  output  (%  total  electricity 
output) 
46.42  2015 
2014 
-31.71 
61.14 
Fossil fuel energy consumption (% of total) 
30.6  2014  28.6 
2013  6.54 
Land 
Arable Land (hectares) 
391000  2018  391000 
2017  0.00 
Forest area (% of land area) 
45.7  2020  46.6 
2019 
-1.97 
5 https://data.worldbank.org/country/cambodia  
6 freshwater withdrawal as a proportion of available freshwater resources. 
7 women participating in three decisions; own health care, major household purchases and visiting family  
16 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Indicator (unit) 
Last value 
Year 
Previous data 
Year 
Evolution 
 (%) 
Agricultural land (% of land area) 
31.5  2018  31.5 
2017  0.00 
Fertilizer  consumption  (kg  per  hectare  of  arable 
land) 
34.3 
2018 
2017 
11.08 
30.5 
Biodiversity 
Bird species threatened 
Fish species threatened 
Mammal species threatened 
Plant species (higher) threatened 
Socio-economic baselines 
Population, total 
Economy 
31 
48 
39 
37 
2018 
No data 
2018 
No data 
2018 
No data 
2018 
No data 
16946446 
2021 
16718971 
2020 
1.34 
GDP per capita (current USD) 
1591 
2021 
1547.5 
2020 
2.73 
External balance on G&S (current USD) 
-811252846 
2021 
-367232323 
2020 
54.73 
Foreign direct investment, net (BoP current USD) 
3,390,000,000  2021 
2020 
-3.24 
-
-3,500,000,000 
Domestic credit to private sector (% of GDP) 
139.6 
2020 
114.2 
2019 
18.19 
Agriculture 
Agriculture, forestry and fishing, value added (% of 
GDP) 
22.8 
2021 
2020 
0.44 
22.7 
Employment 
employment – ILO) 
in  agriculture, 
(%  of 
female 
37 
2019 
38 
34 
2018 
-2.70 
Employment 
employment – ILO) 
in  agriculture, 
(%  of  male 
33 
2019 
2018 
-3.03 
Food production index (2004-2006 = 100) 
120.2 
2019 
116.6 
2018 
3.00 
Livestock production index (2004-2006 = 100) 
99.4 
2019 
90.2 
2018 
9.26 
Cereal production (metric tons) 
11251546 
2018 
11100000 
2017 
1.35 
Development 
Poverty gap at 5.50USD a day (2011 PPP) (%) 
No data 
No data 
Level of water stress* 
1.04 
2018 
1.04 
2017 
0.00 
Access to electricity (% of population) 
86.4 
2020 
84 
2019 
2.78 
17 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Indicator (unit) 
Last value 
Year 
Previous data 
Year 
Evolution 
 (%) 
Women participating in three decisions* 
86.3 
2014 
85.6 
2010 
0.81 
Education 
Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and 
above) 
81 
2015 
Literacy rate, adult female (% of females ages 15 
and above) 
75 
2015 
Government  expenditure  on  education  (%  of  gov 
expenditure) 
Labour force 
11.8 
2019 
2018 
20.34 
Unemployment (% of total labour force) (modelled 
ILO est.) 
0.6 
2021 
Unemployment youth (% of total labour force ages 
15- 24) (ILO) 
1.8 
2021 
2020 
55.56 
Labour force participation rate (% of total ages 15-
64) (ILO) 
84.9 
2019 
Labour  force  participation  rate  for  ages  15-24, 
female (%) (ILO) 
78 
72 
9.4 
2014 
3.70 
2014 
4.00 
0.3 
0.8 
2020 
50.00 
84.9 
63 
2018 
0.00 
65 
2021 
2020 
3.08 
18 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
3. Potential impacts  
Environmental and social Impacts 
As per the SECAP screening tool, the Environmental and Social risk category of the project is 
assessed as moderate. The screening process highlighted the following potential social and 
environmental risks:  
Biodiversity 
The  project  primarily  supports  existing  agricultural  areas,  already  under  production  status 
and  managed  by  members  of  formal  and/or  informal  producers’  organisations.  The  project 
targeting strategy  will systematically exclude interventions and activities involving habitats 
that  are  legally  protected,  officially  proposed  for  protection,  or  recognized  as  protected  by 
traditional  local  communities  and/or  authoritative  sources  (e.g.  wetlands,  National  Park, 
Nature Conservancy, Indigenous Community Conserved Area, ICCA, etc.). The monocropping 
and use of chemical inputs and hormones may impact on the local biodiversity. The project 
will  promote  the  inter/mix  cropping  practices  and  support  to  regulate  the  use  of  chemical 
inputs and encourage to use bio inputs. 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention 
The project is likely to involve inputs of fertilizers and other modifying agents, however the 
related risks are expected to be minor and dispersed. The project will involve inputs suppliers 
and  producers’  organisations  to  promote  safe  and  efficient  use  of  fertilisers  and  modifying 
agents.  Good  Agricultural  Practices  (GAP)  will  be  promoted  for  vegetable  production  in 
particular.  
The  project  is  likely  to  involve  or  lead  to  procurement,  supply  and/or  result  in  the  use  of 
pesticides on  crops, livestock, aquaculture  or forestry. The project  will not directly procure 
pesticides, but the producers are likely to purchase and use pesticides such as fungicides in 
vegetable  production.  The  project  will  engage  with  agrochemical  suppliers  and  producers’ 
organisations to regulate use of use of pesticides and encourage producers in following GAP 
guidelines.  
Given  the  nationwide  nature  of  the  project  target  area,  it  is  unsure  whether  the  project 
interventions could be located in an area which is being, or has been, polluted by an external 
source  (e.g.  a  mine,  smelter,  industry).  This  risk  will  be  included  in  the  ESCMP  and  areas 
polluted by an external source will be avoided / excluded from the target areas.  
The project is likely to involve interventions in the poultry value chain (production of native 
chicken). According to the Cambodia Inter-Censal Agriculture Survey in 20198 there were an 
estimated 23.6 million natural chicken and 7.0 million natural ducks. This shows that poultry 
is one of the popular agriculture businesses in Cambodia. 
Cultural heritage 
The  project  could  possibly  be  located  in  areas  that  are  considered  to  have  archaeological 
(prehistoric),  paleontological,  historical,  cultural,  artistic,  and  religious  values  or  contains 
features  considered  as  critical  cultural  heritage.  The  Cultural  Heritage  Management  Plan 
(CHMP) has been developed to avoid the negative impacts on cultural heritage.  
Indigenous people  
Depending  on  the  selected  target  provinces,  the  project  could  be  sited  in  areas  where 
indigenous  peoples  are  present  (including  the  project  area  of  influence).  Stakeholders’ 
consultations and FPIC process will be adopted at an early stage of project interventions. The 
8 http://nis.gov.kh/nis/Agriculture/CIAS2019/CIAS%202019%20report_FINAL_EN.pdf 
19 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
project  will  not  affect  indigenous  peoples’  rights,  lands,  natural  resources,  territories, 
livelihoods, knowledge, social fabric, traditions, governance systems, and culture or heritage 
(tangible and intangible) either directly or indirectly.To maximize the benefit to IPs and avoid 
potential  impacts,  an  IP’s  plan  and  Free,  Prior  and  Informed  Consent  (FPIC)  has  been 
prepared.  
Working conditions 
Through  its  interventions  under  component  2,  the  project  will  support  the  emergence  of 
entrepreneurs  in  the  agro  processing  industry  sector.  This  may  include  operations  where 
producers and other agricultural workers are typically exposed to significant occupational and 
safety risks, such as shelling cashew nuts, or peeling mangoes. These potential risks will be 
further screened during the detailed design.  
In  any  case,  the  project  will  ensure  that  the  private  partners  involved  in  the  project 
implementation will comply with national labour laws and international commitments in terms 
of workers’ safety, gender inequalities, discriminations, forced labour, working children, and 
other indecent working conditions. 
Overall  environmental  impact:  Increase  in  financial  access  and  technical  support  to  the 
producer organization and agriculture cooperatives increases their capacity for environment 
friendly  agricultural  practices.  The  Project  supported  processing,  store  and  market 
infrastructures will reduce and properly manage waste. Some of the negative impacts include 
i) soil quality, local biodiversity loss, and threat of disease outburst through monocropping, 
ii) use of chemical fertilizer and pesticides impacts on the local biodiversity, human/livestock 
and  soil  health,  pollute  water  resources,  iii)  possibility  of  increase  in  use  of  hybrid  seeds 
replacing traditionally used organic seed, iv) increase pressure in water resources. The Project 
will  motivate  farmers  for  intercropping  in  casava,  cashew  nuts  and  fruit  farming  with  the 
suitable species. The use of chemical inputs will be regulated and farmers will be encouraged 
to produce and use the bio-inputs. Water efficient technologies will be supported to wise and 
effective use of water to reduce pressure on water sources.  
Climate impacts  
As  per  the  SECAP  screening  tool,  the  Climate  risk  category  of  the  project  is  assessed  as 
substantial.  The  screening  process  followed  the  steps  below  and  highlighted  the  following 
potential climate risks:  
Step 1: Hazard identification 
The ThinkHazard report indicates that the expected hazards in the project intervention area 
are assessed as “High” for river flood 
,  coastal  flood,  urban  flood,  landslide,  cyclone, 
extreme  heat  and  wildfires.  Water  scarcity  (agricultural  droughts  and/or  dry  spells)  is 
assessed as Low9.  
Future climate scenarios for the period 2040-2059 indicate10 that under the RCP 8.5 climate 
models: 
 
the expected average temperature change is higher than 1 degree Celsius compared 
to the baseline mean temperature 
  average rainfall change is less than 10% compared to the baseline average rainfall 
  Climate variability and frequency and intensity of extreme events are expected to be 
larger than the baseline  
  The project is not expected to be a significant emitter of greenhouse gases 
9 ThinkHazard report : “there is a 1% chance drought will occur in the coming 10 years” 
10 Future projections on climate variability are available on the World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP 
20 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Step 2: Exposure Assessment 
The project’s nationwide target area does not allow for a detailed downscaled assessment of 
the  level  of  exposure.  Cambodia’s  geography  features  exposed  areas  to  weather-related 
natural hazards, including: Low-lying areas (valleys, coastal zones, and small islands), Very 
warm areas (subtropical), Tropical areas (rainforests) and river banks. 
The  project  targets  agricultural  systems,  ecosystems  or  livelihoods  that  are  exposed  to 
weather-related  hazards.  Crop  production  is  frequently  affected  by  rainfall  variability, 
prolonged  droughts,  changes  in  temperature  or  pests  and  diseases.  Livestock  productivity 
(only  native  poultry  applies  for  ASPIRE-AT  interventions  in  particular)  is  not  significantly 
affected by climate events (rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature 
or diseases). ASPIRE has introduced biosafety measures and production techniques that have 
proven to reduce native chicken mortality. This chicken raising model has received  positive 
reviews and will be further disseminated under ASPIRE-AT.  
The agricultural value chain (production, storage, processing and marketing) are also exposed 
to climate related hazards and rural infrastructure are also likely to be affected by flooding, 
landslides, changes in temperatures, and extreme winds. 
The  spatial  distribution  of  exposure  to  various  climate  hazards  as  presented  in  the 
ThinkHazard tool is presented in the Climate Risk Analysis report in detail. 
Step 3: Sensitivity Assessment 
The human development11 score is above 5 (score of 6.3) and the Multidimensional Poverty 
Index is above 5 (score of 8.3); both aspects trigger a YES response in the screening tool. 
The sensitivity index is of 2.9, as per the SECAP screening tool. 
Agriculture,  forestry,  fisheries  and  water  resources  which  are  climate-sensitive  sectors  are 
the foundation of Cambodian economic growth. Cambodia’s high dependence on those sectors 
which support a majority of livelihood activities makes it highly susceptible to climate change 
and related climate hazards (World Bank, 2022). 12 
Other  factors  that  make  Cambodia  highly  sensitive  to  climate  change  are  its  population 
distribution  (more  than  80  percent  living  in  rural  areas),  country’s  dependency  on  climate 
sensitive  sectors,  poverty,  inequality,  undernourishment,  lack  of  irrigation  and  flood 
controlling infrastructures, highly concentrated rainfall during one (monsoon) season and the 
large  water  basin  coverage  of  Tonle  Sap  Lake  whose  water  level  varies  greatly.  A  detail 
description of each of these factors is presented in the Climate Risk Analysis report. 
Step 4: Adaptive capacity and climate resilience 
Cambodia  still  lacks  disaster  coping  capacity  (DDR  score  of  6.8  as  per  the  INFORM)  and 
climate and weather information services are not effectively being delivered to farmers, rural 
dwellers, and end users. However, the country has an early action plan (preparedness and 
emergency  response)  to  mitigate  the  impacts  of  weather-related  hazards  once  the  shock 
occurs.  A  number  of  strategies  and  institutional  mechanisms  exist  to  help  increase  the 
adaptive capacity of the kingdom and its population such as a National Committee for Disaster 
Management (NCDM) “to lead the disaster management in the kingdom of Cambodia”, a real 
time  weather  update  or  even  early  warning  systems  such  as  EWS  129413  which  alerts  the 
registered users on extreme climate events that are predicted to occur. 
11 HDI 2019 = 0.594  (https://hdr.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/KHM) 
12 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/cambodia  
13 http://ews1294.com/en/home/  
21 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
To  some  extent,  the  government  or  other  institutions  (including  projects  and  CSO/NGOs) 
support the target population/communities with the necessary social and economic resources 
to  prepare  for  or  respond  to  climate-related  events.  The  target  community  carrying  out 
agricultural adaptation, through diversified farming systems and multiple sources of income, 
including off-farm wage labour and remittance. Nevertheless, the target population still lacks 
the  economic  means  or  support  to  adjust  or  adapt  their  activities  in  response  to  weather 
related shocks.  
Farmers still face difficulties in accessing adequate financial credit and loans that are tailored 
to their needs. Requirements for collaterals for loans remain a key constraint for smallholder 
farmers to access financial services. Agricultural insurance remains limited to very few areas, 
focusing  mainly  on  weather-index  based  insurance  scheme  for  paddy  rice.  Rural 
infrastructures (access roads, irrigation, electricity) have improved over the last decades but 
in many areas these infrastructures are not effectively delivering services to farmers and rural 
dwellers. The adaptive capacity score (as returned by the SECAP screening tool) is of 3.8.  
Proposed  climate  risk  classification:  As  per  the  IFAD  screening  tool,  the  climate  risk 
classification is assessed as “substantial”. 
Climate Change Mitigation  
The project will promote the good agricultural practices as far as possible. The support will be 
made for the Renewable Energy Technologies for the production and processing facilities.  The 
project will follow zero forest encroachment and deforestation strategy with no any impact on 
carbon rich ecosystem.  
Climate change adaptation  
The  improved  accessibility  to  the  financial  services  and  technical  assistance  will  improve 
farmers  climate  change  adaptation  capacity.  The  new  infrastructure  to  store,  process  and 
market  will  reduce  the  threat  of  climate  risks.  Expansion  and  intensification  of  agriculture 
production  with  extensive  marketing  support  will  maximize  farmer’s  income.  However,  the 
negative impacts of variation in timing and pattern of precipitation, increase in temperature, 
increasing trend of climate hazard, and possibility to increase pest and diseases cannot be 
entirely  avoided.  The  Project  will  support  on  crop  selection  and  to  prepare/update  location 
specific crop seasonal calendar to minimize the impact of variation in rainfall pattern.  
The in-depth climate risk analysis has assessed project activity level impacts and mitigation 
measures. The table 5 presents overall environmental, climate and social impacts.    
22 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Table 5: Potential impacts 
Component/subcomponents  
Potential environmental impact  
Potential climate impact  
Potential social impact  
Positive 
(Opportunities) 
Negative (Threat) 
Positive 
(Opportunities) 
Negative 
(Threat) 
Positive 
(Opportunities) 
Negative (Threat) 
Component 1: Productive and Resilient Assets for Producer Organizations   
1.1: 
Sub-component 
in  productive 
Investment 
and  resilient  assets  of  POs 
and smallholders 
Reduce  waste  due 
proper 
to 
collection, 
processing 
and 
packaging  facilities  
Land degradation and 
biodiversity  loss  due 
to  monocropping  and 
farming  
commercial 
green 
Reduce 
house 
gas 
emission  through 
promotion 
of 
RETs 
Intensive 
agriculture 
leading 
to 
increase GHGs 
emissions  
Improve 
understanding  on 
soil 
health 
improvement  and 
good  agricultural 
practices  
Increase 
water 
availability for local 
biodiversity 
Soil 
water 
and 
contamination  due  to 
increase 
of 
chemicals  
use 
Additional 
pressure 
on  natural  resources, 
mostly  on  water  and 
area  
forest 
Enhance  climate 
resilience 
capacity 
smallholders  
of 
Increase 
investment 
climate-friendly 
agricultural 
solutions 
in 
1.2: 
Sub-component 
market 
Enabling 
infrastructure  for  Producer 
Organizations 
 Reduce  dust  and 
air pollution  
Increase capacity 
construct 
to 
climate 
proof 
infrastructures  
GHGs 
emission  due 
to 
infrastructures  
Environmental 
if  waste 
pollution 
generated  during  the 
construction  and  use 
of the infrastructure is 
not managed properly 
Demand  timber  thus 
may create additional 
Increase 
income 
through  agriculture 
chains  
value 
Improve 
security 
nutrition 
food 
and 
Potential  of  exclusion  of 
households, 
pro-poor 
ethnic  minority,  youth, 
people  with  disability, 
women  due  to  lack  of 
collateral 
legal 
or 
documentations. 
Creation 
of 
opportunities  
job 
More  benefit  to  well  off 
and  medium  households 
the 
Strengthen 
capacitates  of  PO 
ACs 
and 
Increase  access  on 
production, 
processing 
and 
marketing  facilities  
Open  new  value 
addition  options  in 
value 
agricultural 
chains 
Explore 
for 
opportunities 
income  generation  
Reduce 
harvesting 
post 
losses  
time 
Reduce 
transportation. 
for 
to 
Additional  pressure 
the 
smallholders 
production 
is  not  as 
expected  and  couldn't 
pay back the loan 
if 
Inadvertent 
of 
discrimination 
vulnerable, 
indigenous, 
women  and  youth  led 
organizations 
23 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Component/subcomponents  
Potential environmental impact  
Potential climate impact  
Potential social impact  
Positive 
(Opportunities) 
Negative (Threat) 
Positive 
(Opportunities) 
Negative 
(Threat) 
Positive 
(Opportunities) 
Negative (Threat) 
pressure 
to 
forest  
Accelerate  erosion  if 
site 
selection  and 
design  are  done  not 
adequately  
More 
water 
pressure 
to 
resources 
Smallholders  will 
timely  get  market 
and  good  price  
Value  addition  due 
to  processing  and 
labelling 
Component 2: Business Partnership and Market Access  
2.1 
Sub-Component 
Strengthening 
private 
investment  for  agricultural 
market 
trade 
development  
and 
Improve  skill  on 
good  agricultural 
practices  
Soil 
quality 
degradation  due  to 
business-oriented 
farming  
Sub-Component 
2.2 
Strengthening  the  enabling 
environment for competitive 
agricultural  value  chains 
and trade  
Regulate  use  of 
chemical inputs  
Additional pressure to 
resources 
natural 
to 
(forest,  water) 
construct new houses  
Component 3: Aggregating Farmers and integrate them into Value Chains  
Expand  marketing 
network  exploring 
additional 
opportunities 
for 
income  generation 
Exclusion  of  propoor, 
vulnerable 
and 
marginalized 
HHs/individuals 
support/loan 
to  get 
Enhance 
POs 
capacity  on  agri-
business sector   
GHGs 
emission  due 
to 
infrastructure 
constructions  
Improve health due 
to  limited  chemical 
use  
Increase  value  of 
the product  
Lack of access on services 
to  pro-poor,  vulnerable 
marginalized 
and 
HHs/individuals 
Sub-Component 
3.1 
Structure  and  Capacity  of 
Producer Organizations  
Improve  capacity 
on good agriculture 
practices  
Improve 
awareness 
on 
Improve 
understanding  of 
change 
climate 
issues 
related 
impacts 
and 
mitigation among 
Enhance  resilience 
and 
to 
climate 
shocks  
economic 
Improve  attitudes 
the 
towards 
Inadequate  participation 
from  Indigenous  People, 
women, 
and 
vulnerable households  
youth 
24 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Component/subcomponents  
Potential environmental impact  
Potential climate impact  
Potential social impact  
Positive 
(Opportunities) 
product 
leading 
the 
agriculture  
quality 
towards 
sustainable 
Improve 
knowledge 
access 
environment 
friendly value chain 
and 
on 
Improve 
environmental 
governance  
Negative (Threat) 
Positive 
(Opportunities) 
Negative 
(Threat) 
Positive 
(Opportunities) 
Negative (Threat) 
beneficiaries. 
Contribution 
tackle 
risk impacts    
to 
climate 
Systematic 
dissemination  of 
and 
tools 
of 
techniques 
climate 
smart 
agriculture 
leading to reduce 
GHGs emission  
Introduction of hybrid 
varieties  
adaptation 
climate 
and 
change 
Strengthen 
women’s  voice  and 
leadership  
Improve 
governance 
inclusion  
and 
Access on improved 
agriculture 
techniques   
Sub-component 
Technical 
Centers of Excellence  
Advice 
3.2 
and 
25 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
4.  ESCMF Procedures  
Step 1 
Eligibility Screening 
Environmental Screening 
Social Screening 
Indigenous Screening 
Category A 
Category B 
Category C 
Find an alternative location 
and/or design and start from 
step 1 
Prepare a subproject level 
ESCMP 
Step:2 
Develop Detail proposal including 
ESCMP/suggestive measures 
identified during screening 
Step:3 
Consultation  
Objective of the 
meeting:  
to share the detail 
design and ensure all 
the 
adaptation/mitigation 
measures are 
incorporated 
Stakeholder involvement: 
Project management team, as 
required, at national and provincial 
levels, technical design team, local 
authorities (district, commune and 
village levels) and villagers 
including IPs who will be impacted 
by the subproject. 
Inputs used, places and duration: 
Subproject design presented (technical 
drawing design), flip charts and markers, 
walls or white board, meeting will be in 
the village compound, pagoda, school, 
commune office and big trees nearby and 
time (suitable for community).  Meeting 
minutes preparation 
Minor Suggestions 
Remarkable impacts 
identified 
Step:4 
Finalize Proposal incorporating 
suggestions from consultation and 
submit to IFAD and related govt 
authorities for review and 
suggestions. Incorporate suggestions 
Prepare safeguard report  
26 
Step:5 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Figure 2 ESCMF procedures 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
The project will fully comply with the national environmental laws and regulations. The steps 
for the screening, assessment and management of environmental and social risks related to 
subprojects outlined above were developed in alignment with national regulations while taking 
into  consideration  SECAP  requirements  which  are  considered  to  be  more  stringent.  The 
present  ESMCF,  screening  process  and  ESCMPs  developed  during  implementation  are 
considered  to  be  equivalent  to  national  EIA  regulations  and  meet  the  requirements  for 
Environmental Permits application to the Department of Environmental Protection of GoKC. 
The necessary environmental permits will be obtained during implementation as required by 
national law. 
All  proposed  sub-projects  will  undergo  further  review  and  consideration,  particularly  in 
relation  to  potential  environmental  and  social  impacts  and  mitigation  measures.  The 
preliminary impact assessment of the planned subprojects, presented in SECAP review note 
and  climate  risk  analysis  report,  is  moderate.  The  infrastructure  support  will  be  limited  to 
small access roads, loading areas, collection and handling facilities, multi-purpose buildings 
for  the  producer  organization,  and  some  lab/inspection  office/reference  centre/research 
stations. Considering the type of planned project intervention, the procedure for identifying 
and  assessing  safeguard  impacts  of  project  activities  and  assessing  impact  mitigation 
measures is outlined below. 
Table 6 Screening steps 
Step 
One 
Description 
All the subprojects will be screen using annex III and IPs screening annex VIII questions. This will 
help  to  overall  assess  subproject  category  as  annex  IV.  The  project  activities  nature  is  mostly 
static, except  limited small access roads. Hence, subprojects categorized as ‘A’ with substantial 
social and environmental risk and contravene GoKC obligations under its international agreements 
will  be  avoided.  Those  will  be  recommended  to  revise  the  location,  specification  and  design. 
Category  B  subproject,  if  needed,  will  be  further  assessed  with  checklist  listed  in  annex  V. 
Suggestion will be made to prepare a subproject specific ESCMP as outlined in ESCMP chapter of 
this ESCMP. The category C subproject will be directed to detail proposal development. 
Two 
Detail subproject proposal/design addressing suggestions from step one.  
Three 
Four 
The detail design will be presented among the targeted beneficiaries, related stakeholders in the 
presence of concerned government and project staffs. The  representations from women, youth, 
IPs, PwD, vulnerable households have to be invited in these discussions. There should be further 
discussion about the potential social, climate and environmental impacts from proposed project. 
If  the  consultation  meeting  concludes  with  minor  suggestion,  project  team  will  finalize  the 
subproject design addressing suggestions. If there raises some remarkable concern and identify 
need  of  further  assessment, project  team  will prepare  a  safeguard  report  outlined  in  annex VI. 
Considering  the  planned  project  intervention  type,  project  will  prepare  a  small  but  concise 
safeguard report.  The final draft subproject design together with process documents has to be 
shared with IFAD and concerned authorities for suggestions. 
Five 
Finalize the design incorporating suggestions and start implementation and monitoring.  
Following are the provisions for subcomponent 1.1 and 2.1 
Sub 
component 
1.1 
Description 
ARDB will conduct screening and due diligence of loan applications by checking and, where 
necessary, verifying information submitted on the loan application form. Screening criteria will 
include (1) economic and financial viability of the investment; (2) eligibility of the investment 
27 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
based  on  project  criteria;  (3)  eligibility  of  the  borrower  based  on  project  criteria;  and  (4) 
compliance  with  environmental  and  social  safeguards.  The  checklist  will  be  updated  to  meet 
requirement, if needed, after the formal contract with bank. 
2.2 
SME will conduct screening and due diligence of loan applications by checking and, where 
necessary,  verifying  information  submitted  on  the  loan  application  form  following  same 
screening criteria as 1.1. The checklist will be updated to meet requirement, if needed, after the 
formal contract with bank. 
5.  Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plan 
The  ESCMP  presents  potential  environmental,  climate  and  social  impacts  and  their 
management approaches. The plan reflects identified environmental, social and climate risk 
and opportunities, extent of risk, mitigation or adaptation measures, roles and responsibilities 
to implement suggestive measures, monitoring indicators. The risks and mitigation measures 
cannot be ascertained in more depth at this stage because the exact subprojects are yet to 
be  determined.    An  overall  ESCMP  is  presented  in  annex  I  based  on  the  project  planned 
activities.    The  ESCMP  includes  a  stakeholder  engagement  approach  that  details  how 
stakeholders (PMU, finance institutions, communities, PO, and AC) will be consulted and their 
participation ensured throughout the project. Among its guiding principles, the Program will 
make efforts to mitigate all impacts affecting the equal participation and benefit sharing of 
vulnerable communities, including indigenous peoples.  
The specific subprojects require ESCMP when the screening questions identified social, climate 
and/or environmental impacts by the project activities and those need adequate mitigation 
or adaptation measures. The screening checklist annexed in III and VIII will be assessed once 
the  subproject’s  location,  size,  beneficiaries  are  identified.  Mitigation  and  management 
measures need to be developed and implemented for each impact and risk identified in the 
screening assessment. These measures aim to avoid or reduce identified adverse impacts. If 
the impact is significant, alternative subproject designs and/or locations should be considered 
to avoid potential impacts. Mitigation and management measures need to meet (and ideally 
exceed) national regulations and obligations under international law but also the requirements 
specified in IFAD and EIB standards. 
The content of the ESCMP should address the following sections:  
(1) Mitigation/Adaption: Identifies measures and actions in accordance with the mitigation 
hierarchy  that  avoid,  or  if  avoidance  not  possible,  reduce  potentially  adverse  social  and 
environmental  impacts  to  acceptable  levels.  Specifically,  the  ESCMP:  (a)  identifies  and 
summarizes all anticipated adverse social and environmental impacts; (b) describes – with 
technical details – each mitigation measure, including the type of impact to which it relates 
and  the  conditions  under  which  it  is  required  (e.g.,  continuously  or  in  the  event  of 
contingencies), together with designs, equipment descriptions, and operating procedures, as 
appropriate; (c) estimates any potential social and environmental impacts of these measures 
and any residual impacts following mitigation; and (d) takes into account, and is consistent 
with, other required mitigation plans (e.g. for displacement, indigenous peoples).  
(2) Monitoring: Identifies monitoring objectives and specifies the type of monitoring, with 
linkages  to  the  impacts  assessed  in  the  environmental  and  social  assessment  and  the 
mitigation  measures  described  in  the  ESCMP.  Specifically,  the  monitoring  section  of  the 
ESCMP  provides  (a)  a  specific  description,  and  technical  details,  of  monitoring  measures, 
including the parameters to be measured, methods to be used, sampling locations, frequency 
of measurements, detection limits (where appropriate), and definition of thresholds that will 
signal  the  need  for  corrective  actions;  and  (b)  monitoring  and  reporting  procedures  to  (i) 
28 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
ensure early detection of conditions that necessitate particular mitigation measures, and (ii) 
furnish information on the progress and results of mitigation.  
(3) Capacity development and training: To support timely and effective implementation 
of social and environmental project components and mitigation measures, the ESCMP draws 
on  the  environmental  and  social  assessment  of  the  existence,  role,  and  capability  of 
responsible  parties  on  site  or  at  the  agency  and  ministry  level.  Specifically,  the  ESCMP 
provides a description of institutional arrangements, identifying which party is responsible for 
carrying  out  the  mitigation  and  monitoring  measures  (e.g.  for  operation,  supervision, 
enforcement, monitoring of implementation, remedial action, financing, reporting, and staff 
training). Where support for strengthening social and environmental management capability 
is identified, ESCMP recommends the establishment or expansion of the parties responsible, 
the  training  of  staff  and  any  additional  measures  that  may  be  necessary  to  support 
implementation of mitigation measures and any other recommendations of the environmental 
and social assessment. 
(4) Stakeholder Engagement: Summarizes and links to project Stakeholder Engagement 
Plan  or  outlines  plan  to  engage  in  meaningful,  effective  and  informed  consultations  with 
affected stakeholders. Includes information on (a) means used to inform and involve affected 
people  in  the  assessment  process;  and  (b)  summary  of  stakeholder  engagement  plan  for 
meaningful, effective consultations during project implementation, including identification of 
milestones  for  consultations,  information  disclosure,  and  periodic  reporting  on  progress  on 
project  implementation.  Require  documentation  of  consultations  (summaries  including 
presentations, key points raised and responses provided, participation lists).  
(5) Grievance redress mechanism: Describes effective processes for receiving and 
addressing stakeholder concerns and grievances regarding the project’s social and 
environmental performance.  Describe mechanisms to provide stakeholders and potential 
affected communities avenues to provide feedback or grievances, and receive responses, 
with regard to the implementation of specific activities, policies, or regulations. 
(6) Implementation action plan (schedule and cost estimates): For all four above aspects 
(mitigation,  monitoring,  capacity  development,  and  stakeholder  engagement),  ESCMP 
provides (a) an implementation schedule for measures that must be carried out as part of the 
project, showing phasing and coordination with overall project implementation plans; and (b) 
the capital and recurrent cost estimates and sources of funds for implementing the ESCMP. 
These figures are also integrated into the total project cost tables. Each of the measures and 
actions to be implemented will be clearly specified and the costs of so doing will be integrated 
into the project's overall planning, design, budget, and implementation.  
29 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
6. Institutional arrangements and capacity building  
Institutional arrangements and roles and responsibility 
Figure 3 Institutional setup 
The  Project  Executing  Agency  will  be  MAFF  which  will  assign  project  management 
responsibilities to the existing ASPIRE Secretariat, thus making use of established capacity, 
ensuring continuity and facilitating implementation of the project readiness action plan.  
ASPIRE AT Secretariat responsibilities will include (1) project planning and reporting; (2) 
project  financial  management  and  procurement;  (3)  monitoring  and  evaluation;  (4)  social, 
environment and climate change risk management; (5) guide implementation of the Gender 
Transformative  Approach;  and  (5)  mainstream  adoption  of  digital  technology  in  all 
components. 
MAFF-GDA will be responsible for technical guidance of the project in key areas including (1) 
formation and capacity building of ACs and UACs in compliance with the Law on Agriculture 
Cooperatives;  (2)  registration  of  UACs;  (3)  selection,  design  and  implementation  of  public 
service  investments  under  Component  2.2;  (4)  development  and  approval  of  technical 
protocols for crop production; (5) development of relevant policy and regulation, particularly 
to expand trade and market access in target value chains; (6) coordination of the project ICT 
strategy; and (7) management of Centres of Excellence established / upgraded under Sub-
Component 3.2. 
Agriculture and Rural Development Bank will finance investments in Sub-Component 1.1 
through (1) management of project funds to finance loans and grants to eligible farmers and 
graduated  POs;  (2)  screening  of  investment  proposals;  (3)  financing  loans  and  grants  to 
eligible farmers and graduated POs; (4) reporting to ASPIRE Secretariat.  
SME  Bank  will  finance  investments  in  Sub-Component  2.1  through  (1)  management  of 
project funds to finance loans and credit guarantees in partnership with CGCC; (2) screening 
30 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
of  investment  proposals;  (3)  financing  of  loans  backed  by  credit  guarantees  in  partnership 
with CGCC; and (4) reporting to ASPIRE Secretariat. 
Provincial  Departments  of  Agriculture,  Forestry  and  Fisheries  (PDAFF)  will  (1) 
conduct mapping of pro-poor value chains and producer organisations; (2) conduct formation 
and  registration  of  Agriculture  Cooperatives;  (3)  manage  and  coordinate  networks  of  Lead 
Farmers including identifying training needs; (4) cooperate with regional service providers for 
business  development  services  to  graduated  POs;  (5)  project  planning,  monitoring  and 
reporting at Provincial level.  
Graduated POs (ACs, UACs and other types of formal producer organisation) will (1) ensure 
compliance  with  good  governance  and  inclusivity  criteria;  (2)  prepare  business  plans;  (3) 
develop partnerships with agri-businesses; (4) prepare applications for investment financing 
under Component 1; (5) counter-sign and monitor implementation of farmer loan and grant 
agreements; (6) directly implement PO loan and grant agreements; (7) conduct community 
procurement  to  identify  preferred  suppliers  for  farmer  and  PO  investments;  (8)  monitor 
implementation  of  enabling  infrastructure  investments;  (9)  operate  enterprises  and  cash-
generating activities; (10) operate and maintain enabling infrastructure; and (11) report on 
activities, outputs and outcomes via the project MIS. 
AC  Business  Development  Service  Providers  will  be  recruited  by  the  project  based  on 
proven track record and expertise in working with POs, in specific value chains and specific 
geographic areas. It is envisages that between 5 and 10 service providers will be recruited 
according to TORs to be included in the PIM, with 2 – 4 service providers recruited in Year 1 
and the remainder in Year 2. The roles of these service providers will include (1) strengthening 
governance and inclusiveness of the POs, with particular regard to promoting women’s voice 
and leadership roles; (2) strengthening administrative and financial management capacity of 
the POs; (3) facilitating partnerships with between POs and agri-businesses; (4) supporting 
preparation  of  PO  Business  Plans  through  a  participatory  process  with  PO  members  and  in 
consultation with private sector partners; (5) supporting preparation of investment proposals 
for  Component  1  financing;  and  (6)  an  ongoing  coaching  and  backstopping  role  during 
implementation of the Business Plan. 
Capacity Building 
Specialists with expertise in social and environmental safeguards will be engaged to support 
for screening and the completion of the ESCMP. The expert will support the project staff on 
safeguards  responsibilities  and  approaches.  During  project  implementation,  the  IFAD  will 
provide  advice  to  project  team  members  as  needed  to  support  the  implementation  of  this 
ESCMF, and preparation of the ESCMP and pursuant measures. 
The ASPIRE AT secretariat will have the final responsibility for the integration of the screening 
recommendations  and  ESCMP  in  the  execution  of  the  project.  The  integration  will  need  to 
consider  particular  institutional  needs  within  the  implementation  framework,  including  a 
review  of  the  required  budget  allocations  for  each  measure,  as  well  as  the  authority  and 
capability of institutions at different administrative levels (e.g. local, provincial, and national), 
and their capacity to manage and monitor its implementation.  
The  approximate  budget  for  the  capacity  building  is  included  in  budget  section  (Table  27). 
ASPIRE  AT  needs  to  conducts  capacity  buildings,  including  but  not  limited  to,  for  staff  on 
ESCMF steps and process; developing site specific ESCMP and identify adaptation/mitigation 
measures;  implement,  supervise,  and  report  ESCMF  and  ESCMP;  M&E  framework 
development,  data  collection  formats  preparation,  data  collection  and  reporting  related  to 
31 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
ESCMP/ESCMP; gap assessment and necessary capacity building events to bank and service 
providers; GAPs for chemical suppliers/manufactures and POs. 
32 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
7.  Stakeholder engagement, information disclosure and grievance redress 
Stakeholder engagement  
Community and stakeholder engagement is key in successful implementation of the present 
ESCMF.  Stakeholder  engagement  should  be  conducted  throughout  the  Project  lifecycle.  In 
developing and implementing the environmental and social safeguards, communities and all 
relevant  stakeholders  should  be  consulted  to  provide  feedback  on  the  subproject  design 
proposal and endorsed mitigation and risk reduction measures.  
Stakeholders  include  groups,  institutions  and  individuals  that  will  be  directly  or  indirectly 
impacted by the project, may have interest in the project outcomes, or may have influence 
(negatively or positively) on the project. In the case of the ASPIRE AT, these include MAFF, 
IFAD, EIB, RADB, SME, relevant national governmental actors, producer organisation, MSMEs, 
cooperatives,  members  of  these  institutions.  Further  stakeholders  include  affected 
communities or civil society and other actors working in the Project areas. Importantly, the 
project  has  included  the  indigenous  peoples  plan  and  Free,  Prior,  and  Informed  Consent 
implementation plan.  
The project will also develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan during the start-up in line with 
SECAP  requirements  as  well  as  IFAD’s  guidelines  for  Project  Target  Group  Engagement, 
Feedback and Grievance Redress. 
Information disclosure  
Disclosure  of  relevant  project  information  helps  project  affected  people  and  other 
stakeholders  understand  the  risks,  impacts  and  opportunities  of  the  project.  IFAD  and  its 
implementing  partners  will  provide  the  relevant  stakeholders  with  access  to  relevant 
information,  such  as  i)  purpose,  nature,  and  scale  of  the  project,  ii)  the  duration  of  the 
proposed project activities, iii) any potential risk to and impacts on such as communities, as 
well as mitigation measures, iv) the envisaged stakeholder engagement process, and v) the 
grievance mechanism.  
All relevant documents relating to a proposed investment or subproject need to be disclosed 
as part of stakeholder engagement. Depending on the size and nature of the investment and 
the  significance  of  the  risks  and  impacts,  examples  of  such  documents  include  sub  project 
proposal, ESCMPs, IP plan, FPIC process.  
Disclosure of relevant information should be continuous throughout the Project, including the 
planning  phase  to  seek  feedback  from  the  stakeholders  on  the  safeguard’s  issues  and 
measures, disclosure of all assessment prior to and after approval and disclosure during and 
after  conclusion  of  activities  to  inform  communities  of  implementation  activities,  potential 
impacts and mitigation measures. 
Grievance redress 
The  Project  will  establish  an  accessible  and  transparent  process  for  those  affected  by  the 
Project  to  make  complaints,  report  wrongdoing,  or  seek  redress  in  compliance  with  the 
Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations, and 
IFAD’s Policy on Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and 
Abuse  (SEA)  2018  and  IFAD’s  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures 
(SECAP) 2021.  
The  project  will  establish  confidential  reporting  mechanisms  using  dedicated  accounts  on 
social media, email, and a telephone hotline for reporting complaints. Existence and details 
of  these  reporting  channels  will  be  widely  publicly  promoted  via  Project  communication 
materials and platforms and communicated  directly to POs and their members through the 
capacity building processes. 
33 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
The Project will document and establish an independent process for reviewing and handling 
complaints  received  consistent  with  government  regulations  and  IFAD  policies.  The  Project 
will, as a minimum, produce 6 monthly reports on complaints and grievance redress included 
in  their  regular  progress  report.  This  will  as  a  minimum,  include  the  number  and  types  of 
complaints  received,  progress  in  dealing  with  each  complaint  and  resulting  resolution  and 
actions taken. 
The efforts should be made from the commune level to solve the grievance in a participatory 
way. There will be four levels of grievance in the project. Anyone submitting a grievance may 
wish to raise a concern in confidence. If the complainant asks to protect identity, it should 
not be disclosed without his/her/their consent.  
The  project  will  provide  a  template  to  write  grievances  (sample  is  in  annex  VII).  In  cases 
where  applicant  does  not  have  the  writing  skills  or  are  unable  to  express  their  grievances 
verbally, the  project  should  facilitate  to  find  a common  person  to  write  on  behalf  of  them.  
The applicant will be allowed to have access to the project focal person to ensure that all the 
details have been recorded accurately enabling all parties to be treated fairly. Throughout the 
grievance redress process, the responsible committee will ensure that the concerned applicant 
is provided with copies of complaints and decisions or resolutions reached.  
Stage 1 
Community Level  
a 
There should be proper mechanism to collect grievance at the community level. 
The project should appoint a focal person from the community or extension worker 
or 
grievance.  
The  community  level  discussion  should  solve  the  issue  and  inform  concerned 
person/group/organization  by  15  days*  of  application.  The  concerned  project 
team should forward application along with decision, decision process to district 
authority if applicant is not satisfied. 
suitable 
person 
collect 
the 
to 
Stage 2 
District level 
The district office has to solve and inform to concerned applicants within 15 days*. 
If applicant is not satisfied, forward to Provincial office. 
Stage 3 
Province level 
The  provincial  team  may  take  up  to  15  days*  to  solve  the  problem  in  close 
coordination  with  applicant.  If  applicant  is  not  satisfied,  forward  to  national 
secretariat. 
Stage 4 
Secretariat level 
The secretariat team consults with concerned parties and solve wit in 15 days* of 
application receipt.  
If not solved 
Option A: Write to IFAD 
Option B: Appy to judicial level 
*The project may revisit the number of days in a practical basis.  
34 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Grievance follow up: The relevant PIU coordinators may contact the applicant at a later stage 
to ensure that the activities do not trigger any further issues. If the problem persists, it will 
be treated as a new grievance and re-enter the process.  
The project-level GRM will be further refined by the PIU during early implementation based 
on  the  assessment  of  existing  GRMs  at  the  different  levels.  The  GRM  will  subsequently  be 
disseminated to project stakeholders in the project areas prior to the commencement of any 
on-site work. 
IFAD Complaints Procedure 
Objective:  to ensure that appropriate mechanisms are in place to allow individuals and 
communities to contact IFAD directly and file a complaint if they believe they are or might 
be adversely affected by an IFAD-funded project/programme not complying with IFAD's 
Social and Environmental Policies and mandatory aspects of SECAP. 
Eligibility criteria  
To file a complaint for alleged non-compliance with IFAD's social and environmental policies 
and mandatory aspects of its SECAP, IFAD will consider only complaints meeting the following 
criteria: 
  The complainants claim that IFAD has failed to apply its social and environmental 
policies and/or the mandatory provisions set out in SECAP. 
  The complainants claim that they have been or will be adversely affected by IFAD's 
failure to apply these policies. 
  Complaints must be put forward by at least two people who are both nationals of the 
country concerned and/or living in the project area. Complaints from foreign 
locations or anonymous complaints will not be taken into account. 
  Complaints must concern projects/programmes currently under design or 
implementation. Complaints concerning closed projects, or those that are more than 
95 per cent disbursed, will not be considered. 
The process 
The  complainants should first bring the matter to the attention of the government  or non-
governmental organisation responsible for planning or executing the project or programme 
(the Lead Agency),  or to any governmental body with the responsibility for overseeing the 
Lead  Agency.  If  the  Lead  Agency  does  not  adequately  respond,  then  the  matter  may  be 
brought  to  the  attention  of  IFAD.  The  issue  may  be  brought  straight  to  IFAD  if  the 
complainants feel they might be subject to retaliation if they went to the Lead Agency directly. 
The  Regional  Division  will  examine  the  complaint  and,  if  necessary,  will  contact  the  Lead 
Agency, or the governmental body with the responsibility for overseeing the Lead Agency, to 
decide  if  the  complaints  are  justified.  If  the  complainants  request  that  their  identities  be 
protected,  IFAD  will  not  disclose  this  information  to  the  Lead  Agency  or  anyone  else  in 
government. 
If the complaint is not justified, the Regional Division will inform the complainants in writing. 
If the Regional Division finds the complaint is justified and there is proof of actual or likely 
harm through IFAD's failure to follow its policies and procedures, IFAD will take action. This 
may consist of making changes to the project/programme, or requiring that the government 
observes its obligations under the Financing Agreement. IFAD's response will focus bringing 
the project/programme into compliance and no monetary damages will be available or paid 
35 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
in response to such complaints. The complainants will be informed of the outcome of the issue 
by the Regional Division.  
In all cases, if the complainants disagree with IFAD's response, they may submit a request 
to SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org and request that an impartial review be carried out by the Office 
of the Vice-President. 
The  Office  of  the  Vice-President  will  decide  on  the  steps  to  be  taken  to  examine  such 
complaints,  including,  if  necessary,  contracting  external  experts  to  review  the  matter.  The 
complainants will be informed of the results of the review. 
How to submit a complaint 
A  complaint  relating  to  non-compliance  with  IFAD’s  Social  and  Environmental  Policies  and 
mandatory aspects of its SECAP can be submitted in any of the following ways: 
  Download word file complain form: Here 
  Send an email to SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org  
If you email or mail your complaint, please include the following information: 
  Name, address, telephone number and other contact information 
  Whether the complainants wish to keep their identity confidential, and if so, why 
  Name, location, and nature of the IFAD project/programme (if known) 
  How the Complainants believe they have been, or are likely to be, adversely affected 
by the IFAD-supported project or programme 
Complaints sent by mail should be addressed to: 
IFAD 
SECAP Complaints (PMD) 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
36 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
8.  Cost and budgetary consideration  
Funding for implementation of the ESCMF is included in the project budgets. The estimated 
costs  are  indicated  in  table  7.  Costs  associated  with  the  time  of  Project  Management  Unit 
Staff, including a Project Safeguards Officer, coordinating the implementation of this ESCMF 
are not shown. Further detail is found in the budget of the Project Document. 
Table 7 Tentative Breakdown of project level costs for ESCMF implementation 
Item 
Approximate Budget Cost (USD) 
Social,  Climate  and  Environment 
Specialist   
RADB safeguard Specialist  
SME Safeguard process 
hire 
External 
preparation* 
Travel expenses for consultations* 
safeguard 
for 
Capacity building/training expenses 
Audio-visual  &  print  production 
expenses 
Mainstreamed in design report 
Mainstreamed in design report 
45,000 
150,000 
25,000 
40,000 
10,000 
*Required if the project needs to prepare safeguard reports through service providers.  
Total: 
270,000  
37 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Annexes  
Annex I. ESCMP 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
1) Environmental 
All 
including 
infrastruct
ure  
Encroachm
ent or 
expansion 
of 
agriculture 
in forest 
area 
All 
including 
infrastruct
ure  
Excessive 
harvesting 
of forest 
products, 
especially 
timber for 
constructio
n  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
% 
Community 
and private 
lands for 
project 
activities  
s
t
i
n
u
l
i
a
i
c
n
v
o
r
P
,
t
a
i
r
a
t
e
r
c
e
S
Value chain activities 
will be confined only 
in agriculture lands. 
Project will have 
zero encroachment 
and deforestation 
strategy. 
Farmers 
and 
commune, 
Indigenou
s People 
consultati
on to 
maintain 
forest 
area  
Authorized 
harvestable amount 
of forest products 
will be consumed 
with permission of 
concerned authority. 
Deforestation or any 
damage to forest will 
be prohibited.   
Producer 
organizati
on, 
Agricultur
al 
Cooperativ
es, 
Commune
s, and IP  
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
i
m
u
d
e
M
o
t
w
o
L
.
l
a
u
n
n
a
d
n
a
(A) Secondary 
sources: Local 
Forestry Groups, IP's 
land record, and/or 
provincial Forestry 
Departments; (B) 
Primary source: VC 
Cluster surveys. 
Regular 
monitoring and 
awareness 
program, no 
incremental cost  
l
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
/
m
r
e
t
d
m
/
e
n
i
i
l
e
s
a
B
Annual Outcome 
Survey, 
Baseline/midterm/fina
l impact surveys,  
No additional 
cost required  
l
a
u
n
n
A
38 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
Casava, 
Cashew 
nuts, 
Fruits, 
Vegetable, 
and 
poultry  
Impact on 
local 
biodiversit
y and soil 
health, and 
increased 
water 
pollution 
from 
agriculture 
runoff due 
to the use 
of chemical 
fertilizers 
and 
pesticides 
i
m
u
d
e
M
(a) % 
farmers 
using bio 
inputs  
(b) Number 
of farmers 
aware in 
IPM;  
(c) % 
reduction of 
chemical 
inputs;  
(d) Include 
soil quality 
parameters 
to be 
measured 
Awareness
, capacity 
building 
and easy 
access to 
new 
practices 
and 
technologi
es  
s
c
A
,
s
o
P
,
F
F
A
D
P
,
A
D
G
-
F
F
A
M
(i)  Mulching, 
right 
balance  of  organic 
inorganic 
and 
fertilizer; 
(ii) 
and 
Awareness 
advice on proper use 
and 
of 
pesticide 
regular 
fertilizers, 
product 
soil 
and 
(iii) 
testing; 
Improved 
poultry 
management to keep 
water 
healthy: 
restricting  use  of 
and 
antibiotics 
medicines, 
proper 
aeration  keeps  the 
shed  healthy;  (iv) 
Introducing 
waste 
water  management 
system; 
(v) 
Enhanced testing and 
enforcement  regime 
pesticides 
for 
at 
especially 
wholesale  market 
strategic 
and 
location, 
(vi) 
encourage farmers to 
bio-
homebased 
inputs 
production, 
(vii)  promotion  of 
pest 
integrated 
and 
management 
agricultural 
good 
practices,  (viii)  mix 
cropping, (ix) reduce 
(a) 
Baseline/midterm/fina
l impact surveys; 
Farmers' diaries (b) 
Project training 
records 
Via component 2 
quality 
assurance, 
component three 
technical support 
and component 1 
screening 
support that 
requires addition 
of chemical 
inputs  
No additional 
cost required 
l
a
u
n
n
A
)
b
(
;
l
a
n
i
f
/
m
r
e
t
d
m
/
e
n
i
i
l
e
s
a
B
)
a
(
39 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
use  of  hormones  on 
mango  farming,  (x) 
adhere  to  WHO/FAO 
International Code of 
Conduct  on  Pesticide 
Management  for  the 
safe labelling, 
packaging, handling, 
storage, application 
and disposal of 
pesticides. 
40 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
Improper 
solid waste 
manageme
nt  
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
-
w
o
L
Poultry, 
Processing 
and 
marketing 
infrastruct
ure, 
quality 
assurance 
lab and 
centers  
Awareness
, capacity 
building 
and easy 
access to 
new 
practices 
and 
technologi
es  
(i) Solid Waste 
management plan 
incorporated for 
project supported 
infrastructures; (ii) 
Work with local 
communities and 
authorities; (iii) 
Recycling and reuse 
of waste generated 
during production to 
processing including 
use to make bio-
compost; (iv) 
Capacitate 
smallholders and 
micro entrepreneurs 
on sustainable waste 
management by 
easy and effective 
technologies and 
better hygiene 
s
c
A
,
s
o
P
,
F
F
A
D
P
,
A
D
G
-
F
F
A
M
Project 
"infrastructure" 
records; Training 
reports; Reports from 
field inspection visits 
by Secretariat staff 
(a) % of 
project-
supported 
infrastructur
es with a 
waste 
managemen
t plan and 
an efficient 
waste 
managemen
t system                                                        
(b) No of 
capacity 
building 
events 
organized 
for 
smallholders 
and micro 
entrepreneu
rs for waste 
managemen
t and bio-
compost 
preparation  
a
u
n
n
A
l
Mainstreamed in 
infrastructure 
support and 
capacity building 
components  
41 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
Crops, 
fruits  
i
m
u
d
e
M
Monocroppi
ng; 
Land and 
soil 
degradatio
n  
Awareness
, technical 
consultati
on   
s
c
A
,
s
o
P
,
F
F
A
D
P
,
A
D
G
-
F
F
A
M
(i) encourage 
intercropping in 
casava, cashew nut 
and fruits; (ii) mix 
vegetable cropping 
(iii) Integrated Pest 
Management 
approach will be 
promoted to 
discourage use of 
chemical fertilizers 
and pesticides; (iv) 
Crop varieties which 
demands excessive 
use of fertilizer and 
water will be 
discouraged; (v) Soil 
erosion prone areas 
will not be selected 
for any kind of value 
chain. If value chain 
activities are 
planned proximity to 
such areas, 
adequate land cover 
practices such as 
plantation will be 
encouraged. (vi) 
promotion of good 
agricultural practices  
(a) % of 
farmers 
using IPM 
practices 
(A) Secondary 
sources: Registries 
from communes, 
and/or provincial 
Forestry 
Departments; (B) 
Primary source: VC 
surveys 
l
.
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
/
m
r
e
t
d
m
/
e
n
b) % of 
farmers 
practicing 
inter/mix 
cropping;  
(c) hectares 
of land 
under 
sustainable 
agricultural 
land 
managemen
t                                                                   
e
s
a
B
i
l
i
)
b
(
;
l
a
u
n
n
A
)
a
(
Mainstreamed in 
Comp 1 and 3 
No incremental 
cost  
42 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
Crops, 
fruits, 
poultry 
Introduction of only 
certified/verified 
varieties 
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
t
a
i
r
a
t
e
r
c
e
S
Ex ante:  
Component 
1 and 2 
activities to 
ensure that 
only 
certified/ver
ified seeds 
suppliers 
are 
supported 
under the 
various 
Funds or 
capacity 
building 
activities. 
a
/
n
n/a 
The support on 
chemical and 
quality testing 
includes these 
activities.  
No incremental 
cost 
Threat 
(such as 
chances of 
particular 
pathogen 
or pest 
arriving, 
population 
declines of 
native 
species, 
altering 
key 
ecosystem 
process 
like 
hydrology, 
nitrogen 
fixation 
etc.) from 
introductio
n of exotic 
varieties 
and breeds 
43 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
- 
Impacts on 
community 
health and 
safety due 
to the 
constructio
n and 
operation 
of 
infrastruct
ure and 
handling of 
chemical 
agricultural 
inputs. 
(a) Number 
of farmers 
aware of 
community 
health 
issues; 
(b) Number 
of trainings 
and capacity 
building 
events for 
farmers and 
workers n 
handling of 
pesticides 
and other 
chemical 
inputs. 
(c) Number 
of accidents 
from 
construction 
and 
operation of 
infrastructur
e. 
l
a
u
n
n
A
Awareness
, technical 
consultati
on   
t
a
i
r
a
t
e
r
c
e
S
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
-
w
o
L
Design, construct, 
operate and 
decommission the 
structural 
elements of the 
project in 
accordance with 
national legal 
requirements and 
the World Bank 
Group 
Environmental 
Health and Safety 
guidelines. 
Collect the GPS 
coordinates of 
infrastructure sites 
following a 
systematic and 
standardized 
methodology. 
Ensure applicable 
traffic rules and road 
safety measures in 
rural roads are 
adhered to and road 
signs installed as 
needed according to 
the national 
regulations. 
Raise awareness 
among farmers of 
pesticides used 
locally, the dangers 
Project 
"infrastructure" 
records; Training 
reports; Reports from 
field inspection visits 
by Secretariat staff 
Mainstreamed in 
infrastructure 
support and 
capacity building 
components 
44 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
and risks of pesticide 
exposure and how 
people may be 
exposed to 
pesticides. 
Train workers on the 
signs and symptoms 
of acute and chronic 
poisoning 
from pesticides, 
proper pesticide 
handling, 
application, storing 
practices and 
decontamination 
procedures before 
leaving the 
workplace. 
Social 
45 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
Potential 
increase on 
the 
workload 
on women  
Capacity 
building  
(i) Ensure women’s 
participation from 
the activities 
planning phase; (ii) 
Promote awareness 
of smallholders and 
entrepreneurs on 
work division; (iii) 
Ensure that women 
are not over-
represented in the 
maintenance work 
for the 
infrastructure; (iv) 
Ensure women’s 
participation in 
capacity building 
events; (v) Develop 
and implement GESI 
guidelines 
s
O
P
,
s
C
A
,
F
F
A
D
P
,
A
D
G
-
F
F
A
M
,
t
a
i
r
a
t
e
r
c
e
S
(a) % of 
women 
among 
meetings' 
participants 
and 
awareness 
raising 
events; 
(b) % of 
women 
among 
project 
training, 
capacity 
building 
events and 
exchange 
visits;  
(c) % of 
women 
beneficiaries 
with 
increased 
time spent 
for leisure 
l
.
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
/
m
r
e
t
d
m
/
e
n
i
i
l
e
s
a
b
)
c
(
;
l
a
u
n
n
A
:
)
b
(
d
n
a
)
a
(
(a) Lists of 
participants in 
meetings or 
awareness raising 
events;  
(b) Training records 
Mainstreamed in 
the following 
activities a) 
group 
mentoring/capaci
ty development 
b) Business skill 
training covering 
such issues  
46 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
All 
Investment 
failing: 
Depletion 
of HH 
assets and 
livelihoods' 
base to the 
point 
where they 
can no 
longer 
recover; 
Indebtedne
ss by loan 
beneficiari
es unable 
to repay 
their loans. 
All 
Limited or 
less than 
optimal 
investment 
on women, 
youth, 
PWD and 
vulnerable 
households  
(i) Affordable 
investment 
pathways; (ii) Pre-
screening suitability 
of selected 
commodities for poor 
and vulnerable 
households (iii) 
Working with in 
groups to improve 
market linkages 
which reduces selling 
risk; (iv) Link with 
technical service 
providers; (v) 
Business skill 
training; (vi) 
Encourage saving 
and wealth 
generation practice; 
(vii) Better use of 
income  
i) encourage group 
collateral, ii) 
business skill 
development 
i
m
u
d
e
M
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
Mainstreamed in 
design. No 
incremental cost. 
. 
Awareness
, Capacity 
Building  
Provincial 
units  
(a) % of 
farmers 
repaying 
their loans 
according to 
agreed 
schedule               
(b) No of 
beneficiary 
farmers 
compelled 
to sell their 
collateral 
because 
they are 
unable to 
repay their 
loans.                 
a
u
n
n
A
l
Sensitizati
on, 
Capacity 
building, 
group 
works  
,
t
a
i
r
a
t
e
r
c
e
S
,
s
t
i
n
u
l
i
a
i
c
n
v
o
r
p
APR 
No incremental 
cost 
% of 
women, 
youth, PwD 
sensitized 
or 
capacitated 
via trainings  
l
a
u
n
n
A
E
M
S
,
B
D
A
R
47 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Knowledge share via 
group events and 
trainings like 
business and skill 
development training 
Group 
work 
i) promotion of 
kitchen garden, ii) 
awareness of optimal 
nutrition practices, 
iii) encourage 
intercropping   
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
% of 
women 
beneficiary  
% of 
household 
and women 
reporting 
minimum 
dietary 
diversity 
(MDDW) 
.
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
l
d
n
a
m
r
e
t
d
m
i
,
l
a
u
n
n
A
e
n
i
l
d
n
E
d
n
a
e
n
i
l
i
d
M
Baseline/midterm/co
mpletion surveys 
No incremental 
cost 
Baseline/mid 
term/completion 
surveys, AOS 
Promote kitchen 
garden with 
stakeholder/auth
orities working 
on this.  
Component 3 can 
work on capacity 
building. 
,
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
B
All 
Limited 
participatio
n of 
women, 
youth, 
PWD and 
vulnerable 
households  
All 
Lack of 
nutrition 
improveme
nt  
Climate change  
48 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Flood  
ALL 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
Awareness  
(i) The subproject 
screening process 
will exclude activities 
in flood prone areas 
and encourage to 
use land where 
farmers are 
traditionally doing 
farming; (ii) 
Encourage crop, 
livestock and other 
value chain-based 
enterprises 
insurance; (iii) 
Development of 
sound site selection 
criteria and regular 
field inspection visits 
by safeguard 
specialist. 
h
g
h
i
o
t
i
m
u
d
e
M
% of 
beneficiary 
households 
with a crop 
or livestock 
insurance   
Include 
indicators 
for 
mitigation 
measure 
(ii), and (iii) 
.
n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
l
d
n
a
m
r
e
t
i
d
m
,
n
o
i
t
c
e
e
s
l
'
s
e
i
r
a
i
c
i
f
e
n
e
b
n
o
p
U
A
D
G
-
F
F
A
M
,
t
a
i
r
a
t
e
r
c
e
S
Baseline/mid 
term/completion 
surveys; and RADB 
and SME's progress 
report  
i: mainstreamed 
in ESCMF 
screening 
process; 
ii: needs to 
promoted; 
iii: under the 
component 3;  
for infrastructure, 
screening, 
ESCMP 
preparation, site 
verification is 
mainstream part 
of project. 
No incremental 
costs. 
49 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
Drought, 
water 
shortage  
All value 
chains 
i) % of 
Acs/Pos 
with 
updated 
crop 
seasonal 
calendar, 
ii) % of 
household 
using 
improved 
water 
managemen
t practices  
(i) prepare and/or 
update crop seasonal 
calendar, (ii) 
promotion of local 
drought tolerant 
varieties, (iii) 
Improve 
management 
practices: water 
efficient 
technologies, infield 
water harvesting, 
water catchment 
pond; (iv) Provisions 
of crop, livestock 
and other value 
chain-based 
enterprises 
insurance, (v) bio 
mulching to retain 
water, (vi) protected 
vegetable farming  
h
g
h
i
o
t
i
m
u
d
e
M
Awareness  
s
t
i
n
u
i
e
c
n
v
o
r
p
d
n
a
t
a
i
r
a
t
e
r
c
e
S
Baseline/midterm/fina
l impact surveys; 
Farmers' diaries. 
mainstreamed in 
project  
l
a
u
n
n
A
;
l
a
n
i
f
/
m
r
e
t
d
m
/
e
n
i
i
l
e
s
a
B
50 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
All 
Change in 
disease 
timing and 
outbreaks  
Occurrence 
of wind 
storms 
Cashew 
nuts, 
Fruits  
Awareness  
(i) Promotion of IPM; 
(ii) Capacity building 
and awareness 
events to maximize 
use of bio chemicals 
and fertilizers (iii) 
Promotion of value 
chain-based 
enterprises 
insurance 
(i) Wind break 
plantation; (ii) 
Improve solid mound 
to strengthen plant 
up to pole size 
Capacity 
building  
i
m
u
d
e
M
w
o
L
(a) % of 
farmers 
using sound 
IPM 
practices 
(b) % of 
beneficiary 
households 
with a crop 
or livestock 
insurance   
s
t
i
n
u
t
c
e
j
o
r
p
i
e
c
n
v
o
r
P
s
t
i
n
u
i
e
c
n
v
o
r
p
d
n
a
t
a
i
r
a
t
e
r
c
e
S
Heat stress 
Poultry  
w
o
L
(i) The project will 
promote free ranging 
r
c
e
S
i
r
a
t
e
t
a
d
n
a
i
v
o
r
p
e
c
n
s
t
i
n
u
Baseline/midterm/fina
l impact surveys; 
Farmers' diaries. 
;
l
a
n
i
f
,
m
r
e
t
-
d
m
i
,
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
B
)
b
(
;
l
a
n
i
f
,
m
r
e
t
d
m
i
,
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
b
d
n
a
l
a
u
n
n
A
)
a
(
l
e
s
a
B
,
e
n
i
t
d
m
i
,
m
r
e
l
Baseline/midterm/fina
l impact surveys 
a
n
i
f
No incremental 
cost  
51 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Environme
ntal, social 
and climate 
Impacts  
Commodi
ties as 
main 
driver of 
risks  
Risk 
rati
ng 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhanc
ement measures 
Public 
Consultat
ion 
Activities 
Responsi
ble 
Instituti
on 
Means of Verification 
Cost Estimate & 
Source 
Indicators 
Freque
ncy 
Source of data 
chicks in the areas 
with sufficient tree 
cover. The impact of 
heat stress will be 
minimal for the 
poultry.  
52 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Annex II. Stakeholder consultation  
Date 
Activities 
Type of information  
 Location and 
People to Meet 
30 June to 17 
July  (18 days) 
Country Visit  
30 June-03 July 
Official interactions  
Notes 
IFAD CPO meeting for country and 
project brief 
Meeting with ongoing project's few 
staff: GESI, CCA, Ag/Livestock 
specialist, M&E, Planning officer, PDs 
Country scenario, IFAD's priority 
operations, ASPIRE AT brief, 
Stakeholder listing for meeting, Field 
visit finalization  
Project working area's social, 
environmental and climate status  
-Key challenges on aforementioned 
themes  
-Project mitigation and adaptation 
approach 
-Project targeting and inclusion 
strategy 
-M&E framework, plan and execution 
-Stakeholders to consult  
-Learning and experience on 
environmental and social issues 
management  
-Baseline information 
Introduction of ASPIRE, ASPIRE-AT, 
and field trip confirmation and others 
Meet with ASPIRE 
Field visit (2-3 first phase 
implementation provinces) 
Sat. 2 July 
2022 
At 2:30pm 
04-12 July 
2022 
Mon. 4 July 2022  
06:00am 
03:00pm 
Tue 5 July 2022 
In the morning 
Travel to Ratanakiri 
Leave from MAFF 
Meet Department of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries (Ratanakiri-
PDAFF) 
Explore general information of 
agriculture in the province 
PP-Ratanakiri 
In the town 
Meet IPs agricultural community, 
local authorities (commune and 
district level), cassava buyers. 
ASPIRE Business Cluster 
Tampuon-IPs growing cassava and 
facing problems of climate change and 
land slope, soil erosion 
Keh Chong 
Commune, Bor 
Keo District 
Meet IPs agricultural community, 
local authorities, (commune and 
district level) cashew buyers. ASPIRE 
Area BUT Non-ASPIRE Cluster 
In the 
afternoon 
Kreung-IPs growing cashew and facing 
problems of climate change and land 
slope, soil erosion 
Ou Chum 
Commune, Ou 
Chum District 
Wed. 6 July 2022  
In the morning 
Meet IPs agricultural community, 
local authorities, (commune and 
district level) cashew buyers. Non-
ASPIRE Area and Cluster 
02:30-04:00pm 
Meet ICSO Organization + SCV 
Kreung-IPs growing cashew and facing 
problems of climate change and land 
slope, soil erosion 
Tuen Commune, 
Koun Mom District 
In the town 
53 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Date 
Activities 
Type of information  
04:00-05:00pm 
Thu. 7 July 2022 
07:00-08:00am 
Meet DPA Organization + IADC + 
HA+ Yeak Loam 
Visit Yeak Laom Lake 
08:00-09:00am 
Meet Provincial Department of 
Environment 
09:15-10:15am 
Meet Provincial Department of Rural 
Development 
10:30-11:30am 
Meet Provincial Department of Land 
Management, Urban Planning and 
Construction 
In the 
afternoon 
Fri. 8 July 2022  
08:30-10:00am 
Travel to Siem Reap Province 
Ratanikiri-Steung Treng-Preah Vihear- 
Siem Reap 
Meet Provincial Department of 
Environment 
10:30-11:30am 
Meet Provincial Department of 
Culture and Art 
02:00-03:00pm 
03:00-04:00pm 
Meet Provincial Department of Land 
Management, Urban Planning and 
Construction 
Meet Provincial Department of Rural 
Development 
Meet TSSD-AT Project 
04:00-05:00pm 
Sat. 9 July 2022  
08:00-09:30am 
10:00-11:30am 
Meet Department of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries (Siem Reap-
PDAFF) 
Meet Farmers of ASPIRE Business 
Cluster growing vegetables, buyers 
Farmers living in the area under 
APSARA Control and not allow to 
contruct hard building and 
infrasructiure   
02:00-03:30pm 
Meet farmers of ASPIRE Business 
Cluster growing cassava, buyers 
Farmers living in the national park and 
facing of climate change, crop disease 
04:00-05:00pm  Meet with IP Community 
Sun 10 July 2022  
In the morning 
Meet farmers growing cashew, 
buyers and processor 
Farmers facing climate change 
(drough, flooding), crop insect, disease 
In the 
afternoon 
Travel to Phnom Penh 
Mon. 11 July 2022  
 Location and 
People to Meet 
In the town 
In the town 
In the town 
In the town 
In the town 
In the town 
In the town 
In the town 
In the town 
In the town 
In the town 
Leang Dai 
Commune, Angkor 
Thom District 
Tbreng Commune, 
Banteay Srey 
Distric 
088 87 17 685) 
Kork Doung 
Commune, Angkor 
Chum District 
54 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Date 
Activities 
Type of information  
07:00-09:00am 
09:00-10:00am 
Travel from PP to Kampong Speu 
Province 
Meet Department of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries 
10:15-11:30am 
Meet Provincial Department of 
Environment 
 Location and 
People to Meet 
In the twon 
In the twon 
Meet Farmer of ASPIRE Business 
Cluster growing mango, buyers and 
processor 
Farmers facing climate change 
(drought), crop insect and disease 
Treng Troyeung 
Commune, Phnom 
Srouch District 
Meet LWD Organization 
Meet IPs growing rice and vegetable 
IPs facing climate change (drought and 
flooding) soil erosion… 
Sangke Satob 
Commune, Oral 
District 
Tropeang 
Commune, 
District 
Chor 
Oral 
In the 
afternoon 
Tue 12 July 2022  
09:30-11:00 
02:00-03:30 
13-17 July 2022  
NGOs (youth, women, PWD, 
Indigenous, Envt and CC) 
consultation 
Wed. 13 July 2022  
8:30am-
10:30am 
10:00am -
11:30AM 
Mak Monika , Executive Director  
Meet with IP Alliance Project 
02:00PM-
03:30PM 
04:00PM-
5:30PM 
Meet with Khmer Youth Development 
Association 
The Cambodia Climate Change 
Network (CCCN) or NGO Forum  
In country experts and stakeholders 
consultation  
Identification and ranking of areas of 
support 
Adaptation and mitigation activities 
implementation experience 
Best practices  
Learning and experience: what works 
well and what not  
Baseline information  
Policy gaps 
Cambodia Disable People organization, 
016800527 
Lorang Yun 
<yun.lorang25@gmail.com,        tel: 
099 712 423 
youth engagement in social, cultural 
and enviroment work 
A network of NGO working climate 
mitigation and adaption, environment  
Climate change trend, projections, 
impacts, mitigation and adaptaton 
measures  
Key social challenges and how best 
project can work on them 
Cultural heritage management  
Policy gap and project support  
Thu.14 July 2022  
9am 
Mr. Chan Sophal 
Director, Center for Policy Study 
10:30am 
Director IIRR 
2pm 
4pm 
Mr. Pan Sopheap 
Ms. Thlang Sovan Pisey 
IIRR  has been working here on climate 
and weather for smallholders 
Head of Famer Nature and Network 
(member of Asian Farmer Sociation) 
Executive Director, Khmer Organic 
Association 
Fri. 15 July 2022  
9am 
Climate Change committee of MAFF 
MAFF has a climate change committee 
chaired by H.E. Chan Chesda. 
55 
ASPIRE-AT ESCMF 
Date 
Activities 
Type of information  
10:30AM 
Ag and Rural Development Bank 
2pm 
4pm 
Meach Yardy 
Mr. Kim Soben  
Marketing office of DPS/MAFF 
University of Agriculture 
Sat. 16 July 2022  
9am 
Meeting with GIC on small livestock 
Oum Narin 
 Location and 
People to Meet 
56 
Annex III: Screening Checklist 
This checklist must be completed for all sub-projects and should be used to guide preparation of the Environmental, Social, and Climate Management Plan 
(ESCMP).  
The aim of this screening checklist is to draw attention to positive or negative environmental, social or custom impacts that could occur as a result of the proposed 
project. The checklist satisfies the requirements for an Environmental Permit application to Department of Environmental Protection of GoKC under the IFAD, EIB, 
and reference to WBG-IFC guidance. 
The questions are designed to direct attention towards issues that should be considered at the early stages of project planning and also during project 
construction and operation. It is important that the following details are described in this template: 
Introduction 
 
 
 
Current environment and the likely impacts of the project 
Impacts of project construction and how these will be managed 
Impacts of  project operation and how these will be managed 
Section 1 – Project details 
Project name 
Project proponent (developer) 
Proponent’s email address 
Proponent’s phone number 
Project location (including coordinates, if available) 
Type and purpose of project (brief description) 
Questions to be considered 
Yes/no/N.A./brief 
Is this likely to result in a 
Section 2 – Size and scale of the proposed project 
description 
significant impact – yes/no? Negative 
or positive? Long-term, short-term or 
irreversible? 
Does the potential impact need 
to be further investigated? Will 
it require management? 
2.1 What area of land will be developed? (indicate size of area, in 
m2 or km2) 
2.2 Will a large amount of energy, water or other natural 
resources be required for project construction and operation? 
2.3 Will a large workforce be needed? Is a local and/or external 
workforce to be employed? 
2.4 What is the expected timeframe for the project? (including 
construction, operation, closure and decommissioning 
– if appropriate) 
2.5 What is the current land use of the site? What are the 
neighboring land uses? 
Questions to be considered 
Yes/no/N.A./brief 
Is this likely to result in a 
Section 3 – Character of the proposed project 
description 
significant impact – yes/no? Negative 
or positive? Long-term, short-term or 
irreversible? 
Does the potential impact need 
to be further investigated? Will 
it require management? 
3.1 What type of construction or operational activities will be 
undertaken by the project? 
3.2 Are the project activities novel (new) or have they 
been undertaken before within the country, or in the 
Pacific region? 
Questions to be considered 
Yes/no/N.A./brief 
Is this likely to result in a 
Section 4 – Project Location (as proposed by community) 
description 
significant impact – yes/no? Negative 
or positive? Long-term, short-term or 
irreversible? 
Does the potential impact need 
to be further investigated? Will 
it require management? 
4.1 Is the project to be located within or adjacent to a vulnerable 
area (e.g. low-lying, waterways, floodplain, wetland, steep 
sloping land)? 
4.2 Is the project to be located adjacent to a sensitive site or 
facility (e.g. historical or archaeological site, conservation 
reserve, school, hospital/ medical facility)? 
4.3 Is the project likely to impact on existing land or wetland  
uses/activities? 
4.4 Is the proposed site suitable for the project (e.g. appropriate 
set-back from the streams or rivers; no steep or eroding slopes)? 
4.5 Is the proposed project site customary land? Are all 
customary land/ resource owners aware of the project proposal? 
Have they been consulted/meaningfully engaged? 
Section 5 – Environmental Impacts 
Aspect of the 
Questions to be considered 
Yes/no/N.A./brief 
Is this likely to result 
environment 
description 
in a significant impact 
– yes/no? Negative or 
positive? Long-term, 
short-term, irreversible? 
Does the potential 
impact need to be 
furtherinvestigated? Will 
it require management? 
5.1 Topography, 
5.1.1 Destruction, covering or modification of any unique 
geology and soils 
geological or landscape feature? 
5.1.2 Soil contamination or disturbance of 
previously contaminated soils? 
5.1.3 Disturbance of soils that are fragile, or susceptible to 
erosion or compaction? 
5.1.4 Will dumping of spoil or removal of timber and 
vegetation, rock or soils affect land stability?? 
5.1.5 Will the immediate or downstream effects of the project 
impact on coastal areas (beaches, seabed, coral reefs, and sea 
grass beds) wetlands, lagoons or swamps? 
5.2 Water 
5.2.1 Extraction or use of ground, surface or tank water 
resources, leading to reduction in the volume and quality of 
water available for the public water supply? 
5.2.2 Pollution of ground, surface, coastal or sea water, via 
direct or indirect discharges or seepages; or through 
interception of an aquifer by drilling, cuts or excavations? 
5.2.3 Will project construction involve any hazardous 
substances (including petrol, oils, tar, paints or industrial 
chemicals) to be used or stored on site?? 
5.2.4 Changes in runoff, drainage patterns or absorption 
5.2.5 Coastal, stream or river flooding? 
5.3 Air 
5.3.1 Will the project construction cause dust? 
 rates? 
5.4 Noise 
5.3.2 Will there be any burning of materials on site? 
5.4.1 Will the project construction require the use of heavy or 
noisy machinery or equipment? 
5.5 Plant life 
5.5.1 Damage to or clearing of vegetation communities (e.g. 
coastal vegetation, established forest, upland forest or 
mangrove communities)? 
5.6 Animal Life 
5.5.2 A reduction in agricultural crop production? 
5.6.1 Is the project site located on or close to the sea?? 
5.6.2 Is the project site located on or close to a river, stream 
or wetland? 
5.6.3 Is the project site located in, close to or include a 
protected area?? 
5.6.4 Damage to or destruction of habitat for animal 
communities on land? 
5.6.5 What animal and bird species use, are present on or 
close 
5.6.6 Are there important or endangered species in the area of 
to the project site (eg megapode nesting sites, flying fox roost 
the project? 
5.7 Natural 
resources 
5.7.1 The extraction, harvest or consumption of natural 
resources (e.g. timber, minerals, water)? 
5.7.2 A noticeable increase in the rate of use of any natural 
resource? 
5.7.3 Substantial depletion of non-renewable resources? 
5.8 Human 
communities 
5.8.1 Are there existing homes, settlements or other activities 
present on or adjacent to the project site? 
5.8.2 Influx of an external workforce or in-migration to the 
project area? 
5.8.3 Demand for additional housing to accommodate an 
external workforce? 
5.8.4 Is the area culturally or archaeologically sensitive? 
5.8.5 Increased demand for and disruption to social services 
and infrastructure (e.g. water and energy supply, 
communications, sewage and waste disposal, fire protection, 
police, schools, medical care)? 
5.9 Involuntary 
Resettlement 
5.8.6 Will waste products be generated during construction or 
operation? Will any waste products be treated or disposed of 
offsite? 
5.8.7 Infringement on customs or customary rights? 
5.8.8 Social change or impacts on traditional governance 
structures, resulting in community dislocation or 
loss of community cohesion? 
5.8.9 Restrictions in access to customary areas or 
restrictions in resource use in customary areas? 
5.8.10 Changes in access to or the quality of recreational 
opportunities? 
5.9.1 Have all sites for physical works under the project been 
specified? 
5.9.2. Does the project involve physical works that will require 
any change in land use? 
5.9.3. If any physical works are sited on public land, do any 
persons use or occupy this land 
5.9.4. Will any physical works be sited on communal or 
collective land? 
(a) If so, do any individuals use the land for their 
livelihood or residence? 
(b) Does the project plan to acquire the land through means 
other than market-based lease or purchase, or through 
voluntary donation? 
5.9.5. Are any physical works sited on private land? If so, does 
the project plan to acquire the land through means other than 
market-based lease or purchase, or through voluntary 
donation? 
5.9.6. Will any physical works otherwise restrict access to, or 
use of, land or natural resources? 
5.9.7. Will any physical works require acquisition of more than 
10 percent of a private land plot? 
5.9.8. Will any physical works require demolition of any 
5.10 Local and 
residential or commercial structure? 
5.10.1 Local economic displacement or loss of livelihoods 
national economy 
(including subsistence and informal economic activities)? 
5.10.2 Creation of jobs/livelihood opportunities for locals? 
5.10.3 Influx of the cash economy in areas where there 
was previously a subsistence-based economy? 
5.10.4 Training or educational opportunities for locals? 
5.10.5 Increased tax revenue for the national government? 
Royalties or benefits for sub-national levels of government? 
5.10.6 Benefits for directly affected people and communities 
(which may include direct economic benefits, community 
development programs etc.)? 
5.10.7 Benefits for the broader community (e.g. upgrading of 
social services or infrastructure)? 
5.11 Community 
Health and Safety 
Would the project potentially involve or lead to:  
5.11.1 Risks of waterborne or other vector-borne diseases (e.g. 
temporary breeding habitats), communicable and non-
communicable diseases?  
5.11.2 Unintended negative impacts on nutrition?  
5.11.3Harm or losses due to failure of structural elements of 
the project (e.g. collapse of buildings or infrastructure)?  
5.11.4The construction or rehabilitation of dams?  
5.11.5 Transport, storage and use and/or disposal of hazardous 
or dangerous materials (e.g. explosives, fuel and other 
chemicals during construction and operation)?  
5.11.6 Adverse impacts on ecosystems and ecosystem services 
relevant to communities’ health (e.g. food, surface-water 
purification, natural buffers from flooding)?  
5.11.7 The potential for gender-based violence, including sexual 
abuse, sexual harassment or sexual exploitation as a result of 
labour influx, land redistribution or other actions that alter 
community dynamics?  
5.11.8 Increases in traffic or alteration in traffic flow?  
 5.11.9 An influx of project workers?  
5.11.10Engagement of security personnel to protect facilities 
and property or to support project activities?  
Section 6 – Uncertainty surrounding potential impacts and risks 
Questions to be considered 
6.1 Are the potential project impacts and risks easily identified and 
well understood? 
6.2 Are cumulative impacts in the project’s area of influence well 
understood and have they been properly analyzed? 
Yes/no/N.A./brief description 
Is further investigation required? 
Questions to be considered 
9.1 Are there particular goals, targets or obligations under 
government policies, plans or legislation that are relevant to this 
project? 
Yes/no/N.A./brief description 
Is further investigation required? 
Section 7 – Broader policy and planning context 
Annex IV: Subproject category 
Category A 
Category B 
Category C 
minimal 
adverse 
environmental and/or social impacts 
no 
or 
substantial adverse environmental 
and/or social impacts 
Contravene  GoKC 
under 
agreements; 
its 
obligations 
international 
Encroach  forest  area  or  lead  to 
deforestation  
Potential 
adverse 
limited 
environmental  or  social  risks  and/or 
impacts  that  are  few  in  number, 
generally 
largely 
reversible,  and  readily  addressed 
through mitigation measures  
site-specific, 
displace,  modify  or  restrict/block 
access  to  cultural  heritage  sites, 
historical  monuments,  religious 
structure 
sites 
considered  sacred  by  the  local 
community; 
other 
and 
convert or degrade critical natural 
habitats; 
result  in  the  exclusion/restriction 
of 
certain  groups  who  are 
traditional  users,  from  accessing 
open-access 
otherwise 
an 
resource  which 
have 
they 
traditionally accessed. 
Annex V: IEE screening questions  
Sub- project Name: 
Date:  
Location:   
Environmental and Social Potential Effects/Impacts 
Answer 
Remarks 
No 
Lo
w 
Medi
um 
Hi
gh 
Unk
now
n 
1 
2 
to 
threat 
Issue 
Will  the  subproject  be  identified  or  anticipated 
significant  negative  environmental  impact?  Are 
these impacts sensitive, diverse or unprecedented? 
Will the project involve and or be complicit 
in the alteration, damage or removal of any 
critical cultural heritage? 
local 
Will  project 
cause 
ecosystems  due  to 
invasive  species?( 
Vulnerable  potential  natural  area,  special 
area for protection of biodiversity) 
Will  project  cause  to  distort  the  original 
shape of the natural landscape and increase 
the waste. 
Will  there  be  loss/removal  of  vegetable 
garden shelter or deforestation during land 
clearing for construction. 
Does  the  project  make  the  quality  of 
surrounding  surface  water  or  water  flows 
worse?  (deterioration  of  surface  water 
quality  due  to  silt  runoff  and  sanitary 
wastes from worker-based camps and 
4 
3 
5 
chemicals used in construction) 
Generation  of  dust  or  increased  local  air 
sensitive  areas  during 
in 
pollution 
construction? 
Increased  noise  and  vibration  due  to 
blasting and other civil works? 
Dislocation  or  involuntary  resettlement  of 
people? (If Yes, how many?) 
Use  the  dislocated  area  accordance  with 
environment and / or culture? 
Increase  community  health 
risks  of 
transmission  of  the  virus/diseases  from 
construction  workers  to  local  people  (and 
vice versa)? 
Potential  social  conflicts  between  workers 
hired  with  the  community  and  /or  vice 
versa? 
Risks  to  community  health  and  safety due 
to the use and/or disposal of materials such 
as  explosives,  fuel  and  other  chemicals 
during construction and operation? 
Use land/area that is at risk from landmines 
or other explosive remnants of war? 
The construction leads to disruption of road 
traffic or waterway transport? 
The  construction  leads  to  the  damage  of 
pre-existing roads, bridges or other existing 
rural infrastructure in the area. 
Excavation 
construction that may cause landslides. 
sub-project 
during 
the 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
or 
the 
temporary 
of 
Requirement 
permanent opening of new roads. 
The  construction  leads  to  separation  or 
division of plants and animal habitats? 
The  construction  leads  to  increase  of  long 
term risk/impacts of air quality? 
Safety  risks  due  to  both  accidental  and 
natural hazards to workers and community 
during project construction and operation? 
Utilization of toxic and hazardous materials 
and 
hazardous 
waste/disposals? 
Risks to community health and safety of the 
people in the area. 
generation 
of 
Will the subproject be identified the necessity of acquiring land or restricting the use of these resources? 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
loss  of  businesses  or 
Land  tenure  (temporary  or  permanent) 
(private or public land) for development? 
Usage of land that is legally owned or used 
regularly for production purposes (such as 
horticulture,  agriculture,  grassland,  fishing 
area and fruit trees). 
Will  there  be 
enterprises due to land acquisition? 
Will there be loss of  agricultural and other 
productive  assets,  crops,  trees,  and  fixed 
assets, 
land 
temporarily or permanently or due to land 
acquisition? 
Involuntary Restrictions on Land Use or on 
Access  to  Legally  Designated  Parks  and 
Protected Lands? 
shelter  and 
residential 
If answers 23-27, Yes, Please discuss for Relocation Plan (RP) or change the design/location 
Will the subproject be identified significant negative impact on Indigenous Peoples? 
28 
29 
Are  indigenous  peoples  living  in  or  close 
to the subproject area? 
Will  the  subproject  directly  or  indirectly 
benefit or negatively affect the members 
of Indigenous Peoples Groups? 
If answers 28-29, Yes, please consult IP plan and FPIC process. 
Annex VI: Safeguard report outlook 
The main text of the report should be 15 pages maximum.  
BACKGROUND 
Introduction  
- 
-  Details of subproject 
-  Beneficiaries’ details  
-  Public disclosure and community consultation meetings 
OBJECTIVE 
METHODOLOGY 
Findings and recommendation  
Annexes: 
List of filled checklists 
- 
-  Consultation minutes with decisions  
List of consultation participants  
- 
Location maps, if possible GIS maps 
- 
-  Subroject technical designs 
-  Summary cost estimation  
- 
- 
-  Photos 
- 
Land certification  
Ips letter of agreement  
Final ESCMP 
Annex VII: Grievance sample form 
V 
(Model of complaint form) 
Date:……………… 
To;  Mr./Ms……………………… 
I am/We would like to submit the complaint form relating to the…………………….sub-project funded by AISPIRE 
AT. 
We believe that it will be impacted and can be impacted due to the sub-project in the following sections (please 
describes the impacting sections). We have raised our concerns to………………….in order to address it that is 
reasonable and acceptable for us. 
Annex VIII: IP screening checklist  
KEY CONCERNS 
(Please provide elaborations 
YES 
NO 
NOT 
KNOWN 
Remarks 
on the Remarks column) 
A.  Indigenous Peoples Identification 
1.  Are  there  socio-cultural  groups  present  in  or 
use  the  project  area who  may be  considered  as 
"tribes"  (hill  tribes,  schedules  tribes,  tribal 
peoples), 
(ethnic  or  national 
minorities),  or  "indigenous  communities"  in  the 
project area? 
"minorities" 
2.  Are there customary or national or local laws 
or  policies 
anthropological 
researches/studies  that  consider  these  groups 
present in or using the project area as belonging 
to "IPs? 
as  well 
as 
3. Do such groups self-identify as being part of a 
distinct social and cultural group?  
4.  Do 
collective 
such  groups  maintain 
attachments  to  distinct  habitats  or  ancestral 
territories  and/or  to  the  natural  resources  in 
these habitats and territories? 
5.  Do  such  groups  maintain  cultural,  economic, 
social, and political institutions distinct from the 
dominant society and culture? 
6.  Do  such  groups  speak  a  distinct  language  or 
dialect? 
7. Has such groups been historically, socially and 
economically  marginalized, 
disempowered, 
excluded, and/or discriminated against? 
8.  Are such groups represented as "Indigenous 
Peoples"  or  as  "ethnic  minorities"  in  any  formal 
decision-making bodies at the national, provincial  
or local levels? 
B.  Identification of Potential Impacts 
9.  Will the project directly or indirectly benefit or 
target Indigenous Peoples? Explain in remarks  
10.    Will  the  project  directly  or  indirectly  affect 
Indigenous  Peoples'  traditional  socio-cultural, 
economic,  and  belief  practices?  (e.g.  child-
rearing,  spiritual/burial  place  either  at  the 
mountain  or  the  forest,  health,  education,  arts, 
and governance) 
11.  Will the project affect the livelihood systems 
of  Indigenous  Peoples?  (e.g.,  food  production 
system,  natural  resource  management,  crafts 
and trade, employment status) 
12.    Will  the  project  be  in  an  area  (land  or 
territory)  occupied,  owned,  or  used  by 
Indigenous Peoples, and/or claimed as ancestral 
domain?  
KEY CONCERNS 
(Please provide elaborations 
YES 
NO 
NOT 
KNOWN 
Remarks 
on the Remarks column) 
C. Identification of Special Requirements 
Will the project activities include: 
13.  Commercial  development  of  the  cultural 
resources and knowledge of Indigenous Peoples? 
14.  Physical  displacement  from  traditional  or 
customary lands? 
15. 
  Commercial  development  of  natural 
resources  (such  as  minerals,  hydrocarbons, 
forests, water, hunting or fishing grounds) within 
customary lands under use that would impact the 
livelihoods  or  the  cultural,  ceremonial,  spiritual 
uses  that  define  as  the  core  identity  and 
community of Indigenous Peoples?  
16.    Establishing  legal  recognition  of  rights  to 
lands and territories that are traditionally owned 
or  customarily  used,  occupied  or  claimed  by 
indigenous peoples? 
17.    Acquisition  of  lands  that  are  traditionally 
owned or customarily used, occupied or claimed 
by indigenous peoples? 
Anticipated project impacts on Indigenous Peoples 
Subproject activity 
Anticipated positive effect 
Anticipated negative effect 
1. 
. 
2. 
3. 
Category 
Description 
Subproject Eligibility 
A 
B 
C 
Significant impacts on Indigenous Peoples 
Not Eligible 
Insignificant impacts on Indigenous Peoples 
No impact on Indigenous Peoples 
Eligible 
Eligible 
