China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AII                         
AWPB                  
CAAS        
CAFI   
CIIC        
COSOP                 
CPMO   
DA               
DARA                   
DLI 
DOF                        
EIRR           
GPIG
H2RDP
IPRAD-SN
IPRCC      
IRF                         
JIMAAPP            
KM                        
MARA                  
MOF                     
M&E                     
MRV                     
NDRC                   
O&M    
PDRC                
PforR   
PLOG                 
PMO                     
PPMO 
QLMAPRP                 
RBL                        
SDG                      
SME  
SPRAD-SS   
SSADEP                    
UNDAF
UNSDCF
Y2RDP                  
Agricultural Information Institute
Annual Work Program and Budget
China Academy of Agricultural Science
China Academy of Financial Inclusion
China Internet Information Cente
Country Strategic Opportunity Programme
County Project Management Office
Designated Account
Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
Disbursement-linked indicator
Department of Finance
Economic Internal Rate of Return
Global Poverty Reduction & Inclusive Growth Portal
Hunan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Innovative Poverty Reduction Program: Specialised Agribusiness Development in Sichuan
and Ningxia
International Poverty Reduction Center in China
Integrated Risk Framework
Jiangxi Mountainous Areas Agribusiness Promotion Project
Knowledge Management
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
Ministry of Finance
Monitoring & Evaluation
Measuring, Reporting and Verification System
National Development and Reform Commission
Operation & Maintenance
Provincial Development and Reform Commission
Program for Results
Program of Loans and Grants
Project Management Office
Provincial Project Management Office
Qinghai Liupan Mountain Area Poverty Reduction Project
Result-based lending
Sustainable Development Goal
Small and medium enterprises
Sustaining Poverty Reduction through Agribusiness Development in South Shaanx
Shiyan Smallholder Agribusiness Development Project
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
United Nations Sustainable Development Country Framework
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☑ Gender transformational ☑ Youth sensitive ☐ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/39
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
N/A
N/A
$0
1.  The poverty context: The government of China is planning to eradicate extreme rural poverty, measured against
the prevailing national poverty standards (i.e. approximately US$1.90/day), by 2020 - making China the first
developing country to achieve SDG1, ten years ahead of the global target. However, sustaining this achievement,
reducing inequalities (between costal and western provinces, urban and rural areas, and among population, i.e.
relative poverty), and avoiding that the people moved out of poverty fall back into poverty will remain priorities for
the government in the years following 2020.
2.  The rural development context. China is going through a fundamental transformation in rural areas. Over the
past decades, China has experienced a massive migration of the active workforce from the rural to the urban
areas due to the gap between the urban and rural salaries and the limited income-generating opportunities in the
rural areas. Rural villages today are characterized by a population which mainly comprises elderly, some middle
generation women taking care of the elderly parents, young children, and sick and/or people with disabilities. Rural
families from poverty vulnerable households are often dependent on the remittances provided by migrant worker
family members, complemented by some income from production and local labour. In response to this situation,
the government has recently coined a "rural revitalization" strategy (2017), a long-term, comprehensive strategy
which aims at rebalancing the existing divide between urban and rural areas by accelerating the development of
rural areas and making them attractive for living. Key strategies for pursuing and sustaining poverty reduction
efforts and developing rural areas include: agricultural "industrialization" (i.e. the development of lead "industries"
through the support of agro-enterprises and cooperatives), creation of employment opportunities, and
comprehensive infrastructure development - among other strategies.
3.  Provincial context: Yunnan has consistently been a priority area of the Chinese government’s poverty reduction
program given it hosts the largest share of poor people in the country (11% of the national poor in 2018). In 2018,
88 out of 129 counties (mostly in the Western and North-East parts of the province) were still classified as
nationally-designated poor counties. Although absolute poverty will be eradicated in these counties by 2020, many
rural households will remain vulnerable and with limited income opportunities.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
1.  Gender and youth: Ageing population, youth migration and feminization of the workforce are becoming common
phenomenon in China's rural areas, including in the project area. About 55% of the workforce in the project area is
engaged in migrant labour; more than half of the migrant workers are represented by youth between 15 and 34
year old of age. To revert this trend, a central pillar of the new rural revitalization strategy focuses on creating new
employment opportunities in the rural areas to retain or attract back the active population to the rural areas,
particularly young people. The project will contribute to this objective by (i) providing incentives and support to
entrepreneurs and investors (particularly young and - considering women represent the majority of the workforce in
the rural areas - women) to start their own business in the project area (Ref. Sub-component A.2); and (ii)
facilitating women participation in supported cooperatives, including leading roles (Ref. Sub-component A.1).
2.  Climate change: The project area is moderately vulnerable to the effects of climate change. Future projections
forecast that mean temperatures will further increase, total annual precipitation will increase, and seasonal
variation will increase. This will result in more frequent and intensified extreme weather events. The project will
contribute to reduce the risks and impacts associated to the changing of weather and climate conditions, in
particular increase in variability and unpredictability, by strengthening the capacity of the government and
beneficiaries to assess climate risks (including through better access to climate information and weather
forecasts), and plan and decide accordingly, and improving the climate-resilience of the infrastructure system (Ref.
Activity A.1.7 and Component B). 47% of IFAD financing can be considered as "climate finance". 
3.  Nutrition: Together with the enormous progress in poverty reduction over the past forty years, China made
2/39
significant progress in improving the food security and nutritional status of its people. Similarly, Yunnan made
significant progress in reducing malnutrition in the rural areas: stunting, prevalence of underweight, and wasting
among children under 5 were less than 4%, about 1%, and about 0.7% respectively in 2018. Reducing child
malnutrition is given high importance in the Yunnan Child Development Plan (2011-2020), and clear targets, in
terms of prevalence of severe malnutrition, prevalence of moderate to severe anemia, and anemia prevalence of
primary and secondary students, are set for the province. Data from project area the overall situation in the project
area is not alarming and in line with the objectives of the provincial development plan. The project will contribute to
improved nutrition outcomes by improving access to safe drinking water in the project area (Ref. Activity B.2.2). 
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
1.  The development problem: Although absolute poverty is expected to be eradicated in China by 2020, the areas
that were classified as "poverty priority areas", including the proposed project area, will remain vulnerable and with
limited income-generating opportunities. These areas are characterized by strong rural-urban migration,
particularly among the youth, ageing population, and feminization of the workforce. Traditional small farms, with
low value addition and ad hoc market outlets, cannot provide a reliable source of income, or require too much
work to remain an attractive livelihood opportunity, also considering the remittances the family receives. As a
result, a significant part of the population is moving out of agriculture - without however reliable alternative income
opportunities. Preventing that the families that were brought out of poverty prior to 2020 fall back into poverty, and
securing economic development of these areas in order to make them attractive for living will remain a challenge
in the years after 2020. While the current mainstream approach for rural poverty reduction, notably chaniye
fupin (poverty reduction through "industrialization", i.e. the development of lead "industries" through the support of
agro-enterprises and cooperatives), has delivered results, and it will remain a central element of the new rural
revitalization strategy, it has also shown several shortcomings: (i) the 'one-village-one-crop-one-enterprise' model
which is implicit in the chaniye fupin model has several risks, including insufficient diversification on both the
supply and demand side, and financial unsustainability due to the excessive reliance on government subsidies; (ii)
using dragonhead enterprises (i.e. large enterprises pulling a value chain) as the main entry point for linking poor
smallholders to market has not always been successful, with the result that several smallholders were transformed
in land rent earners with little or no connection to agricultural activities - eventually forcing them to move out of
agriculture; and (iii) cooperative development as an alternative entry point to achieve poverty reduction through
industrialization also presented several shortcomings. The current situation offers an opportunity to re-think and
adjust the current chaniye fupin model, and/or introduce and test new models and approaches, focusing on
enhanced inclusiveness of vulnerable households, women and youth.
2.  Rationale for IFAD involvement: While in the past IFAD was primarily considered as a source of concessional
financing, in recent years IFAD has been increasingly viewed and appreciated as a development partner, whose
"added value" lies in its capacity (through its loans) to introduce, test and pilot innovative approaches that, if
successful, could inform policymaking and be replicated and/or mainstreamed in government programs - or shared
to other developing countries through south-south cooperation. The current situation offers a unique opportunity
for IFAD to support the government in re-thinking and improving the chaniye fupin model, addressing some of its
shortcomings, and adjusting it to a post-2020 scenario: making it more fair, inclusive, and less demanding on
public finance. IFAD has consistently supported the government in pursuing its poverty reduction agenda, working
in the most marginal and vulnerable areas of the country. In recent years, IFAD has thematically focused on
improving access of smallholders to markets by promoting inclusive value-chain and cooperative development,
and on increasing the resilience of rural populations to climate change. IFAD has thus the credibility and the
experience to support the government in improving its poverty reduction through agribusiness development
models. The project is conceived as a "demonstration" project, which will introduce several innovative approaches
to test their applicability in the project area's context, learn lessons, and induce replication of those models and
approaches that demonstrate themselves successful and/or inform policy-making. 
B. Lessons learned
1.  The design of the project benefited from lessons captured in the Evaluation Synthesis Report on Cooperatives of
the Country Program Evaluation (2014), and the experience of several IFAD- and World Bank-funded projects,
including SSADEP, JiMAAPP, QLMPRP, IPRAD, and SPRAD.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and targeting strategy
1.  Project goal and development objective: The project goal is to sustainably maintain the poor and vulnerable
households in the project area out of poverty. The development objective is to enhance the income generating
opportunities for the poor and vulnerable households in the project area, and the inclusiveness of the benefit-
sharing mechanisms from agro-industries. 
2.  Expected outcomes: Expected outcomes include: (i) participation of poor and vulnerable households in rural
economic growth enhanced; (ii) business opportunities for rural households enhanced; (iii) economic opportunities
for women and youth enhanced; (iv) resilience to the negative effects of climate change enhanced.
3/39
3.  Project area: The project will be implemented in seven currently nationally-designated poor counties within the
four municipalities/prefectures of Zhaotong, Dali, Lijiang and Nujiang in the North-East and Western part of
Yunnan province. Criteria for the selection of the counties included: poverty incidence, presence of industries with
a market potential, and commitment of the local government to the objectives and proposed approach of the
project.
4.  Targeting strategy: The project will adopt the following targeting strategy:
1.  Geographical targeting: the project will target current or former nationally-designated poor counties, or
counties with high poverty incidence, and - within these counties - priority will be given to relative backward
villages and communities, i.e. villages and communities with a relatively high concentration (higher than
county average) of registered- or formerly registered-poor. 
2.  Poverty targeting: within the project area, focus will be given on relative poor (i.e. households who have
been registered at least once in the National Poor Registration System since 2014).
3.  Gender, youth and ethnic minorities targeting: among the project beneficiaries, specific focus will be
given to vulnerable groups (i) women; (ii) youth; and (iii) ethnic minorities. 
5.  Beneficiaries: In all, the project is expected to directly benefit an estimated 91,770 individuals, out of which about
25% are formerly registered poor, 50% women, 30% youth, and 60% belong to ethnic minorities (i.e. direct
beneficiaries). The project is expected to indirectly benefit about 414,540 people, inside the project area with
88,200 households.  
D. Components and sub-components
1.  Component A: Supporting Inclusive Rural Development: This component aims at favouring the economic
development of the project area, by (i) promoting improvements in one of the Government's currently adopted
poverty reduction model and approach: chanye fupin, i.e. poverty reduction through "industrialization" (the
development of lead "industries" through the support of agro-enterprises and cooperatives); and (ii) stimulating
additional and more diversified income opportunities in the project areas, by providing services and stimulating
local entrepreneurship, and attracting new investors in agricultural or (rural/resource-based) non-agricultural
activities. This component is organized along three sub-components:
1.  Sub-component A.1: Improving chanye fupin models: This sub-component will support the
piloting/demonstration of innovative/improved chanye fupin models, with specific focus on
promoting/strengthening the role of cooperatives as vehicle/entry point for pursuing inclusiveness through
agribusiness development. Supporting women cooperative members and  managers will be given
particular emphasis. One of the activities under this sub-component will be implemented piloting a result-
based lending approach: disbursement for this activity will be triggered by the number of cooperatives
that meet defined operational standards that make them 'pro-poor' (disbursement-linked indicator), as
confirmed by an independent third-party verification agency.
2.  Sub-component A.2: Stimulating entrepreneurship/attracting investors: This sub-component will
provide incentives and support to entrepreneurs and investors (particularly young and women) to start their
own business in the project area, thus retaining young business-minded people in the project area - or
attracting them from other areas. 
3.  Sub-component A.3: Improving access to finance: This sub-component will stimulate financial service
innovations to improve access to finance in the project area in support of Sub-component A.1 and A.2.
2.  Component B: Climate-proofed public infrastructure planning and development: This component aims at
improving and expanding the infrastructure systems in the project area through a combination of physical
improvements, institutional strengthening and technical assistance to improve road access, water security, and
prevent soil erosion, and reduce the risks and the impacts associated to changing weather and climate conditions
and promote a sustainable and climate resilient agricultural production. This component is organized along two
sub-components:
1.  Sub-component B.1: Improving infrastructures' climate resilience: This sub-component will support
the improvement of climate-risk assessment, planning and decision-making, and the development and
improvement of the underdeveloped and/or deteriorated water irrigation, water harvesting and water
delivery systems in the project area. 
2.  Sub-component B.2: Improving rural infrastructure system: This sub-component will address some of
the major gaps in the current infrastructure system in the project area, which may limit or constrain the
implementation of the proposed project activities: incomplete rural road network, lack of drinking water
and/or segmented, unlevelled and sloping agricultural land, etc. All infrastructures supported under this
sub-component will be climate-proofed. 
4/39
3.  Component C: Project Management, Knowledge Management, M&E, and Policy: This component will support
the planning, coordinating, monitoring, reporting and overall management functions of the project management
offices (PMOs) at provincial and county level. An important partnership will be established with the Agricultural
Information Institute, Center of International Agricultural Research of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science
(AII-CAAS) for the provision of support in monitoring and evaluation functions, knowledge management, and policy
engagement.
E. Theory of Change
1.  Industrialization as key strategy for poverty reduction and rural revitalization: Promoting thriving "industries"
(i.e. agribusiness development) and linking them with farmers for income generation has been the primary
approach in government poverty reduction programs (i.e. chanyie fupin, poverty reduction through
industrialization). Agricultural "industrialization" remains a central pillar in the new rural revitalization strategy.
However, persistent challenges remain in tackling poverty issues, sustaining poverty reduction results, and
promote economic development in the so called "deep poverty" areas, such as those targeted by the project. The
current base scenario: In the current base scenario, the project area and the relative poor and vulnerable
households still face a mixture of constraints: (i) limitation in income-generating opportunities; (ii) outflow of rural
labour force to urban areas and limited household resources for investments in agriculture or other economic
activities; (iii) increasing trend of feminization of the agricultural workforce; (iv) limited scale of household land
holding, preventing them from being competitive; and (v) inability of smallholders to effectively operate collectively
and enter value chain. Furthermore, (vi) increasing rainfall variability and frequency of unusual weather events and
other risks (price fluctuation & epidemics) are seen as growing uncertainties to agricultural production in the project
area. The shortcomings of the current approach: While "industrialization" remains a key strategy for poverty
reduction and for revitalizing the rural areas, the current approach which focuses on reaching the smallholder
households through "dragonhead enterprises" has several shortcomings, does not always bring the desired
results and/or guarantee sustainability. There are evident gaps in inclusiveness (linking to more poor farmers and
households), fairness and equality (in benefit sharing), efficiency (of government support), and sustainability
(lasting of relationship). At the same time, while strengthening the role and capacity of farmer cooperatives can
offer a more viable approach to achieve the objectives of poverty reduction through industrialization and for
sustaining the results, cooperative development in China also presented some major shortcomings: in many
cases cooperatives are established (and controlled) by enterprises and/or large farmers, rather than by the
spontaneous coordination of small farmers, resulting in little participation and control of the small farmers over the
cooperative. Finally, the government also recognized that, while aiming largely to realize the immediate milestone
of poverty eradication, many of the efforts and practices were not adequately thought through or will not be equally
effective after 2020.
2.  Turning the challenges into opportunities: The current situation offers an opportunity to introduce and test
alternative approaches that could have potential value in informing the government on its pursuit for rural
revitalization and sustainable poverty reduction. The proposed approach: The project would introduce
improvements in the current chaniye fupin model, placing greater emphasis on the principles of diversification,
inclusiveness, equality and sustainability. Through the proposed project interventions, rural villages and
cooperatives, and proactive smallholder farmers (including youth, women and ethnic minorities) will be supported
in developing initiatives around sustainable agriculture as well as rural-based non-farm opportunities. This will
incorporate organizational innovations (e.g. shorter supply chains or digital payment mechanisms), along with
improved agricultural practices that reduce the need for chemical inputs and take care of the environment and
adapt to climatic risks. The project activities would also invest in improving productive and managerial capacities of
women and increase their participation in decision making roles in community institutions. How the approach will
be operationalized: This will be achieved through: (i) capacitating genuine cooperatives (rather than dragonhead
enterprises) as the main entry point to link poor farmers to markets, and piloting alternative chanyie fupin models
(Ref. Sub-component A.1); (ii) stimulating additional and more diversified income opportunities in the project areas
by providing services and stimulating local entrepreneurship (especially among women and young farmers/migrant
returnees), and attracting new investors in agricultural or (rural/resource-based) non-agricultural activities (Ref.
Sub-component A.2); (iii) stimulating financial service innovations to improve access to finance in support of Sub-
component A.1 and A.2 (Ref. Sub-component A.3); (iv) addressing some of the major gaps in the current
infrastructure system in the project area (e.g. road access, water scarcity, etc.) which may limit or constrain the
implementation of the proposed project activities, while at the same time reducing the risks associated to climate
change (Ref. Component B).
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
1.  Alignment with national priorities and strategies: The project is well aligned with the national priorities and
5/39
strategies as it will (i) contribute to the government's objective of sustaining the poverty reduction achievements in
the years following 2020, in line with the principles of the rural revitalization strategy, where "sustaining poverty
eradication efforts" represents a key priority in the strategy; (ii) promote agricultural industrialization, create
employment opportunities, and develop the infrastructure system, in line with the rural revitalization strategic
approach; (iii) contribute to make the project area economically more attractive, thus retaining migrant workers,
and possibly attracting people back to the rural areas; and (iv) promote environmental sustainability, in line with
the government’s concepts of ‘ecological civilization’ and ‘ecologically-balanced development’. The project is in
addition aligned with and is expected to contribute to the Yunnan Young League's 'Action Plan of Youth
Contribution to Rural Revitalization (2019-2022)'.
2.  Alignment with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): The objective and activities of the proposed project
are aligned with and will contribute to the Agenda 2030, and, more specifically to SDG1 (eradicating poverty),
SDG2 (ending hunger and malnutrition, achieving food security and promoting sustainable agriculture), SDG5
(achieving greater gender equality and empower women), SDG10 (reducing inequality within China), SDG13
(reducing the impacts of climate change), and SDG15 (managing sustainably natural resources and halting and
reducing land degradation).
3.  Alignment with COSOP 2016-2020: The project is the third investment operation to be designed under the
current 2016-2020 COSOP, and it well reflects the recent trend of focusing IFAD support towards enhancing
income opportunities and increasing resilience by promoting and strengthening cooperatives, giving more
emphasis to improving access to markets and value-chains, and resilience to climate change. The project supports
the COSOP 2016-2020 strategic objectives 1 (Increase smallholders’ capacity and opportunities to access
markets) and 2 (Strengthen environmental sustainability and climate resilience), and particularly thematic area of
focus 1.A (Support inclusive and safe value chain development), 1.B (Support inclusive cooperatives), 1.C
(Support inclusive financial services), and 2.B (Mainstreaming environmental and climate resilience
considerations). The project is also fully aligned with and supports the three COSOP 2016-2020 strategic thrusts
(i.e. innovation, knowledge management to inform policy, and scaling-up). The project is conceived as a
"demonstration" project, which will introduce several innovations (e.g. innovative chanyie fupin models, inclusive
finance models, disbursement against results, climate-proofed design of infrastructure, etc.) to test their
applicability in the project context, learn lessons, and promote replication of the models and approaches that
demonstrate themselves successful.  
4.  Alignment with UNDAF 2016-2020 and draft UNSDCF 2021-2025: The project is in line with and contributes to
the priority areas of the UNDAF 2016-2020, and particularly with priority area 1 (Reduction of Poverty and
Equitable Development)/ outcome 1 (more people, particularly the vulnerable and disadvantaged, enjoy improved
living conditions and increased opportunities for economic, social and cultural development), and priority area 2
(Improved and Sustainable Environment)/ outcome 2 (more people enjoy a cleaner, healthier and safer
environment as a result of improved environmental protection and sustainable green growth). The project is also in
line and is expected to contribute to the strategic priorities of the draft UNSDCF 2021-2025, currently under
preparation, and particularly to strategic priority 1/ outcome 2/ output 2.1 (China demonstrates a strengthened
enabling environment to stimulate public and private investment and support to overcome income inequality,
particularly in rural areas), and strategic priority 2/ outcome 3/ output 3.1 (Farmers, fishers, and livestock owners -
both male and female - have enhanced skills, ability, and access to adopt and implement sustainable and resilient
practices in their work), and output 3.2 (The Government has strengthened capacity, resources, and incentives to
develop, implement and enforce sustainable agriculture, production and consumption, and biodiversity
conservation policies at national and local levels).
5.  Alignment with IFAD’ Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and with IFAD11 mainstreaming agenda: The
objective and activities of the project are in line with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025 goal and strategic
objectives, particularly strategic objective 2 (increase poor rural people’s benefits from market participation) and
strategic objective 3 (strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of poor rural people’s
economic activities). The project directly supports three of the four IFAD-11 thematic priorities, as it promotes
gender empowerment, foster opportunities for the youth, and addresses or reduces the impacts of climate change.
6.  Alignment with Transition Framework: The strategic approach of the IFAD country program in China (as
elaborated in the COSOP 2016-2020) is in line and supports the principles of the Transition Framework (2018) in
terms of adoption of a mix and diversified lending and non-lending instruments (e.g. investments, knowledge/policy
dialogue, SSTC, etc.), increase co-financing (particularly domestic co-financing), and alignment with partners
approach (e.g. contribution and alignment to/with UNDAF/UNSDCF). Specifically, the proposed project implements
several of the principles and elements of the Transition Framework. In particular, it will (i) pilot one of the new
proposed products under IFAD11 (i.e. the result-based lending, RBL), with the objective of informing IFAD on the
applicability of this instrument widely across its portfolio; (ii) contribute to informing policy-making: a strategic
partnership with the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS) will be established precisely to extract and
document knowledge from the project and utilising it to inform policy making; and (iii) significantly contribute to
increase co-financing, particularly domestic co-financing: the project is expected to mobilise resources in a 1:2.1
ratio, 50% above the IFAD11 target of 1:1.4 (and almost three-times above the 1:0.8 target for domestic co-
financing), and above the COSOP target of 1:1.5. 
6/39
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
1.  Project costs: The total project cost is estimated at US$ 234.5 million, including contingencies. The total base
cost is US$ 224.8 million; physical and price contingencies account for an estimated US$ 9.7 million (i.e. 4.3% of
the total base cost or 4.1% of the total project cost). Project costs are allocated among the three components as
follows: (A) Supporting Inclusive Rural Development (49% of the total project cost); (B) Climate-proofed public
infrastructure planning and development (47% of the total cost); and (C) Project Management, Knowledge
Management, M&E, and Policy (4% of the total cost). 
b. Project financing/co-financing 
1.  Project financing and co-financing: IFAD will contribute to the project with a loan for a total amount of US$ 74.8
million (32% of the total project cost). The Government will contribute US$ 115.3 million (49% of the total cost),
and participating enterprises and cooperatives are expected to contribute approximately US$ 41.7 million (18% of
the total cost). The beneficiaries’ contribution is expected to be approximately US$ 2.8 million (1% of the total
cost). Costs by expenditure account are presented in Table 1 in Annex 3.
2.  Co-financing ratio: The IFAD loan has a co-financing ratio of approximately 1:2.1. This is 50% above the IFAD11
target of 1:1.4 (and almost three-times above the 1:0.8 target for domestic co-financing). 
3.  Climate financing: As per the multilateral development banks’ methodologies for tracking climate change
adaptation and mitigation finance, the total amount of IFAD climate finance for this project is calculated as US$
35.16 million, which represents 47% of the total IFAD project amount. 
c. Summary of economic and financial analysis
1.  Results of the financial analysis: The financial viability of the project has been assessed on the basis of a
number of indicative economic activities that could be supported by the project. Results of the financial analysis,
with-  and without-project scenarios, of the different productive models show positive cash-flows even after the
project closure, and reasonable financial returns in the range of 9-45%.
2.  Results of the economic analysis: Project benefits have been estimated over a period of 20 years using a
discount rate of 5%. The results of the economic analysis suggest that the project is economically viable, with an
economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 15.3% for the base case scenario, with a net present value (NPV) of
US$ 199 million.
3.  Results of the sensitivity analysis: The results of the sensitivity analysis suggest that the project is relatively
robust to to changes in input prices and investment costs, while more sensitive to changes in benefits and output
prices.
e. Sustainability
1.  Sustainability: There are several elements in the project that are likely to ensure post-project sustainability of the
supported activities and generated benefits: (i) Economic viability, as suggested by the results of the economic
analysis; (ii) Alignment with national policies, strategies and priorities: The project is fully aligned with and
embedded in the key policies, strategies and priorities of the country. It is thus expected that the Government will
continue to ascertain political commitment towards the project objectives, and ensure adequate human and
financial resources to ensure that the project achievements are sustained after project completion; (iii) Institutional
sustainability and sustainable partnerships: The project activities will be implemented by permanent government
institutions and/or existing service providers in the project area, which will continue to exist and provide their
services after project completion; (iv) Beneficiary ownership and empowerment: Ownership and commitment of
beneficiaries (cooperatives, enterprises, investors, etc.) will be guaranteed through the business plan
development and selection process, where agribusiness entities and investors are expected to present their own
business ideas, and expected to take a financial risk by mobilizing their own resources, which the project will
simply match through co-financing arrangements. Likewise, infrastructure (water and roads) ownership and
organization of operation, maintenance and management will be supported prior to any infrastructure investment;
(v) Financial viability: Financial viability will be one of the criteria for the selection of the business plans to be
financed by the project.The results of the financial analysis of the different productive models that could be
supported by the project show positive cash-flows even after the project closure, and reasonable financial returns;
(vi) Moving away from subsidizing production towards responding to market demand: The project avoids building
on the conventional 'subsidization' strategy which focused on subsidising production of predefined commodities,
and is promoting a shift towards a more 'market-driven' approach, which focused on market demand, instead.
Sustainability of activities supported by the project will thus not depend on subsidies provided through the project,
but will be ensured by the capacity of the supported entities to adequately respond to market demands; (vii)
Mainstreaming climate considerations into infrastructure development, and ensure O&M arrangements: The
anticipated effects of climate change will be taken into consideration in the planning and design process of the
infrastructures to be supported by the project, and the anticipated impacts of climate change integrated into the
technical specification of the infrastructure to mitigate climate risks. The establishment of Water Users Associations
and Operation and Maintenance Associations, and the preparation of O&M plans are pre-conditions to any
infrastructure investment supported by the project.  
7/39
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
1.  Project risks: Annex 9 presents the Integrated Risk Framework (IRF), with financial management risks reviewed
in the financial management section below. In general, most of the identified risks (i.e. political and governance,
macroeconomic, sector strategies, procurement, stakeholders) have low probability and low impact, except for
risks inherent to institutional capacity, which are rated medium, and environmental and social risks, which are
rated minor to moderate and are discussed in more details in Section I. Appropriate mitigation measures are
identified and reported in Annex 9.
2.  Implementation readiness: Implementation readiness is not considered a major risk (risks of delayed start-up are
considered low). Yunnan has extensive experience in implementing foreign-funded projects, including IFAD-
funded projects (the last one, YARIP, was completed in 2018). The PMO has experience in implementing an
ADB-funded project. Geographical dispersion of project counties is common in internationally-financed project,
and does not represent a factor that affects implementation readiness. In order to further mitigate the the risks of
start-up delays, provision for retroactive financing is made to the project to finance start-up activities and facilitate
prompt execution of the project.
I. Environment and Social category
1.  Environment and Social category: The project is classified as Category B. The Project has minor to moderate
risks of adverse environmental impacts. All possible impacts are reversible in nature, and can be readily remedied
by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures as outlined in the ESMP.
J. Climate Risk classification
1.  Climate Risk classification: The potential climate risk of this project is classified as "moderate". To further
reduce the potential negative impacts of climate change on the project investments, the project would adopt
adaptation measures, e.g. (i) the project will refrain from investments in headworks (i.e. intake weirs), which are
prone to flood damage; (ii) all physical infrastructures, and particularly on-farm irrigation works and rural roads, will
be climate-proofed.  
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
1.  Lead implementing agency: The Provincial Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (DARA) has been
appointed as lead implementing agency. Specifically, the Farmland Enhancement Division within DARA would
take lead responsibility for project design, management, supervision and evaluation, and will act as the Provincial
Project Management Office (PPMO). Additional support will be mobilized from the Division of Cooperative
Economy of DARA, and other divisions whenever needed.
2.  County Project Management Offices: Major implementation responsibilities of the project lie with the counties.
County Project Management Offices (CPMOs) will be established at the County Bureau of Agriculture and Rural
Affairs. Relevant technical bureaus in the counties (such as water conservancy, meteorological, transportation
bureaus, etc.) will be mobilized to support the project implementation in the related activities of the project as per
need.
3.  Project Joint Meeting: At provincial level, a coordinating committee comprising at least the Provincial
Department of Finance (DOF), the Provincial Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (DARA), the Provincial
Development and Reform Commission (PDRC), and the Provincial Office of Poverty Alleviation may be
established to provide overall guidance and coordination of the project implementation. Involvement of the Women
Federation, Youth League, the Meteorological Service, and Work Bureau is also recommended. Similar
coordination committees led by the county mayors should be established at county level.
4.  Independent third-party Verification Agency: An independent third-party verification agency will be contracted
by the project to verify that the disbursement-linked indicator target set for the activity that would pilot the result-
based lending approach (A.1.1 - Promoting pro-poor farmer cooperatives) (i.e. number of cooperatives that meet
defined operational standards) is achieved.
8/39
5.  Role of the Agricultural Information Institute of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science: IFAD and
the Agricultural Information Institute, Center of International Agricultural Research of the Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Science (AII-CAAS) are entering into an agreement by which CAAS would provide support to IFAD in
monitoring and evaluating the IFAD portfolio in China, extracting relevant knowledge from IFAD portfolio, and
utilizing it to inform policy making. Within this context, the project would enter into an agreement with AII-CAAS for
carrying out major functions related to M&E, knowledge management and policy dialogue, i.e. carrying out
baseline, midline, and endline surveys, analysis of data, impact evaluations, policy notes, etc.
6.  Role of MARA: In order to facilitate the possible scaling up of successful innovations promoted through the project
beyond Yunnan province, and inform national policies, DARA is invited to strengthen the linkages with the Ministry
of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA). A budget for policy activities under Component C has been included to
favour and provide sufficient resources to implement activities aimed - among alia - to this purpose.
L. Learning, and KM 
a. Learning and Knowledge Management
1.  Learning and knowledge management (KM): The project knowledge management strategy would be built on
the following key elements: (i) an effective M&E framework will be established to monitor implementation progress,
and would provide the evidence for learning; (ii) a baseline, mid-line, and endline survey will be conducted at the
beginning, mid-term, and completion of the project; (iii) workshops at different levels will be held regularly to share
knowledge, experiences, innovations, and best practices; (iv) study tours, exposure and exchange visits, both in
the country and outside the country will be encouraged as a vehicle for sharing knowledge; (v) an agreement with
the Agricultural Information Institute, Center of International Agricultural Research of the Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Science (AII-CAAS) will be signed for the provision of support in M&E, and knowledge management.
b. Innovation and scaling up
1.  Innovations: One of the main objectives of the project is to introduce, test, pilot, and demonstrate innovative
models, approaches, mechanisms, that - if successful - could be replicated and scaled-up, inform policy-making -
or shared with other developing countries through south-south cooperation. Anticipated innovations include: (i)
Innovative chanyie fupin models: The project will introduce and pilot an upgraded chanye fupin model, where the
role and capacity of farmer cooperatives to act as vehicle/entry point for pursuing inclusiveness through
agribusiness development will be piloted. The project would promote cooperative standardization (i.e. the adoption
of 'best operational standards' by cooperatives); the adoption of value-chain approaches by agro-business entities;
business plans as strategic development tool for agro-business entities; and benefit-sharing mechanisms that
allow active participation of the target group in the economic success of the cooperative and stimulate individual
engagement in the cooperative's economic activity (Ref. Sub-component A.1); (ii) Traceability systems: The
project will support the adoption of a traceability system at county level, a trusted system to ensure that food safety
requirements are met and eventual breaches identified, thus generating consumer trust in food standards and
certification (Ref. Sub-component A.1); (iii) Business incubation centers: The project will support the setting-up and
operationalization of business incubation centers, platforms to support entrepreneurship programs and business
start-up (Ref. Sub-component A.2); (iv) Inclusive finance models: The project will stimulate financial service
innovations to improve access to fiance in the project area (Ref. Sub-component A.3); (v) Climate proofed design
of infrastructure: The project will support the improvement of the capacity to assess climate-risks, and plan and
make investment decisions accordingly, and the integration of climate considerations into the design and technical
specification of the infrastructures, to reduce their vulnerability to the anticipated impacts of climate change (Ref.
Component B); (vi) Disbursement against results: The project will introduce on a pilot basis an innovative
mechanism for disbursement, i.e. disbursing project funds allocated for a sub-set of activities (Ref. Activity A.1.1)
against the achievement of agreed and independently verifiable targets or milestones that are considered
important towards contributing to the achievement of the project objectives. The achievements of the agreed
targets or milestones, or disbursement linked indicators (DLIs), will be verified by an assigned independent agency
following agreed verification protocols. The disbursement against results will be piloted on a small scale by the
project, and replication at a larger scale could be considered at mid-term on the basis of the positive results and
lessons generated during implementation.
2.  Policy engagement and scaling-up: The project is conceived as a 'demonstration' project, which will introduce
several innovative approaches to test their applicability in the project area's context, learn lessons, and induce
replication of those models and approaches that demonstrate themselves successful and/or inform policy-making.
The policy engagement and scaling-up framework relies on the following elements: (i) Champions: The project will
closely engage national and provincial stakeholders as champions to learn and replicate ideas and experiences
derived from the project. Central level agencies such as the Ministry of Finance, (MOF) the National Reform and
Development Commission (NDRC), and the Leading Group Office of Poverty Alleviation and Development (LGOP)
9/39
place great expectations on the capacity of IFAD-funded projects to introduce innovations and good practices that
can be replicated or inform policy-making, and will closely observe the progress and results of the project. The
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) has a special interest on a number of features in the project, that
may inform its policies and programs; (ii) Drivers: There is a mix of (i) market forces associated to the growing
demand for safe and high quality food; and (ii) genuine policy interest from the government, particularly from the
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA), in observing how some of its policies and strategies can be best
operationalized or adjusted; (iii) Pathway: The pathway for policy engagement and scaling-up would include the
following steps: (a) regular monitoring of project progress and results, which will provide evidence for learning; (b)
learning and stocktaking of lessons and best practices, including through possible research/analytical works,
impact assessments, etc. - this function will be supported by the Agricultural Information Institute of the China
Academy of Agricultural Science (AII-CAAS), with which the project would enter into an agreement; (c) workshops,
seminars and other learning events at different levels will be held regularly to share knowledge, experiences,
innovations, and best practices and inform policy-makers. AII-CAAS is expected to play a critical role to
disseminate relevant lessons from the project and inform policy-making; (d) IFAD's role: IFAD will contribute by
providing the necessary expertise, contributing to the monitoring of the results and to the knowledge management
that will catalyze the scaling-up process.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
10/39
a. National Context
1.
2.
The poverty context: The government of China is planning to eradicate extreme rural poverty, measured against
the prevailing national poverty standards (i.e. approximately US$1.90/day), by 2020 - making China the first
developing country to achieve SDG1, ten years ahead of the global target. However, sustaining this achievement,
reducing inequalities [1] (between costal and western provinces, urban and rural areas, and among population, i.e.
relative poverty), and avoiding that the people moved out of poverty fall back into poverty will remain priorities for the
government in the years following 2020.
The rural development context. China is going through a fundamental transformation in rural areas. Over the past
decades, China has experienced a massive migration of the active workforce from the rural to the urban areas due to
the gap between the urban and rural salaries and the limited income-generating opportunities in the rural areas.
Rural villages today are characterized by a population which mainly comprises elderly, some middle generation
women taking care of the elderly parents (the so-called “left-behind women”, who represent about 60% of the labour
force in rural areas), young children, and sick and/or people with disabilities. Rural families from poverty vulnerable
households are often dependent on the remittances provided by migrant worker family members, complemented by
some income from production and local labour. Today, 42% of the population is registered in rural areas. This
percentage is expected to drop to 31% by 2030, furthering the urban-rural divide, unless measures are taken to
economically develop the rural areas. In response to this situation, the government has recently coined a "rural
revitalization" strategy (2017), a long-term, comprehensive strategy which aims at rebalancing the existing divide
between urban and rural areas by accelerating the development of rural areas and making them attractive for living.
Key strategies for pursuing and sustaining poverty reduction efforts and developing rural areas include: agricultural
"industrialization" (i.e. the development of lead "industries" through the support of agro-enterprises and cooperatives),
creation of employment opportunities, and comprehensive infrastructure development - among other strategies.
3.
Provincial context: Yunnan has consistently been a priority area of the Chinese government’s poverty reduction
program given it hosts the largest share of poor people in the country (11% of the national poor in 2018). In 2018, 88
out of 129 counties (mostly in the Western and North-East parts of the province) were still classified as nationally-
designated poor counties. Although absolute poverty will be eradicated in these counties by 2020, many rural
households will remain vulnerable and with limited income opportunities.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
4.
Gender and youth [2]: Ageing population, youth migration and feminization of the workforce are becoming common
phenomenon in China's rural areas, including in the project area. About 55% of the workforce in the project area is
engaged in migrant labour; more than half of the migrant workers are represented by youth between 15 and 34 year
old of age. 
Even though women represents the majority in the workforce in the project counties, women lead less than 5% of
cooperatives and women have low participation in leadership roles in male-led cooperatives. Women hold less than
17% of leadership positions in the village. The household is regarded as the member of farmer’s cooperatives as the
basic production unit, yet, the household head (culturally the man), is registered as the member representing the
household.
To revert this trend, a central pillar of the new rural revitalization strategy focuses on creating new employment
opportunities in the rural areas to retain or attract back the active population to the rural areas [3], particularly young
people. The project will contribute to this objective by (i) providing incentives and support to entrepreneurs and
investors (particularly young and - considering women represent the majority of the workforce in the rural areas -
women) to start their own business in the project area (Ref. Sub-component A.2); and (ii) facilitating women
participation in supported cooperatives, including leading roles (Ref. Sub-component A.1).
5.
Climate change: The average atmospheric temperature in China has increased by 0.91oC in the past 100 years. It
is predicted that, with the continued intensification of climate change, the occurrence of extreme weather events and
natural disasters will continue to increase. As poverty areas often coincide with climate and ecologically vulnerable
areas, the effects of climate change will have a higher impact on rural, marginalized and natural resource-dependent
households, who have higher exposure and lower adaptive capacity - increasing their overall vulnerability. The
project area is moderately vulnerable to the effects of climate change. From 1961 to 2010, mean temperature in the
project area has increased at a rate of 0.16oC per 10 years. Precipitations decreased in spring and autumn, and
increased in summer. Frequency and intensity of extreme weather events increased, causing more seasonal
droughts and floods, with an adverse impact on soil erosion. Future projections forecast that mean temperatures will
further increase, total annual precipitation will increase, and seasonal variation will increase. This will result in more
frequent and intensified extreme weather events. The project will contribute to reduce the risks and impacts
associated to the changing of weather and climate conditions, in particular increase in variability and unpredictability,
by strengthening the capacity of the government and beneficiaries to assess climate risks (including through better
access to climate information and weather forecasts), and plan and decide accordingly, and improving the climate-
resilience of the infrastructure system (Ref. Activity A.1.7 and Component B). According to international
methodologies for tracking climate change adaptation and mitigation finance, 47% of IFAD financing can be
considered climate finance.
11/39
6.
Nutrition: Together with the enormous progress in poverty reduction over the past forty years, China made
significant progress in improving the food security and nutritional status of its people. Prevalence of
undernourishment decreased from 24% in 1992 to 9% in 2016. Malnutrition prevalence in children under 5 years
decreased from 38% to 9% (measured as height for age) and from 19% to 3% (weight for age) in the period 1987-
2010. Stunting, underweight, and wasting among children under 5 years were 8%, 2% and 2% respectively in 2013.
China's value in the Global Hunger Index fell from 25.1 in 1990 (serious hunger level), to 7.6 in 2018 (low hunger
level). Similarly, Yunnan made significant progress in reducing malnutrition in the rural areas: stunting, prevalence of
underweight, and wasting among children under 5 were less than 4%, about 1%, and about 0.7% respectively in
2018. Reducing child malnutrition is given high importance in the Yunnan Child Development Plan (2011-2020), and
clear targets, in terms of prevalence of severe malnutrition, prevalence of moderate to severe anemia, and anemia
prevalence of primary and secondary students, are set for the province. Delivery is mainly driven by the 'programs on
health management for children under 6 years'. Limited data from the three project counties visited during design (i.e.
Suijiang, Yunlong, and Yongping) showed that complementary foods are reasonably available, and that some of the
targets (e.g. prevalence of moderate to severe anemia of children under 5 maintained under 12%) have already been
achieved, suggesting the overall situation in the project area is not alarming and in line with the objectives of the
provincial development plan. The project will contribute to improved nutrition outcomes by improving access to safe
drinking water in the project area (Ref. Activity B.2.2). 
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
7.
The development problem: Although absolute poverty is expected to be eradicated in China by 2020, the areas that
were classified as "poverty priority areas", including the proposed project area, will remain vulnerable and with limited
income-generating opportunities. These areas are characterized by strong rural-urban migration, particularly among
the youth, ageing population, and feminization of the workforce. Traditional small farms, with low value addition and
ad hoc market outlets, cannot provide a reliable source of income, or require too much work to remain an attractive
livelihood opportunity, also considering the remittances the family receives. As a result, a significant part of the
population is moving out of agriculture - without however reliable alternative income opportunities. Preventing that the
families that were brought out of poverty prior to 2020 fall back into poverty, and securing economic development of
these areas in order to make them attractive for living will remain a challenge in the years after 2020. While the
current mainstream approach for rural poverty reduction, notably chaniye fupin (poverty reduction through
"industrialization", i.e. the development of lead "industries" through the support of agro-enterprises and cooperatives),
has delivered results, and it will remain a central element of the new rural revitalization strategy, it has also shown
several shortcomings: (i) the 'one-village-one-crop-one-enterprise' model which is implicit in the chaniye fupin model
has several risks, including insufficient diversification on both the supply and demand side, and financial
unsustainability due to the excessive reliance on government subsidies; (ii) using dragonhead enterprises (i.e. large
enterprises pulling a value chain) as the main entry point for linking poor smallholders to market has not always been
successful (Ref. Section on Lessons learnt), with the result that several smallholders were transformed in land rent
earners with little or no connection to agricultural activities - eventually forcing them to move out of agriculture; and
(iii) cooperative development as an alternative entry point to achieve poverty reduction through industrialization also
presented several shortcomings (Ref. Section on Lessons learned). The current situation offers an opportunity to re-
think and adjust the current chaniye fupin model, and/or introduce and test new models and approaches, focusing on
enhanced inclusiveness of vulnerable households, women and youth.
8.
Rationale for IFAD involvement:
1.  How the proposed intervention fits in the context of the evolving IFAD-China partnership - IFAD's added
value: While in the past IFAD was primarily considered as a source of concessional financing, in recent years
IFAD has been increasingly viewed and appreciated as a development partner, whose "added value" lies in its
capacity (through its loans) to introduce, test and pilot innovative approaches that, if successful, could inform
policymaking and be replicated and/or mainstreamed in government programs - or shared to other developing
countries through south-south cooperation. This represents the foundations of the current COSOP (2016-2020),
which provides the framework for the design of this project. Although the next COSOP (2021-2025), which will
provide the framework for the implementation of the project, has not yet been developed, it is expected that the
expectations about the role and added value of IFAD in China in the near future would broadly remain the same.
The current situation offers a unique opportunity for IFAD to support the government in re-thinking and improving
the chaniye fupin model, addressing some of its shortcomings, and adjusting it to a post-2020 scenario: making it
more fair, inclusive, and less demanding on public finance.
2.  IFAD's "niche" in China - the rationale for working in poor areas on improving chanye fupin models: Since
12/39
1981, when the first IFAD loan to China was approved, IFAD has supported the government in pursuing its
poverty reduction agenda, working in the most marginal and vulnerable areas of the country. In recent years (Ref.
COSOP 2016-2020), IFAD has thematically focused on improving access of smallholders to markets by promoting
inclusive value-chain and cooperative development, and on increasing the resilience of rural populations to climate
change. IFAD has thus the credibility and the experience to support the government in improving its poverty
reduction through agribusiness development models. The project would upgrade the chanyie fupin model by
strengthening the role and capacity of farmer cooperatives to act as a vehicle/entry point for pursuing inclusiveness
through agribusiness development. The underlying hypotheses which underpin the proposed approach are: (i)
smallholder agriculture can remain competitive by differentiating from the increasingly industrialized crop
production and developing "niche" markets where consumers are willing to pay a premium price - and that such
opportunities exist in the project area and can be tapped by smallholder farmers (organized in cooperatives)
through partnerships with other value chain actors; and (ii) farmer cooperatives where poor households/individuals
have 60-70% of the shares can be effective for poverty reduction.
3.  How the project will expand women's economic empowerment and strengthen women's role in decision-
making making the project "gender transformative": In line with Mainstreaming Gender-transformative
Approaches in the IFAD Action Plan 2019-2025, the project intends to be gender transformative. As illustrated
above, there is an increasing trend of feminization of the agricultural workforce. However, there isn’t a subsequent
increase in women’s participation in cooperatives and decision making roles. The activities of the project will
expand women’s economic empowerment through access to finance and technology, strengthen women’s role in
community institutions,  and address social norms by bringing more women in decision making positions in
community institutions.
4.  How the project would inform policymaking and favour replication [4]: The project is conceived as a
"demonstration" project, which will introduce several innovative approaches to test their applicability in the project
area's context, learn lessons, and induce replication of those models and approaches that demonstrate
themselves successful and/or inform policy-making. The potential of this project to become a vehicle for policy
engagement and scaling-up relies on the genuine interest from the central level agencies, particularly from the
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA), in observing how some of its policies and strategies can be best
operationalized or adjusted. The provincial Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (DARA), the lead
implementing agency, will play a critical role as entry point to inform MARA. Key elements for pursuing policy
engagement and scaling-up include: (i) regular monitoring of project progress and documentation of results, which
will provide evidence for learning; (ii) stocktaking and analysis of lessons and best practices, including through
possible research/analytical works, impact assessments, etc.; (iii) regular workshops, seminars and other learning
events to share knowledge, experiences, innovations, and best practices and inform policy-makers; (iv) joint field-
visits with relevant stakeholders and policy-makers to showcase lessons and best practices; (v) regular interaction
with other projects to share lessons and best practices. Within this context, it is strategic the partnership that the
project will pursue with the Agriculture Information Institute of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science (AII-
CAAS) to receive support in monitoring and evaluation, extracting relevant knowledge from the project, and
utilizing it to inform policy making.
5.  Complementarity with other lending and non-lending instruments: According to the COSOP 2016-2020, the
implementation of the IFAD country program in China will be pursued through three complementary
instruments/delivery mechanisms: investment loans, non-lending activities (which would include analytical works,
technical assistance, impact assessments, policy engagement, south-south cooperation), and partnerships. The
three instruments/delivery mechanisms are jointly expected to contribute to the COSOP' strategic objectives:
increase smallholder capacity and opportunities to access markets, and strengthen environmental sustainability
and climate resilience. This project should be seen as synergetic and complementary to the other ongoing and
planned activities: it will further pilot and test different approaches of poverty reduction through agribusiness
development, which represented the thematic focus of the last five IFAD-funded projects (in six different
provinces) in China and of the next investment in pipeline in Hunan, offering additional insights on the factors and
conditions that make different 'poverty reduction through agribusiness development' models more or less
successful. In addition, the project well complements the analytical works on value chain development and poverty
reduction carried out by the China Agricultural University (CAU) and the China Academy of Agricultural Sciences
(CAAS) under the country grant "Enhancing Knowledge Management & Cooperation and Policy Dialogue" (Value
chain models for poverty reduction, and E-commerce for value-chain development in poverty areas), and the
planned analytical work on digital finance for smallholders carried out in partnership with the China Academy of
Financial Inclusion (CAFI). If successful, the approaches piloted under the project can be documented and shared
with other developing countries through the Global Poverty Reduction & Inclusive Growth Portal (GPIG), a digital
platform hosted by the International Poverty Reduction Center in China (IPRCC) and the China Internet
Information Center (CIIC) aimed at favouring south-south knowledge cooperation on poverty reduction and
inclusive growth - as in the case of the "pro-poor private-public partnership" model piloted under the IFAD-funded
SSADeP. 
B. Lessons learned
13/39
9.
The design of the project benefited from lessons captured in the Evaluation Synthesis Report on Cooperatives of the
Country Program Evaluation (2014), and the experience of several IFAD- and World Bank-funded projects, including
SSADEP, JiMAAPP, QLMPRP, IPRAD, and SPRAD.
Lesson
How the lesson has been incorporated in the project
Poverty reduction through direct support to
dragonhead enterprises evidenced
shortcomings: Most of government's past efforts to
reduce poverty through 'industrialization' (i.e.
chanye fupin) focused on directly supporting
(through incentives, subsidies, preferential access
to finance, etc.) local dragonhead enterprises, under
the assumption that the economic benefits
generated by the enhanced industries would trickle
down to the surrounding population, including the
poor. However such approach demonstrated some
limitations, as: (i) highly dependent on government
subsidies, which are likely to decrease after 2020,
when poverty will be eradicated, and thus not
sustainable in the long run; (ii) not necessarily
inclusive, as limited attention in the model was paid
to targeting and the benefit sharing mechanisms (in
most cases, land leasing and dividends were the
preferred benefit sharing mechanisms); and (iii)
expensive: because limited attention was paid on
targeting and benefit sharing mechanisms, most of
the resources were captured by the enterprise and
only limitedly reached the target population, making
the investment/benefit ratio extremely high.
Farmers cooperatives are an important force to
facilitate farmers' access to market: The
Evaluation Synthesis Report on Cooperatives of the
Country Program Evaluation (2014) highlighted that
farmers’ cooperatives are an inevitable outcome of
China's recent rural economic development, and an
important force to link farmers to markets, as they
contribute to: (i) provide funding support for the poor
farmers; (ii) reduce production and transactions
costs; (iii) generate economies of scale effect(s);
and (iv) improve the comprehensive quality of
farmers.
The project aims at improving the government's
currently adopted poverty reduction through
industrialization model (chanye fupin) by
introducing and piloting different delivery
mechanisms, that - if successful - can be
replicated. Particularly:
(i)   The project will not provide direct support to
dragonhead enterprises (or enterprises in general):
the project will primarily focus on cooperatives as
the main entry point for investments;
(ii)  Joint cooperatives-agribusiness enterprises [5]
partnerships, where the enterprise is a partner in
an out-grower partnership arrangement, will be
considered (Ref. Activity A.1.3). However,
enterprises will not be eligible for receiving grant
financing for their own assets from the project;
(iii) The project will promote benefit sharing
mechanisms that allow active participation of the
target group in the economic success of the
cooperative (i.e. income from production, wage
labour, or dividends as active member in a
cooperative. Using land as a share will be given
preference over leasing the land for an annual or
one-time payment).
In order to maximize the benefits for the project
target group, some of the criteria for farmer
cooperatives to be supported by the project
include: (i) a critical balance between business
strength (generally from non-poor members) and
appropriate inclusiveness of vulnerable and poor
households; (ii) transparency in business decisions
and financial accounts to reduce elite capture and
social disruptions; (iii) the application of fair benefit-
sharing arrangements, which allow participation of
the cooperative members in the business success
of the cooperative, and stimulate individual
engagement in the cooperative's economic activity;
and (iv) shareholding structures and mechanisms
which provide sufficient attractiveness for the
necessary financial capital or land asset
contribution.
The shortcomings of the cooperative
development in China: Over the past ten years,
the number of farmer cooperatives in China has
rapidly increased. However, the overall cooperative
development in China presents some major
shortcomings:
14/39
(i)  In many cases cooperatives are established (and
controlled) by enterprises and/or large farmers,
rather than by the spontaneous coordination of
small farmers dealing with the same problems. As a
result, small farmers have little participation and
control in the cooperatives;
(ii) In other cases, cooperatives are created 'top-
down', headed by village leaders, with every
household considered as a member (i.e. the so-
called 'village cooperatives'). However, such village
cooperatives lack the features of self-elected
governing and decision-making business entities,
and lack financial independence and transparency.
Strengthening the role and capacity of farmer
cooperatives in critical to achieve the objectives of
poverty reduction through industrialization, and for
sustaining the results. The success of farmer
cooperatives in generating the economic benefits
for their members in general, and for their poor
members in particular, depend on their ability to
meet operational standards (in terms of
membership, financial management capacity,
transparency, governance and decision making
processes, etc.) and poverty alleviation
commitments (in terms of inclusiveness of poor
households, and fair shareholding and benefit
sharing mechanisms).
The project will not support either the cooperatives
controlled by an enterprise and/or large investor, or
the village cooperatives, as they are not likely
effective to create ownership, empowerment and
self-development of the project target group.
The shortcomings of the 'large or lead
households' and/or 'enterprises shareholding'
cooperative model: An analysis carried out under
three World Bank's projects supporting some 500
farmer cooperatives in China, which classified
cooperatives into six basic organisational models
along asset ownership, involvement of large or lead
households and enterprises and shareholding
characteristics, showed that pure smallholder or
poverty household cooperatives have extremely
limited chances for financial success. Enterprise
shareholding in cooperatives or large investors
owning majority shares raise the financial success
significantly, but hardly allow enough transparency
and fairness in the profit sharing. 
The improvement of cooperative operations is
an important objective in government programs.
The government has been supporting farmer
cooperatives mainly by providing investments in
productive assets and infrastructures, and in
subsidizing farm inputs and trainings. However,
limited success has been achieved, mainly
because the traditional support programs are 'input
oriented' and pay for expenses, rather than focusing
on outputs and outcomes.
The project design uses a balance between
inclusiveness and benefit-sharing mechanisms on
one hand, and the likelihood of economic success,
which requires involvement of investors and better-
off  households on the other hand. These models
have been successfully field tested in Guizhou and
Guangxi under the World Bank projects.
The project would pilot a different incentive system
to provide incentives to the cooperatives to meet
the standards and conditions needed to achieve the
expected economic performance and poverty
reduction impact, whereas public support will not
be provided in the form of productive assets and
inputs, but as payment upon achievement of a
certain result (i.e. the achievement of certain
operational standards in terms of governance,
membership, decision-making arrangements,
financial management standards, benefit-sharing
mechanisms, etc.). This approach will be piloted in
Activity A.1.1 adopting a result-based lending
approach.
15/39
Limited attention to post-production, value-
addition and marketing: Government's
conventional agricultural development strategies
have mainly focused on production/productivity
enhancement, with emphasis on infrastructure
development rather than on post-production, value-
addition and marketing, which did not necessarily
take advantage of the emerging market
opportunities, and in some cases resulted in cases
of local overproduction which led in drops in the
price of commodities and farmers' income.
As observed in the Evaluation Synthesis Report on
Cooperatives of the Country Program Evaluation
(2014), some of the shortcomings observed in the
past programs that include a value-chain
development module is that the module is not
complete as the government mainly provides
support for expansion of production, and is lacking a
market operation mechanism. Selling of the
products is often only considered a next step
deferred after the project.
The increasing weight of non-agricultural
activities in the rural household's income:
Greater emphasis in previous projects has been
placed on making agriculture activities more
profitable for poor smallholders, with the objective of
increasing their income. However, evidence shows
that, following the fundamental transformation that
rural China is experiencing, income from agricultural
activities represents today - on average - a relatively
small percentage of the overall income of a rural
household.
Pricing in RBLs - Emerging lessons from the
World Bank's Guangxi Poverty Reduction
Program for Results (PforR): In principle, pricing
for RBLs can be either 'cost/expenditure-based' (i.e.
disbursements are triggered by the documented
execution of eligible expenditures), or
'value/incentive-based' (i.e. the required incentive to
trigger the operator to deliver the outcome/result).
The former method however presents several
problems, as several actions that are critical to the
achievement of the outcome/result are not directly
related to expenditures. The World Bank Poverty
Reduction PforR, approved in June 2018, adopts a
value/incentive-based pricing.
The project will promote the adoption of a 'market-
driven' approach (i.e. it will support cooperatives to
identify and respond to markets' demands). While
not excluding support to increasing/expanding
production base [6], preference would be given to
proposals that promote 'value-addition' (i.e.
processing, product differentiation and certification,
traceability, branding, marketing, etc.), as value-
addition is expected to generate higher profits, and
shortening of the value-chain (i.e. linking
cooperatives to end-consumers, using e-commerce
and direct sales arrangements with supermarkets,
etc.).
The project will take several measures to promote a
'market-driven' approach: (i) the project moves
away from a government designed investment
package for farmer cooperatives to a demand-
driven support of business opportunities identified
in business plan proposals. To be financed, each
business plan needs to demonstrate market
demand and a market operation mechanism with
satisfactory financial viability criteria; (ii)
cooperatives need to attract a private co-investor
matching the project investment at least on a 1:1
basis. The private investor will introduce
management and business expertise and
understanding: through such risk sharing it will
contribute to market and business orientation; and
(iii) investments in production will follow a ‘contract
farming approach’ and will be based on joint
business plan prepared by a market partner
(enterprise) and a farmer cooperative.
The project would combine activities aimed at
promoting value-addition, shortening the value-
chain, and making the benefit-sharing mechanisms
more fair and inclusive (ref. Sub-component A.1)
with activities aimed at stimulating
entrepreneurship, including off-farm/non-
agricultural activities (Ref. Sub-component A.2),
with the overall objective of offering additional and
more diversified income-generating opportunities to
the households in the project area.
The design team proposed the adoption of the
value/incentive-based pricing for the pilot RBL
activity in the project, and the agreement of a fixed
or average price per cooperative, rather than a
different price for each individual cooperative.
However, understanding the proposed approach
was not consistent with the Draft Guidance Note on
Project and Programmatic Results-Based Lending
(November 2018), the project eventually decided to
adopt an expenditure-based approach for setting
the fixed average price in the pilot RBL activity
(Activity A.1.1).
16/39
The perverse incentive of decentralized
repayment responsibilities: Experiences from
previous projects (e.g. SSADEP and JIMAAPP)
showed that in those cases where the loan
repayment responsibility is transferred to the local
county authorities, and from them to the
beneficiaries (i.e. agro-enterprises, cooperatives, or
poor households) a perverse incentive is created
whereas local authorities have an incentive to select
among the entities to support those who could offer
the highest likelihood of repayment, which are not
necessarily those that are more functional to the
achievement of the project objectives.
As in most recent IFAD-funded projects (e.g.
SPRAD and IPRAD), it was proposed that project
funds be not on-lent to the project counties, but
repaid by the Yunnan province. Counties would
use project funds as grants for targeted entities.
This would allow better targeting of project
beneficiaries.
Unfortunately, during Appraisal, the province
informed it had already reached its debt ceiling,
and thus decided to on-lend the IFAD loan to the
project counties. In order to mitigate the risk of the
perverse incentives that such loan repayment
modality could generate, it is agreed that the loan
on-lent to the counties cannot be further on-lent to
the beneficiaries, i.e. the project resources will be
transferred to the beneficiaries as a grant. 
Limited policy-influence of results/lessons from
IFAD-funded projects: Recent assessments and
evaluations indicated that IFAD-funded projects had
a positive impact on the ground, but that the
results/lessons generated by the projects had limited
influence on policy-making.
The project will partner with the Agriculture
Information Institute, Center of International
Agricultural Research of the Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Science (CAAS) to receive support in
monitoring and evaluation, extracting relevant
knowledge from the project, and utilizing it to inform
policy making.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
10.
Project goal and development objective: The project goal is to sustainably (i.e. in economic, social, and
environmental terms - including climate risk resilience) maintain the poor and vulnerable households in the project
area out of poverty. The development objective is to enhance the income generating opportunities for the poor and
vulnerable households in the project area, and the inclusiveness of the benefit-sharing mechanisms from agro-
industries.
This will be achieved by (i) strengthening and supporting cooperatives committed to poverty alleviation in terms of
inclusiveness of poor households among their members and fair shareholding and benefit sharing mechanisms to
become more competitive and generate more revenues (Ref. Sub-component A.1); (ii) stimulating additional and
more diversified income opportunities in the project areas, by providing services and stimulating local
entrepreneurship, and attracting new investors in agricultural or (rural/resource-based) non-agricultural activities (Ref.
Sub-component A.2); (iii) improving access to finance (Ref. Sub-component A.3); and (iv) addressing some of the
major gaps in the current infrastructure system in the project area which may limit or constrain the implementation of
the proposed project activities (Ref. Component B). Climate change considerations will be mainstreamed throughout
the project by strengthening the capacity of the government and beneficiaries to assess climate risks and identify
adaptation options - and plan and decide accordingly, and improving the climate-resilience of the infrastructure
system. Special focus will be at strengthening women’s involvement in decision-making and leadership roles in
cooperatives and entrepreneurship.
11.
Key indicators: The impact of the project would be measured through the following key indicators: (i) increase in
households' income; (ii) new jobs created; (iii) increase in cooperatives' sales; (iv) increase in number of
cooperatives engaged in formal partnerships/contracts with public or private entities; (v) participating women report
an adequate empowerment score in pro-WEAI index; (vi) increase in people adopting environmentally sustainable
and climate resilient practices; (vii) reported reduced water shortages; and (viii) number of policies completed -
among other indicators (Ref. Annex I - Logframe). Indicators will be disaggregated by gender, age, and ethnic group,
when relevant.
12.
Disbursement-linked indicator: In addition to the key indicators above, output indicator 1.1 (i.e. Number of pro-poor
professional farmer cooperatives meeting agreed operational standards) will be used as disbursement-linked
indicator for Activity A.1.1, i.e. the indicator that will be used to trigger the disbursement of funds for activity A.1.1, in
line with the result-based lending approach that will be pilot under this project.
17/39
13.
Expected outcomes: Expected outcomes include: (i) participation of poor and vulnerable households in rural
economic growth enhanced; (ii) business opportunities for rural households enhanced; (iii) economic opportunities for
women and youth enhanced; (iv) resilience to the negative effects of climate change enhanced.
14.
Project duration: The project will be implemented over a period of 5 years [7].
15.
Project area: The project will be implemented in seven currently nationally-designated poor counties within the four
municipalities/prefectures of Zhaotong, Dali, Lijiang and Nujiang in the North-East and Western part of Yunnan
province (i.e. Zhenxiong and Suijiang counties in Zhaotong municipality; Yunlong and Yongping counties in Dali
prefecture; Huaping and Yongsheng counties in Lijang municipality; and Lanping county in Nujiang prefecture).
Criteria for the selection of the counties included: poverty incidence (nationally- or provincially-designated poor
county), presence of industries with a market potential, and commitment of the local government to the objectives
and proposed approach of the project.
16.
Ethnic minorities in project area: Yunnan has 25 of the 55 ethnic minority groups of the country. Five of the seven
project counties are located in the so-called "cultural diversity area" of Yunnan. Dali and Nujiang are classified
"minority autonomous prefectures". In Lijiang prefecture, 60% of the population belong to ethnic minority groups.
Overall, about 29% of the population in the project area belong to ethnic minority groups. Main ethnic minority groups
in the project area are: Hui, Bai, Yi, Miao, Lisu, Naxi, Lahu, Pumi, Dai and Nu people.
17.
Targeting strategy: The project will adopt the following targeting strategy:
1.  Geographical targeting: the project will target current or former nationally-designated poor counties, or counties
with high poverty incidence, and - within these counties - priority will be given to relative backward villages and
communities, i.e. villages and communities with a relatively high concentration (higher than county average) of
registered- or formerly registered-poor. Based on the above criteria, 172 villages in 29 townships have been pre-
identified for project implementation, which represent about one-fifth of the villages in the project counties. The
project would cover about 19% of the poor villages in the project counties. Poverty incidence in the project area is
about 23%, about one-third higher than county average (17%) and four-time higher than provincial average (5%).
Net income per capita in the project area is about 13% lower than provincial average and 8% lower than county
average.
2.  Poverty targeting: within the project area, focus will be given on relative poor (i.e. households who have been
registered at least once in the National Poor Registration System since 2014). It is in fact expected that no more
households will be in the NPRS after 2020.
The advantages of relying on 'households who have been registered at least once in the National Poor
Registration System since 2014' as targeting category:
Adherence to this category for targeting offers several advantages: first, it allows precise targeting; second, it
ensures full alignment with government poverty reduction strategies and efforts, as government is expected to
keep track of the formerly registered poor after 2020 to avoid they fall back into poverty; and third, it enables the
project to broadly target ‘vulnerable’ households (rather than strictly ‘poor’ households), as several of the
formerly registered poor may have actually moved out of poverty in the period 2014-2020, but they would still
remain vulnerable to shocks.
While the targeting strategy “focuses” on formerly registered poor, it does not however exclude households that
have never been poor in the period 2014-2020, but may became poor after 2020. The measures that the project
puts in place to minimize the risk of excluding people who become poor for the first time after 2020 include the
financing rules for approval of business plan proposal, where inclusion of poor households is one of the criteria
for accessing project co-financing.
The risk of exclusion is thus considered minimal. However, it is also possible that some poor households give
preference to different livelihoods strategies (for instance, continue to rely on migrant labour), and decide not
take advantage of the opportunities provided by the project interventions.
3.  Gender, youth and ethnic minorities targeting: among the project beneficiaries, specific focus will be given to
vulnerable groups (i) women; (ii) youth (i.e. people between 18-45 years of age [8]); and (iii) ethnic minorities.
Particularly, the project will actively favour women and youth participation to/benefit from project activities as
follows:   
1.  Women targeting strategy: (1) Women participation in supported cooperatives will be promoted as follows:
(i) Women-led cooperatives will be encouraged: the project will support at least two women-led
cooperatives per county; (ii) Gender eligibility criteria will be applied to select the cooperatives to be
supported by the project: percentage of women in the cooperative should be higher than the percentage of
women in the local village; women should be included in the cooperative's board; at least 60% of the
participants to trainings and capacity building activities should be women; (2) Women entrepreneurship will
be favoured by awarding at least 25% of the start-up investment support to women.
18/39
2.  Youth targeting strategy: (1) Youth participation in supported cooperatives will be promoted by supporting
at least one youth-led cooperative per county; (2) Youth entrepreneurship will be favoured by awarding at
least 50% of the start-up investment support to youth, of which 50% will be for young women.
3.  Ethnic minorities targeting strategy: Ethnic minorities in the project area are in general well integrated in
the existing socio-economic context, have livellihood strategies similar to those of the other rural
populations, are not excluded from existing economic opportunities, are not discriminated, and have not
distinct needs from the rest of the population. They are vulnerable not because belonging to an ethnic
minority group, but because they live in poor and not well developed areas. Government policies targeting
rural poor and vulnerable households do not differentiate based on ethnicity, but target based on poverty
indicators. The project engagement approach with pro-poor cooperatives and agro-businesses will be
based on informed consultations to ensure that particular livelihood strategies of the different ethnic groups
are taken into account, where existing.
18.
19.
20.
Beneficiaries: In all, the project is expected to directly benefit an estimated 91,770 individuals, out of which about
25% are formerly registered poor, 50% women, 30% youth, and 60% belong to ethnic minorities (i.e. direct
beneficiaries). The project is expected to indirectly benefit about 414,540 people, inside the project area with 88,200
households.
The added value of the infrastructure component in terms of outreach of targeted population: Unequal
availability, access, and quality of infrastructures is often quoted as one of the main factors of regional inequalities,
particularly between better-off and poorer areas. In this context, the improvement of the infrastructure system in the
project area is expected to overall develop the project area and improve the conditions and reduce the gap with more
developed areas of the province. As the benefits generated by public infrastructures can be considered public goods,
and as such equally accessible to the whole population of the project area, it is difficult to claim that the project target
group will benefit more from the improved infrastructure system than the rest of the population. However, considering
that poverty incidence in the project area is higher than the county and provincial average, it can be argued that
overall the infrastructures supported by the project would incrementally benefit more IFAD target group. That being
said, selection of the infrastructures to be supported by the project (particularly production roads, irrigation systems
and land improvement) would in principle follow and be driven by the selection of the cooperatives to be supported.
Improvement of safe drinking water supply systems will primarily benefit villages and households that do not have yet
access to safe drinking water, i.e. the poorest.
How support to cooperatives would ensure outreach to the target population: The project will provide technical
and financial support as an incentive to selected cooperatives to stimulate them to establish inclusive and fair
relationship with the project target group. Practically, the project will co-finance competitively-selected business plans
as a means to efficiently allocate public resources to cooperatives or enterprise-cooperative joint ventures  to
promote the inclusion of the project target group in sustainable and profitable value chains through mutually
beneficial contractual arrangements. The selection of the business plans will be on a competitive basis and will be
based on selecting criteria, including: (i) project target group outreach; (ii) definition of fair and sustainable contractual
arrangements with the project target group; and (iii) viability and sustainability of the proposal, among other criteria.
The project would give preference to benefit sharing models which allow actively participation of the target group
beneficiaries in the economic success of cooperatives and enterprises (i.e. income from production, wage labour, or
dividends as active members in a cooperative). Using land as a share would be given preference over leasing the
land for an annual or one-time payment, but land leasing is acceptable as it reflects individual choice (i.e. risk
perceptions) of part of the target group. The project engagement approach with pro-poor cooperatives and agro-
businesses will be based on informed consultations to ensure that particular livelihood strategies of the different
ethnic groups are taken into account, where existing. This will include discussions with subgroups (women, youth and
ethnic minorities) to insure the aspirations, inclusion barriers and needs of these groups are considered in the
cooperative and agro-business development strategies, activities and investment plans. 
D. Components/outcomes and activities
21.
Component A: Supporting Inclusive Rural Development: This component aims at favouring the economic
development of the project area, by (i) promoting improvements in one of the Government's currently adopted
poverty reduction model and approach: chanye fupin, i.e. poverty reduction through "industrialization" (the
development of lead "industries" through the support of agro-enterprises and cooperatives); and (ii) stimulating
additional and more diversified income opportunities in the project areas, by providing services and stimulating local
entrepreneurship, and attracting new investors in agricultural or (rural/resource-based) non-agricultural activities. This
component is organized along three sub-components:
1.  Sub-component A.1: Improving chanye fupin models: This sub-component will support the
19/39
piloting/demonstration of innovative/improved chanye fupin models, with specific focus on promoting/strengthening
the role of cooperatives as vehicle/entry point for pursuing inclusiveness through agribusiness development. Key
activities under this sub-component include:
A.1.1: Promoting pro-poor farmer cooperatives: The project will provide support to interested or newly
established cooperatives to reach operational standards (in terms of membership - ensuring a minimum
percentage of poor households, women and youth among their members, financial management capacity,
transparency, governance and decision making processes, benefit-sharing mechanisms, etc.) which qualify
them as 'pro-poor standard cooperatives', i.e. cooperatives committed to poverty alleviation in terms of
inclusiveness of poor households among their members, and fair shareholding and benefit sharing
mechanisms.
Specific focus under this key activity will be placed on supporting women cooperative members and
managers. In the selection of pro-poor cooperatives to be supported by the project, quotas will be set to
ensure that at least 40% of membership are women; at least 60% of participants in technical trainings are
women; management training will be provided to women cooperative board members; at least two women-
led cooperatives will be supported in each county, which will be closely supported by county Women
Federation. The project will also engage with male members and board members of cooperatives to enlist
support for facilitation of women’s membership and leadership in pro-poor cooperatives.
Result-based lending
This activity will be implemented piloting a result-based lending approach: disbursement for this activity
will be triggered by the number of cooperatives that meet defined operational standards that make them
'pro-poor' (disbursement-linked indicator), as confirmed by an independent third-party verification agency.
The verification protocol is described in Section K - Organizational Framework, and Annex 8 - Project
Implementation Manual. 
The amount to be disbursed against the achievement of the agreed target would be determined on the
basis of the actual costing/expenditures of the activities needed to reach this target, evidenced by the
documentation of the actual expenditures. As an additional incentive to cooperatives to adopt the defined
operational standards, cooperatives that will meet the agreed operational standards would have a
preferential access to the resources allocated to finance business plan proposals under this component
(Ref. Activity A.1.2). 
Should the pilot deliver positive results, replication at a larger scale (i.e. increase the allocation to this
activity and increase the target, but also assessing the possibility to adopt the RBL approach in other
activities which are suitable for adopting verifiable DLIs) will be considered at mid-term.
A.1.2: Supporting certified pro-poor farmer professional cooperatives: Successfully certified pro-poor
farmer professional cooperatives will be eligible to apply for a special matching grant from the project,
whose conditions would be more favourable than those under the other models under this component.
This funding will be provided based on an approved business plan.
A.1.3: Promoting pro-poor cooperative-investor joint-ventures: The project will establish an incentive
system to attract interested investors (e.g. migrant labour returnees, talented young entrepreneurs, etc.)
and support pro-poor farmer cooperatives. Specifically, the project will co-fund joint pro-poor cooperative-
investor proposals. Investors can only be individuals (not enterprises). Project co-investment will be
converted into shares of cooperative members, prioritizing poor and vulnerable households.
A.1.4: Promoting company-cooperative (or household) models: The project will co-fund joint- buyer (i.e.
company) and producer (i.e. cooperative, or, in those cases where the formation of a cooperative is not
appropriate, individual household's) investment proposals. Specifically, the project will partially finance the
cooperative (or individual household) share of the proposal. Project funds will be used to finance technical
assistance or jointly owned/operated assets by the cooperative (e.g. agricultural machineries, processing
facilities, water storage and distribution facilities, etc.) and land improvements (e.g. terracing, drainage and
water pipes systems, etc.).
A.1.5: Promoting other innovative models: The project will support other chanye fupin models to be
proposed by participating counties. Such models would need to feature agreed project's guiding principles,
in particular: (i) clear focus on the project target group; (ii) participation of the target group in the design,
implementation, and benefit-sharing mechanism of the model; and (iii) a reasonable prospect for
sustainability and replicability of the model.
20/39
A.1.6: Adopting a county traceability system: The project will support project counties in the adoption and
application of a traceability system synchronized with the 'national agro-products traceability system', the
traceability system promoted by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, to - among other ends - favour
adding value of locally produced products. Specifically, the project will support access and registration to
the system, provision of necessary software, and user training.
A.1.7: Improving climate information and adaptation advice: The project will finance a set of activities aimed
at improving farmers' access to weather and climate forecast information and advice on options to make
their farming practices more resilient to climate change, i.e. (i) technical assistance to improve the analysis
of the changes in crop climatic zones and of the climate risks associated with different crops; (ii) upgrade
of a few meteorological stations to monitor key parameters relevant to agriculture; (iii) technical assistance
to relevant county-level agencies to improve climate-related forecasts, advice, and early warnings; and (iv)
trainings to farmers in climate change risks and vulnerability management. Activities include: carrying-out
climate risks and vulnerability analysis; installing additional weather and agro-met monitoring units;
establishing early warning systems for priority products in selected areas; training of producers in the use
of climate data, identification of risks and application of appropriate coping strategies; and - when
demanded - technical support to selected entities to establish climate-smart agricultural platforms.
2.  Sub-component A.2: Stimulating entrepreneurship/attracting investors: This sub-component will provide
incentives and support to entrepreneurs and investors (particularly young and women) to start their own business
in the project area, thus retaining young business-minded people in the project area - or attracting them from other
areas. Key activities under this sub-component include:
A.2.1: Establishing Business Incubation and Service Centers: The project will support the setting up and
operationalization of Business Incubation and Service Centers at county level [9], with the main objective of
providing services to talented youth (i.e. college graduates, new professional farmers, agricultural
professional managers, and new rural leaders) and women. The centers will provide services, training and
advice in business development (planning, financial management, loan applications, marketing skills, e-
commerce, legal counsel, etc.) and management of climate risks, and will favour market linkages by
reducing information asymmetries and building trust among the actors along a value chain. The centers
will also help enterprises to access appropriate financial products by facilitating linkages with partnering
financial institutions. Finally, the centers will offer facilities (office space, meeting rooms, internet access,
equipment, etc.) for interested start-up entrepreneurs to work in a professional environment. Women
entrepreneurs will especially be encouraged to benefit from services of the incubation centres.
The operating plan of the centres would introduce a decreasing cost sharing arrangement. The centres are
expected to become financially sustainable by the end of the project through generation of their own
revenues for the provided services.
A.2.2: Investment support to start-ups: The project will provide start-up investment support as matching
grant to acceptable investment proposals, including non-agricultural related business proposals (e.g.
tourism, e-commerce shops, agricultural machinary services, etc.), presented by youth and women
entrepreneurs who participate to activities under A.2.1. At least 25% of all start-up packages will be
guaranteed for women entrepreneurs.
3.  Sub-component A.3: Improving access to finance: This sub-component will stimulate financial service
innovations to improve access to finance in the project area in support of Sub-component A.1 and A.2. Key
activities under this sub-component include: 
A.3.1: Strengthening financial capacity: The project will provide specific capacity building opportunities (e.g.
trainings, study tours, etc.) to cooperatives, small- and medium-enterprises (SMEs), financial institutions,
financial service agents, staff of the PMO, etc. on financial matters.
A.3.2: Improving financial services: The project will enhance the availability and capacity to provide
financial services in the project area by (i) establishing one agribusiness credit system for the cooperatives,
SMEs, and farmers; and (ii) establishing an information platform and developing digital micro-lending
models in the counties willing to participate.
A.3.3: Establishing a financial advisory service center: The project will support the establishment of a
financial advisory service center which will act as a bridge between the supply side (i.e. financial
institutions) and the demand side (i.e. cooperatives, SMEs, farmers) to provide financial services. These
centers can be combined with the business incubation and service centers supported under Activity A.2.1.
22.
Component B: Climate-proofed public infrastructure planning and development: This component aims at
improving and expanding the infrastructure systems in the project area through a combination of physical
improvements, institutional strengthening and technical assistance to improve road access, water security, and
prevent soil erosion, and reduce the risks and the impacts associated to changing weather and climate conditions and
promote a sustainable and climate resilient agricultural production. This component is organized along two sub-
components:
21/39
1.  Sub-component B.1: Improving infrastructures' climate resilience: This sub-component will support the
improvement of climate-risk assessment, planning and decision-making, and the development and improvement of
the underdeveloped and/or deteriorated water irrigation, water harvesting and water delivery systems in the
project area. Key activities under this sub-component include:
Activity B.1.1: Improving climate-risk assessment, planning and decision-making: The project will (i)
support the analysis of current and future climate trends and risks and the identification and preparation of
disaster risk reduction, adaptation and mitigation measures in infrastructure planning and design in the
three most vulnerable counties (Yongsheng, Zhenxiong, and Lanping); and (ii) support the development of
adaptation guidelines for the design of infrastructure projects linked to key agricultural industries involving
smallholders (water, roads, and soil conservation).
Activity B.1.2: Piloting climate-proofed smart irrigation investments: The project will (i) support the
development and improvement of the irrigation water supply system (e.g. canals), water harvesting and
water source facilities (e.g. water ponds and water pools), and pumping stations and delivery systems (e.g.
water pipelines) to provide irrigation water to agribusiness entities and farmers and drinking water to some
villages. This would contribute to improving agricultural productivity, agricultural diversification, and climate-
resilience in the project area; and (ii) support selected cooperatives, in areas with periodic water scarcity,
in the development of a digital water monitoring and management system that would allow for continuous
adaptation of irrigation systems and optimization of water use.
Ownership of the irrigation and the water source facilities improved and developed under the project will
belong to the beneficiary villages, water users associations, or farmers’ cooperatives, depending on the
decision of respective county project management offices. The ownership groups will receive training and
be involved in the planning of the infrastructure. An operation, maintenance and water management plan
with roles and responsibilities, budget and financing sources must be agreed before the investments are
made to ensure sustainability. 
2.  Sub-component B.2: Improving rural infrastructure system: This sub-component will address some of the
major gaps in the current infrastructure system in the project area, which may limit or constrain the implementation
of the proposed project activities, and - in the case of water source facilities - help reducing the vulnerability to the
impact of climate change: incomplete rural road network, underdeveloped and/or deteriorated irrigation and
drainage systems, lack of drinking water and/or electricity supply facilities, segmented and sloping agricultural
land, etc. All infrastructures supported under this sub-component will be climate-proofed. Key activities under this
sub-component include:
Activity B.2.1: Improving and developing rural roads: The project will support the development and
improvement of village and production roads, which will serve both agribusiness entities and village
farmers.
Activity B.2.2: Improving and developing safe drinking water supply system: The project will support the
development and improvement of water supply pipelines to those villages that lack access to safe drinking
water, or whose existing systems/facilities are deteriorated. Safe water supply, given its direct impact on
infectious disease, especially diarrhoea, is important for preventing malnutrition. 
Activity B.2.3: Land improvement and preparation: The project will support land levelling in order to enable
safe and productive farming, and soil and water conservation.
Activity B.2.4: Supporting infrastructures' operation & maintenance (O&M): The project will support (i) the
establishment and strengthening of O&M organizations; and (ii) implementation of any required
environmental and social safeguards (Ref. ESMP PIM, chapter 10).
Activity B.2.5: Promoting women’s participation in community management: Women will be involved in
Village Infrastructure O&M Committees and Water User Associations. Meanwhile, for ensuring women’s
capacity for participating in decision-making, women will share half of the O&M training opportunities.
23.
Component C: Project Management, Knowledge Management, M&E, and Policy: This component will support
the planning, coordinating, monitoring, reporting and overall management functions of the project management
offices (PMOs) at provincial and county level. An important partnership will be established with the Agricultural
Information Institute, Center of International Agricultural Research of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science
(AII-CAAS) for the provision of support in monitoring and evaluation functions, knowledge management, and policy
engagement.
22/39
24.
Promoting gender transformative impact: The project will promote gender transformtive impact by (a) Building
support systems for women’s participation: Involving the Women Federation in the project activities at all levels to
facilitate the implementation of gender strategy through the project process; (b) Building a network for women in the
project:  Annual exchange activity will be organized for women involved in the project in each county, and provincial
women’s exchanges will be held every two years.  Besides networking individuals, government agencies and other
gender issues concerned organizations will be engaged in the project.  These exchanges will also provide women
and these organizations with the opportunity to exchange their experience on promoting women’s participation in the
project process; (c) Building awareness for the project management system: In the beginning of the project, gender
awareness training will be integrated in the project management training for PMO staff at all levels. Gender
perspectives will be integrated in the training for the staff of implementing agencies, and for WUA and O&M
Committee members during the project implementation.  Provincial and county gender focus will be involved in these
trainings; (d) Nutrition training will be arranged for members of women-led cooperative through CPMO coordination
with township health centre; (e) Policy engagement: if the proposed model is successfully implemented, it will
generate evidence of impact on women’s productivity and empowerment, which could be proposed to local
governance bodies for replication and scaling up.
25.
Components coordination and sequencing: Awareness building and mobilisation of cooperatives and other key
stakeholders will be implemented first, to ensure a bottom up approach in the selection of cooperatives and to drive
the selection of infrastructure to be financed by the project. To allow for synergies with the component A investments,
the first infrastructure investments are deferred to year 2 of the project, assuming that the cooperative and investor
business proposals will take some time to be developed. The field survey shows that company-cooperative (or
household) models could be more readily identified. Some of them would need to be supported by public
infrastructure investments. Before any infrastructure investments are made Water Users Associations and other
Operation & Maintenance associations should be formed and they should be involved in decisions on the design and
the preparation of the O&M plan for each infrastructure.
E. Theory of Change
26.
27.
28.
Industrialization as key strategy for poverty reduction and rural revitalization: Promoting thriving "industries"
(i.e. agribusiness development) and linking them with farmers for income generation has been the primary approach
in government poverty reduction programs (i.e. chanyie fupin, poverty reduction through industrialization). Agricultural
"industrialization" remains a central pillar in the new rural revitalization strategy - a long-term strategy that aims at
making rural areas a liveable place for all. However, persistent challenges remain in tackling poverty issues,
sustaining poverty reduction results, and promote economic development in the so called "deep poverty" areas, such
as those targeted by the project.
The current base scenario: In the current base scenario, the project area and the relative poor and vulnerable
households still face a mixture of constraints: (i) limitation in income-generating opportunities; (ii) outflow of rural
labour force to urban areas and of financial resources to sustain the education of the young generation - leaving the
old, children and part of the women population behind together with limited household resources for investments in
agriculture or other economic activities; (iii) limited scale of household land holding, value addition and secure market
outlets preventing them from being competitive, and progressive land consolidation (i.e. leasing of land to
enterprises); and (iv) inability of smallholders to effectively operate collectively and enter value chain. Furthermore,
(v) increasing rainfall variability and frequency of unusual weather events and other risks (price fluctuation &
epidemics) are seen as growing uncertainties to agricultural production in the project area. Even though migration for
employment has a high social cost in terms of separating the families, it still brings a much needed and higher income
than they can currently earn from their small farms and disarticulated production.
The shortcomings of the current approach: While "industrialization" remains a key strategy for poverty reduction
and for revitalizing the rural areas, the current approach which focuses on reaching the smallholder households
through "dragonhead enterprises" has several shortcomings, does not always bring the desired results and/or
guarantee sustainability. There are evident gaps in inclusiveness (linking to more poor farmers and households),
fairness and equality (in benefit sharing), efficiency (of government support), and sustainability (lasting of
relationship). At the same time, while strengthening the role and capacity of farmer cooperatives can offer a more
viable approach to achieve the objectives of poverty reduction through industrialization and for sustaining the results,
cooperative development in China also presented some major shortcomings: in many cases cooperatives are
established (and controlled) by enterprises and/or large farmers, rather than by the spontaneous coordination of
small farmers, resulting in little participation and control of the small farmers over the cooperative. Finally, the
government also recognized that, while aiming largely to realize the immediate milestone of poverty eradication,
many of the efforts and practices were not adequately thought through or will not be equally effective after 2020.
Furthermore, there is an increasing trend of feminization of the agricultural workforce, however, there isn’t a
subsequent increase in women’s participation in decision making roles, preventing women from optimising their
29.
30.
31.
32.
productivity. They are affected by lack of access to technology, finance and leadership roles and this has a
disproportionate impact on their economic empowerment in relation to their participation in the agricultural sector.
Lack of access to productive assets and knowledge also translates into low productivity.
23/39
Turning the challenges into opportunities: The current situation offers an opportunity to introduce and test
alternative approaches that could have potential value in informing the government on its pursuit for rural
revitalization and sustainable poverty reduction.
The proposed approach: The project would introduce improvements in the current chaniye fupin model, placing
greater emphasis on the principles of diversification, inclusiveness, equality and sustainability. Through the proposed
project interventions, rural villages and cooperatives, and proactive smallholder farmers (including youth, women and
ethnic minorities) will be supported in developing initiatives around sustainable agriculture as well as rural-based
non-farm opportunities. This will incorporate organizational innovations (e.g. shorter supply chains or digital payment
mechanisms), along with improved agricultural practices that reduce the need for chemical inputs and take care of
the environment and adapt to climatic risks.
The project activities would also invest in improving productive and managerial capacities of women and increase
their participation in decision making roles in community institutions. This would be done through ensuring higher
quotas for women in cooperative and board membership, providing leadership and management trainings for women
board members, supporting women’s only cooperatives, improving access of women to knowledge and technology
and investing in women’s start-ups. It is assumed that enhancing women’s economic empowerment would strength
women’s status in society and enable them to be more present in decision making spaces, that would also lead to
improved access to productive assets.  Studies from around Asia have also demonstrated that improving women’s
access to agricultural technologies and input services, investment in rural infrastructure, access to finance, lead to
economic empowerment of women that in turn impacts on reduction in their work load, as women are able to employ
enhanced production practises and also have surplus income to employ hired labour.
How the approach will be operationalized: This will be achieved through: (i) capacitating genuine cooperatives
(rather than dragonhead enterprises) as the main entry point to link poor farmers to markets, and piloting
alternative chanyie fupin models (Ref. Sub-component A.1); (ii) stimulating additional and more diversified income
opportunities in the project areas by providing services and stimulating local entrepreneurship (especially among
women and young farmers/migrant returnees), and attracting new investors in agricultural or (rural/resource-based)
non-agricultural activities (Ref. Sub-component A.2); (iii) stimulating financial service innovations to improve access
to finance in support of Sub-component A.1 and A.2 (Ref. Sub-component A.3); (iv) addressing some of the major
gaps in the current infrastructure system in the project area (e.g. road access, water scarcity, etc.) which may limit or
constrain the implementation of the proposed project activities, while at the same time reducing the risks associated
to climate change (Ref. Component B).
Expected outcomes: With these strategy and interventions, (i) additional income generating opportunities for
targeted farmers will have been generated; (ii) more equitable and sustainable business partnership with agro-
entities will be developed for farmers so that added value of farmers' products or services will be attained; (iii) more
young people will find business opportunities at home and investment in rural sectors will be promoted - which will
also help mitigating the labor and finance outflow; (vi) more women would be active members of cooperatives and
improve their access to inputs, farm productivity and income; (v) potential climate risks will be mitigated; and (v) those
farmers who got rid of poverty will have less likelihood of reverting to poverty; (vi) more women would be decision
making roles in local/community institutions. These will help achieving the project objectives and goals, and
contribute to revitalizing the rural areas along with other measures taken by government.   
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
33.
Alignment with national priorities and strategies: The project is well aligned with the national priorities and
strategies as it will (i) contribute to the government's objective of sustaining the poverty reduction achievements in the
years following 2020, in line with the principles of the rural revitalization strategy, where "sustaining poverty
eradication efforts" represents a key priority in the strategy; (ii) promote agricultural industrialization, create
employment opportunities, and develop the infrastructure system, in line with the rural revitalization strategic
approach; (iii) contribute to make the project area economically more attractive, thus retaining migrant workers, and
possibly attracting people back to the rural areas; and (iv) promote environmental sustainability, in line with the
government’s concepts of ‘ecological civilization’ and ‘ecologically-balanced development’. The project is in addition
aligned with and is expected to contribute to the Yunnan Young League's 'Action Plan of Youth Contribution to Rural
Revitalization (2019-2022)'.
34.
Alignment with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): The objective and activities of the proposed project are
aligned with and will contribute to the Agenda 2030, and, more specifically to SDG1 (eradicating poverty), SDG2
(ending hunger and malnutrition, achieving food security and promoting sustainable agriculture), SDG5 (achieving
greater gender equality and empower women), SDG10 (reducing inequality within China), SDG13 (reducing the
impacts of climate change), and SDG15 (managing sustainably natural resources and halting and reducing land
degradation).
35.
24/39
Alignment with COSOP 2016-2020: The project is the third investment operation to be designed under the current
2016-2020 COSOP, and it well reflects the recent trend of focusing IFAD support towards enhancing income
opportunities and increasing resilience by promoting and strengthening cooperatives, giving more emphasis to
improving access to markets and value-chains, and resilience to climate change. The project supports the COSOP
2016-2020 strategic objectives 1 (Increase smallholders’ capacity and opportunities to access markets) and 2
(Strengthen environmental sustainability and climate resilience), and particularly thematic area of focus 1.A (Support
inclusive and safe value chain development), 1.B (Support inclusive cooperatives), 1.C (Support inclusive financial
services), and 2.B (Mainstreaming environmental and climate resilience considerations). The project is also (a) fully
aligned with and supports the three COSOP 2016-2020 strategic thrusts (i.e. innovation, knowledge management to
inform policy, and scaling-up); and (b) aligned to and contributes to the “programmatic” approach envisioned under
the COSOP.
1.  Alignment with and support to the three COSOP 2016-2020 strategic thrusts (i.e. innovation, knowledge
management to inform policy, and scaling-up): The project is conceived as a "demonstration" project, which
will introduce several innovations (e.g. innovative chanyie fupin models, inclusive finance models, disbursement
against results, climate-proofed design of infrastructure, etc.) to test their applicability in the project context, learn
lessons, and promote replication of the models and approaches that demonstrate themselves successful.
Assessment and replication of successful models and approaches will be favoured by the strong collaboration that
the project will develop with the Division of Cooperative Economy of the Department of Agriculture and Rural
Affairs (DARA). In addition, a strategic partnership with the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS) will
be established to extract and document knowledge from the project and utilising it to inform policy making at
central level. 
2.  Alignment with and support to the "programmatic" approach envisioned under the COSOP: The project is
aligned to and contributes to the “programmatic” approach envisioned under the COSOP as it has to be
considered part of a series of IFAD-funded projects within a broader programmatic framework that pilot different
‘poverty reduction through agribusiness development’ approaches in different provinces, with the broad
“programmatic” objective of contributing to learn about the conditions that make the different models more or less
successful, and compare the strengths/weaknesses of the different models. (Y2RDP is the sixth project in IFAD
portfolio that introduces and pilots improved chanyie fupin models. The H2RDP, which will be presented to the
September EB, also fits within the same programmatic framework) [10].
Alignment with UNDAF 2016-2020 and draft UNSDCF 2021-2025: The project is in line with and contributes to the
priority areas of the UNDAF 2016-2020, and particularly with priority area 1 (Reduction of Poverty and Equitable
Development)/ outcome 1 (more people, particularly the vulnerable and disadvantaged, enjoy improved living
conditions and increased opportunities for economic, social and cultural development), and priority area 2 (Improved
and Sustainable Environment)/ outcome 2 (more people enjoy a cleaner, healthier and safer environment as a result
of improved environmental protection and sustainable green growth). The project is also in line and is expected to
contribute to the strategic priorities of the draft UNSDCF 2021-2025, currently under preparation, and particularly to
strategic priority 1/ outcome 2/ output 2.1 (China demonstrates a strengthened enabling environment to stimulate
public and private investment and support to overcome income inequality, particularly in rural areas), and strategic
priority 2/ outcome 3/ output 3.1 (Farmers, fishers, and livestock owners - both male and female - have enhanced
skills, ability, and access to adopt and implement sustainable and resilient practices in their work), and output 3.2
(The Government has strengthened capacity, resources, and incentives to develop, implement and enforce
sustainable agriculture, production and consumption, and biodiversity conservation policies at national and local
levels).
Alignment with IFAD’ Strategic Framework 2016-2025. The objective and activities of the project are in line with
the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025 goal and strategic objectives, particularly strategic objective 2 (increase
poor rural people’s benefits from market participation) and strategic objective 3 (strengthen the environmental
sustainability and climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities).
Alignment with Transition Framework: The strategic approach of the IFAD country program in China (as
elaborated in the COSOP 2016-2020) is in line and supports the principles of the Transition Framework (2018) in
terms of adoption of a mix and diversified lending and non-lending instruments (e.g. investments, knowledge/policy
dialogue, SSTC, etc.), increase co-financing (particularly domestic co-financing), and alignment with partners
approach (e.g. contribution and alignment to/with UNDAF/UNSDCF). Specifically, the proposed project implements
several of the principles and elements of the Transition Framework. In particular, it will (i) pilot one of the new
proposed products under IFAD11 (i.e. the result-based lending, RBL), with the objective of informing IFAD on the
applicability of this instrument widely across its portfolio; (ii) contribute to informing policy-making: a strategic
partnership with the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS) will be established precisely to extract and
document knowledge from the project and utilising it to inform policy making; and (iii) significantly contribute to
increase co-financing, particularly domestic co-financing: the project is expected to mobilise resources in a 1:2.1 ratio,
50% above the IFAD11 target of 1:1.4 (and almost three-times above the 1:0.8 target for domestic co-financing), and
above the COSOP target of 1:1.5.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
Alignment with IFAD11 mainstreaming agenda: The project directly supports three of the four IFAD-11 thematic
priorities, as it promotes gender empowerment, foster opportunities for the youth, and addresses or reduces the
impacts of climate change.
25/39
Alignment with Private Sector Engagement Strategy: This project is aligned with and directly contributes to the
objectives of the IFAD's Private Sector Engagement Strategy, i.e. mobilize private funding and investments, and
expand markets and increase income and job opportunities for IFAD's target groups, as it will (i) use loan resources
to attract domestic private sector investments and develop inclusive value-chain to foster pro-poor cooperative-
investor join ventures and/or company-cooperatives joint proposals (Ref. Activities A.1.2 and A.1.3), or support
entrepreneurs and investors, particularly young and women, to start their business - thus contributing to expand the
market opportunities and increase the income and job opportunities for the project target group; and (ii) stimulate
financial service innovations to improve access to finance in the project area (Ref. Sub-component A.3).  
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
41.
Project costs: The total project cost is estimated at US$ 234.5 million, including contingencies. The total base cost is
US$ 224.8 million; physical and price contingencies account for an estimated US$ 9.7 million (i.e. 4.3% of the total
base cost or 4.1% of the total project cost). Project costs are allocated among the three components as follows: (A)
Supporting Inclusive Rural Development (49% of the total project cost); (B) Climate-proofed public infrastructure
planning and development (47% of the total cost); and (C) Project Management, Knowledge Management, M&E, and
Policy (4% of the total cost). Costs per component and sub-component, and financier are summarised in Table 2 in
Annex 3. 
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
42.
43.
Country eligibility and PBAS allocation 2019-2021: China is eligible for IFAD financing, and it officially confirmed
its intention to borrow from IFAD during IFAD11 in 2018. China was included among the countries that would benefit
from IFAD11 resources. On the basis of the PBAS formula, US$ 134.99 million were allocated to China for the period
2019-2021, and the proposed project included in the IFAD program of loans and grants (PoLG) 2019-2021. The
country allocation was re-confirmed in December 2019.
Project financing and co-financing: IFAD will contribute to the project with a loan for a total amount of US$ 74.8
million (32% of the total project cost). The Government will contribute US$ 115.3 million (49% of the total cost), and
participating enterprises and cooperatives are expected to contribute approximately US$ 41.7 million (18% of the
total cost). The beneficiaries’ contribution is expected to be approximately US$ 2.8 million (1% of the total cost).
Costs by expenditure account are presented in Table 1 in Annex 3.
44.
Co-financing ratio: The IFAD loan has a co-financing ratio of approximately 1:2.1. This is 50% above the IFAD11
target of 1:1.4 (and almost three-times above the 1:0.8 target for domestic co-financing).
45.
46.
47.
Climate financing: Project sub-components A.1, A.2, and B.1 are counted as climate finance. As per the multilateral
development banks’ methodologies for tracking climate change adaptation and mitigation finance, the total amount of
IFAD climate finance for this project is calculated as US$ 35,163,000 million, which represents 47% of the total IFAD
project amount.
Co-financing strategy: The project co-financing strategy is in line with the IFAD co-financing strategy in China
outlined in the COSOP 2016-2020, where focus is placed on leveraging domestic co-financing (from Government
and other domestic parties, i.e. the private sector, financial institutions, cooperatives and beneficiaries). Particularly,
Government's co-financing will be equivalent to 1.54 times IFAD's contribution (i.e. US$ 115.25 million), well-above
the co-financing ratio of 1:1 applied in projects designed in IFAD9 and IFAD10. In addition to Government's
contribution, about 19% of the project budget (i.e. about US$ 44.44 million) is leveraged from non-government
partners (i.e. cooperatives and agro-enterprises, financial institutions, and beneficiaries).
Opportunities for international co-financing: Opportunities for co-financing with other international partners were
sought, but did not materialize. It is important to note that co-financing opportunities with other international financiers
in China are limited. First, borrowing provinces must not have exceeded their debt ceiling: it is thus difficult for a
province to borrow too many international resources at the same time, and it is thus rare to observe a concentration
of international resources in one single province. Second, as a general principle, the National Development and
Reform Commission (NDRC), the government institution in charge of defining the pipeline of internationally-financed
projects in China, tends to favour equal opportunities and even distribution of international resources among the
provinces, thus discouraging concentration of international resources in one single province. Even within the same
province, for the same principle, the Provincial Development and Reform Commission (PDRC) also discourages a
concentration of donor resources in the same counties. Within this context, international co-financing is difficult, if not
explicitly discouraged. The Yunnan province confirmed there were not other planned activities to be funded by
international agencies in the project area. 
26/39
c. Disbursement
48.
In accordance with the section 4.04(d) of the General Conditions, immediately after entry into force of the Financing
Agreement, there shall be a Designated Account (DA) for the IFAD Loan denominated in the currency of the loan
(USD/EURO to be the same currency of the loan) to be opened, through which IFAD funding shall be channelled.
The DA is to be set up at and managed by DOF. DOF will be directly responsible for the management, maintenance
and reconciliation of the DA activities. Supporting documents required for IFAD disbursements will be prepared and
submitted by CPMOs through PPMO for review and verification before sending to DOF for further disbursement
processing.
49.
The PPMO and county CPMOs are responsible for reviewing the Disbursement Request as well as the supporting
documentation required for IFAD disbursements. Disbursement Requests will be prepared and submitted by CPMOs
to PPMOs for review and verification before sending the Disbursement Request to DOF for further disbursement
processing. Once approved, project resources will be channeled directly from provincial level to county level .
50.
In accordance with Section 3.1 of the LDH, the Designated Account will be administered following Imprest Account
arrangements. Advances from this Financing must be segregated from other funds for the Project .
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
Expected benefits: The project is expected to generate substantial net incremental benefits for farmers, rural
entrepreneurs and rural households in the project area. Benefits would directly accrue from (i) diversification of
productive activities and sources of income; (ii) increased agricultural production and productivity; (iii) increased
value-added of agricultural outputs; (iv) improved quality of processed products, thus attracting higher prices at local
market; (v) reduced transportation costs and enhanced processing efficiency through innovative technology and
improved infrastructure; (vi) increased employment either for hired or family labour, for both on-farm and off-farm
activities; (vii) increased water availability for both human and productive use; (viii) enhanced climate adaptation
capacity; and (ix) tax revenues as a result of increased volume of taxable production. Increase in income would be
largely dependent on farmers/household/rural entrepreneurial groups adopting improved technologies which the
programme will promote through technical assistance, development plans and infrastructure investments, thus
improving market access, supporting marketing linkages and generally creating a favourable economic environment
that encourages farmers/rural entrepreneurs to produce more competitive products.
Results of the financial analysis: The financial viability of the project has been assessed on the basis of a number
of indicative economic activities that could be supported by the project. Results of the financial analysis, with-  and
without-project scenarios, of the different productive models show positive cash-flows even after the project closure,
and reasonable financial returns in the range of 9-45% (Ref. Annex 4 - Economic and Financial Analysis).
Results of the economic analysis: Project benefits have been estimated over a period of 20 years using a discount
rate of 5%. The results of the economic analysis suggest that the project is economically viable, with an economic
internal rate of return (EIRR) of 15.3% for the base case scenario, with a net present value (NPV) of US$ 199 million
(Ref. Annex 4 - Economic and Financial Analysis).
Results of the sensitivity analysis: The results of the sensitivity analysis suggest that the project is relatively robust
to to changes in input prices and investment costs, while more sensitive to changes in benefits and output prices.
More specifically, switching values and critical thresholds have been identified for the main variables: the project
would no longer be viable in case of (i) investment costs increase by more than 73%; (ii) operating costs increases
by more than 23%; (iii) benefits decline by more than 19%; (iv) input cost increase by more than 30%; (v) output
prices fall by more than 23%; and (vi) project beneficiaries involved in productive activities are less than 2,260 HHs
(Ref. Annex 4 - Economic and Financial Analysis).
Assessment of the environmental externalities related to carbon emission/sequestration: The economic
analysis includes a tentative assessment of the environmental externalities related to carbon emission/sequestration.
Results of the anlysis indicate that the programme would be responsible for a net emission of approximately 754,443
tons of CO2 equivalent. The analysis considered the average 32.3 tons year-1 ha-1 emission in accordance with the
phasing-in of production activities and infrastructure. Each ton of carbon has been valued at a very conservative price
of 4 US$ per ton, so as to determine the economic contribution of carbon reduction to the overall project worth. The
net economic effect is estimated at an average annual outlay of approximately US$ 321,000. 
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
27/39
56.
Sustainability: There are several elements in the project that are likely to ensure post-project sustainability of the
supported activities and generated benefits:
1.  Economic viability, as suggested by the results of the economic analysis;
2.  Alignment with national policies, strategies and priorities: The project is fully aligned with and embedded in
the key policies, strategies and priorities of the country. Mainstreaming smallholders in modern agriculture;
revitalizing rural areas, making them economically more attractive and creating new employment opportunities;
sustaining poverty achievements and preventing that those that were brought out of poverty fall back into poverty;
upgrading and standardizing farmer cooperatives; and promoting environmental sustainability are all important
objectives of the government policies and strategies. It is thus expected that the Government will continue to
ascertain political commitment towards the project objectives, and ensure adequate human and financial resources
to ensure that the project achievements are sustained after project completion. It is important to note that the
development and up-grading of farmer professional cooperatives into self-standing and self-sustained viable rural
economic entities has been and continues to be a central element of the government's poverty reduction and rural
development strategy: farmer cooperatives are not seen as a vehicle to implement government programs, but
intended to be self-standing, inclusive and growing business entities;
3.  Institutional sustainability and sustainable partnerships: The project activities will be implemented by
permanent government institutions and/or existing service providers in the project area, which will continue to exist
and provide their services after project completion. The project will promote different forms of partnerships
(cooperative-investor, enterprise-cooperative, economic entities-service providers, etc.) whereas project (public)
financing will be used as a catalyst to forge business relations and start/expand viable business operations;
4.  Beneficiary ownership and empowerment: Ownership and commitment of beneficiaries (cooperatives,
enterprises, investors, etc.) will be guaranteed through the business plan development and selection process,
where agribusiness entities and investors are expected to present their own business ideas, and expected to take
a financial risk by mobilizing their own resources, which the project will simply match through co-financing
arrangements. Likewise, infrastructure (water and roads) ownership and organization of operation, maintenance
and management will be supported prior to any infrastructure investment. Beneficiaries will be adequately
empowered, including in collective decision-making, management, etc. through various capacity building activities
provided through the project;
5.  Financial viability: Financial viability will be one of the criteria for the selection of the business plans to be
financed by the project. Business plans would need to include a financial analysis that demonstrates that the
investment is financially viable and offers acceptable financial under manageable risk scenarios, convincing
marketing arrangements, cost-benefit and cash flow projections and projected break-even forecasts. It is to be
noted that the results of the financial analysis of the different productive models that could be supported by the
project show positive cash-flows even after the project closure, and reasonable financial returns;
6.  Moving away from subsidizing production towards responding to market demand: While it is true that the
project operates in marginal and remote areas, with relatively low productivity and high transaction costs, it is
nevertheless true that the project avoids building on the conventional 'subsidization' strategy which focused on
subsidising production of predefined commodities, and is promoting a shift towards a more 'market-driven'
approach, which focused on market demand, instead [11]. Sustainability of activities supported by the project will
thus not depend on subsidies provided through the project, but will be ensured by the capacity of the supported
entities to adequately respond to market demands;
7.  Mainstreaming climate considerations into infrastructure development, and ensure O&M arrangements:
The anticipated effects of climate change will be taken into consideration in the planning and design process of
the infrastructures to be supported by the project, and the anticipated impacts of climate change integrated into
the technical specification of the infrastructure to mitigate climate risks. The establishment of Water Users
Associations and Operation and Maintenance Associations, and the preparation of O&M plans are pre-conditions
to any infrastructure investment supported by the project.  
57.
Exit strategy: The exit strategy of the project is built on two building blocks. More details in Annex 10 - Exit Strategy.
1.  Sustainability and value of project interventions (Ref. to Section on Sustainability above); and
2.  Potential for scaling-up and informing policy-making (Ref. to Section L.b).  
3. Risks
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
28/39
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
Project risks: Annex 9 presents the Integrated Risk Framework (IRF), with financial management risks reviewed in
the financial management section below. In general, most of the identified risks (i.e. political and governance,
macroeconomic, sector strategies, procurement, stakeholders) have low probability and low impact, except for risks
inherent to institutional capacity, which are rated medium, and environmental and social risks, which are rated minor
to moderate and are discussed in more details in Section I. Appropriate mitigation measures are identified and
reported in Annex 9.
How risks related to the potential complexity of results-based lending (RBL) piloting have been assessed
and managed: On the basis of early experience and lessons from the World Bank's Guangxi Poverty Reduction
Program for Results, the main risk in implementing an RBL approach relates to insufficient understanding of the
approach by the relevant implementers on the ground, and misunderstandings about the need for sufficient upfront
budget allocation - which generally causes delays. As a mitigation measure, the proposed project will raise
awareness and create enough understanding about the principles of the RBL approach such as prior achievement
and independent verification of results before disbursement and the need to advance  government funds (e.g. from
the consolidated budgets for poverty alleviation) for the achievement of the disbursement-linked indicator. In addition,
given the pilot nature of the RBL activity, a relatively small share of the budget is allocated to this activity, in order to
reduce the risk of possible low disbursement in case the targets set result too difficult to be achieved, or the
incentives provided not sufficient to generate an interest in the cooperatives.
How risks related to the perverse incentive of decentralized repayment responsibilities have been
mitigated: Experiences from previous projects (e.g. SSADEP and JIMAAPP) showed that in those cases where the
loan repayment responsibility is transferred to the local county authorities, and from them to the beneficiaries (i.e.
agro-enterprises, cooperatives, or poor households) a perverse incentive is created whereas local authorities have
an incentive to select among the entities to support those who could offer the highest likelihood of repayment, which
are not necessarily those that are more functional to the achievement of the project objectives. Because  the Yunnan
province has already reached its debt ceiling, it decided to on-lend the IFAD loan to the project counties. In order to
mitigate the risk of the perverse incentives that such loan repayment modality could generate, it is agreed that the
loan on-lent to the counties cannot be further on-lent to the beneficiaries, i.e. the project resources will be transferred
to the beneficiaries in the form of grant.
Implementation readiness: Implementation readiness is not considered a major risk (risks of delayed start-up are
considered low). Yunnan has extensive experience in implementing foreign-funded projects, including IFAD-funded
projects (the last one, YARIP, was completed in 2018). The PMO has experience in implementing an ADB-funded
project. Geographical dispersion of project counties is common in internationally-financed project, and does not
represent a factor that affects implementation readiness. In order to further mitigate the the risks of start-up delays,
provision for retroactive financing is made to the project to finance start-up activities and facilitate prompt execution of
the project. 
The overall inherent risk of the country is deemed to be Medium. China is ranked 87th out of 180 countries in the
2018   TI Corruption Perception Index, with a medium score of 39. With the most recent developments in the country,
some improvements on accountability and transparency performance of governments can be anticipated. The
government since beginning of 2013 has embarked on refreshed campaign to fight corruption, promote public fiscal
austerity and transparency and reform fiscal budgeting arrangements. The most recent fourth plenary session of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China in October 2014 further upheld the rule of law, giving prospect of
further improvement in TI rating and scorings.
Taking into consideration recent experience of IFAD-financed project in Yunnan, Financial Management Assessment
was undertaken for this project at the design, guided by the 'financial management questionnaire (FMAQ)'. In view of
the mitigation measures and previous experience of, the overall project fiduciary risk is assessed to be Medium at the
design stage.
MOF will be the responsible agency for repayment of the loan in subsequent arrangement with Yunnan province. The
loan proceeds will be onlent from the Ministry of Finance (MOF) to DOF of Yunnan province where the loan proceeds
will be further onlent to County BOFs, at the same terms and conditions without additional charges. At county level,
the funds will be transferred from BOFs to PMOs and the later will forward the funds to relevant project implementing
agencies (IAs) for the project implementation in accordance with expenditures incurred under approved annual work
plan and budgets (AWPBs).
The Yunnan Provincial Department of Finance (DOF) will have the primary responsibility for the administration of
project resources. The Department/Bureaux of Finance (DOF/BOFs) at the provincial and county levels respectively
will be responsible for the followings: (i) opening and management of the Project Accounts; (ii) administering the
project resources including the IFAD loan and counterpart funds; (iii) review and approval of the financing needs of
project implementation; (iv) overseeing the use of project resources; (v) ensuring effective flow of funds for project
implementation; (vi) providing appropriate training to the financial officers of PMOs in terms of financial management;
and (vii) preparing Withdrawal Applications (WAs) and reimbursement of eligible project expenditures on a timely
basis.
29/39
66.
Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs(DARA) as the Lead Project Agency (LPA), will have the overall
accountability for the project, including fiduciary aspects.
67.
The project will (i) establish a control framework integrating periodic internal audits, independent external audits, and
social safeguards to be adopted based on IFAD policies; (ii) adopt a good governance and mutual accountability
framework to strengthen accountability and transparency in line with international best practices.(iii) outline the
project specific financial management procedures and disbursement requirements in the PIM. (iv) establish a
Management Information System (MIS) to support the core project management functions
I. Environment and Social category
68.
Environment and Social category: The project is classified as Category B. The Project has minor to moderate risks
of adverse environmental impacts. Water infrastructures are smaller water harvesting ponds (15-100 m3 serving 5-40
ha each), rehabilitation and upgrading of reservoirs (max. 130 000 m3) and some pumping stations. The water
sources are rainwater and mountain streams and the Jin Sha Jiang river which has a dry season streamflow of
400m3/second against which the water volume intake will be insignificant. Road works are all below the threshold for
requiring an environmental assessment and the counties have experience in soil erosion control and proper drainage
in mountain road construction. The infrastructure will entail some conversion of farmland, where all farmers impacted
will lose less than 10% of the land they have user rights to through voluntary agreements. The increased production,
can potentially increase pollution from pesticides and increase pressure on land resources against which farmers will
be trained in IPM and soil fertility management. All these possible impacts are reversible in nature, and can be
readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures as outlined in the ESMP (PIM chapter
9). The farmer-cooperative-enterprise models for rural transformation has risks of elite capture and limited economic
inclusion and benefits generated for poor and vulnerable households, women and youth. It is at the core of the design
to support a pro-poor and inclusive development and implementation of these models and monitor the results (ref.
component A). 
J. Climate Risk classification
69.
Climate Risk classification: The potential climate risk of this project is classified as "moderate". The three key
climate trends that may have a potential impact in the project area are: (i) Changes in rainfalls quantity and intensity:
Decrease in rainfalls may affect the viability of rain-fed agriculture in the absence of irrigation or water harvesting
technologies; Increase in rainfalls, may increase the likelihood of floods. Shorter but more intense rainy seasons may
increase flood risks; (ii) Changes in rainfall patterns: Changes in the seasonality of the rainy seasons, particularly
delays in the onset of the rainy season, may increase the risks of droughts and have detrimental consequences for
the agricultural production; (iii) Increases in temperatures: Higher temperatures in the dry season may increase the
magnitude of dry spells and droughts. The project will finance a series of hard and soft investments (i.e. climate-
proofed infrastructures, institutional strengthening, and technical assistance) aimed at reducing the risks and the
negative impacts associated to the changing of weather and climate conditions, and promote climate-resilient
production (e.g. Improving climate-risk assessment, planning and decision-making, and Piloting climate-smart
irrigation investments - Ref. Component B). To further reduce the potential negative impacts of climate change on the
project investments, the project would adopt adaptation measures, e.g. (i) the project will refrain from investments in
headworks (i.e. intake weirs), which are prone to flood damage; (ii) all physical infrastructures, and particularly on-
farm irrigation works and rural roads, will be climate-proofed. As most of the infrastructures financed by the project
will be relatively small infrastructures, climate-proofing will be largely achieved by the implementation of good
management, operation, and maintenance practices. Potential climate risks related to the project investments are
mostly linked to changing rainfall patterns and rising temperature, which in turn may lead to (i) landslides on steep
hillsides, (ii) flash floods and water logging in lowlands, and (iii) droughts and extreme hot spells. 
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
30/39
a. Project management and coordination
70.
Lead implementing agency: The Provincial Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (DARA) has been
appointed as lead implementing agency. Specifically, the Farmland Enhancement Division within DARA would take
lead responsibility for project design, management, supervision and evaluation, and will act as the Provincial Project
Management Office (PPMO). Additional support will be mobilized from the Division of Cooperative Economy of
DARA, and other divisions whenever needed. DARA will be in addition the main institutional entry point for linkages
with MARA.
71.
County Project Management Offices: Major implementation responsibilities of the project lie with the counties.
County Project Management Offices (CPMOs) will be established at the County Bureau of Agriculture and Rural
Affairs. Relevant technical bureaus in the counties (such as water conservancy, meteorological, bureaus, etc.) will be
mobilized to support the project implementation in the related activities of the project as per need.
72.
Role of the Department/Bureaus of Finance: The Department/Bureau of Finance at Provincial/County level will be
responsible for administering project resources, including the IFAD loan and counterpart funds.
73.
Implementing Support Units: Implementing Support Units will be established in the project townships to facilitate
project implementation, targeting and related monitoring activities.
74.
75.
76.
Project Joint Meeting: At provincial level, a coordinating committee comprising at least the Provincial Department of
Finance (DOF), the Provincial Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (DARA), the Provincial Development and
Reform Commission (PDRC), and the Provincial Office of Poverty Alleviation may be established to provide overall
guidance and coordination of the project implementation. Involvement of the Women Federation, Youth League, the
Meteorological Service, and Work Bureau is also recommended. Similar coordination committees led by the county
mayors should be established at county level.
Independent third-party Verification Agency: An independent third-party verification agency will be contracted by
the project to verify that the disbursement-linked indicator target set for the activity that would pilot the result-based
lending approach (A.1.1 - Promoting pro-poor farmer cooperatives) (i.e. number of cooperatives that meet defined
operational standards) is achieved.
Verification protocol: The Agricultural Bureaus or the Economic and Management Bureaus of DARA at the county
levels will record the cooperative information in a database on a regular basis and be responsible for the accuracy of
the information. Cooperatives meeting all the agreed eligibility requirements will be reported to the PPMO on a semi-
annual basis. The independent third-party Verification Agency (VA) will conduct a verification of all cooperatives
deemed to meet the agreed operational standards in a given DLI disbursement period (e.g. quarterly). The
cooperatives will report to the VA who after verification will report to the PPMO according to the agreed check list.
Confirmation that the disbursement-linked indicators (DLI) target has been achieved would be through a letter of
confirmation to IFAD.
77.
Role of the County Meteorological Bureaus: The County Meteorological Bureaus will take the lead in
implementing the Improving climate information and adaptation advice activity (Ref. Activity A.1.7).
78.
79.
80.
Role of the Agricultural Information Institute of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science: IFAD and the
Agricultural Information Institute, Center of International Agricultural Research of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Science (AII-CAAS) are entering into an agreement by which CAAS would provide support to IFAD in monitoring and
evaluating the IFAD portfolio in China, extracting relevant knowledge from IFAD portfolio, and utilizing it to inform
policy making. Within this context, the project would enter into an agreement with AII-CAAS for carrying out major
functions related to M&E, knowledge management and policy dialogue, i.e. carrying out baseline, midline, and
endline surveys, analysis of data, impact evaluations, policy notes, etc.
Role of the Yunnan Youth League: The Yunnan Youth League is the most extensive youth organization in the
province and at the county level. The project envisions its involvement as a member of the Project Joint Meeting. In
addition, the project will explore collaboration with the Youth League for the setting-up and operation of the business
incubation and service centers [12].
Role of Women Federation: The Yunnan Women Federation is the main women’s organization in the province. The
project envisions its involvement as a member of the Project Joint Meeting. In addition, the project will explore
collaboration with the Women Federation for the setting-up and operation of the business incubation and service
centers. 
81.
82.
Role of MARA: In order to facilitate the possible scaling up of successful innovations promoted through the project
beyond Yunnan province, and inform national policies, DARA is invited to strengthen the linkages with the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA). A budget for policy activities under Component C has been included to favour
and provide sufficient resources to implement activities aimed - among alia - to this purpose. 
31/39
Leveraging existing development partners' platforms: Existing platforms with other developing partners, for
instance the UN technical working group on agriculture, the IPRCC-ADB-FAO-IFAD-UNDP-WB-WFP collaboration
on poverty reduction and south-south cooperation, will be leveraged and mobilized to maximize the opportunities for
policy dialogue and engagement.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
Organisation and staffing. A dedicated provincial PMO (PPMO) shall be set up within the Department of Cropland
Construction and Management, DARA. It will be responsible for project coordination, management support,
monitoring and reporting, ensuring adherence to agreed standards, guidelines, and procedures, providing overall
guidance on operational aspects to the various implementing units, and facilitating intra-knowledge transfer among
project provinces and with external domestic and international agencies.
PMOs are staffed with officers who need to have experience in project management, financial management,
procurement, and monitoring and evaluation. They will also be assisted by officers from the technical line bureaus of
Water Resources, Agriculture, Forestry, and Finance at the corresponding level. PPMOs and CPMOs will be in
charge of day to day management of project activities, overseeing project designs, implementing and supervising
project activities, arranging for counterpart-funding and local labor contribution, preparing annual work plans, financial
plans, procurement plans, monitoring and reporting on project progress, outputs, and outcomes.
PMO and the CPMOs will assign financial staff and to support the Financial Division of the LPA for the financial
management of the project. The financial division at each level is composed of three or more professional staff
(Finance Manager, released on a full-time basis, to be assisted by an Accountant and Accounts Assistants).
The PPMO organization structure is composed of the director who has overall responsibility and a Finance Manager
who has financial responsibility overseeing an accountant and a cashier. The technical officers in the PMOs will have
review and pre-approval functions, similarly in the counties PMOs.
Financial Manager (accountant in professional title) is responsible for the project financial management. The
manager will be assigned who has accumulated rich experiences in managing projects of international cooperation in
the years implementation of the World Bank and ADB projects.
88.
Budgeting staff are responsible for the allocation of project plan funds. procurement personnel , accountants are
responsible for calculating and reviewing the fund inflow and disbursement
89.
Financial accountants are personnel of state organs, all of whom have been selected and recruited through
examinations.
90.
91.
Budgeting. China has undertaken extensive reforms to its budgeting system over the past 10 years. These have
encompassed the entire budgeting cycle: formulation, approval, implementation and audit. The early challenge was
fundamentally to create the institutional infrastructure for a modern budget process where none had previously
existed. Under its budgeting system, provincial, and local government. All activities of the government are
predetermined and are set out in plans and programs. The annual estimates of expenditure detail the financial
commitment of the government for the next year’s program of activities.
The PPMO, after consultations with project stakeholders, shall prepare its annual budget, linking all the planned
activities to the cost categories outlined in Schedule II of the Financing Agreement; this exercise will take place in
advance of the preparation of the national budget, to ensure that the required Government funds will be allocated and
available on time. All financing contributions should be clearly stated in the budget to be submitted to internal for
approval and to IFAD for non –objection.
92.
The LPA should make adequate annual budgetary provisions for IFAD funds and Counterpart funds in the National
Budget, based on the AWPB of the Project.
93.
Counterpart funding will consist of allocations made by the project province and counties/districts. Government will
ensure that counterpart funds are contained in the domestic fiscal allocations for the counties, and that they are
released for the project on time. The counterpart funding maintain in the Treasury Accounts of the counties will be
used to pre-finance the project expenditures as well.
94.
Budget allocations will be made to enable the function of the provincial and county PMOs, to cover investment and
recurrent expenses, office and training equipment, capacity building, M&E, knowledge management, and
agribusiness facilitation services. Modest project support will also be reserved for function at township where existing
government staff and facilities will be used. Recurrent costs for all PMOs will be ensured by government counterpart
funding, which will cover staff salaries, travel costs, administrative costs, and operation and maintenance of vehicles
etc.
32/39
95.
Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds. In accordance with the section 4.04(d) of the General Conditions,
immediately after entry into force of the Financing Agreement, there shall be a Designated Account (DA) for the IFAD
Loan denominated in the currency of the loan (USD/EURO to be the same currency of the loan) to be opened,
through which IFAD funding shall be channelled. The DA is to be set up at and managed by DOF. DOF will be
directly responsible for the management, maintenance and reconciliation of the DA activities. Supporting documents
required for IFAD disbursements will be prepared and submitted by CPMOs through PPMO for review and verification
before sending to DOF for further disbursement processing.
96.
The PPMO and county CPMOs are responsible for reviewing the Disbursement Request as well as the supporting
documentation required for IFAD disbursements. Disbursement Requests will be prepared and submitted by CPMOs
to PPMOs for review and verification before sending the Disbursement Request to DOF for further disbursement
processing. Once approved, project resources will be channeled directly from provincial level to county level .
97.
In accordance with Section 3.1 of the LDH, the Designated Account will be administered following Imprest Account
arrangements. Advances from this Financing must be segregated from other funds for the Project .
98.
Additional general conditions precedent to withdrawal: The following are designated as additional general
conditions precedent to withdrawal
99.
(a)    The Provincial Project Management Office (PPMO”) and at least one County PMO, the respective key Project
staff shall have been selected;
100.
(b)     The Borrower, through the Lead Project Agency, shall have submitted, and the Fund shall have received, an
official document confirming the availability of adequate counterpart funds for the first Project Year;
101.
(c)        The Designated Account shall have been duly opened : Documentation evidencing the opening of the
Designated Account, with details of the names and titles of the persons authorized to operate the DA, must reach
IFAD before withdrawal from the loan account can begin.
102.
(d) the designated representative a letter designating the names of officials authorized to sign withdrawal applications
which includes their authenticated specimen signature(s). The project is eligible and authorised to use the IFAD
Client Portal (ICP), the applicable form is included in LTB.
103.
(d)     A draft PIM shall have been prepared and is acceptable to the Fund and
104.
(e)     A computerized accounting system acceptable to the Fund shall have been identified and selected by the
Provincial PMO.
105.
Upon fulfilment of conditions precedent to withdrawal and the Borrower’s request, the Fund will make one (or more)
withdrawal(s) of up to the ceiling USD/EURO 6 million for the loan.,and deposit such amount(s) into the Designated
Account; DOF shall submit withdrawal applications to replenish the Designated Account from time to time, based on
expenditures, provided that the amount claimed is not less than 20% of the initial deposit. All withdrawals must be in
line with projected expenditures as detailed in the approved AWPBs.
106.
The following are the SOE thresholds that apply for withdrawal application under procedure (i) "Advance Withdrawal"
and under procedure (iii) "Reimbursement": USD 300,000 for all expenditures categories.
107.
PMOs and IAs shall maintain Implementation ledger Accounts in local currency in the Treasury System or
commercial banks to receive the proceeds of the IFAD financing and/or the counterpart funding respectively. The
County PMOs and BOFs will ensure that funds received at each level are transferred without delay. Separate
bookkeeping is maintained by each of the IAs where Project activities will be implemented.
108.
Y2RDP will pilot a result-based Lending/disbursement  in selected sub-component (sub- component 1. 1 ).
Replication at larger scale could be considered at mid-term on the basis of the positive results and lessons generated
during implementation. The disbursement under RBL will be conditional to the achievement of agreed and
independently verifiable targets or milestones. Detailed disbursement linked indicators need to be identified and
verified by an assigned independent agency following agreed verification protocols.
109.
Y2RDP will pilot a result-based Lending/disbursement (RBL) in selected sub-components. Replication at larger scale
could be considered at mid-term on the basis of the positive results and lessons generated during implementation.
The disbursement under RBL will be conditional to the achievement of agreed and independently verifiable targets or
milestones. Detailed disbursement linked indicators need to be identified and verified by an assigned independent
agency following agreed verification protocols.
110.
FM procedures for the annual audit, verification on missions are still  as part of the annual process. Project needs to
ensure that verification on the funds used for the intended purpose, for efficiency, social equity, basically value added
principles.
33/39
111.
Retroactive financing As an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, IFAD will
seeking IFAD Executive Board approval that for retroactive financing from the loan up to US$7.5 million for eligible
expenditures incurred as from the date which the design document approval by Quality assurance group to the date
of the entry in force of the financing agreement. Eligible expenditures for retroactive financing are considered those
incurred to finance the start-up and preparation project activities such as : (i) purchase of essential items (including
equipment and procurement of MIS system) for the PMOs; (ii) recruitment of project staff; (iii) costs related to
tendering, selection, and recruitment of service providers; (iv) costs related to the finalization of the program
implementation manual, customization of accounting software to fit IFAD requirement and license fees, start-up
trainings and workshops; (v) establishment of the M&E system, including carrying-out of the baseline survey and
development of MIS; (vi) exposure visits for knowledge and experiences sharing; (vii) surveys and feasibility studies;
(viii) training and technical assistance for cooperatives, including recruitment of service providers, cooperative
support field officers, technical advisors for business plans development, brokers/facilitators for linkages with
supermarkets; and value-chain officers and monitoring & evaluation officers; and (ix) business plans.
112.
Financing of taxes: In line with IFAD GCs, IFAD’s funds may be used to finance taxes that are not “excessive,
discriminatory or otherwise unreasonable”. In view of improvement of the efficiency of funds flow and better support
to the project implementation, IFAD’s financing will be used to finance taxes for an estimated amount of
approximately US$2.1 million. Government financial contribution to the project is   in the amount of US$ 115 million
which  is  more than 54 times of the amount of taxes (US$ 2.1  million)  financed by IFAD.
113.
Internal controls and internal audit：： As part of internal control procedures, the PPMO need to provide a formal
delegation of authority and clear segregation of duties among the project staff. In addition, the project’s financial
performance will be periodically reviewed. The overall control measures and systems and procedures that are in
place
114.
Management Information System (including Accounting software). The Project will establish a Management
Information System (MIS) to support the core project management functions at the central and district levels, such as
business plan development, financial management and project monitoring and evaluation. The MIS should be able to
record all expenditures transactions by categories, components, project activities and sources at all level of this
project
115.
The PPMO and CPMOs will adopt an accounting software, customised to record and generate financial reports and
preserve financial data per the requirements of IFAD. The customisation should comply to the chart of accounts,
disbursement rules and share of financiers and should be able to generate Financial Statements and automate the
preparation of WAs.
116.
The Provincial PMO shall make sure proper internal controls defined and described in the project FM guideline, as
part of the PIM. Detailed control activities include a good transaction trail, personnel policies and competent project
staff, segregation of duties, physical protection of assets, and timely progress and performance reporting
117.
Financial Supervision and Inspection Bureau does random check / audit of the financial issues. The focus is shifting
randomly to all the relevant units. In addition, the commissioners of MOF organize non-scheduled inspection.
34/39
118.
Corrective measures to the problems found in the internal audit are carried out in line with the relevant provisions of
the national financial funds management.
119.
External Financial Audit. The auditing is conducted by the DAO which is constituted as an independent body under
the National Audit Office (NAO) and responsible for the audit for all IFIs projects in China. The Provincial Audit Office
will be delegated to be responsible for auditing the project. PAO has rich experiences with WB, ADB and IFAD
project auditing. The audited financial statements and a detailed audit report along with a Management Letter not
later than six months after the end of each financial year.
120.
IFAD will publicly disclose project financial statements and audit reports of projects financed by IFAD. In line with the
standards of the International Aid Transparency Initiative, the government is encouraged to publish relevant financial
information on their own websites, for increased accountability. The audit TORs shall explicitly mention the right of
the borrower/recipient and of IFAD to publish the audit report, with no limitation-of-use clause.
121.
Lending Terms and Financing Conditions. The Loan is granted on ordinary terms and shall be subject to interest
on the principal amount outstanding of the Loan rate equal to the IFAD Reference Interest Rate including the variable
or fixed spread, payable semi-annually in the Loan Service Payment Currency. The loan has a maturity period with a
( MAXIMUM 35) YEARS, including a grace period   with (MAXIMUM 10 YEARS) subject to subject to a maximum
average repayment maturity of 20 years. The maturity period is initiated when the Fund determines that all general
conditions precedent to withdrawal have been met by the Borrower.
122.
China remains at low risk of external debt distress. China recorded a government debt equivalent to 47.60 percent of
the country's Gross Domestic Product in 2017. According to the date released on March 2019 by the State
Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) of China, as of the end of 2018 China’s foreign debt balance was
USD$1.9652 trillion, for an increase of $207.3 billion, or 12% compared to the end of 2017 with the foreign debt
balance-to-GDP ratio standing at 14.4%. It is also stated that China will continue to pay close attention to changes in
foreign debt conditions, and strengthen foreign debt risk prevention and maintain the security of the national
economy and finance while persevering with management of foreign exchange to service the real economy.
123.
Financial Management Manual: (i) The PPMO in consultation with DOF will update the financial management (FM)
Guideline for the project to regulate the project financial management. The PPMO shall make sure that proper
internal controls are defined and described in the FM guideline, as part of the PIM. The PIM will be made a condition
to disbursement. The project shall draft and submit to IFAD financial statements for the loan on a biannually basis
which shall indicate the financial and physical achievements during project implementation. Annual unaudited
financial statements should be prepared and delivered to IFAD no later than four (4) months after the end of each
Fiscal Year. (ii) Dedicated finance staff should be appointed in the implementing agencies at provincial and county
level. This will be a disbursement condition to disburse funds to participating cooperatives and enterprises.
Participating enterprises/cooperatives should also have sufficient financial capacity. Capacity building will be
provided through the project.
124.
Lessons learned from previous projects. To speed up the project start-up: (i) adequate and capable finance staff
should be appointed at each level of PMOs with more relevant educational background and working experience to
quickly adapt to the sound FM requirements, arrangements and accounting practices; (ii) PIM should be properly
prepared, translated and distributed to all level of PMOs; (iii) training on capacity building for staff at implementing
agencies should be conducted at early phase to enhance their understandings and capability and possibly improve
staff turnover rate (iv) retroactive financing to be used for the project. .
Strong management and effective coordination systems will be essential to ensure efficient financial reporting and
fund-flows, which will be key to improve slow disbursement and successful project implementation;
Web-based accounting software should be identified and procured in the design stage
The MIS system to be serve as project management tool should be adopted more widely with the development of
key areas of the system including Financial management to be linked with procurement management, etc.;
125.
Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services financed by the project will be carried out in accordance
with the Procurement Law of the People's Republic of China (2002) and its amendments to the extent that they are
consistent with the provisions of IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines and Handbook (2010) and its amendments.
The procurement methods to be applied, prior review arrangements, and the thresholds for different procurement
methods will depend on the expenditure and the estimated value of the contract, and will be detailed in the letter to
the borrower.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
35/39
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
126.
Planning: Planning will follow current practices for the IFAD-funded projects in China: planning will be done on
annual basis through the development of annual work plan and budgets (AWPBs). AWPBs will be developed through
participatory approach. AWPBs would include, among other things, a detailed description of the planned activities
and required budget, a procurement plan, and a plan for the implementation of the activities. AWPBs would need to
receive IFAD's "no objection".
127.
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E): Monitoring and evaluation is an essential function that would support project
management. M&E will be supported by a management information system (MIS) which will be specifically
developed for the project, and that will integrate information regarding project management, financial management
and physical progress, allowing real-time reporting.
As part of its commitment to being gender transformative, a pro-WEAI survey will be undertaken at baseline and
completion. The pro-WEAI survey will assess the increase in the participating women’s agency and empowerment.
Aspects of pro-WEAI will also be included in the Core Indicator Outcome Indicator Survey, particularly with regard to
asset management and productivity. 
128.
Learning and knowledge management (KM): The project knowledge management strategy would be built on the
following key elements: (i) an effective M&E framework will be established to monitor implementation progress, and
would provide the evidence for learning; (ii) a baseline, mid-line, and endline survey will be conducted at the
beginning, mid-term, and completion of the project; (iii) workshops at different levels will be held regularly to share
knowledge, experiences, innovations, and best practices; (iv) study tours, exposure and exchange visits, both in the
country and outside the country will be encouraged as a vehicle for sharing knowledge; (v) an agreement with the
Agricultural Information Institute, Center of International Agricultural Research of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Science (AII-CAAS) will be signed for the provision of support in M&E, and knowledge management. 
b. Innovation and scaling up
129.
Innovations: One of the main objectives of the project is to introduce, test, pilot, and demonstrate innovative models,
approaches, mechanisms, that - if successful - could be replicated and scaled-up, inform policy-making - or shared
with other developing countries through south-south cooperation.
It is important to clarify that, in the context of this project, the term 'innovative' is used to describe a model, approach
or mechanism that is different from the  'mainstreamed' approach. This definition reflects the Government's
understanding and expectations. Some of the elements described below can be considered truly 'innovative' in the
country, provincial or project area's context. Others may not be completely new in the country context, but their
adoption may have been limited and their implementation may have encountered challenges that the Government is
interested to understand and overcome.
Anticipated innovations include:
1.  Innovative chanyie fupin models: The project will introduce and pilot an upgraded chanye fupin model, where
the role and capacity of farmer cooperatives to act as vehicle/entry point for pursuing inclusiveness through
agribusiness development will be piloted. The project would promote cooperative standardization (i.e. the adoption
of 'best operational standards' by cooperatives); the adoption of value-chain approaches by agro-business entities;
business plans as strategic development tool for agro-business entities; and benefit-sharing mechanisms that
allow active participation of the target group in the economic success of the cooperative and stimulate individual
engagement in the cooperative's economic activity (Ref. Sub-component A.1);
2.  Traceability systems: The project will support the adoption of a traceability system at county level, a trusted
system to ensure that food safety requirements are met and eventual breaches identified, thus generating
consumer trust in food standards and certification (Ref. Sub-component A.1);
3.  Business incubation centers: The project will support the setting-up and operationalization of business
incubation centers, platforms to support entrepreneurship programs and business start-up (Ref. Sub-component
A.2);
4.  Inclusive finance models: The project will stimulate financial service innovations to improve access to fiance in
the project area (Ref. Sub-component A.3);
5.  Climate proofed design of infrastructure: The project will support the improvement of the capacity to assess
climate-risks, and plan and make investment decisions accordingly, and the integration of climate considerations
into the design and technical specification of the infrastructures, to reduce their vulnerability to the anticipated
impacts of climate change (Ref. Component B);
36/39
6.  Disbursement against results: The project will introduce on a pilot basis an innovative mechanism for
disbursement, i.e. disbursing project funds allocated for a sub-set of activities (Ref. Activity A.1.1) against the
achievement of agreed and independently verifiable targets or milestones that are considered important towards
contributing to the achievement of the project objectives. The achievements of the agreed targets or milestones, or
disbursement linked indicators (DLIs), will be verified by an assigned independent agency following agreed
verification protocols. The disbursement against results will be piloted on a small scale by the project, and
replication at a larger scale could be considered at mid-term on the basis of the positive results and lessons
generated during implementation.
130.
Policy engagement and scaling-up: Policy engagement is a key strategic thrust of IFAD-China partnership, as
highlighted in the COSOP 2016-2025. Policy engagement is a long-term process, which is pursued through a
combination of different instruments: lending (e.g. investment project) and non-lending (e.g. dialogue, partnerships,
analytical works, etc.). 
Within this framework, the project will contribute to the policy and scaling-up agendas as follows: the project is
conceived as a 'demonstration' project, which will introduce several innovative approaches to test their applicability in
the project area's context, learn lessons, and induce replication of those models and approaches that demonstrate
themselves successful and/or inform policy-making. The policy engagement and scaling-up framework relies on the
following elements:
1.  Champions: The project will closely engage national and provincial stakeholders as champions to learn and
replicate ideas and experiences derived from the project. Central level agencies such as the Ministry of Finance,
(MOF) the National Reform and Development Commission (NDRC), and the Leading Group Office of Poverty
Alleviation and Development (LGOP) place great expectations on the capacity of IFAD-funded projects to
introduce innovations and good practices that can be replicated or inform policy-making, and will closely observe
the progress and results of the project. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) has a special interest
on a number of features in the project, that may inform its policies and programs, including the cooperative
standardization, rural enterpreneurship program, syncronization with the 'national agro-products traceability
system, climate service for agricultural production, etc.
2.  Drivers: There is a mix of (i) market forces associated to the growing demand for safe and high quality food; and
(ii) genuine policy interest from the government, particularly from the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
(MARA), in observing how some of its policies and strategies can be best operationalized or adjusted, including
ensuring long-term sustainability of poverty achievements, mainstreaming smallholder farmers into modern
agriculture, revitalizing and creating new employment opportunities in rural areas, upgrading and standardizing
cooperatives, among other policies and strategies; 
3.  Pathway: The pathway for policy engagement and scaling-up would include the following steps: (i) regular
monitoring of project progress and results through the project M&E system, supported by a management
information system (MIS) that would allow real-time reporting, which will provide evidence for learning; (ii) learning
and stocktaking of lessons and best practices, including through possible research/analytical works, impact
assessments, etc. - this function will be supported by the Agricultural Information Institute of the China Academy of
Agricultural Science (AII-CAAS), with which the project would enter into an agreement; (iii) workshops, seminars
and other learning events at different levels will be held regularly to share knowledge, experiences, innovations,
and best practices and inform policy-makers, including the IFAD Annual Portfolio Review, consultations in the
framework of the design and/or evaluation of the COSOP, regular policy seminars organized by IFAD to share
experience from its projects with various stakeholders, etc. AII-CAAS is expected to play a critical role to
disseminate relevant lessons from the project and inform policy-making; (iv) joint field-visits with relevant
stakeholders and policy-makers to showcase lessons and best practices; (v) regular interaction with other projects
to share lessons and best practices;
4.  Possible scaling-up directions: Possible scaling-up could happen through (i) expanding services to more clients
in a given geographical space; (ii) horizontal replication, from one geographical area to another; (iii) functional
expansion, by adding additional areas of engagement; and (iv) vertical expansion, moving from a local or provincial
engagement to a nation-wide engagement;
5.  Provisions: Adequate budget is provided for project M&E and knowledge management, and to undertake the
necessary advocacy and policy activities;
6.  IFAD's role: IFAD will support and facilitate the process, by providing the necessary expertise, contributing to the
monitoring of the results and to the knowledge management, and leveraging its own partnerships and platforms
that will catalyze the scaling-up process. However, the policy engagement and scaling-up strategy of the project
will primarily rely on and will be delivered through the government systems - not by IFAD.
131.
37/39
Clarifying the boundaries for policy engagement: This primary objective of this project is not to support the central
government in pursuing or implementing policy reforms in the country, but to support the provincial government of
Yunnan in financing income-generating activities in the project area. Within this framework, the Design Team
considers this project relevant enough to key development policy questions and innovative enough to generate
lessons that could stay on the table of policy dialogue. Within this framework, the project has set-up a framework for
policy engagement (ref. above). However, policy outcomes would be a possible and desired by-product of the
project, and not its primary objective. Moreover, the extent by which the project could influence policymaking cannot
be determined a priori, as it would depend on a number of factors that are not predictable and beyond the control of
the project. In conclusion, the project policy engagement strategy is not to claim an ‘a priory’ policy impact, but to use
the results, lessons, etc. of this project as an entry point for dialogue within the broader context of IFAD's
engagement and dialogue in China.  
M. Implementation plans
a. Implementation readiness and start-up plans.
132.
Key steps towards project approval and project start-up: The following are the key milestones between the end
of project design and project start-up:
IFAD - Design Review Meeting:              4 February 2020
IFAD - Quality Assurance Group Review:              10-15 February 2020
IFAD - Submission of IFAD Project Design Report to SEC:             19 February 2020
Government - Submission Feasibility Study to PDRC and Foreign Capital Use Report to NDRC for
approval:             February 2020 (expected)
IFAD - Informal EB Seminar:             25 March 2020
Government - NDRC approval and MOF authorization to negotiate:             March 2020 (expected)
Loans negotiations:             First half April 2020 (tentative)
IFAD Executive Board approval:             20-22 April 2020
Signing financing agreement:             May 2020 (expected)             
Establishment of PMOs and appointment of project staff:             June-September 2020 (tentative)
Implementation support mission:             September/October 2020 (tentative)
Opening designated account:             November 2020 (tentative)
Start-up:             December 2020 (tentative)
133.
Retroactive financing: To mitigate the the risks of start-up delays and facilitate prompt execution of the project,
provision for retroactive financing is made to the project. Conditional to the approval of the IFAD Executive Board,
IFAD will reimburse eligible project expenditures incurred by the borrower before the loan effectiveness to finance the
start-up preparation activities [13] up to a maximum of 10% of the total IFAD financing (i.e. US$ 7.5 million).
Retroactive expenditures are pre-financed by the borrower.
134.
Stakeholder consultations and feedback: An indicative list of the stakeholders that have been consulted during the
design process, and views captured in the project design, include: Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs,
Yunnan Province (DARA); Farmland Enhancement Division, DARA; Farmland Construction Division, Department of
Agriculture & Rural Development, DARA; Division of Cooperative Economy, DARA; Poverty Alleviation Division,
DARA; Finance Division, DARA; Yunnan Department of Finance; Yunnan Water Conservancy Bureau; Yunnan
Meteorological Bureau; Yunnan Transportation Bureau; Yunnan Women’s Federation; Yunnan Youth League;
Yunnan Poverty Alleviation Office; Yunnan Maternity and Child Care Center; Bureau of Agriculture and Rural Affairs,
Yunlong, Yongping, Yongshen, Huaping, Lanping, Zhenxiong, Suijiang counties; Plant protection and Extension
Services, Bureau of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Yunlong county; Poverty Alleviation Office, Yunlong, Yongping,
Lanping, Yongshen  counties; Bureau of Ethnic Groups and Religions, Yunlong, Yongping counties; Bureau of
Employment, Yunlong county; Women’s Federation, Yunlong, Yongping, Lanping, Yongshen counties; Youth
League, Yunlong, Yongping, Zhenxiong, Yongshen counties; Environment Protection Agency, Yunlong county;
County Metrological station, Yunlong county; Dayanchang Livestock Cooperative, Yunlong county; Wenxing Village
Committee (village heads, households & women), Yunlong county; Jiaju Village (village heads, households &
women), Yunlong county; Water Conservancy Bureau, Yunlong, Yongping, Huaping, Lanping, Zhenxiong, Suijiang,
Yongshen counties; Transportation Bureau, Yunlong, Yongping, Huaping, Lanping, Zhenxiong, Suijiang, Yongshen
counties; Bureau of Human Resources and Social Security, Yongping county; Bonanshan Tea Company, Yongping
county; Boheng Tea Factory, Yongping county; Dapingtan Village (Village heads, households & women), Yongping
county; Dapingtan Tea Factory, Yongping county; Shijiacun Kiwi Cooperative, Yongping county; Maternity and Child
Care Center, Zhenxiong, Yongshen counties; Pianjiao Township, Yongshen county; Pianjiao Pomegranate
Cooperative, Yongshen county; Cunong Fruit & Vegetable Cooperative, Yongshen county; Anhong Cropping and
Livestock Cooperative, Yongshen county; various Village Committees and Farmer Cooperatives in Yongping,
Lanping, Zhenxiong, Huaping, Lanping, Zhenxiong, Suijiang counties.
In addition, a consultative meeting with representatives of IFAD Executive Board in China and other relevant
development partners will be organized in early March 2020 to present the main elements of the design and seek
their feedback.
38/39
135.
Project Design and Delivery Team: Matteo Marchisio (Country Director, APR); Rikke Grand Olivera (Senior Global
Technical Specialist and Project Technical Leader, PMI); Sun Yinhong (Country Program Officer, APR); Josef
Ernstberger (Rural Development Specialist); Cai Kui (Social Development Specialist); Li Guangyong (Rural
Infrastructure Specialist, China Agricultural University); Mo Xiugeng (Rural Finance Specialists, China Academy of
Financial Inclusion); Enrico Mazzoli (Economist); Ghulam Marri (Economist); Irene Li (Senior Regional Financial
Officer, IFAD); Candra Samekto (Program Officer, APR); Mattia Prayer Galletti (Lead Technical Specialist, ECG);
Puri Tola Satue (Legal Officer, LEG); Lauren Phillips (Lead Policy and Results Specialist, OPR); Fabrizio Bresciani
(Regional Economist, APR); Martina Huonder (Program Liaison, APR); Yinyin Shi (Country Program Assistant, APR).
b. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
136.
Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans: The project will be under the direct supervision of IFAD. In
order to facilitate the project’s implementation and ensure the achievement of project objectives, IFAD and the
Government will perform project supervisions/reviews that include (at least one) annual supervision, mid-term review,
and completion review. Additional, specific implementation support missions to deal with specific implementation
issues can be organized as per need. 
1.  Annual supervision: Annual supervision will be conducted by supervision missions sent by IFAD, and to the
extent possible jointly with the Government. The missions will review the progress of program implementation,
both physically and financially; implementation performance; fiduciary aspects, results, impact and sustainability.
Recommendations to issues raised, if any, will be made by the mission to improve the program implementation.
For the first supervision of the program, the focuses will be on reviewing adherence to the programme strategies
and institutional performance, including implementation arrangements, targeting, appropriateness of procurement,
functioning of the M&E system, and effectiveness of financial management.
2.  Mid-term review: IFAD and the Government will jointly carry out a “mid-term review” (MTR). Among other things,
the MTR mission will review the project approaches and strategies including the effectiveness of targeting and
gender mainstreaming strategies, implementation modalities, poverty and gender focuses, impact of individual
intervention, and sustainability. The mission will recommend a scaling-up or reorientation as may be required to
achieve project objectives and remove eventual constraints. Recommendations from the MTR may result in
modifications to the Loan Documents.
3.  Completion review: Completion review, also jointly conducted by IFAD and the Government, will evaluate,
among other things, the results and impact of the program, review sustainability and exit arrangement, and draw
experiences and lessons for later IFAD and government supported projects.  
Footnotes
[1] According to the World Bank (2015), GINI coefficient in China was 38.6.
[2] Presently, China does not have any explicitly written, unified, national policy on youth, or any official executive
mechanism for carrying out and monitoring national or regional youth affairs. Youth policy is regarded as a component of
the overall policy of the China's Communist Party.
[3] In this regard, the Government has recently launched a pilot "Mass Rural Youth Volunteer Program", which aims at
facilitating the migration of ten million young volunteers from large cities to rural areas.
[4] The extent by which the project will be scaled-up or influence policymaking cannot be determined a priori as it would
depend on a number of factors that are not predictable and beyond the control of the project - not least, the extent by
which the piloted models would demonstrate themselves successful.
[5] Dragonhead and SMEs.
[6] Production expansion would be conditional to formal out-grower arrangements, ensuring they respond to a real
demand.
[7] The Project Design Team was of the opinion that, given the innovative nature of some of the models to be introduced
by the project, and the time usually needed to build adequate capacity of the cooperatives, a 6 year implementation
period would have been more appropriate. However, the PPMO strongly requested the implementation period not to
exceed 5 years. The rationale is linked to the preference of the government to start paying the loan back after project
activities are completed (ordinary terms loans do grant a five-year grace period). The government is also be concerned on
the additional administrative costs (i.e. costs of the PMOs, which are borne by the government and not funded by the
project) associated with a longer implementation period. The rationale for a longer implementation period suggested by
the reviewers to ensure sufficient time for policy engagement is noted. However, policy engagement and possible scaling-
up would be guaranteed by the continuous engagement of IFAD in China, by the integration of the lessons generated and
successful models tested by the project in future IFAD investments, and by the policy dialogue conducted by the IFAD
Country Office through various instruments and channels - and not necessarily by activities of the project. 
39/39
[8] The Youth League defines "youth" as individuals between 18 and 45 year old.
[9] The Business Incubation and Service Centers will be primarily located at the premises of the recently established
county e-commerce centers, established under the Ministry of Commerce, which generally have sufficient office, meeting
and conference space, and communication  facilities. Collaboration with the youth and women leagues will be sought.
[10] The project will not rely on a central agency as lead implementing agency. The appointment of a central agency as
lead implementing agency requires a number of conditions - not least the willingness and the capacity of a central agency
to accept and repay, with its own resources, an international loan - which are difficult to attain. So far, such approach has
been piloted in one project only: the IPRAD-SN. While the benefits of such approach have yet to be demonstrated, the
experience has already demonstrated the extremely high costs of such approach, including much more lengthy and
cumbersome government internal approval process, delays in start-up (e.g. opening of designated accounts, etc.), high
supervision costs. It was thus considered more prudent to adopt the more conventional and tested ‘loan to a provincial
government’ approach for the projects developed under IFAD11 - while not excluding to reconsider the possibility of a loan
implemented by a central agency in the future, based on the experience of IPRAD-SN.
[11] The project strategy builds on two important macro-trends in China: (i) a rapidly growing demand and consumer
preferences for clean and safe food, for which the remote project areas have a comparative advantage. The project will
focus on investments and organizational arrangements primarily on value addition (i.e. special products, branding,
traceability, green and organic certification) and on linking consumers as directly as possible to the producers, which is
now possible due to (ii) significant adoption of Information Technology (IT), which has penetrated most aspects of people’s
life in China. Online information and shopping including ordering food and even fresh food product has become common
feature for many urban citizens. It permits development of more efficient forward and backward linkages and facilitates
faster responses to consumer preferences, as well as increasing consumer control over production standards.
[12] The nature of the partnership with the Youth League will be further detailed during the start-up and implementation
phases.
[13] Eligible expenditures for retroactive financing are those incurred to finance: (i) purchase of essential items (including
equipment and procurement of necessary software) for the PMOs; (ii) recruitment of project staff and/or consultants and
procurement of technical assistance; (iii) costs related to tendering, selection, and recruitment of service providers; (iv)
costs related to the finalization of the Project Implementation Manual, customization of accounting software to fit IFAD
requirement and license fees, start-up trainings and workshops; (v) establishment of the M&E system, including carrying-
out of the baseline survey and development of MIS; (vi) exposure visits and study tours for knowledge and experiences
sharing; (vii) surveys and feasibility studies; (viii) recruitment of service providers. 
China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Logical Framework
1/6
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outreach 
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
Females
Males
Young
Indigenous people
Total number of persons
receiving services
22943
45885
22943
45885
6882
27531
27531
55062
45885
91770
Project M&E,
Household
Surveys
Baseline,
Annual and
Completion
surveys
PPMO, M&E
Young
15
30
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed
households
Project M&E,
Household
Surveys
Baseline,
Annual and
Completion
surveys
26460
61740
PPMO, M&E
Households
44100
88200
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
Household members
207270 414540
Project M&E,
Household
Surveys
Baseline,
Annual and
Completion
surveys
PPMO, M&E
Continuity of
government socio-
eoconomic policies and
poverty reduction
strategies and political
commitment. (A)
Farmers slow/reluctant
tendency towards
cooperative led
organizations. (R)
Cooperatives thrive as
per government new
laws and regulations.
(A)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Project Goal 
Poor and vulnerable rural households are sustainably out
of poverty in the project area
2/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
%age of households with income growth higher than the
county average growth
female-headed households
ethnic households
total households
Baseline and
Completion
surveys
PPMO; M&E
Project M&E,
Household
Surveys,
Govt
Statistics
80
80
80
Development Objective 
Enhancing the income generating opportunities in the
project area for poor and vulnerable households, and the
inclusiveness of the benefit-sharing mechanisms from
industries
At the end of the project, targeted households achieve at
least a 30% increase in annual income from project-
supported activities
Project M&E,
Government
Statistics
PPMO, M&E
Baseline,
Mid-term and
completion
surveys
total households
female headed hhs
ethnic hhs
2.2.1 New jobs created
Job owner - men
New jobs
Job owner - women
Job owner - young
79380
90
90
700
2000
1300
200
Project M&E,
Government
Statistics
Baseline,
Mid-term and
completion
surveys
PPMO, M&E
Participating women report an adequate empowerment
score in pro-WEAI index
pro-WEAI
survey
baseline, and
completion
PPMO
women
0
50
Continuity of economic,
social and marketing
stability in the target
project area. (A)
Poverty is a dynamic
process associated with
different socio-
economic shocks, so
maintaining zero rural
poverty will be subject
to such shocks (R)
Providing investment
opportunities/ benefit
sharing mechanism
through enhanced and
standard cooperatives
to the poor farmers lead
to high income. (A)
Farmers reluctance to
go with cooperative led
value chain and industry
model. (R)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outcome 
1. Strengthen the participation of poor and vulnerable
population in rural economic growth
2.2.3 Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private
entities
Project M&E
Reports
Number of POs
42
140
2.2.4 Supported rural producers' organizations members
reporting new or improved services provided by their
organization
Project M&E
Reports
Number of POs
4000
11760
Output 
1.1 Up-grade/develop Pro-poor farmer cooperatives
Pro-poor Farmer Professional Cooperatives meeting the
operational standards
Project M&E
Reports
cooperatives
14
35
PPMO, M&E
PPMO, M&E
PPMO, M&E
Baseline,
yearly after
Mid-term and
completion
surveys
Baseline,
yearly after
Mid-term and
completion
surveys
Baseline,
yearly and
Completion
surveys
Output 
1.2 Private co-investment in Business plans of Agro-
entities
Number of co-investment plans supported under the project Project M&E
plans
50
178
Reports
PPMO, M&E
Baseline,
yearly and
Completion
surveys
Output 
1.3 Establishing county Traceability System TS
Agro-Entities adopting digitalized traceability system
agro-entities
35
70
Project M&E
Reports
Baseline,
yearly and
Completion
surveys
PPMO, M&E
Cooperative
management are
committed to
smallholder
membership. (A)
Cooperatives are
increasingly member-
driven and responsive
to smallholder needs.
(A) Weak Farmers
might be influenced by
rich farmers (R)
Design estimates are
realistic (A) Farmers are
committed to abide by
new cooperatives law
(A) Farmers are new to
geneuine cooperatives
with its profit
meckhanism sharing
and might show
lukewarm attitude or get
influnced by rich farmer
members. (R)
Private agro-investors
are interested to
join/share farmers
cooperatives income
sharing mechanism and
willing to pay related
subscription and for the
services. (A) Influential
members might hold
bigger share. (R)
Continued policy
support to farmer
cooperatives and
private enterprises. (A)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outcome 
2. Improved climate information and adaptation advice
used by farmers
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices
Households
Total number of household
members
Households
15
62181
13230
Project M&E
Reports,
Service
provider
report
Baseline,
yearly after
Mid-term and
completion
surveys
PPMO, M&E
Farmers will participate
in climate information
services
workshop/centers (A)
Climate sensitivity is
new phenomon and
might not be welcomed
overwhelmingly. ( R)
Output 
2.1 Improving climate information and adaptation advice
3.1.2 Persons provided with climate information services
Persons provided with
climate information services
14700
Outcome 
3. Improve business opportunities for rural households
2.2.5 Rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase
in sales
Percentage of rural POs
10
70
Project M&E
Reports ,
Service
provider
reports
Project M&E
Reports,
Government
Statistics
Baseline,
yearly and
Completion
surveys
Baseline,
yearly after
Mid-term and
completion
surveys
PPMO
PPMO
Continuity of economic,
social and marketing
stability in the target
project area ( A).
Enterprise/cooperative
management are
committed to
smallholder
membership. (A)
Enterprise/Cooperatives
are increasingly
member-driven and
responsive to
smallholder needs. (A)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
5/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
3.1 Business development/support provided by service
centers
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or
business management
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Persons trained in IGAs or
BM (total)
19845
19845
11907
27783
39690
Project M&E,
Household
Surveys,
Cooperative
registers
Baseline,
yearly and
Completion
surveys
PPMO, M&E
Output 
3.2 Investment Support for start-ups
Start-up businesses of young people /women
entrepreneurs supported
total start-ups
80
140
start ups of young people
start ups of women
98
70
Output 
3.3 Improved access to finance
1.1.7 Persons in rural areas trained in financial literacy
and/or use of financial products and services
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Persons in rural areas
trained in FL and/or use of
FProd and Services (total)
9065
9065
5400
12730
18130
Project M&E,
Household
Surveys,
Cooperative
registers
Baseline,
yearly and
Completion
surveys
PPMO, M&E
Project M&E,
Household
Surveys,
Cooperative
registers
Baseline,
yearly and
Completion
surveys
PPMO, M&E
Small holder farmers
are interested to join
upscale value chain and
willing to pay related
subscription and for the
services. (A) Failure of
farmer cooperatives and
private enterprises to
cooperative standards
and farmers needs and
excluding poor farmers
from joining value chain
development (R)
Small holder farmers
are interested to join
upscale value chain and
willing to pay related
subscription and for the
services. (A) Failure of
farmer cooperatives and
private enterprises to
cooperative standards
and farmers needs and
excluding poor farmers
from joining value chain
development (R)
FIs willing to participate
in government rural
revitalization strategy
programme (A)
Communities are willing
to access credit. (A)
Poor Farmers' (lack of)
capacity to access and
to pay back. ( R)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
6/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outcome 
4. Climate resilient infrastructure
2.2.6 Households reporting improved physical access to
markets, processing and storage facilities
Households reporting
improved physical access to
markets
Households reporting
improved physical access to
processing facilities
Households reporting
improved physical access to
storage facilities
15
20
20
Impact
Assessment
Reports,
Project
Reports
Baseline,
yearly after
Mid-term and
Completion
surveys
PPMO, M&E
Adequate participation
in climate related
information training ( A)
Output 
4.1 Improved infrastructure and systems for climate
resilient water and soil management
3.1.4 Land brought under climate-resilient practices
Hectares of land
8820
Impact
Assessment
Reports,
M&E Reports
Baseline,
yearly and
Completion
surveys
PPMO, M&E
Output 
4.2 Improved Rural Infrastructure
1.1.2 Farmland under water-related infrastructure
constructed/rehabilitated
Hectares of land
Impact
Assessment
Reports,
M&E Reports
Baseline,
yearly and
Completion
surveys
3600
PPMO and
M&E
Output 
stand alone output: Policy
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
M&E reports
Number
3
yearly and
Completion
surveys
PPMO and
M&E
Local leaders and
farmers are sensitive of
the issue and
assessment studies will
find adequate sites for
rainwater harvest ( A)
Communities assume
responsibility for use,
maintenance and
management of facilities
invested in by the
project ( A)
Commitment of
Provincial stakeholders
to the policy value of the
project
China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
• Limited IGA opportunities
• Labor and finance outflow
• Small scale landholding
• Limited skills of target HH
• Prevailing risks (climatic, 
markets reverting to 
poverty)
Activities: 
• Stimulating 
entrepreneurship and 
investors through 
incubation and start up 
support
• Improving access to 
finance
• Develop climate proofed 
infrastructure
Theory of Change: 
Capacitate cooperatives (instead 
of dragon head enterprises) to 
develop inclusive, equitable, fair 
& sustainable business 
partnership with agro-entities, 
for diversified rural based IGA 
for target groups
Outcome 2: 
Increased Market 
Participation of rural 
HH 
Project goal: 
Poor and vulnerable rural 
households sustainably out 
of poverty in the project 
area
Hurdles for 
target groups
others
vulnerable
Ethnic 
minorities
youth
women 
Cooperatives
Project 
destination
Industrial development for Poverty Eradication  ------ Rural Revitalization 
• Lack of inclusiveness of 
govt. CYFP approach
• Benefiting mechanism not 
adequately fair
• Relationship not 
sustainable
• Lack of farmers collective 
operation
• ……
Activities: 
• Upgrade cooperatives
• Support co-investment 
in cooperatives
• Develop business 
partnership with agro-
entities
• Establish traceability 
system
• Explore other 
innovative models
Outcome 1: 
Strengthening agricultural 
industrialization through 
enhanced cooperative 
linkages.
Project objective: 
Enhancing the income 
generating opportunities in 
the project area for poor 
and vulnerable households, 
and the inclusiveness of 
the benefit-sharing 
mechanisms from 
industries
China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex-3:  Y2RDP PROJECT COSTS AND FINANCING 
1.  Assumptions:  Key  assumptions  used  in  estimating  the  project  costs  include  (i)  price 
contingencies assumed at 5% and applied on all items, except for Grant and Subsidies category; 
(ii) exchange rate at CNY 7.07 per USD; (iii) taxes as prevailing at the time of design and broadly 
based at 10%; (iv) a FIVE year implementation phase and the project starting in April 2020; (v) 
all unit costs are input in Chinese Yuan, i.e. CNY and the price contingencies at 2% based on an 
average annual inflation rate in China; (vi) taxes excluded from IFAD financing rules and (vii) 
cost tables are presented in China fiscal year which corresponds to Calendar Year. 
2.  Unit costs: Unit costs for all detailed Tables were provided by the respective counties, in 
particular for the Component-2: Climate proofed public infrastructure activities. Operations and 
maintenance costs for these interventions have been assumed at 1% of annual investment costs. 
Unit  costs  for  Component  1:  Support  to  inclusive  rural  development  were  developed  in 
consultation with the respective Counties during the field visits and refined with the Provincial 
PMO. In doing so, some adjustments have been made but otherwise, total average expenditure for 
this component is more or less identical. Unit costs for the Component 3, Project Management, 
M&E, KM and Policy were provided by the Provincial PMO. 
3.  Costab  accounts:    Costab  accounts  are  organised  into  following  three  accounts:  (i) 
procurement  accounts,  (ii)  disbursement  accounts  and  (iii)  expenditure  accounts.  Following 
accounts have been created in accordance with the project expenditure categories and the project 
financing arrangements: 
Expenditure accounts (EA)  
Procurement accounts (PA) 
a/ 
Civil work_PA 
Smart Civil work_PA 
Equipment and 
materials_PA 
Training, capacity building 
and TA_PA 
Goods, services and 
inputs_PA 
Grants and subsidy_PA 
Salary and allowances_PA 
Operating costs_PA 
Operations and 
maintenance_PA 
a/ in Summary and Detailed tables, these accounts will end up with PA, DA & EA 
respectively 
Disbursement accounts 
(DA)  
Civil work_DA 
Smart Civil work_DA 
Equipment and 
materials_DA 
Training, capacity building 
and TA_DA 
Goods, services and 
inputs_DA 
Grants and subsidy_DA 
Salary and allowances_DA 
Operating costs_DA 
Operations and 
maintenance_DA 
Civil work_EA 
Smart Civil work_EA 
Equipment and 
materials_EA 
Training, capacity building 
and TA_EA 
Goods, services and 
inputs_EA 
Grants and subsidy_EA 
Salary and allowances_EA 
Operating costs_EA 
Operations and 
maintenance_EA 
4.  Y2RDP  Project  accounts:  The  project  has  three  expenditure  components  including  the 
project management and 5 sub-components. Cost Tables have according organised, prepared and 
1 
provided  in  following  pages:  (i)  first  Summary  Tables  for  components,  (ii)  detailed  Tables  by 
Components and sub-components and (iii) Detailed Tables by Counties.  
5. 
Summary Tables: These Tables are presented summarising all components by financiers 
(that is GOC, IFAD, PRIVATE SECTOR and BENEFICIARIES) under the project in thousand 
USD currency units. (Tab file: Y2RDP_components.tab) 
6.  Detailed  Cost  Tables:  Each  Detailed  Table  contains  the  following  data  and  information 
relating  to  the  project  interventions  and  activities.  These  are  description  of  an  activity,  unit, 
physical quantities by year, unit cost in CNY and USD, base costs in thousand USD currency unit, 
total  costs  including  contingencies  in  thousand  USD,  percentage  of  disbursement  account  and 
financing rule (ie % of financing by Government, IFAD, private sector and the beneficiaries). 
Components 
Sub-components 
Cost 
Table 
reference 
# 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
2.1 
2.2 
Support to Inclusive Rural 
Development 
Climate-proofed public 
infrastructure planning and 
development 
Project Management, M&E, 
KM and Policy 
Improving chanye fupin models 
Stimulating entrepreneurships 
Improving access to finance 
Improving infrastructure climate resilience  
Improving rural infrastructure system 
Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 
3.1 
7.  Retroactive  financing    As  an  exception  to  the  General  Conditions  for  Agricultural 
Development  Financing,  IFAD  will    be  seeking  IFAD  Executive  Board  approval  that  for 
retroactive financing from the loan  up to a maximum of 10% of the total IFAD financing ( i.e 
US$7.5  million)  for  eligible  expenditures  incurred  as  from  the  date  of  wrap  up  of  the  design 
completion  mission  to  the  date  of  the    entry  in  force  of  the  financing  agreement.  Eligible 
expenditures  for  retroactive financing  are considered those incurred to  finance the start-up and 
preparation project activities such as : (i) purchase of essential items (including equipment and 
procurement of MIS system) for the PMOs; (ii) recruitment of project staff; (iii) costs related to 
tendering, selection, and recruitment of service providers; (iv) costs related to the finalization of 
the  program  implementation  manual,  customization  of  accounting  software  to  fit  IFAD 
requirement  and  license  fees,  start-up  trainings  and  workshops;  (v)  establishment  of  the  M&E 
system, including carrying-out of the baseline survey and development of MIS; (vi) exposure visits 
for knowledge and experiences sharing;  (vii) surveys and  feasibility studies; (viii) training and 
technical  assistance  for  cooperatives,  including  recruitment  of  service  providers,  cooperative 
support field officers, technical advisors for business plans development, brokers/facilitators for 
linkages with supermarkets; and value-chain officers and monitoring & evaluation officers; and 
(ix) business plans.  
2 
8. Financing of taxes: In order to improve the efficiency of funds flow and better support project 
implementation, IFAD’s funds may be used to finance taxes that are not “excessive, discriminatory 
or otherwise unreasonable”. In case the Government intends to use IFAD financing to finances 
taxes that is impossible or impractical to exempt, the Government would need to formalize such 
request in writing. 
3 
Annex 3 – Y2RDP: Project cost and financing  
Summary tables 
Y2RDP Disbursement Accounts by Financiers 
4 
China Y2RDP  PDR Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (US$ '000) Govt of ChinaIFADPrivate sectorBeneficiariesTotalFor.Local (Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)Taxes1. Civil work 86 311.1100.0------86 311.136.8-77 679.98 631.12. Smart civil work 2 048.310.018 434.690.0----20 482.98.7-18 434.62 048.33. Equipment and materials 145.350.8140.749.2----286.00.1-257.428.64. Training, workshop, capacity building and TA 1 390.914.68 107.985.4----9 498.84.1-8 548.9949.95. Goods, services and inputs 599.016.63 004.283.4----3 603.31.5-3 242.9360.36. Grants and subsidy 18 955.718.144 132.342.141 685.739.8--104 773.744.7-104 773.7-7. Salary and allowances 2 405.580.6580.519.4----2 986.01.3-2 986.0-8. Operating costs 3 423.690.1377.99.9----3 801.51.6-3 801.5-9. Operations and maintenance ------2 769.0100.02 769.01.2-2 769.0-Total PROJECT COSTS 115 279.449.274 778.131.941 685.717.82 769.01.2234 512.2100.0-222 494.012 018.2 
Y2RDP Components by Financiers 
5 
China Y2RDP  PDR Components by Financiers (US$ '000) Govt of ChinaIFADPrivate sectorBeneficiariesTotalFor.Local (Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Components 1. Comp-1: Supporting inclusive rural development a. Improving Chanye fupin model 19 299.118.645 102.943.439 565.738.1--103 967.744.3-103 624.3343.4b. Stimulating entreprenuership 898.09.56 422.968.02 120.022.5--9 440.94.0-9 069.3371.6c. Improving access to finance 51.010.0458.990.0----509.90.2-458.951.0Subtotal 20 248.117.851 984.745.641 685.736.6--113 918.548.6-113 152.5766.02. Comp 2:  Climate-proofed public infrastructure a. Improving infrastructure climate resilience 2 195.79.719 761.587.3--687.03.022 644.29.7-20 448.52 195.7b. Improving rural infrastructure 86 311.197.6----2 082.02.488 393.137.7-79 762.08 631.1Subtotal 88 506.879.719 761.517.8--2 769.02.5111 037.347.3-100 210.510 826.83. Comp 3 Project management, M&E, KM and policy a. Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 6 524.568.33 031.931.7----9 556.44.1-9 131.0425.4Total PROJECT COSTS 115 279.449.274 778.131.941 685.717.82 769.01.2234 512.2100.0-222 494.012 018.2 
Expenditure accounts by financiers 
6 
China Y2RDP  PDR Expenditure Accounts by Financiers (US$ '000) Govt of ChinaIFADPrivate sectorBeneficiariesTotalFor.Local (Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesI. Investment Costs A. Civil works 86 311.1100.0------86 311.136.8-77 679.98 631.1B. Smart civil work 2 048.310.018 434.690.0----20 482.98.7-18 434.62 048.3C. Equipment and materials 145.350.8140.749.2----286.00.1-257.428.6D. Training, workshop, capacity building & TA 1 390.914.68 107.985.4----9 498.84.1-8 548.9949.9E. Goods, services and inputs 599.016.63 004.283.4----3 603.31.5-3 242.9360.3F. Grants and subsidy 18 955.718.144 132.342.141 685.739.8--104 773.744.7-104 773.7-Total Investment Costs 109 450.348.773 819.832.841 685.718.5--224 955.795.9-212 937.512 018.2II. Recurrent Costs A. Salary and allowances 2 405.580.6580.519.4----2 986.01.3-2 986.0-B. Operating costs 3 423.690.1377.99.9----3 801.51.6-3 801.5-C. Opeartions and maintenance ------2 769.0100.02 769.01.2-2 769.0-Total Recurrent Costs 5 829.161.0958.310.0--2 769.029.09 556.54.1-9 556.5-Total PROJECT COSTS 115 279.449.274 778.131.941 685.717.82 769.01.2234 512.2100.0-222 494.012 018.2 
Y2RDP Project cost summary 
7 
China Y2RDP  PDR %% TotalComponents Project Cost Summary (CNY '000)(US$ '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Components 1. Comp-1: Supporting inclusive rural development a. Improving Chanye fupin model 695 776.0-695 776.099 254.8-99 254.8-44b. Stimulating entreprenuership 62 750.8-62 750.88 951.6-8 951.6-4c. Improving access to finance 3 400.0-3 400.0485.0-485.0--Subtotal 761 926.8-761 926.8108 691.4-108 691.4-482. Comp 2:  Climate-proofed public infrastructure a. Improving infrastructure climate resilience 153 929.9-153 929.921 958.6-21 958.6-10b. Improving rural infrastructure 596 075.7-596 075.785 032.2-85 032.2-38Subtotal 750 005.6-750 005.6106 990.8-106 990.8-483. Comp 3 Project management, M&E, KM and policy a. Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 63 909.5-63 909.59 116.9-9 116.9-4Total BASELINE COSTS 1 575 841.9-1 575 841.9224 799.1-224 799.1-100Physical Contingencies --------Price Contingencies 68 088.4-68 088.49 713.0-9 713.0-4Total PROJECT COSTS 1 643 930.3-1 643 930.3234 512.2-234 512.2-104 
Y2RDP Expenditure accounts project cost summary 
8 
China Y2RDP  PDR %% TotalExpenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary (CNY '000)(US$ '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCosts I. Investment Costs A. Civil works 582 433.2-582 433.283 086.0-83 086.0-37B. Smart civil work 139 367.5-139 367.519 881.2-19 881.2-9C. Equipment and materials 1 985.0-1 985.0283.2-283.2--D. Training, workshop, capacity building & TA 63 733.5-63 733.59 091.8-9 091.8-4E. Goods, services and inputs 24 116.0-24 116.03 440.2-3 440.2-2F. Grants and subsidy 700 800.0-700 800.099 971.5-99 971.5-44Total Investment Costs 1 512 435.2-1 512 435.2215 754.0-215 754.0-96II. Recurrent Costs A. Salary and allowances 19 911.8-19 911.82 840.5-2 840.5-1B. Operating costs 25 350.0-25 350.03 616.3-3 616.3-2C. Opeartions and maintenance 18 144.9-18 144.92 588.4-2 588.4-1Total Recurrent Costs 63 406.7-63 406.79 045.2-9 045.2-4Total BASELINE COSTS 1 575 841.9-1 575 841.9224 799.1-224 799.1-100Physical Contingencies --------Price Contingencies 68 088.4-68 088.49 713.0-9 713.0-4Total PROJECT COSTS 1 643 930.3-1 643 930.3234 512.2-234 512.2-104 
Project cost summary: IFAD financing % 
9 
China Y2RDP  PDR Project Cost Summary Cost(US$ '000) Including% ofIFAD%ContingenciesTotalFinancingFinancingA. Components 1. Comp-1: Supporting inclusive rural development a. Improving Chanye fupin model 103 967.744.345 102.943.4b. Stimulating entreprenuership 9 440.94.06 422.968.0c. Improving access to finance 509.90.2458.990.0Subtotal 113 918.548.651 984.745.62. Comp 2:  Climate-proofed public infrastructure a. Improving infrastructure climate resilience 22 644.29.719 761.587.3b. Improving rural infrastructure 88 393.137.7--Subtotal 111 037.347.319 761.517.83. Comp 3 Project management, M&E, KM and policy a. Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 9 556.44.13 031.931.7Total PROJECT COSTS 234 512.2100.074 778.131.9 
Expenditure accounts by components 
10 
China Y2RDP  PDR ComponentsExpenditure Accounts by Components - Base Costs Comp 3(US$ '000) Projectmanagement,Comp 2:  Climate-proofedM&E, KM andComp-1: Supporting inclusive ruralpublic infrastructurepolicydevelopmentImprovingProjectImprovingImprovinginfrastructureImprovingmanagement,Chanye fupinStimulatingaccess toclimateruralM&E, KM andmodelentreprenuershipfinanceresilienceinfrastructurePolicyTotal I. Investment Costs A. Civil works ----83 086.0-83 086.0B. Smart civil work ---19 881.2--19 881.2C. Equipment and materials -----283.2283.2D. Training, workshop, capacity building & TA 1 592.03 295.3485.01 435.1-2 284.49 091.8E. Goods, services and inputs 1 685.6249.6---1 505.03 440.2F. Grants and subsidy 95 977.23 994.3----99 971.5Total Investment Costs 99 254.87 539.2485.021 316.383 086.04 072.5215 754.0II. Recurrent Costs A. Salary and allowances -613.5---2 227.02 840.5B. Operating costs -798.9---2 817.43 616.3C. Opeartions and maintenance ---642.31 946.1-2 588.4Total Recurrent Costs -1 412.4-642.31 946.15 044.49 045.2Total BASELINE COSTS 99 254.88 951.6485.021 958.685 032.29 116.9224 799.1Physical Contingencies -------Price Contingencies Inflation Local 4 712.9489.324.8685.63 360.9439.59 713.0Foreign -------Subtotal Inflation 4 712.9489.324.8685.63 360.9439.59 713.0Devaluation -------Subtotal Price Contingencies 4 712.9489.324.8685.63 360.9439.59 713.0Total PROJECT COSTS 103 967.79 440.9509.922 644.288 393.19 556.4234 512.2  Taxes 343.4371.651.02 195.78 631.1425.412 018.2 
Project components by year –baseline costs 
11 
China Y2RDP  PDR Project Components by Year -- Base Costs (US$ '000) Base Cost20202021202220232024TotalA. Components 1. Comp-1: Supporting inclusive rural development a. Improving Chanye fupin model 11 786.425 955.232 537.425 378.63 597.299 254.8b. Stimulating entreprenuership 1 191.21 940.11 940.11 940.11 940.18 951.6c. Improving access to finance 97.097.097.097.097.0485.0Subtotal 13 074.627 992.334 574.527 415.75 634.3108 691.42. Comp 2:  Climate-proofed public infrastructure a. Improving infrastructure climate resilience 6 505.89 220.75 241.2776.1214.921 958.6b. Improving rural infrastructure 21 190.025 788.121 847.511 714.24 492.485 032.2Subtotal 27 695.835 008.927 088.612 490.34 707.3106 990.83. Comp 3 Project management, M&E, KM and policy a. Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 2 157.71 780.41 910.71 758.31 509.89 116.9Total BASELINE COSTS 42 928.164 781.663 573.841 664.311 851.4224 799.1Physical Contingencies ------Price Contingencies Inflation Local 429.31 956.43 229.82 992.31 105.29 713.0Foreign ------Subtotal Inflation 429.31 956.43 229.82 992.31 105.29 713.0Devaluation ------Subtotal Price Contingencies 429.31 956.43 229.82 992.31 105.29 713.0Total PROJECT COSTS 43 357.366 738.066 803.644 656.612 956.6234 512.2  Taxes 3 016.63 855.23 109.31 477.2559.912 018.2 
Y2RDP Project components by year –total including contingencies 
12 
China Y2RDP  PDR Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) Totals Including Contingencies20202021202220232024TotalA. Components 1. Comp-1: Supporting inclusive rural development a. Improving Chanye fupin model 11 904.226 739.134 190.427 201.33 932.7103 967.7b. Stimulating entreprenuership 1 203.11 998.72 038.72 079.42 121.09 440.9c. Improving access to finance 98.099.9101.9104.0106.1509.9Subtotal 13 205.328 837.736 331.029 384.76 159.8113 918.52. Comp 2:  Climate-proofed public infrastructure a. Improving infrastructure climate resilience 6 570.89 499.25 507.4831.8234.922 644.2b. Improving rural infrastructure 21 401.926 566.922 957.412 555.54 911.388 393.1Subtotal 27 972.736 066.128 464.813 387.35 146.2111 037.33. Comp 3 Project management, M&E, KM and policy a. Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 2 179.31 834.22 007.71 884.61 650.69 556.4Total PROJECT COSTS 43 357.366 738.066 803.644 656.612 956.6234 512.2 
Project components by year –investment and recurrent costs 
13 
China Y2RDP  PDR Project Components by Year -- Investment/Recurrent Costs (US$ '000) Totals Including Contingencies20202021202220232024TotalA. Components 1. Comp-1: Supporting inclusive rural development a. Improving Chanye fupin model Investment Costs 11 904.226 739.134 190.427 201.33 932.7103 967.7Recurrent Costs ------Subtotal 11 904.226 739.134 190.427 201.33 932.7103 967.7b. Stimulating entreprenuership Investment Costs 917.81 707.71 741.81 776.71 812.27 956.2Recurrent Costs 285.3291.0296.8302.8308.81 484.7Subtotal 1 203.11 998.72 038.72 079.42 121.09 440.9c. Improving access to finance Investment Costs 98.099.9101.9104.0106.1509.9Recurrent Costs ------Subtotal 98.099.9101.9104.0106.1509.9Subtotal 13 205.328 837.736 331.029 384.76 159.8113 918.52. Comp 2:  Climate-proofed public infrastructure a. Improving infrastructure climate resilience Investment Costs 6 570.89 432.25 342.9609.51.921 957.2Recurrent Costs -67.0164.6222.4233.0687.0Subtotal 6 570.89 499.25 507.4831.8234.922 644.2b. Improving rural infrastructure Investment Costs 21 401.926 348.622 466.011 936.44 158.186 311.1Recurrent Costs -218.3491.4619.1753.22 082.0Subtotal 21 401.926 566.922 957.412 555.54 911.388 393.1Subtotal 27 972.736 066.128 464.813 387.35 146.2111 037.33. Comp 3 Project management, M&E, KM and policy a. Project management, M&E, KM and Policy Investment Costs 1 160.3794.8947.6803.3547.64 253.7Recurrent Costs 1 019.01 039.31 060.11 081.31 103.05 302.7Subtotal 2 179.31 834.22 007.71 884.61 650.69 556.4Total PROJECT COSTS 43 357.366 738.066 803.644 656.612 956.6234 512.2Total Investment Costs 42 053.165 122.364 790.642 431.110 558.6224 955.7Total Recurrent Costs 1 304.31 615.72 012.92 225.52 398.09 556.5 
Expenditure accounts by year 
14 
China Y2RDP  PDR Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies  Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)20202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Civil works 21 401.926 348.622 466.011 936.44 158.186 311.1B. Smart civil work 6 353.08 181.35 341.1607.6-20 482.9C. Equipment and materials 286.0----286.0D. Training, workshop, capacity building & TA 1 474.73 202.32 399.81 318.41 103.59 498.8E. Goods, services and inputs 650.9819.5886.1909.2337.53 603.3F. Grants and subsidy 11 886.626 570.633 697.727 659.44 959.4104 773.7Total Investment Costs 42 053.165 122.364 790.642 431.110 558.6224 955.7II. Recurrent Costs A. Salary and allowances 573.8585.3597.0608.9621.12 986.0B. Operating costs 730.5745.1760.0775.2790.73 801.5C. Opeartions and maintenance -285.3656.0841.5986.22 769.0Total Recurrent Costs 1 304.31 615.72 012.92 225.52 398.09 556.5Total PROJECT COSTS 43 357.366 738.066 803.644 656.612 956.6234 512.2 
Financing Investment and Recurrent costs by year 
15 
China Y2RDP  PDR Financing of Investment/Recurrent Costs and Financial Charges by Year(US$ '000) Financing20202021202220232024TotalI. Investment Costs  Govt of China 25 856.032 508.629 135.216 804.25 146.3109 450.3 IFAD 11 874.721 753.321 939.514 633.53 618.873 819.8 Private sector 4 322.410 860.513 715.910 993.41 793.541 685.7 Beneficiaries ------Total Investment Costs 42 053.165 122.364 790.642 431.110 558.6224 955.7II. Recurrent Costs  Govt of China 1 120.11 142.51 165.41 188.71 212.45 829.1 IFAD 184.2187.8191.6195.4199.3958.3 Private sector ------ Beneficiaries -285.3656.0841.5986.22 769.0Total Recurrent Costs 1 304.31 615.72 012.92 225.52 398.09 556.5III. Financial Charges  Govt of China ------ IFAD ------ Private sector ------ Beneficiaries ------Total Financial Charges ------Total Financing of Costs 43 357.366 738.066 803.644 656.612 956.6234 512.2Financing of Investment/Recurrent Costs and Financial Charges by Year 
Annex-3: DETAILED COST TABLES BY COMPONENTS 
Table 1.1: Improving Chanye fupin models 
16 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 1.1. Improving chanye fupin models Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 1. Payment to cooperative  meeting   operational standard coop-1827--45234,00033,381-619.0947.1--1 566.1IFAD ( 100% )2. Verification expenses Verification agency LS7777-2815,0002,14015.115.415.716.1-62.4IFAD ( 100% )MIS for RBL LS-7777287,5001,070-7.77.98.08.231.8IFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 15.123.123.624.18.294.23. Investment on pro-poor cooperatives Project grant support coop--8168321,500,000213,980--1 798.83 669.61 871.57 339.9IFAD ( 100% )Private investments coop--8168321,000,000142,653--1 199.22 446.41 247.74 893.2PRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop--816832600,00085,592--719.51 467.8748.62 935.9GOVTSubtotal --3 717.57 583.83 867.715 169.0Subtotal 15.1642.14 688.27 607.93 875.916 829.3B. Matching grant for cooperative co-investers Project grant support coop-223022-741,200,000171,184-3 879.85 396.44 036.5-13 312.7IFAD (100% )Private investment coop-223022-741,200,000171,184-3 879.85 396.44 036.5-13 312.7PRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop-223022-74------IFAD ( 100% )Subtotal -7 759.610 792.98 073.1-26 625.5C. Company-cooperatives-households model 1. Company-cooperative-household models Project grant each15222213-721,500,000213,9803 241.84 849.74 946.72 981.5-16 019.8IFAD ( 100% )Private sector participation each15222213-721,500,000213,9803 241.84 849.74 946.72 981.5-16 019.8PRIVATE ( 100% )Support from Govt each15222213-721,000,000142,6532 161.23 233.23 297.81 987.7-10 679.9GOVTSubtotal 8 644.812 932.613 191.37 950.7-42 719.42. Other innovative models Project support each15222213-72500,00071,3271 080.61 616.61 648.9993.8-5 339.9IFAD ( 100% )Private sector each15222213-72500,00071,3271 080.61 616.61 648.9993.8-5 339.9PRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance each15222213-72500,00071,3271 080.61 616.61 648.9993.8-5 339.9GOVTSubtotal 3 241.84 849.74 946.72 981.5-16 019.8Subtotal 11 886.617 782.318 138.010 932.3-58 739.2D. Product traceability system Promotion and user registration LS7777-282,5003572.52.62.62.7-10.4IFAD ( 90% )Training of Govt staff and agro-entity LS-7777287,000999-7.27.37.57.629.7IFAD ( 90% )Equipment support /a LS-77772825,0003,566-25.726.226.827.3106.0IFAD ( 90% )Operating costs, supervision LS-7142128705,000713-5.110.516.121.853.5IFAD ( 90% )Subtotal 2.540.646.753.056.8199.6E. Improving climate information|and adoptation advice LS-777-21500,00071,327-514.4524.7535.1-1 574.2IFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 11 904.226 739.134 190.427 201.33 932.7103 967.7II. Recurrent Costs Total 11 904.226 739.134 190.427 201.33 932.7103 967.7 _________________________________\a Such as bar-code printer, computer set, scanner, data hardware, fast-testing tools, etc 
Table-1.2: Stimulating entrepreneurships/ attracting investors 
17 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 1.2. Stimulating entreprenuership Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Business incubation / Service centres centre7----7250,00035,663252.1----252.1IFAD ( 90% )B. Technical assistance to the service centre TA support from the project LS/year7777735660,00094,151665.6679.0692.5706.4720.53 464.1IFAD ( 100% )C. Startup investments Project support each-777728500,00071,327-514.4524.7535.1545.82 120.0IFAD ( 100% )Private sector support each-777728500,00071,327-514.4524.7535.1545.82 120.0PRIVATE ( 100% )Subtotal -1 028.71 049.31 070.31 091.74 240.0Total Investment Costs 917.81 707.71 741.81 776.71 812.27 956.2II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary Manager pers/year777773574,88010,68275.577.078.680.181.7393.0IFAD ( 90% )Adminstrator pers/year777773548,0006,84748.449.450.451.452.4251.9IFAD ( 90% )Subtotal 123.9126.4128.9131.5134.1644.9B. Other operating costs Rental costs per year777773580,00011,41280.782.383.985.687.3419.9GOVTOther operating costs per year777773580,00011,41280.782.383.985.687.3419.9IFAD ( 90% )Subtotal 161.4164.6167.9171.2174.7839.8Total Recurrent Costs 285.3291.0296.8302.8308.81 484.7Total 1 203.11 998.72 038.72 079.42 121.09 440.9 
Table-1.3: Improving access to finance 
18 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 1.3. Improving access to finance UnitDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostCostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Improving access to finance Strengthening financial capacity LS888884045,0006,41951.952.954.055.056.1269.9IFAD ( 100% )Improving financial advisory services LS888884040,0005,70646.147.048.048.949.9239.9IFAD ( 100% )Total 98.099.9101.9104.0106.1509.9 
Table-2.1: Improving infrastructure climate resilience  
19 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 2.1. Improving infrastructure climate resilience Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Counties: 1. Zhengxiong: Planning and design LS/year1111-412,5001,7831.81.81.91.9-7.4IFAD ( 90% )Pond each15----15100,00014,265216.1----216.1IFAD ( 90% )Pipeline km45----4530,0004,280194.5----194.5IFAD ( 90% )Support to WUA each7----710,0001,42710.1----10.1IFAD ( 90% )Training persons6060606060300200291.71.81.81.81.99.0IFAD ( 90% )Rural road, rehabilitation km668--20900,000128,388778.0793.61 079.3--2 650.9IFAD ( 90% )Subtotal 1 202.3797.21 083.03.71.93 088.02. Suijiang: Planning & design LS1111-4122,00017,40417.617.918.318.7-72.4IFAD ( 90% )Pond each1515---3080,00011,412172.9176.4---349.2IFAD ( 90% )Pipeline km1515---3020,0002,85343.244.1---87.3IFAD ( 90% )Irrigation system mu-8 000---8 0001,250178-1 469.6---1 469.6IFAD ( 90% )Drip irrigation system mu-2 000---2 0003,500499-1 028.7---1 028.7IFAD ( 90% )Subtotal 233.72 736.718.318.7-3 007.43. Yongping: Design and planning lumpsum1111-4125,00017,83218.018.418.719.1-74.2IFAD ( 90% )Pond each363636--10838,9005,549201.8205.8209.9--617.5IFAD ( 90% )Pipeline km61616161-24454,5007,775479.0488.6498.3508.3-1 974.2IFAD ( 90% )Irrigation canal km1----150,0007,1337.2----7.2IFAD ( 90% )Pumping stations each22---4750,000106,990216.1220.4---436.6IFAD ( 90% )Subtotal 922.1933.2727.0527.4-3 109.74. Yunlong: Design and planning lumpsum1111-4125,00017,83218.018.418.719.1-74.2IFAD ( 90% )Pipeline km113130---24349,5007,061805.9945.7---1 751.6IFAD ( 90% )Irrigation canal km142023--57167,40023,880337.7492.0577.1--1 406.8IFAD ( 90% )Domestic water supply unit each11---22,500,000356,633360.2367.4---727.6IFAD ( 90% )Subtotal 1 521.81 823.5595.919.1-3 960.35. Lanping: Design and planning lumpsum1111-4125,00017,83218.018.418.719.1-74.2IFAD ( 90% )Pond lumpsum233--8100,00014,26528.844.145.0--117.9IFAD ( 90% )Storage reservoirs each81010--28100,00014,265115.3147.0149.9--412.1IFAD ( 90% )Subtotal 162.1209.4213.619.1-604.26. Yongsheng: Design and planning lumpsum1111-4125,00017,83218.018.418.719.1-74.2IFAD ( 90% )Pipeline km303638--104400,00057,0611 729.02 116.22 278.5--6 123.7IFAD ( 90% )Irrigation system each------------IFAD ( 90% )Subtotal 1 747.02 134.62 297.219.1-6 197.97. Huaping: Design and planning lumpsum1111-415,0002,1402.22.22.22.3-8.9IFAD ( 90% )Pumping stations each221--52,706,000386,020779.8795.4405.6--1 980.7IFAD ( 90% )Subtotal 781.9797.6407.92.3-1 989.7Total Investment Costs 6 570.89 432.25 342.9609.51.921 957.2II. Recurrent Costs A. Annual maintenance /a lumpsum-67.0164.6222.4233.0687.0BEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -67.0164.6222.4233.0687.0Total 6 570.89 499.25 507.4831.8234.922 644.2 _________________________________\a 1% of total investment cost per year 
Table-2.2: Improving rural infrastructure system 
To be continued…. 
20 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 2.2. Improving rural infrastructure Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Road design and management: Counties 1. Zhengxiong per year1111151,200,000171,184172.9176.4179.9183.5187.1899.8GOVT2. Suijiang per year1111151,000,000142,653144.1147.0149.9152.9156.0749.8GOVT3. Yongping: per year1111155,127,000731,384738.7753.5768.5783.9799.63 844.2GOVT4. Yunlong per year1111151,270,000181,170183.0186.6190.4194.2198.1952.2GOVT5. Lanping per year1111-41,000,000142,653144.1147.0149.9152.9-593.8GOVT6. Yongsheng: per year1111151,280,000182,596184.4188.1191.9195.7199.6959.7GOVT7. Huaping per year111115920,000131,241132.6135.2137.9140.7143.5689.8GOVTSubtotal 1 699.71 733.71 768.41 803.71 683.98 689.4B. Rural infrastructure: Counties 1. Zhengxiong: Rural road, new construction km4.95.39.64.85.9530.551,300,000185,449917.81 012.61 870.8954.11 206.35 961.5GOVTNew lateral road km34.122.122.161.613900,000128,388389.0544.9286.0297.2224.61 741.8GOVTRehabilitation of lateral road km5774-23600,00085,592432.2617.2629.6367.0-2 046.0GOVTMiscellaneous structures mu-300300400-1 0003,000428-132.3134.9183.5-450.7GOVTSubtotal 1 739.02 307.02 921.31 801.81 430.910 200.02. Suijiang Fire-contro observation tower each6----6200,00028,531172.9----172.9GOVTFarm road km102525--60558,40079,658804.52 051.62 092.6--4 948.7GOVTTractor road km12.512.512.512.5-50713,500101,7831 285.01 310.71 336.91 363.7-5 296.3GOVTCanal road km7.57.57.57.5-30300,00042,796324.2330.7337.3344.0-1 336.1GOVTSubtotal 2 586.63 693.03 766.81 707.7-11 754.13. Yongping Pumping stations each7----7842,900120,243850.1----850.1GOVTPipeline km55---10280,00039,943201.7205.7---407.5GOVTElectricity transmission line km55---10600,00085,592432.2440.9---873.1GOVTFarm road, transportable km1399--311,580,600225,4782 960.52 090.62 132.4--7 183.5GOVTTractor road km15101010-45100,00014,265216.1147.0149.9152.9-665.9GOVTCross-drainage structures each11---21,000,000142,653144.1147.0---291.0GOVTSubtotal 4 804.83 031.12 282.3152.9-10 271.14. Yunlong Farm road, transportable km15151515-60572,00081,5981 236.21 260.91 286.11 311.9-5 095.2GOVTWater source development lumpsum-1---12,759,400393,638-405.5---405.5GOVTIrrigation canal km-324747-126167,40023,880-787.21 179.41 203.0-3 169.6GOVTPipeline km-8989--17849,5007,061-647.4660.4--1 307.8GOVTSubtotal 1 236.23 101.13 125.92 514.8-9 978.1 
From previous page…Table-2.2: Improving rural infrastructure system 
21 
5. Lanping: Farm road, transportable km8----8300,00042,796345.8----345.8GOVTLand leveling mu110150150100-51038,0005,421602.3837.7854.4581.0-2 875.4GOVTPipeline km24353224-115320,00045,6491 106.51 646.01 535.01 174.3-5 461.7GOVTInstallations LS2331-91,000,000142,653288.2440.9449.7152.9-1 331.6GOVTUnspecified each-11--2300,00042,796-44.145.0--89.1GOVTSubtotal 2 342.72 968.62 884.11 908.2-10 103.66. Yongsheng Farm road, transportable km10155--30300,00042,796432.2661.3224.9--1 318.4GOVTPipe line km224237--101------GOVTPond, 5000m3 capacity lumpsum21---35,146,500734,1651 483.0756.3---2 239.4GOVTPond 1000 m3 capacity each102010--401,125,000160,4851 620.93 306.61 686.4--6 613.9GOVTCanal rehabilitation km203530--85400,00057,0611 152.62 057.51 798.8--5 008.9GOVTSubtotal 4 688.86 781.83 710.0--15 180.67. Huaping Farm road km8888-32700,00099,857806.8823.0839.4856.2-3 325.5GOVTSprinkler sets mu3 0003 0003 0003 0002 00014 0001,500214648.4661.3674.6688.0467.93 140.2GOVTPond each15151515157570,0009,986151.3154.3157.4160.5163.8787.3GOVTStorages each30303030301508,0001,14134.635.336.036.737.4180.0GOVTPumping stations each12---32,601,000371,041374.8764.5---1 139.2GOVTPipeline km101010101252200,00028,531288.2293.9299.8305.8374.31 562.0GOVTSubtotal 2 304.02 732.32 007.22 047.31 043.410 134.1Subtotal 19 702.224 614.920 697.610 132.72 474.377 621.7Total Investment Costs 21 401.926 348.622 466.011 936.44 158.186 311.1II. Recurrent Costs A. Annual maintenance /a lumpsum-218.3491.4619.1753.22 082.0BEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -218.3491.4619.1753.22 082.0Total 21 401.926 566.922 957.412 555.54 911.388 393.1 _________________________________\a 1% of total investment cost per year 
Table-3.1: Project management, M&E, KM and Policy.. Investment costs 
22 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 3.1. Project Management, M&E, KM and Policy Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Provincial PMO 1. Office equipment lumpsum1----1500,00071,32772.0----72.0GOVT2. Staff training Management workshop & training lumpsum111115200,00028,53128.829.430.030.631.2150.0GOVTGender focus training lumpsum1-1--260,0008,5598.6-9.0--17.6GOVTM&E and KM training lumpsum111115100,00014,26514.414.715.015.315.675.0GOVTSubtotal 51.944.154.045.946.8242.63. Knowledge management Study tours lumpsum11111570,0009,98610.110.310.510.710.952.5GOVTKnowledge documents & sharing lumpsum111115100,00014,26514.414.715.015.315.675.0GOVTSubtotal 24.525.025.526.026.5127.54. Women federation capacity building Capacity building lumpsum11111530,0004,2804.34.44.54.64.722.5GOVTKnowledge document & sharing lumpsum11111550,0007,1337.27.37.57.67.837.5GOVTSubtotal 11.511.812.012.212.560.05. Monitoring, evaluation and policy Baseline suyrvey0, lumpsum1-11-3300,00042,79643.2-45.045.9-134.1GOVTMIS set up lumpsum1----1700,00099,857100.9----100.9GOVTPolicy activities lumpsum-1111450,0007,133-7.37.57.67.830.3GOVTSubtotal 144.17.352.553.57.8265.2Subtotal 304.088.2143.9137.693.6767.3B. Prefecture PMOs 1. Equipment and materials (4 sets) lumpsum4----4100,00014,26557.6----57.6GOVT2. Workshop and training Management workshop lumpsum44444205,0007132.92.93.03.13.115.0GOVTM&E and KM workshops prefecture44444205,0007132.92.93.03.13.115.0GOVTSubtotal 5.85.96.06.16.230.03. Knowledge management events National study tours prefecture44444205,0007132.92.93.03.13.115.0GOVTKnowledge documents sharing prefecture44444205,0007132.92.93.03.13.115.0GOVTSubtotal 5.85.96.06.16.230.0Subtotal 69.211.812.012.212.5117.6C. County PMOs 1. Office equipment /a LS7----7155,00022,111156.3----156.3IFAD ( 90% )2. Staff training General management training person35353535351751,0001435.05.15.25.45.526.2IFAD ( 100% )FM & procurement training person2828-28-841,0001434.04.1-4.3-12.4IFAD ( 100% )Social safe-guard training person77-7-211,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1IFAD ( 100% )Environmental safe-guard training person77-7-211,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1IFAD ( 100% )Other Technical training person7070707070350500715.05.15.25.45.526.2IFAD ( 100% )Overseas training team-77--1450,0007,133-51.452.5--103.9IFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 16.167.963.017.110.9175.03. Study tours Within the region persons91919191914552,50035732.833.434.134.835.5170.6IFAD ( 100% )Outside the region LS/year2121---425,00071315.115.4---30.6IFAD ( 100% )Overseas study tour LS--14--1450,0007,133--104.9--104.9IFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 47.948.9139.034.835.5306.14. Consultants & short-term staff Project planning and design LS7777-28200,00028,531201.7205.7209.9214.1-831.4IFAD ( 100% )Short-term staff pers_month14141414147036,0005,13672.674.175.577.178.6377.9IFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 274.3279.8285.4291.178.61 209.35. Workshops and meetings Lumpsum282828282814010,0001,42740.341.142.042.843.7209.9IFAD ( 100% )6. Monitoring and evaluation and KM LS/year7777735250,00035,663252.1257.2262.3267.6272.91 312.1IFAD ( 90% )Subtotal 787.2694.9791.7653.4441.63 368.8Total Investment Costs 1 160.3794.8947.6803.3547.64 253.7 
Table-3.1: Project management, M&E, KM and Policy.. Recurrent costs 
23 
II. Recurrent Costs A. Provincial PMO 1. Staff salary ( 5 staff) per year111115600,00085,59286.488.289.991.793.6449.9GOVT2. Other operating costs Travel per year111115500,00071,32772.073.575.076.478.0374.9GOVTVehicle hiring per year111115400,00057,06157.658.860.061.262.4299.9GOVTOther operating costs per year111115400,00057,06157.658.860.061.262.4299.9GOVTSubtotal 187.3191.0194.9198.8202.7974.7Subtotal 273.8279.2284.8290.5296.31 424.6B. Prefecture PMOS 1. staff salary (4 staff from each Prefecture) per year202020202010030,0004,28086.488.289.991.793.6449.9GOVT2. Other operating costs Travel costs per year444442025,0003,56614.414.715.015.315.675.0GOVTOffice operating costs per year444442025,0003,56614.414.715.015.315.675.0GOVTSubtotal 28.829.430.030.631.2150.0Subtotal 115.3117.6119.9122.3124.8599.8C. County PMOs Staff salary (three staff) per year7777735274,60039,173277.0282.5288.1293.9299.81 441.3GOVTVehicle hiring charges per year777773550,0007,13350.451.452.553.554.6262.4GOVTOffice operating costs per year7777735300,00042,796302.6308.6314.8321.1327.51 574.6GOVTSubtotal 629.9642.5655.4668.5681.93 278.3Total Recurrent Costs 1 019.01 039.31 060.11 081.31 103.05 302.7Total 2 179.31 834.22 007.71 884.61 650.69 556.4 _________________________________\a Such as computer, printers, photo copier, projector, laptops, digital and video cameras, etc 
China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4: 
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
A. 
Introduction 
The programme is expected to generate substantial net incremental benefits for farmers, rural 
1. 
entrepreneurs  and  rural  households  in  the  project  area.  Benefits  would  directly  accrue  to  farmers, 
women  and  youth  through  activities  aimed  at:  i)  diversifying  productive  activities  for  rural  poor,  ii) 
boosting  agriculture  thorough  increase  in  production  and  productivity;  iii)  strengthening  climate 
adaptation  capacity,  iv)  facilitating  access  to  market  and  access  to  finance;  v)  promoting 
entrepreneurship and value-addition to agricultural produce and vi) strengthening farmers cooperatives.  
2. 
Benefits would accrue from: (i) increased water availability for both human and productive use; 
(ii) diversification of productive activities and sources of income; (iii) increased food availability for rural 
poor, (iv) increased value-added of agricultural outputs; (v) reduced transportation costs and enhanced 
processing efficiency through innovative technology and improved infrastructure; (vi) improved quality 
of processed products, thus attracting higher prices at local market; (vii) increased employment either 
for hired or family labour, for both on-farm and off-farm activities; and (viii) tax revenues as a result of 
increased volume of taxable production.  
3. 
Increase  in  income  would  be  largely  dependent  on  farmers/household/rural  entrepreneurial 
groups  adopting  improved  technologies  which  the  programme  will  promote  through  technical 
assistance,  development  plans  and  infrastructure  investments,  thus  improving  market  access, 
supporting  marketing  linkages  and  generally  creating  a  favourable  economic  environment  that 
encourages farmers/rural entrepreneurs to produce more competitive products. 
4. 
This annex presents the Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) of programme’s interventions 
through  the  use  of  indicative  activity  models.  The  analysis  builds  upon  the  precautionary  principle, 
accounting  for  project  benefits  in  a  realistic  and  conservative  manner. A  cash-flow  analysis  is  finally 
carried out to present the “with” and “without” programme analysis. The key-indicators used to carry out 
the analysis are Net Present Values (NPVs), Financial and Economic Internal Rate of Return (FIRR - 
EIRR), Benefit-cost ratio (B/C ratio) and switching values for both benefits and costs.  
B. Methodology, assumptions and data 
5. 
Financial analysis. The primary  objective of the financial  analysis is to determine the financial 
viability and incentives for the programme target group as a result of their engagement in programme 
activities,  and  hence  to  examine  Programme’s  impacts  on  family  labour,  cash  flow  and  household 
incomes. A  number  of  indicative  economic  activities  to  be  supported  by  programme  were  identified 
during the programme design process. The following nine illustrative models are used in the EFA: (i) 
Transition  from  rice  cultivation  to  premium  rice  and  fish;  (ii)  Medicinal  herb  production;  iii)  Pepper 
production;  iv) Tea  production  in  highlands;  v)  Green  tea  production  in  lowlands;  vi) Tea  processing 
factory;  vii)  Pig  breeding  and  fattening;  viii)  Orange  production  and  ix)  Orange  processing.  These 
models will be used as building blocks for the economic evaluation of the entire project once aggregated 
for the target population. All the technical assumptions within the models have been elaborated jointly 
with the team members on the basis of field surveys, national statistics, international and national expert 
consultation. The diagram in figure 1Figure 1 provides a logical sketch of the adopted approach and 
the selected value chains, while summary results from the financial models are presented in table 1.  
Figure 1: EFA diagram 
Table 1: Summary of financial models 
MODELS  
NPV 
(CNY) @ 
7% 
Return to 
family 
labour 
(CNY) 
 Rice -> Premium rice + fish 
 Medicinal herbs  
 Pepper production  
 Buddha tea production highlands  
 Green tea production lowlands  
 Orange production  
 Pig breeding  
 Tea processing  
 Orange processing  
23,363 
186,187 
138,491 
63,179 
72,650 
68,580 
376,959 
1,052,331 
1,708,466 
227 
645 
280 
283 
529 
391 
933 
n/a 
n/a 
IRRf 
n/a 
45% 
11% 
14% 
13% 
19% 
33% 
9% 
13% 
B/C 
ratio 
Switching 
value 
Benefits 
Switching 
value 
Costs 
1.40 
1.54 
1.24 
1.52 
1.73 
1.55 
1.18 
1.37 
1.04 
-29% 
-35% 
-20% 
-34% 
-42% 
-35% 
-15% 
-27% 
-4% 
40% 
54% 
24% 
52% 
73% 
55% 
18% 
37% 
4% 
6. 
Programme target group and beneficiaries. The broad target group for the Programme will be 
smallholder farmers, rural and indigenous communities actively engaged in productive activities. The 
Programme  will  have  a  poverty  focus  and  it  is  estimated  that  the  number  of  direct  and  indirect 
beneficiaries of 88,200 HHs of whom 52,981 HHs are directly accounted for in the production models, 
in the cooperatives models and in the rural infrastructure benefits included in the EFA. Estimating the 
precise number of HHs benefitting for processing units was not possible due to the different nature of 
the  investment  and  the  uncertainty  regarding  the  forward  and  backward  linkages  in  the  market. 
Aggregation  is  this  case  is  done  on  the  number  of  facilities  newly  established  or  renovated. 
Nonetheless,  an  estimated  70  HHs  are  assumed  to  benefit  for  the  establishment/renovation  of  the 
cooperatives. 
7. 
Overall the programme will benefits women, youth and men directly involved in farm and off-
farm activities proposed by the project as well as indirect beneficiaries employed  in the value adding 
activities. Direct beneficiaries inclusion and phasing is described in table 2 below.  
Table 2: Beneficiaries and investment phasing 
MODELS  
unit 
Rice -> Premium rice + fish 
HHs 
Medicinal herbs 
HHs 
HHs 
Pepper production 
Buddha tea production highlands  HHs 
HHs 
Green tea production lowlands 
HHs 
Orange production 
HHs 
Pig breeding 
no. 
Tea processing 
no. 
Orange processing 
Y1 
382 
382 
153 
199 
199 
183 
31 
4 
4 
Y2 
1032 
1032 
413 
537 
537 
495 
83 
12 
12 
Y3 
1185 
1185 
474 
616 
616 
569 
95 
13 
13 
Y4 
497 
497 
199 
258 
258 
238 
40 
6 
6 
Y5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total 
3,095 
3,095 
1,238 
1,610 
1,610 
1,486 
248 
35 
35 
8. 
Key assumptions. The following source of information gathered during the design mission have 
been used to set up the analysis: interviews with farmers and entrepreneurs, documents and surveys 
from the Chinese Bureau of statistics, academic papers and mission estimates. In particular, information 
on labour and input requirements for various operations, capital costs, prevailing wages, yields, farm 
gate and market prices of commodities, input and farm-to-market transport costs were collected through 
pre-feasibility studies carried out prior to the mission. Conservative assumptions were made both for 
inputs and outputs, and take account of possible risks.  
Exchange rate. The exchange rate used in the analysis is fixed at 1 USD = 7 CNY computed 
9. 
as an average of the exchange rate prevailing during design mission. 
10. 
Numeraire and Prices. The adopted numeraire for the EFA is the domestic price level expressed 
in local currency unit. The financial prices for programme inputs and products represent average market 
prices and  were collected  in the field during the  design mission (June 2019). Prices used  represent 
estimates of the average seasonal prices and the analysis is carried out using nominal constant prices.  
Labour. Family labour has been valued both in financial and economic analysis. It has been 
11. 
assumed that farm labour is provided by the households and is valued at CNY 85 day-1 (USD 12). Hired 
labour (skilled) is priced at CNY 170 day-1 (USD 24), which is the prevailing market rate.    
12. 
Opportunity cost of capital. The discount rate for both the financial and the economic analysis 
have been calculated starting from the macroeconomic indicators of the financial market in China. As 
shown in table 3, estimates prove that the current financial discount rate would be equal to 5%. A higher 
value of 7% has been adopted to discount financial cash flows so to account for the higher interest rates 
charge by financial institutions when lending to rural farmers. The selected value is calculated as an 
average of the lending, deposit and money market interest rates. 
Table 3: Historical trend of money market rates 
Source: World Bank data 
C. Productive models 
13. 
From rice to premium rice and fish production. Rice production is facing major challenges both 
in term of climate change and rice price volatility on the market. The country has constantly supported 
paddy production while also aiming at diversifying production and increase efficient use of resources. 
Rural households in various parts of the country are already adopting new premium rice varieties able 
to fetch a higher market price. The production system is combined with a fish production which is both 
sold on the market and self-consumed.  
The  total  initial  investment  for  rice  seeds  and  fingerlings  in  year  one  would  be  around  CNY 
14. 
5,700 (USD 814). Operating costs over one year of production at full development would reach CNY 
7,192 (USD 1,012) including cost for fertilizer acquisition, irrigation, tools, and transportation. Labour 
force requirement is  of about  83  working days, fully  provided by  the family, for a total value  of  CNY 
7,055 (USD 1,007).  
Rice production would reach 4.2 tons ha-1, equivalent to 840 kg on the 3 mu1 of land considered 
15. 
in  the  model,  thus  generating  a  potential  revenue  of  CNY  33,600  (USD  4,800).  Fish  production 
represents a very marginal contribution to the family income fetching an average CNY 6,300 (USD 900) 
annually. In the without project (WoP) scenario, current rice production carried out with traditional seeds 
is considered as the activity counterfactual.  
16. 
The activity presents positive returns. The cash-flow over the period of ten years, discounted 
at 7%, produces a NPV of CNY 73,511 M (USD 10,501). For every dollar invested, the activity would 
generate a 40-cent extra worth (B/C ratio equal to 1.40) and return to family labour of CNY 226 day-1. 
Finally, the activity would be no longer viable only if benefits decline by 29% or costs increase by 40%.  
17. 
Medicinal herb production model (3 mu). Medicinal herbs production is a particularly important 
activity which could bring substantial economic return to the households involved in the target area. Yet, 
climate  change,  particularly  drought  and  changes  in  rainfall  patters,  are  having  great  impact  on  the 
quality and quantity of the produce. In recent years, droughts have reduced water resources and further 
depleted groundwater. As a result, insufficient water supply at farm level reduced productivity. 
18. 
The  programme  will  help  stabilizing  medicinal  herb  production  by  promoting  management 
practices  oriented  towards  sustainable  production  and  a  more  efficient  use  of  water  resources. 
Investment costs in the model concern acquisition of drip irrigation system, small equipment, seedlings 
for new medicinal herb varieties and other tools with an initial outlay of about CNY 35,615 (USD 5,008). 
1 One mu of land is equivalent to one fifteenth of ha. One ha is equivalent to 15 mu. Average landholding in the 
province is equal to 3 mu.   
200920102011201220132014201520162017Avg5%-1%-1%4%4%5%4%3%0%3%Fin. Rate5%6%7%6%6%6%4%4%4%5%2%3%4%3%3%3%2%2%2%2%7%7%7%7%7%7%7%7%7%7%2%2%3%1%1%2%1%2%2%2%Economic rate4%Real interest rate (%)Lending interest rate (%)Deposit interest rate (%)5%Long-term bond yield (%)Money market interest rate (%) 
Operating costs related to inputs, tools and utilities costs would sum up to an average CNY 28,773 per 
year (USD 4,000). Labour costs for family labour would instead reach CNY 6,290 (about USD 900).  
19. 
At  full  development  stage,  production  of  three  varieties  of  medicinal  herbs  (i.e.  Codonopsis 
Pinosula, Geutiana,  and Coptis) on the 3-mu land plot  would reach  2.4  tons, therefore  generating  a 
revenue of CNY 76,500 M (USD 10,928). The traditional rice production income is used in the WoP 
scenario as a counterfactual to medicinal herb production.  
20. 
The NPV of the model, is equal to CNY 186,187 M (USD 26,598) with a FIRR of 45%, B/C ratio 
equal to 1.54 and return to family labour of CNY 644 day-1. Activity results would turn negative in case 
of benefits declines of 35% or costs increase of 54%. 
21. 
Pepper production model (3 mu). Like medicinal herbs, pepper is a plant that requires plenty of 
water during the dry season and the programme will promote more water-use efficient technologies and 
proper management practices for its cultivation. 
22. 
The  initial  investment  for  cultivating  pepper  on  3  mu  of  land  concerns  small  machinery  and 
equipment, seedlings, and land preparation costs. The investment cost in year one would make up to 
around  CNY  26,300  M  (USD  3,760).  Operating  costs,  mainly  covering  expenses  for  fertilizers  and 
maintenance of equipment would roughly equal CNY 12,700 M (USD 1,814).   
23. 
Pepper is sold at CNY 65 kg generating a gross revenue of about CNY 49,400 M (USD 7,057) 
once production reaches its full regime. In order to appreciate activity contribution to household income 
the  proposed  investment  should  have  been  nested  in  a  broader  HHs  model.  Unfortunately,  lack  of 
reliable data at design stage, concerning source of income for HHs, made it impossible to complete the 
task. Nonetheless - as a partial finding towards change in income - it is worth noticing that returns to 
labour will attain CNY 279 day-1 - higher than the actual rural labour wage (i.e. CNY 170).  
Activity results are positive with a NPV of CNY 27,698 M (USD 3,956) and a FIRR of 11%. B/C 
24. 
ratio is equal to 1.24 and switching values for benefits and costs of -20% and +24% respectively. 
25. 
Tea production models (3 mu). In recent years, tea has played a big role in poverty reduction 
and it gradually progresses to sustain the livelihoods of smallholder tea farmers in various provinces of 
China. In addition to economic value, tea also plays an important role in creating jobs in rural areas; 
reforming agricultural economy, modernizing rural activities and developing new rural areas alongside 
with  agricultural  restructuring,  contributing  to  greening  bare  hills  as  well  as  improving  ecological 
environment. 
26. 
However, the production, processing and consumption of tea have also faced many difficulties 
in  terms  of  planting,  tending  techniques,  intensive  tea  cultivation  and  production;  meanwhile  also 
seeking to ensure food safety, high-hygiene standards and meeting consumer taste. 
27. 
The  programme  will  support  farmers  groups  or  cooperatives  involved  in  tea  production  to 
overcome  current  constraints  and  apply  new  farming  techniques. Two  models  of  tea  production  are 
elaborated to account for different production context (highlands vs lowlands). In both models, the initial 
investment cost includes improved varieties, land preparation and small equipment. The average cost 
for setting up the activity on a 3-mu farm would range between CNY 2,700 - 3,800 (USD 385 - 542). 
Operating  costs  related  to  inputs  acquisition,  utilities  and  maintenance  expenses  would  instead  on 
average range between CNY 2,742 - 3,674 (USD 390 - 525). At full development stage, labour cost for 
would equal to CNY 8,500 (USD 1,214). 
Annually, green tea production in the lowlands is expected to fetch 12 tons ha-1 (2.4 tons on 3 
28. 
mu) while tea in the highlands would reach 11 tons ha-1 (2.2 tons on 3 mu). Sales to processors would 
generate an average gross revenue of CNY 20,600 M (USD 2,942). The WoP scenario includes current 
practices of tea production in the region, where the crop is not properly managed, resulting in lower 
yields and lower quality.  
29. 
The cash-flow over the period of 15 years, discounted at 7%, produces a NPV of CNY 14,530 
(USD 2,075) and a FIRR of 13% in the lowlands. Similarly, results on the highlands show a NPV of CNY 
12,636 (USD 1,805) and an FIRR of 14%. The B/C ratio ranges from 1.52 (highlands) to 1.73 (lowlands) 
while  switching  values  for  benefits  range  from  -34%  (highlands)  to  -42%  (lowlands).  Cost  variations 
affecting final results for tea production in the highlands and lowlands would be instead equal to +52% 
and +73% respectively. 
30. 
Tea processing model. Tea processors in the target area are interests in accessing better quality 
raw material and increase value-addition via investments in new machineries and equipment so as to 
reach  high-quality  standards  and  product  certification.  The  programme  will  support  enterprises  and 
cooperatives  to  access  finance  and  renovate  their  processing  lines.  In  the  foreseen  scenario, 
processors  would  invest  in  new  machineries  and  equipment;  training  on  processing  advanced 
techniques, food hygiene and labour safety.  
31. 
Models details are presented in annex to this appendix. Activity’s results are positive with NPV 
equal to CNY 1.05 M (USD 150,333 M) and FIRR of 9%. The investment will be fully recovered at the 
end of the eighth year. The benefit-cost ratio amounts to 1.37 while switching values for benefits and 
cost are equal to -27 % and +37 % percent respectively. 
32. 
Orange production model (3 mu). Thanks to the support of the programme, farmer will establish 
fruit  orchards  and  implement  good  management  practices  to  achieve  both  product  quality  and  high 
yields in fruit production. Expected changes are compared to returns from maize production, which in 
this  case  is  considered  being  the  counterfactual  upon  which  orange  production  performances  are 
evaluated. 
33. 
The production scenario foresees planting of a new variety of certified oranges. Initial outlays 
for  the  activity  is  mainly  related  to  acquisition  of  certified  seedlings  and  fertilizers.  Investment  and 
operating  costs  in  the  first  year  would  attain  CNY  16,000  (USD  2,285).  In  subsequent  years  the 
operating cost - mainly related to disease control - will average CNY 5,700 (USD 814). Gross revenues 
at  full  development  would  on  average  equal  CNY  30,400  M  (USD  4,343).  The  model’s  cash-flow 
discounted at 7%, produces a NPV  of  CNY 68,580 M (USD 9,797)  with an FIRR of  19%. Switching 
value are of - 35% for benefits and + 55% for cost while the benefit to cost ratio of the model is equal 
to 1.55.  
Orange processing models. In order to consolidate the EFA around the value chain crops,  a 
34. 
model describing an orange processing facilities is elaborated. Investment in orange processing will 
mainly  concern  the  installation  of  processing  lines  including  machinery  and  equipment for  weighing, 
packing and sorting. The initial outlay for the investment is equal to CNY  2.4 M (USD 343,000) while 
operating cost at full development stage would roughly reach CNY 13.3 M (USD 1.9 M). Labour costs 
for  12  specialized  workers  would  sum  up  to  CNY  258,400  (USD  36,914).  Administrative  staff  and 
managers would instead cost CNY 327,040 (USD 46,720). Gross revenues from sales of fresh product 
is equal to CNY 15.4 M (USD 2.2M). Given the lack of an alternative scenario, the counterfactual to this 
activity if given by the foregone opportunity labour of the workers employed in the facility. 
The cash-flow over the period of 15 years, discounted at 7%, produces a NPV of CNY 1.7 M 
35. 
(USD 244,000) with an FIRR of 13%. The investments would be repaid within the first nine years. The 
B/C ratio is equal to 1.04 and switching values for benefits and cost are low showing that the activity is 
exposed to risk related to input-output price fluctuations. Indeed, increase or fall of costs and benefits 
of about ± 4 percent would provide a negative NPV. 
36. 
Pig breeding and fattening models. The market for pig meat is large due to the high demand 
and a limited supply, with the latter being further affected by recent cases of swine fever in the target 
area. Vaccination and proper  pigpen management are therefore deemed key to increase production 
while  also  ensuring  animal  welfare.  Current  production  technique  follows  traditional  methods  mainly 
characterized by little use of vaccination and inadequate medication and feeding. 
37. 
The  investment  for  this  activity  includes  the  initial  animal  stock  (16  females)  and  the 
construction  of  a  pigsty  with  the  hosting  capacity  of  100  animals.  The  average  cost  of  the  initial 
investment  is  equal  to  CNY  436,000  (USD  62,287).  Operating  costs  related  to  vaccination,  feeding, 
utilities and maintenance expenses would reach on average  CNY 290,000 M (USD  41,400).  Labour 
cost, provide by the family, would be equal to CNY 11,900 M (USD 1,700). Gross revenues from sales 
are expected to reach CNY 426,000 (USD 60,800).  
38. 
The NPV of the activity is equal to about CNY 374,000 (USD 53,851) and a FIRR of 33%. The 
B/C ratio equal to 1.18 while switching values for benefits and costs are of -15% and +18 % respectively. 
D. Economic analysis 
39. 
The objectives of the economic analysis are: (i) to examine the overall Programme viability; (ii) 
to assess the Programme’s impact and the overall economic rate of return; and (iii) to perform sensitivity 
analyses upon risks and variables affecting project’s results. 
40. 
Key Assumptions. Production and activity models considered in the financial analysis are used 
as building blocks for determining the viability of the  whole programme, once addressing for market 
distortion and opportunity costs for inputs and outputs. The economic analysis of the programme hinges 
on the following assumptions: (i) Programme life has been assumed at 20 years in light of investments 
lifecycle;  (ii)  programme  inputs  and  outputs  are  valued  at  their  economic  parity  prices  estimated  upon 
international prices as reported by the World Bank commodity outlook, and on the basis of custom duties 
and taxes rates as provided by the national bureau of international trade; (iii) an economic discount rate 
of 5% has been calculated as the weighted average of saving interest rates, long term bonds yields and 
the  real  interest  rate  (table  3);  (iv)  family  labour  is  valued  at  its  opportunity  cost;  (v)  the  shadow 
exchange rate factor (SERF) of 1.02 is calculated upon international trade statistics and applied for the 
conversion of commodity prices when detailed conversion factor is not available; vi) conversion factors 
for main inputs and outputs are calculated starting from international prices2 and on the basis of import 
and  export  taxes  and  duties  in  China;  and  (vii)  the  shadow  exchange  rate  (SER),  estimated  upon 
international trade data, is equal to CNY 7.1 ( table 4). 
2 World Bank - Pink sheet - June 2019 
Table 4: Calculation of shadow factors - trade data in billions of CNY 
41. 
Programme Economic Costs. The economic analysis includes the investment and incremental 
recurrent  costs  of  programme  components.  Programme  financial  costs  have  been  converted  to 
economic values by removal of taxes, duties and subsidies. In order to avoid double counting, the final 
aggregation considered  only  those costs that  were not included in financial models. Specifically, the 
estimation  of  economic  costs  considered:  (a)  all  investments  costs  deducted  from  taxes;  (b)  the 
recurrent costs of the program; and (c) the use of a conversion factor of 1.02 (SERF) to correct market 
costs to economic costs into Costab.  
42. 
Benefits Estimation. The incremental benefits stream comprises the economic net values of all 
the  models  developed  in  the  financial  analysis.  These  benefits  are  then  aggregated  following  the 
inclusion phasing foreseen for targeted households and cooperatives (table 2). 
43. 
Infrastructure benefits. Rural infrastructure (i.e. roads and irrigation infrastructures) is estimated 
to account for an additional 20% of the net incremental benefits derived from the production models. At 
the  time  of  the  design,  it  was  neither  possible  to  validate,  nor  to  further  investigate,  the  economic 
benefits  of  rural  infrastructure.  Therefore,  this  very  conservative  approach  only  provides  a  notional 
figure  to  quantify  the  benefits  for  both  the  direct  and  the  indirect  target  population.  Moreover,  this 
approach allows to partially offset the infrastructure investment cost.  
44.  Environmental  externalities.  The  economic  analysis  includes  a  tentative  assessment  of  the 
environmental externalities related to carbon emission/sequestration. Such effects are calculated and 
based  on  inputs  and  information  included  into  the  activity  models  included  in  the  EFA.  Information 
regarding  infrastructure  construction  and  rehabilitation,  as  well  as  use  of  fertilizers  and  change  in 
cultivation patterns are included respecting the actual timing of occurrence throughout the programme 
lifespan. 
45.  Results  below  indicate  that  the  programme  would  be  responsible  for  a  net  emission  of 
approximately 754,443 tons of CO2 equivalent. The analysis considered the average 32.3 tons year-1 
ha-1 emission in accordance with the phasing-in of production activities and infrastructure. Each ton of 
carbon has been valued at a very conservative price of 4 USD per ton, so as to determine the economic 
contribution of carbon reduction to the overall project worth. The net economic effect is estimated at an 
average annual outlay of CNY 2.2 M. (USD 321,000). 
Average SCF0.98           Average SERF1.02           SWRF0.98           OER (2017)7.0             SER (2017)7.1             Derivation of SCF and SER (LCU billion) with national data200920102011201220132014201520162017AverageTotal imports of G&SM7,034       9,344       11,795     12,266     13,131     13,769     12,475     12,920     14,926     13,444    Total exports of G&SX8,537       10,849     12,964     13,730     14,586     15,130     14,710     14,618     16,342     15,077    Weighted average of import tariff ratem4%5%6%4%4%5%5%4%4%4.1%Import dutiesTm277434707491525653564457572554          Export dutiesTxTotal international commercM+X15,571     20,193     24,759     25,996     27,718     28,899     27,185     27,538     31,268     28,522    M+Tm7,311       9,778       12,501     12,757     13,656     14,422     13,039     13,377     15,498     13,999    X-Tx8,537       10,849     12,964     13,730     14,586     15,130     14,710     14,618     16,342     15,077    0.98          0.98          0.97          0.98          0.98          0.98          0.98          0.98          0.98          0.981      6.83          6.77          6.46          6.31          6.20          6.14          6.23          6.64          6.76          7                7                7                6                6                6                6                7                7                SCFOER (CNY/USD)SERTable 5: Carbon Balance 
Table 6: Fluxes (left) and balance (right) per component 
Table 7: GHG Balance and emission source 
Project NameYunnan revitalizationClimateCool Temperate (Moist)Duration of the Project (Years)20ContinentAsia (Continental)Dominant Regional Soil TypeLAC SoilsTotal area (ha)1168Gross fluxesShare per GHG of the BalanceResult per yearWithoutWithBalanceAll GHG in tCO2eqWithoutWithBalanceAll GHG in tCO2eqCO2N2OCH4Positive = source / negative = sinkBiomassSoilOtherCO2-BiomassCO2-SoilCO2-OtherN2OCH4Deforestation0000000000Afforestation0000000000Other LUC0301,239301,2390299,7801,4590015,06215,062AgricultureAnnual-13,486-1,68611,800012,157-3570-674-84590Perennial0-10,424-10,4240-10,424000-521-521Rice0000000000Grassland & LivestocksGrassland0000000000Livestocks068,97468,97416,68452,29003,4493,449Degradation & ManagementForest degradation0000000000Peat extraction000000000Drainage organic soil000000000Rewetting organic soil000000000Fire organic soil0000000Coastal wetlands0000000000Inputs & Investments132,371515,215382,844229,104153,74006,61925,76119,142Fishery & Aquaculture000000000Total118,885873,317754,4330301,513229,104171,52552,2905,94443,66637,722Per hectare101.8747.7645.9196.2258.1196.2146.944.8Per hectare per year5.137.432.39.812.99.87.32.25.137.432.3Components of the projectLand use changes0 
Economic Profitability. The programme is a technical and economically viable investment to the 
46. 
economy as a whole. The programme economic NPV of the net benefit stream, discounted at 5%, is 
CNY  1,390  million  (USD  199  million) producing  an  EIRR  of  15.3%  for  the  base  case  scenario.  The 
summary of economic analysis is presented in table 8. 
Table 8: Summary of the economic results (CNY million) 
47. 
Sensitivity Analysis. The section presents the effect of variations in Programme benefits and 
costs. Project results were tested to sensitivity analysis so as to measure variations due to unforeseen 
factors, hence identifying those variables affecting final results the most.  (figure  2)Error! Reference 
source  not  found.  depicts  the  extent  to  which  a  variable  change  (horizontal  axis)  would  induce  a 
change to the project NPV (vertical axis). The stepper the curve, the higher the impact and the change 
to the NPV. As one can notice, the project is more sensitive to changes in  benefits and output prices 
costs, rather than changes in inputs prices and investment costs.  
InvestmentOperatingyear 1(79)                 55                   -               (0)                        (134)                year 2(224)              124                 -               (1)                        (349)                year 3(270)              193                 -               (2)                        (464)                year 4(109)              125                 -               (2)                        (235)                year 578                  43                   4                   (2)                        28                    year 6185                -                 4                   (2)                        178                  year 7259                -                 4                   (2)                        253                  year 8296                -                 4                   (2)                        289                  year 9313                -                 4                   (2)                        306                  year 10321                -                 4                   (2)                        314                  year 11323                -                 4                   (2)                        316                  year 12325                -                 4                   (2)                        318                  year 13325                -                 4                   (2)                        318                  year 14325                -                 4                   (2)                        318                  year 15325                -                 4                   (2)                        318                  year 16325                -                 4                   (2)                        318                  year 17325                -                 4                   (2)                        318                  year 18325                -                 4                   (2)                        318                  year 19325                -                 4                   (2)                        318                  year 20325                -                 4                   (2)                        318                  NPV (CNY M) @ 5%1,390              NPV (USD M) @ 5%199                  EIRR15.3% Total incremental  benefits  Total net incremental benefits Total costs Environmental  externalities  
Figure 2: Changes in NPV in response to changes in key variables 
48. 
However,  only  the  variability  and  uncertainty  around  specific  variables  could  put  at  risk  the 
overall  viability  of  the  programme,  and  therefore  need  to  be  monitored  more  closely  than  others. 
Threshold values in variables changes are identified in Figure 3.  For instance, an increase in recurrent 
cost of 40% (from 100% to 140%) would bring the NPV down to CNY -96 million. Similarly, the project 
would no longer be viable if benefits drop by 20% (from 100% to 80%). 
Figure 3: NPV thresholds determined by changes in key variables 
1,390            1,390            1,390            20%6,310            20%6,252            20%(6,542)          40%3,789            40%5,037            40%(4,559)          60%2,640            60%3,821            60%(2,576)          80%1,914            80%2,605            80%(593)              100%1,390            100%1,390            100%1,390            120%981                120%174                120%3,373            140%645                140%(1,041)          140%5,356            160%359                160%(2,257)          160%7,339            180%108                180%(3,473)          180%9,322            200%(116)              200%(4,688)          200%11,305          Recurrent costBenefitsInvestment cost1,390            1,390            20%29,304          20%(4,223)          40%11,861          40%(2,820)          60%6,046            60%(1,417)          80%3,136            80%(13)                100%1,390            100%1,390            120%225                120%2,793            140%(608)              140%4,196            160%(1,234)          160%5,600            180%(1,721)          180%7,003            200%(2,111)          200%8,406            Output pricesInput prices 
More  in  detail,  switching  values  and  critical  threshold  have  been  identified  for  the  main 
49. 
variables. In particular, the project would no longer be viable in case: a) investment costs increase of 
73%; b) operating costs increases of 23%; c) benefits decline by 19%; d) input cost increase by 30%; 
e) output prices fall by 23% f) project beneficiaries involved in productive activities are less than 2,260 
HHs. 
50. 
Also, the sensitivity analysis allows to examine the effects of a simultaneous variation in some 
of  the  pre-identified  key  variables  on  the  overall  project  profitability,  hence  determining  all  possible 
combinations of variables’ changes that would result in a negative (or positive) NPV.  
Figure 4: Simultaneous sensitivity analysis 
1389.8620%40%60%80%100%120%140%160%180%200%20%(22,852)    (12,904)    (9,421)      (7,629)      (6,542)      (5,823)      (5,320)      (4,956)      (4,687)      (4,486)      40%(15,561)    (8,731)      (6,406)      (5,243)      (4,559)      (4,122)      (3,829)      (3,627)      (3,488)      (3,394)      60%(8,271)      (4,558)      (3,391)      (2,857)      (2,576)      (2,421)      (2,338)      (2,299)      (2,290)      (2,301)      80%(980)          (385)          (376)          (472)          (593)          (720)          (846)          (970)          (1,091)      (1,208)      100%6,310        3,789        2,640        1,914        1,390        981           645           359           108           (116)          120%13,601     7,962        5,655        4,300        3,373        2,682        2,136        1,687        1,307        977           140%20,891     12,135     8,670        6,685        5,356        4,383        3,627        3,016        2,506        2,069        160%28,182     16,308     11,685     9,071        7,339        6,084        5,118        4,345        3,705        3,162        180%35,472     20,481     14,700     11,457     9,322        7,784        6,610        5,673        4,903        4,254        200%42,763     24,655     17,715     13,842     11,305     9,485        8,101        7,002        6,102        5,347        1389.8620%40%60%80%100%120%140%160%180%200%20%25,354     14,359     10,153     7,801        6,252        5,133        4,274        3,586        3,015        2,531        40%20,593     11,716     8,275        6,329        5,037        4,095        3,367        2,779        2,289        1,869        60%15,832     9,074        6,396        4,858        3,821        3,057        2,459        1,972        1,562        1,208        80%11,071     6,431        4,518        3,386        2,605        2,019        1,552        1,165        835           546           100%6,310        3,789        2,640        1,914        1,390        981           645           359           108           (116)          120%1,549        1,146        761           442           174           (57)            (263)          (448)          (619)          (778)          140%(3,211)      (1,496)      (1,117)      (1,029)      (1,041)      (1,096)      (1,170)      (1,255)      (1,345)      (1,439)      160%(7,972)      (4,139)      (2,996)      (2,501)      (2,257)      (2,134)      (2,077)      (2,062)      (2,072)      (2,101)      180%(12,733)    (6,782)      (4,874)      (3,973)      (3,473)      (3,172)      (2,985)      (2,868)      (2,799)      (2,763)      200%(17,494)    (9,424)      (6,752)      (5,445)      (4,688)      (4,210)      (3,892)      (3,675)      (3,526)      (3,424)      Investment costInvestment costRecurrent costBenefits 
APPENDIX 1 
PRICES AND MODELS 
Table A 1: Prices and conversion factors 
UnitFinancial Prices (CNY)Conversion factorsEconomic Prices (CNY)OUTPUTSRice -> Maize & BeansTraditional paddykg12.00.597.08Rice by-product (Straw) kg0.50.590.29Hybrid premium ricekg30.00.5917.69Fishkg60.01.0261.17Medical herbsCodonopsis Pinosula (dangsheng)kg251.0626.42Geutianakg551.0658.20Coptiskg351.0637.04Pepper productionPepperkg65.01.0266.26Buddha tea production highlandsTea WoP varietykg71.067.40Tea WP varietykg91.069.51Green tea production lowlandsTea WOP varietykg71.067.40Tea WP varietykg91.069.51Tea processingTea Akg601.0663.39Tea Bkg301.0631.70Tea Ckg51.065.28Orange productionMaizekg41.024.08Certified orangeskg81.068.50Orange processingUncertified orangeskg81.068.50Certified orangeskg121.0612.76Pig breedingPigletshead3,0001.063188.94INVESTMENTSRice -> Maize & BeansRice Hybrid seedskg600.5935Fishkg401.0241Pepper production / Medical herbsMachineno.7,6801.027,829Drip irrigation systemper mu1,5001.021,529Pump no.1,2801.021,305Wire, tuberoll6401.02652Accessoriesset6401.02652Seedlingno.221.0223Pillarsno. 451.0246Soil treatmentlumpsum2,3041.022,349Shan tea/green tea production highlands/lowlandsInfrastructurelumpsum1,2801.021,305Equipmentlumpsum1281.02130Improved seedskg0.641.021Shade trees/windbreakskg3.201.023Tea processingWarehouse (3000-4000 m2)no.1,120,0001.021,141,761CTC production lineno.1,760,0001.021,794,196Other supporting machinesno.120,0001.02122,332Orange productionCertified seedlingtree1601.06170Orange processingWarehouseno.1,428,5711.021,456,328Processing machineno.714,2861.02728,164Weighing machineno.535,7141.02546,123Packing machineno.321,4291.02327,674Pig breedingFemale initial stockhead6,5001.026,626Shedno332,0001.02338,451OPERATING INPUTSRice -> Maize & BeansRice seedskg300.5918Rice Hybrid seedskg600.5935Fishkg401.0241Tools/equipmentlumpsum7681.02783Irrigationha1921.02196Transportationbag41.025Bags/packaging (50 kg each)no.11.021Pepper production / Medical herbsMedical herbs seedling (average)no.111.0211Plastic coverper mu1001.02102Compound fertilizerkg31.023Chemical fertilizerlt301.0231Powdered limekg20.822Manurebag260.8221Phosphatekg30.822Microbial organic fertilizerkg21.022Ureakg40.823SAkg20.822Lan (P205)kg21.022Ka li (KCl)kg40.824Medication cures & nourishes fruitsbarrel1921.02196Baggingbag21.022Machinelumpsum5761.02587Pump lumpsum5761.02587Wire, tubelumpsum2961.02301Accessorieslumpsum4801.02489Pillarslumpsum641.0265Transportationton3201.02326Bags (50 kg)no.11.021Shan/Green tea production highlands/lowlandsBasal fertilizer (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg30.823Top dress fertilizer (Urea) kg5.440.824Manure (organic)kg3.200.823Foliar fertilizerkg3.840.823Herbicidekg2240.82183Tools/equipmentlumpsum961.0298Transportationton3201.02326Bagsno.321.0233O&M expenseslumpsum1281.02130Tea processingTea BPkg31.063Tea PFkg81.068Tea PDkg31.063Electricity (1432KW / 1 ton of product)Kwh0.901.001Coal (0.61 m3/1 ton of product)ton2,5601.022610O&M building (3% of investment cost)lumpsum33,6001.0234253O&M machinery and equipment (5%)lumpsum94,0001.0295826Tea sacks (60 kg) no.17.601.0218Shipping to warehouseston3201.02326Orange productionCertified seedlingtree161.0617Fertilizer:Manurekg10.821Ureakg50.824Phosphat fertilizerkg20.822Potassium fertilizerkg100.828Organic fertilizer - foliarkg2240.82184Lime powderkg1.00.821NPKkg40.823Fish mealkg31.023Kali chloridekg100.828Ketomiumkg2240.82184AT micro-leaf fertilizerskg960.8279AT disease and Insect-limitedkg1920.98188Pesticidekg770.9875Tools/equipmentno.2,5601.022610Transportationton-km3201.02326Boxes/cratesno.31.023Orange processingUncertified orangeskg61.027Certified orangeskg131.0614Electricity (786KW / 1 ton SP)Kwh0.91.001Maintenance hygieneCNY/ton3201.02326O&M building (5% of investment cost)lumpsum71,4291.0272816O&M machinery and equipment (5%)lumpsum78,5711.0280098Packagingkg0.41.020Transportationton3201.02326Tools/equipmentlumpsum1,2801.021305Pig breedingShed maintenanceLumpsum16,6001.0216923Feedkg101.0210Artificial inseminationper female501.0251Vaccinationsper head2501.02255Water, electricitylumpsum per animal3201.02326Equipment and toolslump sum9301.02948FertilizersRice -> Maize & BeansBasal fertilizer (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg30.822Top dress fertilizer (Urea) kg60.824.7Manure (organic)kg00.820Others (for rice)kg50.824.211Chemical productsPesticides (for rice)liter490.9848Herbicidesliter470.8238Pesticide (for coffee)kg380.9838Energy and othersElectricity Kwh11.001Gasolinelt90.979LabourSkilled labourpers.day1700.98166.37Family labourpers.day850.9883.19Administrative staff, managerspers.day4480.98438.44Taxes%10%00Insurance%22%0%0%Discount rate%7%5% 
Table A 2: Premium rice + fish model 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (CNY)112345678910Main productionTraditional paddykg121,650Selfconsumptionkg20Rice by-product (Straw) kg11,485Hybrid premium ricekg30840840840840840840840840840840Fishkg60105105105105105105105105105105Post harvest losses%25%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%Total Productionkg1,238803803803803803803803803803803Investment inputsRice Hybrid seedskg6035Fishkg4090Operating inputsRice seedskg3040Rice Hybrid seedskg60353535353535353535Fishkg40909090909090909090Fertilizer:Basal fertilizer (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg380100100100100100100100100100100Top dress fertilizer (Urea) kg65080808080808080808080Manure (organic)kg0.48040404040404040404040Otherskg510101010101010101010Chemicals:Pesticidesliter4925555555555Herbicidesliter4747777777777Tools/equipmentlumpsum7681111Irrigationha1920.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.2Transportationbag42516161616161616161616Bags/packaging (50 kg each)no.12516161616161616161616LabourPlantingpers. dayF48888888888Operationspers. dayU/F3050505050505050505050Harvestingpers. dayU/F425252525252525252525Sub-total labour days3883838383838383838383Skilled labour (S)pers. day17000000000000Unskilled labour (U)Family labour (F)pers. day853883838383838383838383FINANCIAL BUDGET ('000 CNY)WITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910Main production revenueRice/paddy19,8000000000000Selfconsumption2400000000000Rice by-product (Straw) 7430000000000Hybrid premium rice025,20025,20025,20025,20025,20025,20025,20025,20025,20025,200Fish06,3006,3006,3006,3006,3006,3006,3006,3006,3006,300Post harvest losses5,1364,7254,7254,7254,7254,7254,7254,7254,7254,7254,725Total revenue15,16726,77526,77526,77526,77526,77526,77526,77526,77526,77526,775incben11,60811,60811,60811,60811,60811,60811,60811,60811,60811,608Investment input costsRice Hybrid seeds02,100000000000Fish03,600000000000Sub-total investment costs05,700000000000Operating inputsRice seeds1,2000000000000Rice Hybrid seeds002,1002,1002,1002,1002,1002,1002,1002,1002,100Fish003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,600Fertilizer:Basal fertilizer (NPK, DAP, CAN)205256256256256256256256256256256Top dress fertilizer (Urea) 288461461461461461461461461461461Manure (organic)3618181818181818181818Others051515151515151515151Chemicals:Pesticides99246246246246246246246246246246Herbicides187327327327327327327327327327327Tools/equipment7687680000768000768Irrigation3838383838383838383838Transportation11172727272727272727272Bags/equipment3523232323232323232323Sub-total operating costs2,9662,2607,1927,1927,1927,1927,9607,1927,1927,1927,9601,027Labour costsSkilled labour costs00000000000Unskilled labour costsFamily labour costs3,2307,0557,0557,0557,0557,0557,0557,0557,0557,0557,055Sub-total labour costs3,2307,0557,0557,0557,0557,0557,0557,0557,0557,0557,055Total production costs6,19615,01514,24714,24714,24714,24715,01514,24714,24714,24715,015Net Benefits (after labour costs)8,97111,76012,52812,52812,52812,52811,76012,52812,52812,52811,760Net Incremental Benefits (NIB)2,7893,5573,5573,5573,5572,7893,5573,5573,5572,789inccos8,8198,0518,0518,0518,0518,8198,0518,0518,0518,819Net Benefits (before labour costs)*11,96118,81519,58319,58319,58319,58318,81519,58319,58319,58318,815*Farm liquidity=  Net benefits from sales plus family labour Return to family labour*226.68          *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate7%NPV (CNY) @ 0.0723,363IRR#NUM!NPVb81,531NPVc58,168B/C ratio1.40               Switching values Benefits-29%Switching values Costs40%WITH PROJECTWITH PROJECT 
Table A 3: Medicinal herbs (3 mu) 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (CNY)012345678910-15Main productionCodonopsis Pinosula (dangsheng)kg254807209601,2001,2001,2001,2001,2001,2001,200Geutianakg55180270360450450450450450450450Coptiskg35300450600750750750750750750750By-productkgPost harvest losses%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%Investment inputsDrip irrigation systemper mu1,5003Pump no.1,2801Wire, tuberoll64030Accessoriesset6403Seedlingno.11765Plastic coverper mu1003Operating inputsSeedlingno.110765765765765765765765765765Fertilizer:Compound fertilizerkg3237237237237237237237237237237Manurebag26195195195195195195195195195195Chemical fertilizerslt3036363636363636363636Ureakg4750750750750750750750750750750SAkg2240240240180180180180180180180Lan (P205)kg2360600600600600600600600600600Ka li (KCl)kg4360360360420420420420420420420Tools/equipment maintenance: Machinelumpsum per mu5763333333333Pump lumpsum per mu5763333333333Wire, tubelumpsum per mu2963333333333Accessorieslumpsum per mu4803333333333Diesel for irrigationlt9136136136136136136136136136136Transportationton41.01.41.92.42.42.42.42.42.42.4Bags (50 kg)no.119293848484848484848LabourLand preparation / Plantingpers. dayS/F35Operationspers. dayS/F35353535353535353535Harvestingpers. dayS/F35353535353535353535Post harvestingpers. dayS/F4444444444Sub-total labour0109747474747474747474Skilled (paid) labour (S)pers. day17000000000000Family labour (F)pers. day850109747474747474747474FINANCIAL BUDGETWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910-15Main production revenueCodonopsis Pinosula (dangsheng)012,00018,00024,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,000Geutiana09,90014,85019,80024,75024,75024,75024,75024,75024,75024,750Coptis010,50015,75021,00026,25026,25026,25026,25026,25026,25026,250Sales032,40048,60064,80081,00081,00081,00081,00081,00081,00081,000Selfconsumption00000000000By-product00000000000Post harvest losses01,8002,7003,6004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,500Total revenue030,60045,90061,20076,50076,50076,50076,50076,50076,50076,50021,62936,92952,22967,52967,52967,52967,52967,52967,52967,529Investment input costsDrip irrigation system04,500000000000Pump 01,280000000000Wire, tube019,200000000000Accessories01,920000000000Seedling08,415000000000Plastic cover0300000000000Sub-total investment costs035,615000000000Operating input costsSeedling008,4158,4158,4158,4158,4158,4158,4158,4158,415Fertilizer:Compound fertilizer0711711711711711711711711711711Manure04,9924,9924,9924,9924,9924,9924,9924,9924,9924,992Chemical fertilizers01,0801,0801,0801,0801,0801,0801,0801,0801,0801,080Urea03,0723,0723,0723,0723,0723,0723,0723,0723,0723,072SA0599599599449449449449449449449Lan (P205)06911,1521,1521,1521,1521,1521,1521,1521,1521,152Ka li (KCl)01,5671,5671,5671,8281,8281,8281,8281,8281,8281,828Tools/equipment maintenance: Machine01,7281,7281,7281,7281,7281,7281,7281,7281,7281,728Pump 01,7281,7281,7281,7281,7281,7281,7281,7281,7281,728Wire, tube0887887887887887887887887887887Accessories01,4401,4401,4401,4401,4401,4401,4401,4401,4401,440Diesel for irrigation01,2191,2191,2191,2191,2191,2191,2191,2191,2191,219Transportation046911111111111111Bags (50 kg)025374961616161616161Sub-total operating costs019,74228,63328,64728,77328,77328,77328,77328,77328,77328,773Labour costsSkilled (paid) labour costs00000000000Family labour costs09,2656,2906,2906,2906,2906,2906,2906,2906,2906,290Sub-total labour costs09,2656,2906,2906,2906,2906,2906,2906,2906,2906,290Total production costs064,62234,92334,93735,06335,06335,06335,06335,06335,06335,063Income (after labour costs)8,971-34,02210,97726,26341,43741,43741,43741,43741,43741,43741,437Incremental net income-42,9932,00717,29232,46632,46632,46632,46632,46632,46632,466Income (before labour costs)0-24,75717,26732,55347,72747,72747,72747,72747,72747,72747,727Return to family labour*644.96*consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate7%NPV (CNY) @ 0.07186,187IRR45%NPVb532,938NPVc346,751B/C ratio1.54Switching values Benefits-35%Switching values Costs54%WITH PROJECTWITH PROJECT 
Table A 4: Pepper production (3 mu) 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (CNY)-1.02.03.04.05.06.07.08.09.010-15Main productionPepperkg65.0---456.0532.0608.0760.0760.0760.0760.0By-productkgPost harvest losses%0.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.2Investment inputsMachineno.7,680.00.2Pump no.1,280.00.2Wire, tuberoll640.02.0Accessoriesset640.02.0Seedlingno.22.4480.0Pillarsno. 44.8240.0Soil treatmentlumpsum2,304.00.2Operating inputsFertilizer:Powdered limekg1.9100.0Manurebag25.660.060.060.0Phosphatekg2.6100.0Microbial organic fertilizerkg1.9720.01,200.01,200.01,200.01,200.01,200.01,200.01,200.01,200.01,200.0Ureakg4.172.072.072.096.096.096.096.096.096.096.0SAkg2.548.048.048.036.036.036.036.036.036.036.0Lan (P205)kg1.972.0120.0120.0120.0120.0120.0120.0120.0120.0120.0Ka li (KCl)kg4.480.072.072.084.084.084.084.084.084.084.0Medication cures & nourishes fruitsbarrel192.06.05.05.015.815.815.815.815.815.815.8Baggingbag1.914.014.014.014.014.014.014.0Tools/equipment maintenance: Machinelumpsum576.00.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.2Pump lumpsum576.00.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.2Wire, tubelumpsum295.70.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.2Accessorieslumpsum480.00.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.2Pillarslumpsum64.00.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.2Diesel for irrigationlt9.0136.0136.0136.0108.0108.0108.0108.0108.0108.0108.0Transportationton-km320.09.110.612.215.215.215.215.2Bags (50 kg)no.1.39.110.612.215.215.215.215.2LabourLand preparation / Plantingpers. dayS/F86.2Operationspers. dayS/F32.046.046.013.813.813.813.813.813.813.8Harvestingpers. dayS/F40.040.040.040.040.040.040.0Post harvestingpers. dayS/F4.84.84.84.84.84.84.8Sub-total labour-118.246.046.058.658.658.658.658.658.658.6Skilled (paid) labour (S)pers. day170.0-65.013.825.332.232.232.232.232.232.232.2Family labour (F)pers. day85.0-53.232.220.726.426.426.426.426.426.426.4FINANCIAL BUDGETWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 1.01.02.03.04.05.06.07.08.09.010-15Main production revenuePepper----29,640.034,580.039,520.049,400.049,400.049,400.049,400.0Sales----29,640.034,580.039,520.049,400.049,400.049,400.049,400.0Selfconsumption-----------By-product-----------Post harvest losses----4,446.05,187.05,928.07,410.07,410.07,410.07,410.0Total revenue----25,194.029,393.033,592.041,990.041,990.041,990.041,990.0---25,194.029,393.033,592.041,990.041,990.041,990.041,990.0Investment input costsMachine-1,536.0---------Pump -256.0---------Wire, tube-1,280.0---------Accessories-1,280.0---------Seedling-10,752.0---------Pillars-10,752.0---------Soil treatment-460.8---------Sub-total investment costs-26,316.8---------Operating input costsFertilizer:Powdered lime-192.0---------Manure-1,536.01,536.01,536.0-------Phosphate-256.0---------Microbial organic fertilizer-1,382.42,304.02,304.02,304.02,304.02,304.02,304.02,304.02,304.02,304.0Urea-294.9294.9294.9393.2393.2393.2393.2393.2393.2393.2SA-119.8119.8119.889.989.989.989.989.989.989.9Lan (P205)-138.2230.4230.4230.4230.4230.4230.4230.4230.4230.4Ka li (KCl)-348.2313.3313.3365.6365.6365.6365.6365.6365.6365.6Medication cures & nourishes fruits-1,152.0960.0960.03,033.63,033.63,033.63,033.63,033.63,033.63,033.6Bagging----26.926.926.926.926.926.926.9Tools/equipment maintenance: -Machine-115.2115.2115.2115.2115.2115.2115.2115.2115.2115.2Pump -115.2115.2115.2115.2115.2115.2115.2115.2115.2115.2Wire, tube-59.159.159.159.159.159.159.159.159.159.1Accessories-96.096.096.096.096.096.096.096.096.096.0Pillars-12.812.812.812.812.812.812.812.812.812.8Diesel for irrigation-1,218.61,218.61,218.6967.7967.7967.7967.7967.7967.7967.7Transportation----2,918.43,404.83,891.24,864.04,864.04,864.04,864.0Bags (50 kg)----11.713.615.619.519.519.519.5Sub-total operating costs-7,036.47,375.47,375.410,739.611,228.011,716.312,693.012,693.012,693.012,693.0Labour costsSkilled (paid) labour costs-11,051.72,346.04,301.05,479.15,479.15,479.15,479.15,479.15,479.15,479.1Family labour costs-4,521.22,737.01,759.52,241.52,241.52,241.52,241.52,241.52,241.52,241.5Sub-total labour costs-15,572.95,083.06,060.57,720.67,720.67,720.67,720.67,720.67,720.67,720.6Total production costs-48,926.112,458.413,435.918,460.218,948.519,436.920,413.520,413.520,413.520,413.5Income (after labour costs)2,241.5-48,926.1-12,458.4-13,435.96,733.810,444.514,155.121,576.521,576.521,576.521,576.5Incremental net income-51,167.5-14,699.8-15,677.34,492.48,203.011,913.719,335.019,335.019,335.019,335.0Income (before labour costs)--44,404.9-9,721.4-11,676.48,975.312,685.916,396.623,817.923,817.923,817.923,817.9Return to family labour*279.8*consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate7%NPV (CNY) @ 0.0727,698.1IRR11%NPVb244,855.3NPVc196,742.2B/C ratio1.24Switching values Benefits-20%Switching values Costs24%WITH PROJECTWITH PROJECT 
Table A 5: Pig breeding and fattening 
PRODUCTION PARAMETERS WITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE112345678910Production parameters Farrowings a yearno.11111111111Farrowing percentage%94%94%94%94%94%94%94%94%94%94%94%Age at first farrowingmonth12Farrowing intervalmonths33333333333Number of piglets per sow per farrowingmonth1010101010101010101010Mortality piglets%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%Mortality adults%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%Body weight of animalskg2030303030303030303030Culling rate%16%16%16%16%16%16%16%16%16%16%16%Sex ratio (% of sows)ratio0.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.50Off-take rate piglets%70%97%97%97%97%97%97%97%97%97%97%Off-take rate female%70%65%65%64%64%64%64%64%64%64%64%Off-take rate male%70%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%Manure production per day per pigkg33333333333Stock growth modelF7-8yrs00000000000F6-7yrs00000000000F5-6yrs00000000000F4-5yrs00010000000F 3-4yrs00301111111F 2-3yrs10233333333F 1-2yrs6111111111212121212Piglets 0-1yr150150143142145144146147148149M1-2yrs00000000000M2-3yrs00000000000M3-4yrs00000000000M4-5yrs00000000000M5-6yrs00000000000M6-7yrs00000000000M7-8yrs00000000000Female in stock016151515151616161616Male in stock00000000000Total stock0166166158157160160162162164165YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE112345678910Main production output (yields)Pigletshead3,0000146146139138140140142142144144Adults femaleheadSaleshead0136131124123125125127127129129Selfconsumptionhead010151515151515151515Manurekg0181,770181,387173,495172,201175,240175,058177,293177,710179,523180,304Culled sowhead03222222333Investment inputsFemale initial stockhead6,50016Shedno332,0001Operating inputsShed maintenanceLumpsum16,600111111111Feedkg10018,67518,63617,82517,69218,00417,98518,21518,25818,44418,524Artificial inseminationper female50016151515151616161616Vaccinationsper head2500166166158157160160162162164165Water, electricitylumpsum per animal3200166166158157160160162162164165Equipment and toolslump sum9301111111111LabourSkilled (paid) labour (S)pers. dayFamily labour (F)pers. day85140140140140140140140140140140FINANCIAL BUDGETWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910Main production revenuePiglets0436,500437,664417,149412,840421,034419,925425,798426,413431,055432,713Sales00000000000Selfconsumption00000000000Manure00000000000Culled sow00000000000Total revenue0436,500437,664417,149412,840421,034419,925425,798426,413431,055432,713Investment costsFemale initial stock0104,000000000000Shed0332,000000000000Sub-total investment costs0436,000000000000Operating costShed maintenance0016,60016,60016,60016,60016,60016,60016,60016,60016,600Feed0186,750186,356178,248176,919180,041179,854182,150182,579184,441185,244Artificial insemination0800763755770768778779788791798Vaccinations041,50041,41339,61139,31540,00939,96840,47840,57340,98741,165Water, electricity053,12053,00850,70250,32451,21251,15851,81251,93352,46352,692Equipment and tools0930930930930930930930930930930Sub-total operating inputs costs0283,100299,069286,845284,858289,560289,288292,749293,403296,213297,428LabourSkilled (paid) labour costs00000000000Family labour costs011,90011,90011,90011,90011,90011,90011,90011,90011,90011,900Sub-total labour costs011,90011,90011,90011,90011,90011,90011,90011,90011,90011,900Total production costs0731,000310,969298,745296,758301,460301,188304,649305,303308,113309,328Income (after labour costs)11,900-294,500126,695118,404116,082119,574118,736121,149121,110122,943123,385Incremental net income-306,400114,795106,504104,182107,674106,836109,249109,210111,043111,485Income (before labour costs)11,900-282,600138,595130,304127,982131,474130,636133,049133,010134,843135,285Return to family labour*933.12        *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate7%NPV @ 0.07376,959IRR33%NPVb2,993,470NPVc2,532,930B/C ratio1.18            Switching values Benefits-15%Switching values Costs18%WITH PROJECTWITH PROJECTWITH PROJECT 
Table A 6: Tea production (highlands) - 3mu 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (CNY)112345678910-20Main productionTea WoP varietykg71,200----------Tea WP varietykg9----1,1261,4081,7602,2002,2002,2002,200By-productkg-----------Post harvest losses%----------------------Investment inputs-----------Infrastructurelumpsum1,280-0---------Equipmentlumpsum128-2---------Improved seedlingskg1-3,000---------Shade trees/windbreakskg3-100--------------------Operating inputs-----------Seedlings for replantationno.1--300--------Fertilizer:-----------Basal fertilizer (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg3100144838094949494949494Top dress fertilizer (Urea) kg52420344242424242424242Manure (organic)kg380400-200-200-200-200-Foliar fertilizerkg4---160100100100100100100100Chemicals:-----------Herbicidekg22411111111111Tools/equipmentlumpsum9600000000000Transportationton-km3201---1122222Bagsno.3224---23283544444444O&M expenseslumpsum128--000000000Labour-----------Plantingpers. dayS/F-10---------Operationspers. dayS/F2424283236363636363636Harvestingpers. dayS/F18---24242424242424Sub-total labour4234283260606060606060Skilled (paid) labour (S)pers. day1702214141440404040404040Family labour (F)pers. day852020141820202020202020FINANCIAL BUDGETWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910-20Main production revenueTea WOP variety8,400Tea WP variety---10,13812,67215,84019,80019,80019,80019,800Sales8,400---10,13812,67215,84019,80019,80019,80019,800Selfconsumption-----------By-product-----------Post harvest losses-----------Total revenue8,400---10,13812,67215,84019,80019,80019,80019,800incben-8,400-8,400-8,4001,7384,2727,44011,40011,40011,40011,400Investment input costsInfrastructure-256---------Equipment-256---------Improved seeds-1,920---------Shade trees/windbreaks-320---------Sub-total investment costs-2,752---------Operating input costsSeeds/rooted cuttings--192--------Fertilizer:NPK320461266256300300300300300300300Urea 131109185228228228228228228228228Manure (organic)2561,280-640-640-640-640-Foliar fertilizer---614384384384384384384384Chemicals:Herbicide224224134134224224224224224224224Tools/equipment1919191919191919191919Transportation384---360451563704704704704Bags768---7219011,1261,4081,4081,4081,408O&M expenses--666666666Sub-total operating costs2,1022,0938031,8992,2433,1532,8513,9143,2743,9143,274Labour costsSkilled (paid) labour costs3,7402,3802,3802,3806,8006,8006,8006,8006,8006,8006,800Family labour costs1,7001,7001,1901,5301,7001,7001,7001,7001,7001,7001,700Sub-total labour costs5,4404,0803,5703,9108,5008,5008,5008,5008,5008,5008,500Total production costs7,5428,9254,3735,80910,74311,65311,35112,41411,77412,41411,774Income (after labour costs)858-8,925-4,373-5,809-6051,0194,4897,3868,0267,3868,026Incremental net income-9,783-5,231-6,667-1,4641603,6316,5287,1686,5287,168inccost1,383-3,169-1,7333,2014,1123,8094,8724,2324,8724,232Income (before labour costs)2,558-7,225-3,183-4,2791,0952,7196,1899,0869,7269,0869,726Discounted return to labour* (CNY/day)283*consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate (%)7%NPV (CNY) @ 0.0712,636IRR (%)14%NPVb (CNY)36,776NPVc (CNY)24,141B/C ratio1.52Switching values Benefits (%)-34%Switching values Costs (%)52%WITH PROJECTWITH PROJECT 
Table A 7: Tea production (lowlands) - 3 mu 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNIT PRICE (CNY) 1                                   1                         2                         3                         4                         5                         6                         7                         8                         9                         10-15Main productionTea WOP varietykg7.00            1,400                           -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Tea WP varietykg9.00            -                               -                     -                     -                     1,229                 1,536                 1,920                 2,400                 2,400                 2,400                 2,400                 Total Saleskg1,400                          -                     -                     -                     1,229                1,536                1,920                2,400                2,400                2,400                2,400                Selfconsumptionkg-                               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     By-productkg-                               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Post harvest losses%-                               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Investment inputs-                               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Infrastructurelumpsum1,280.00    -                               0                         -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Equipmentlumpsum128.00        -                               2                         -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Improved seedlingskg0.64            -                               4,600                 -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Shade trees/windbreakskg3.20            -                               40                       -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Operating inputs-                               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Seedlings for replantingkg0.64            -                               -                     460                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Shade trees for replantingkg3.20            -                               -                     4                         -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Fertilizer:-                               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Basal fertilizer (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg3.20            120                               40                       60                       80                       94                       94                       94                       94                       94                       94                       94                       Top dress fertilizer (Urea) kg5.44            40                                 40                       34                       25                       30                       30                       30                       30                       30                       30                       30                       Manure (organic)kg3.20            -                               500                     400                     400                     400                     400                     400                     400                     400                     400                     400                     Phospate/foliar fertilizerkg3.84            80                                 176                     90                       40                       80                       80                       80                       80                       80                       80                       80                       Chemicals:-                               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Herbicidekg224.00        1                                   1                         1                         0                         1                         1                         1                         1                         1                         1                         1                         Tools/equipmentno.96.00          0.2                                0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      Transportationton-km320.00        1                                   -                     -                     -                     1                         2                         2                         2                         2                         2                         2                         Bagsno.32.00          28                                 -                     -                     -                     25                       31                       38                       48                       48                       48                       48                       Operation & maintenancelumpsum128.00        -                               -                     0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      0.2                      Labour-                               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Plantingpers. dayS/F-                               16                       -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Operationspers. dayS/F32                                 38                       32                       37                       38                       38                       38                       38                       38                       38                       38                       Harvestingpers. dayS/F18                                 -                     -                     -                     20                       20                       20                       20                       20                       20                       20                       Sub-total labour50                                 54                       32                       37                       58                       58                       58                       58                       58                       58                       58                       Skilled (paid) labour (S)pers. day170.00        30                                 34                       12                       17                       38                       38                       38                       38                       38                       38                       38                       Family labour (F)pers. day85.00          20                                 20                       20                       20                       20                       20                       20                       20                       20                       20                       20                       FINANCIAL BUDGETWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 1                                   1                         2                         3                         4                         5                         6                         7                         8                         9                         10-15Main production revenueTea WOP variety9,800.00                     Tea WP variety-                     -                     -                     11,059.20         13,824.00         17,280.00         21,600.00         21,600.00         21,600.00         21,600.00         Total revenue9,800.00                    -                     -                     -                     11,059.20        13,824.00        17,280.00        21,600.00        21,600.00        21,600.00        21,600.00        9,800.00-           9,800.00-           9,800.00-           1,259.20           4,024.00           7,480.00           11,800.00         11,800.00         11,800.00         11,800.00         Investment input costsInfrastructure-                               256.00               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Equipment-                               256.00               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Improved seeds-                               2,944.00           -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Shade trees/windbreaks-                               128.00               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Sub-total investment costs-                               3,584.00          -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Operating input costsSeeds/rooted cuttings-                               -                     294.40               -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Improved seeds (hybrid)-                               -                     12.80                 -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     Fertilizer:NPK384.00                         128.00               192.00               256.00               299.52               299.52               299.52               299.52               299.52               299.52               299.52               Urea 217.60                         217.60               184.96               136.00               163.20               163.20               163.20               163.20               163.20               163.20               163.20               Manure (organic)-                               1,600.00           1,280.00           1,280.00           1,280.00           1,280.00           1,280.00           1,280.00           1,280.00           1,280.00           1,280.00           Foliar fertilizer307.20                         675.84               345.60               153.60               307.20               307.20               307.20               307.20               307.20               307.20               307.20               Chemicals:Herbicide224.00                         224.00               134.40               67.20                 179.20               179.20               179.20               179.20               179.20               179.20               179.20               Tools/equipment19.20                           19.20                 19.20                 19.20                 19.20                 19.20                 19.20                 19.20                 19.20                 19.20                 19.20                 Transportation448.00                         -                     -                     -                     393.22               491.52               614.40               768.00               768.00               768.00               768.00               Bags896.00                         -                     -                     -                     786.43               983.04               1,228.80           1,536.00           1,536.00           1,536.00           1,536.00           Operation & maintenance-                               -                     6.40                   6.40                   6.40                   6.40                   6.40                   6.40                   6.40                   6.40                   6.40                   Sub-total operating costs2,496.00                    2,864.64          2,469.76          1,918.40          3,434.37          3,729.28          4,097.92          4,558.72          4,558.72          4,558.72          4,558.72          Labour costsSkilled (paid) labour costs5,100.00                     5,780.00           2,040.00           2,890.00           6,460.00           6,460.00           6,460.00           6,460.00           6,460.00           6,460.00           6,460.00           Family labour costs1,700.00                     1,700.00           1,700.00           1,700.00           1,700.00           1,700.00           1,700.00           1,700.00           1,700.00           1,700.00           1,700.00           Sub-total labour costs6,800.00                    7,480.00          3,740.00          4,590.00          8,160.00          8,160.00          8,160.00          8,160.00          8,160.00          8,160.00          8,160.00          Total production costs9,296.00                    13,928.64        6,209.76          6,508.40          11,594.37        11,889.28        12,257.92        12,718.72        12,718.72        12,718.72        12,718.72        Income (after labour costs)504.00                         13,928.64-         6,209.76-           6,508.40-           535.17-               1,934.72           5,022.08           8,881.28           8,881.28           8,881.28           8,881.28           Incremental net income14,432.64-         6,713.76-           7,012.40-           1,039.17-           1,430.72           4,518.08           8,377.28           8,377.28           8,377.28           8,377.28           4,632.64           3,086.24-           2,787.60-           2,298.37           2,593.28           2,961.92           3,422.72           3,422.72           3,422.72           3,422.72           Income (before labour costs)2,204.00                     12,228.64-         4,509.76-           4,808.40-           1,164.83           3,634.72           6,722.08           10,581.28         10,581.28         10,581.28         10,581.28         Return to family labour* (CNY/day)529.06          *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate (%)7%NPV (CNY) @ 0.0714,530.09    IRR (%)13%NPVb (CNY)34,323.85    NPVc (CNY)19,793.76    B/C ratio1.73              Switching values Benefits (%)-42%Switching values Costs (%)73%WITH PROJECTWITH PROJECT 
Table A 8: Tea processing model 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (CNY)112345678910Main productionTea Akg60192,400127,083152,499177,916203,332254,165254,165254,165254,165254,165254,165Tea Bkg30249,600164,864197,837230,810263,782329,728329,728329,728329,728329,728329,728Tea Ckg578,00051,52061,82472,12882,432103,040103,040103,040103,040103,040103,040Post-processing losses%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%Investment inputsFactory (3000-4000 m2)no.1,120,00001CTC production lineno.1,760,00001Other supporting machinesno.120,00001Operating inputsTea Akg3641,333363,093435,712508,331580,949726,187726,187726,187726,187726,187726,187Tea Bkg8832,000471,040565,248659,456753,664942,080942,080942,080942,080942,080942,080Tea Ckg3260,000147,200176,640206,080235,520294,400294,400294,400294,400294,400294,400Electricity (1432KW / 1 ton of product)Kwh0.90744,640491,844590,213688,582786,951983,689983,689983,689983,689983,689983,689Coal (0.61 m3/1 ton of product)ton2,560317210251293335419419419419419419O&M building (3% of investment cost)lumpsum33,6001111111111O&M machinery and equipment (5%)lumpsum94,0001111111111Tea sacks (60 kg) no.188,6675,7246,8698,0149,15911,44911,44911,44911,44911,44911,449Shipping to warehouseston320520343412481550687687687687687687LabourOperations pers. dayS/F5,6323,3644,0374,7095,3826,7286,7286,7286,7286,7286,728Managerspers. dayS/F78600600600600600600600600600600Administrative staff, managers, etcpers. dayS/F3903,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,000Sub-total labour6,1006,9647,6378,3098,98210,32810,32810,32810,32810,32810,328Skilled (paid) labour (S)pers. day1705,6323,3644,0374,7095,3826,7286,7286,7286,7286,7286,728Administrative staff, manaagers, etcpers. day4484683,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,600FINANCIAL BUDGETWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910Main production revenueTea A11,544,0007,624,9609,149,95210,674,94412,199,93615,249,92015,249,92015,249,92015,249,92015,249,92015,249,920Tea B7,488,0004,945,9205,935,1046,924,2887,913,4729,891,8409,891,8409,891,8409,891,8409,891,8409,891,840Tea C390,000257,600309,120360,640412,160515,200515,200515,200515,200515,200515,200Sales19,422,00012,828,48015,394,17617,959,87220,525,56825,656,96025,656,96025,656,96025,656,96025,656,96025,656,960Selfconsumption00000000000Post-processing losses577,200381,248457,498533,747609,997762,496762,496762,496762,496762,496762,496Total revenue18,844,80012,447,23214,936,67817,426,12519,915,57124,894,46424,894,46424,894,46424,894,46424,894,46424,894,464Incremental revenues-6,397,568-3,908,122-1,418,6751,070,7716,049,6646,049,6646,049,6646,049,6646,049,6646,049,664Investment input costsFactory (3000-4000 m2)01,120,000000000000CTC production line01,760,000000000000Other supporting machines0120,000000000000Sub-total investment costs03,000,000000000000Operating input costsTea A2,052,2671,161,8991,394,2781,626,6581,859,0382,323,7972,323,7972,323,7972,323,7972,323,7972,323,797Tea B6,389,7603,617,5874,341,1055,064,6225,788,1407,235,1747,235,1747,235,1747,235,1747,235,1747,235,174Tea C832,000471,040565,248659,456753,664942,080942,080942,080942,080942,080942,080Electricity (1432KW / 1 ton of product)667,197440,692528,831616,969705,108881,385881,385881,385881,385881,385881,385Coal (0.61 m3/1 ton of product)812,032536,358643,629750,901858,1721,072,7151,072,7151,072,7151,072,7151,072,7151,072,715O&M building (3% of investment cost)33,600033,60033,60033,60033,60033,60033,60033,60033,60033,600O&M machinery and equipment (5%)94,000094,00094,00094,00094,00094,00094,00094,00094,00094,000Tea sacks (60 kg) 152,533100,750120,900141,050161,200201,500201,500201,500201,500201,500201,500Shipping to warehouses166,400109,909131,891153,873175,855219,819219,819219,819219,819219,819219,819Sub-total operating costs11,199,7896,438,2357,853,4839,141,13010,428,77713,004,07113,004,07113,004,07113,004,07113,004,07113,004,071Labour costsSkilled (paid) labour costs957,372571,838686,205800,573914,9401,143,6751,143,6751,143,6751,143,6751,143,6751,143,675Family labour costs209,6641,612,8001,612,8001,612,8001,612,8001,612,8001,612,8001,612,8001,612,8001,612,8001,612,800Sub-total labour costs1,167,0362,184,6382,299,0052,413,3732,527,7402,756,4752,756,4752,756,4752,756,4752,756,4752,756,475Total production costs12,366,82511,622,87310,152,48811,554,50212,956,51715,760,54615,760,54615,760,54615,760,54615,760,54615,760,546Gross Income (after labour costs)6,477,975824,3594,784,1915,871,6236,959,0559,133,9189,133,9189,133,9189,133,9189,133,9189,133,918Taxes (5%)647,79782,436478,419587,162695,905913,392913,392913,392913,392913,392913,392Insurance on labour (22%)256,748480,620505,781530,942556,103606,425606,425606,425606,425606,425606,425Net Income (after labour costs)5,573,429261,3033,799,9914,753,5185,707,0467,614,1027,614,1027,614,1027,614,1027,614,1027,614,102Net Incremental income-5,312,126-1,773,438-819,911133,6172,040,6732,040,6732,040,6732,040,6732,040,6732,040,673incremental costs-743,953-2,214,338-812,323589,6913,393,7203,393,7203,393,7203,393,7203,393,7203,393,720Net Income (before labour costs)6,740,4652,445,9406,098,9967,166,8918,234,78610,370,57710,370,57710,370,57710,370,57710,370,57710,370,577Return to family labour*n/a*consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate7%NPV (CNY) @ 0.071,052,331IRR9%NPVb12,977,742NPVc9,498,228B/C ratio1.37Switching values Benefits-27%Switching values Costs37%WITH PROJECTWITH PROJECT 
Table A 9: Orange production - 3 mu 
YIELDS AND INPUTSITEMS UNITPRICE (CNY)112345678910-20Main productionMaizekg4107----------Certified orangeskg8----1,5201,9002,2802,6603,0403,4203,800Total Saleskg107---1,5201,9002,2802,6603,0403,4203,800SelfconsumptionkgBy-productkgPost harvest losses%Investment inputsCertified seedlingtree160-100--------------------Operating inputs-----------Fertilizer:-----------Manurekg1-3,0003,0003,0004,000------Ureakg5-20202050505050505050Phosphat fertilizerkg2-909090150150150150150150150Potassium fertilizerkg10-40404036363636363636Organic fertilizer - foliarkg224-111-------Lime powderkg1-300300300300300300300300300300NPKkg4----240240240240240240240Fish mealkg3----200200200200200200200Kali chloridekg10----60606060606060Ketomiumkg224----4444444AT micro-leaf fertilizers)kg96----4444444AT disease and Insect-limitedkg192----2222222-----------Chemicals:-----------Pesticidekg77-2233333333Tools/equipmentno.2,560-0---0---0-Transportationton320----2223334Boxes/cratesno.3----20202020202020-----------Labour-----------Plantingpers. dayS/F-9---------Operationspers. dayS/F-23222634343434343434Harvestingpers. dayS/F----457891011Post harvest managementpers. dayS/F-----------Sub-total labour-32222638394142434445Skilled (paid) labour (S)pers. day170-1391015161617171818Family labour (F)pers. day85-19131623242425262627FINANCIAL BUDGETWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910-20Main production revenueMaize428----------Certified oranges----12,16015,20018,24021,28024,32027,36030,400Sales428---12,16015,20018,24021,28024,32027,36030,400Selfconsumption-----------By-product-----------Post harvest losses-----------Total revenue428---12,16015,20018,24021,28024,32027,36030,400Incremental revenues-428-428-42811,73214,77217,81220,85223,89226,93229,972Investment input costsCertified seedling-16,000---------Sub-total investment costs-16,000---------Operating input costsFertilizer:Manure-1,9201,9201,9202,560------Urea-109109109272272272272272272272Phosphat fertilizer-202202202336336336336336336336Potassium fertilizer-384384384346346346346346346346Organic fertilizer - foliar-224224224-------Lime powder-288288288288288288288288288288NPK----845845845845845845845Fish meal----640640640640640640640Kali chloride----576576576576576576576Ketomium----896896896896896896896AT micro-leaf fertilizers)----384384384384384384384AT disease and Insect-limited----384384384384384384384Chemicals:Pesticide-138138215215215215215215215215Tools/equipment-512---512---512-Transportation----4866087308519731,0941,216Boxes/crates----64646464646464Sub-total operating costs-3,7773,2653,3418,2926,3655,9756,0976,2186,8526,461Labour costsSkilled (paid) labour costs-2,1621,4961,7682,6072,6812,7552,8292,9032,9763,050Family labour costs-1,6221,1221,3261,9552,0112,0662,1222,1772,2322,288Sub-total labour costs-3,7842,6183,0944,5634,6924,8214,9505,0805,2095,338Total production costs-23,5615,8836,43512,85511,05710,79611,04711,29812,06111,799Income (after labour costs)428-23,561-5,883-6,435-6954,1437,44410,23313,02215,29918,601Incremental net income-23,989-6,311-6,863-1,1233,7157,0169,80512,59414,87118,173Incremental costs23,5615,8836,43512,85511,05710,79611,04711,29812,06111,799Income (before labour costs)428-21,939-4,761-5,1091,2616,1539,51012,35515,19917,53220,888Return to family labour*391.22*consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate7%NPV (CNY) @ 0.0768,580IRR19%NPVb194,018NPVc125,438B/C ratio1.55Switching values Benefits-35%Switching values Costs55%WITHOUT PROJECTWITH PROJECT 
Table A 10: Orange processing 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (CNY)112345678910-15Technical parametersProcessing capacity (of which)kg/yearUncertified orangeskg/yearCertified orangeskg/year0589,760737,200884,6401,032,0801,179,5201,326,9601,474,4001,474,4001,474,4001,474,400Input to output ratioUncertified oranges%95%9%9%9%9%9%9%9%9%9%9%Certified oranges%91%91%91%91%91%91%91%91%91%91%91%Orange production sharesUncertified oranges%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%Certified oranges%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%Main productionUncertified orangeskg8053,07866,34879,61892,887106,157119,426132,696132,696132,696132,696Certified orangeskg120536,682670,852805,022939,1931,073,3631,207,5341,341,7041,341,7041,341,7041,341,704Total Saleskg0589,760737,200884,6401,032,0801,179,5201,326,9601,474,4001,474,4001,474,4001,474,400SelfconsumptionkgProcessing losses%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%Investment inputsWarehouseno.1,142,85701Processing machineno.571,42901Weighing machineno.428,57101Packing machineno.257,14301Operating inputsUncertified orangeskg6053,07866,34879,61892,887106,157119,426132,696132,696132,696132,696Certified orangeskg80536,682670,852805,022939,1931,073,3631,207,5341,341,7041,341,7041,341,7041,341,704Electricity (58.6KW / 1 ton SP)Kwh1034,56043,20051,84060,48069,12077,76086,40086,40086,40086,400Maintenance hygieneCNY/ton3205907378851,0321,1801,3271,4741,4741,4741,474O&M building (5% of investment cost)lumpsum57,143111111111O&M machinery and equipmentlumpsum62,857111111111Packagingkg0.4589,760737,200884,6401,032,0801,179,5201,326,9601,474,4001,474,4001,474,4001,474,400Transportationton320.05907378851,0321,1801,3271,4741,4741,4741,474Tools/equipmentlumpsum1,2801111111111LabourOperations (0.1 FTE days per 100 kgs)pers. dayS/F5907378851,0321,1801,3271,4741,4741,4741,474Harvestingpers. dayS/FAdministrative staff, managers, etcpers. dayS/F730730730730730730730730730730Sub-total labour01,3201,4671,6151,7621,9102,0572,2042,2042,2042,204Skilled (paid) labour (S)pers. day17005907378851,0321,1801,3271,4741,4741,4741,474Administrative staff, managers, etcpers. day4480730730730730730730730730730730FINANCIAL BUDGETWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910-15Main production revenueUncertified oranges0424,627530,784636,941743,098849,254955,4111,061,5681,061,5681,061,5681,061,568Certified oranges06,440,1798,050,2249,660,26911,270,31412,880,35814,490,40316,100,44816,100,44816,100,44816,100,448000000000000Sales06,864,8068,581,00810,297,21012,013,41113,729,61315,445,81417,162,01617,162,01617,162,01617,162,016Selfconsumption00000000000Post-porcessing losses0686,481858,1011,029,7211,201,3411,372,9611,544,5811,716,2021,716,2021,716,2021,716,202Total revenue06,178,3267,722,9079,267,48910,812,07012,356,65213,901,23315,445,81415,445,81415,445,81415,445,814Incremental revenues5,600,6387,145,2198,689,80110,234,38211,778,96413,323,54514,868,12614,868,12614,868,12614,868,126Investment input costsWarehouse01,142,857000000000Processing machine0571,429000000000Weighing machine0428,571000000000Packing machine0257,143000000000Sub-total investment costs02,400,000000000000Operating input costsUncertified oranges0339,702424,627509,553594,478679,404764,329849,254849,254849,254849,254Certified oranges04,293,4535,366,8166,440,1797,513,5428,586,9069,660,26910,733,63210,733,63210,733,63210,733,632Electricity (58.6KW / 1 ton SP)030,96638,70746,44954,19061,93169,67377,41477,41477,41477,414Maintenance hygiene0188,723235,904283,085330,266377,446424,627471,808471,808471,808471,808O&M building (5% of investment cost)0057,14357,14357,14357,14357,14357,14357,14357,14357,143O&M machinery and equipment0062,85762,85762,85762,85762,85762,85762,85762,85762,857Packaging0226,468283,085339,702396,319452,936509,553566,170566,170566,170566,170Transportation0188,723235,904283,085330,266377,446424,627471,808471,808471,808471,808Tools/equipment01,2801,2801,2801,2801,2801,2801,2801,2801,2801,280Sub-total operating costs05,269,3156,706,3238,023,3329,340,34010,657,34911,974,35813,291,36613,291,36613,291,36613,291,366Labour costsSkilled (paid) labour costs0100,259125,324150,389175,454200,518225,583250,648250,648250,648250,648Administrative staff, managers, etc0327,040327,040327,040327,040327,040327,040327,040327,040327,040327,040Sub-total labour costs0427,299452,364477,429502,494527,558552,623577,688577,688577,688577,688Total production costs08,096,6147,158,6878,500,7619,842,83411,184,90712,526,98113,869,05413,869,05413,869,05413,869,054Gross Income (after labour costs)0-1,918,288564,220766,728969,2361,171,7441,374,2521,576,7601,576,7601,576,7601,576,760Taxes (5%)0056,42276,67396,924117,174137,425157,676157,676157,676157,676Insurance on labour (22%)094,00699,520105,034110,549116,063121,577127,091127,091127,091127,091Net Income (after labour costs)577,688-2,012,294408,278585,021761,764938,5071,115,2501,291,9931,291,9931,291,9931,291,993Incremental net income-2,589,982-169,4107,333184,076360,819537,562714,305714,305714,305714,305incremental costs8,096,6147,158,6878,500,7619,842,83411,184,90712,526,98113,869,05413,869,05413,869,05413,869,054Net income (before labour costs)577,688-1,584,995860,6421,062,4501,264,2571,466,0651,667,8731,869,6811,869,6811,869,6811,869,681Return to family labour*2,285*consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate7%NPV (CNY) @ 0.071,708,466IRR13%NPVb108,614,800NPVc104,800,504B/C ratio1.04Switching values Benefits-4%Switching values Costs4%WITH PROJECTWITH PROJECT 
Table A 11: Project costs 
ChinaYunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration ProjectProject Components by Year -- Base CostsEconomic Costs (RMB Million)Base Cost (RMB Million)20202021202220232024TotalA. Supporting Inclusive Rural Development1. Improving chanye fupin models /aUpgrading Cooperative Meeting Operational Standards /b-15.115.17.6-37.8Cooperative Co-investor support-50.467.233.6-151.2Company-cooperative/household models42.063.063.021.0-189.0Other Innovative Models14.021.021.07.0-63.0Establishment of County Traceability Systems0.00.20.20.20.21.0Improving Climate Information and Adaptation Advice2.2----2.2Subtotal Improving chanye fupin models58.2149.8166.669.40.2444.22. Stimulating entrepreneurship/attracting investorsBusiness Incubation/Service Centers6.86.06.06.05.029.7Investment Support for Start-ups /c-7.035.035.07.084.0Improved Access to Financing-5.4---5.4Subtotal Stimulating entrepreneurship/attracting investors6.818.341.041.012.0119.0Subtotal Supporting Inclusive Rural Development65.0168.1207.5110.412.3563.2B. Climate Proofed Public Infrastructure Planning & Development1. Infrastructure for improved climate resilienceClimate proofed irrigation planning, design & decision making0.72.2---2.9Piloting Climate proofed Smart irrigation Investments /d-6.420.235.111.773.3Subtotal Infrastructure for improved climate resilience0.78.620.235.111.776.22. Rural Infrastructure /e15.447.582.025.48.4178.6Subtotal Climate Proofed Public Infrastructure Planning & Development16.156.1102.260.520.0254.9C. Project Management, M&E and LearningManagement13.412.811.48.08.353.9M&E and Learning2.10.41.70.42.26.7Subtotal Project Management, M&E and Learning15.513.213.18.410.560.696.6237.4322.7179.242.8878.755124193125435512419312543Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Base CostsEconomic Costs Base Cost (RMB Million)20202021202220232024Total I. Investment CostsA. Works15.453.9102.260.520.0252.0B. Consultancies3.418.517.68.22.450.2C. Good, Services&Inputs16.717.011.39.08.462.5D. Grants and Subsidies56.0141.4186.296.67.0487.2E. Operating costs4.44.44.44.44.422.1F. Training0.72.11.00.50.54.8G. Results Based Lending------Total Investment Costs96.6237.4322.7179.242.8878.7II. Recurrent CostsTotal BASELINE COSTS96.6237.4322.7179.242.8878.7Recurrent costs for final aggregation44444Investment costs for final aggregationTOTAL PROJEC COSTProject cost balance from components not used in the models 
China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 8. SECAP Review Note 
1.  Major landscape characteristics and issues (social, health, environmental and climate 
change) 
1.  Country Context:   
1.  National  context:  The  Government  of  China  is  planning  to  eradicate  extreme  rural 
poverty,  measured  against  the  prevailing  national  poverty  standards  (i.e.  approximately 
US$1.90/day), by 2020 - making China the first developing country to achieve SDG1, ten 
years ahead the global target. There is broad consensus that China has achieved an historic 
reduction in absolute poverty since the initiation of the rural reform process in 1978. Based 
on the international poverty line of $1.90 per day (expressed in 2011 purchasing power 
parity), the World Bank estimates that the incidence of poverty in China declined from 878 
million in 1981 to 87 million in 2012 (or from 88% to 6.5% of the population). Official 
government estimates indicate a similarly sharp and prolonged decline in the number of 
poor, and that the number of rural poor had declined to about 16.6 million by end of 2018. 
2.  However, sustaining this achievement, reducing inequalities (between costal and western 
provinces, urban and rural areas, and among population. i.e. relative poverty), and avoiding 
that the people moved out of poverty fall back into poverty will remain priorities for the 
Government in the years following 2020. In addition to this, the Government has recently 
coined a Rural Revitalization strategy (2017), a long-term, comprehensive strategy which 
aims at rebalancing the existing divide between urban and rural areas by accelerating the 
development  of  rural  areas  and  making  them  attractive  for  living.  Key  strategies  for 
pursuing  and  sustaining  poverty  reduction  efforts  and  developing  rural  areas  include: 
agricultural  "industrialization"  (i.e.  the  development  of  lead  "industries"  through  the 
support of agro-enterprises and cooperatives), creation of employment opportunities, and 
comprehensive infrastructure development - among other strategies.   
3.  Geography  explains  much  of  the  inequality  in  China.  Several  studies  indicate  that 
disparities between urban and rural  areas represent  the largest  share of total inequality. 
Unequal access to infrastructure and municipal services, which is associated with rural-
urban  disparity,  is  a  significant  contributor  to  overall  inequality.  Disparities  between 
coastal and inland provinces are also high. Substantial state-led investments in the interior 
provinces  have  reduced  the  income  gap  in  recent  years  but  at  the  cost  of  capital 
misallocation, which is increasingly evident. The challenge to create sustainable income 
opportunities in the interior provinces thus remains. 
4.  Demographic  transition  and  aging  population  are  also  boding  ill  to  China  socio-
economic sustainability. The widening urban-rural population gap and ageing population 
are becoming new challenges for China to meet social security and keep agriculture labour 
force intact which are backbone of china food security depending on 250 million small 
farm  holders.  Today  about  42  percent  of  the  Chinese  population  are  registered  in  rural 
areas, which is predicted to be down to 31% by 2030. Between 1950 and 2015, the total 
fertility rate per woman declined from 6.11 to 1.6. over the same time, the overall mortality 
rate also declined significantly resulting in a steady increase in life expectancy. In addition, 
due to large scale rural labor migration, China rural and agriculture feminization and aging 
became a common phenomenon 
5.  The rural development context. China is going through a fundamental transformation in 
rural areas. Over the past decades, China has experienced a massive migration of the active 
workforce from the rural to the urban areas due to the gap between the urban and rural 
salaries and the limited income-generating opportunities in the rural areas. Rural villages 
today  are  characterized  by  a  population  which  mainly  comprises  elderly,  some  middle 
generation women taking care of the elderly parents (the so-called “left-behind women”, 
who represent about 60% of the labour force in rural areas), young children, and sick and/or 
people  with  disabilities.  Rural  families  from  poverty  vulnerable  households  are  often 
dependent on the remittances provided by migrant worker family members, complemented 
by some income from production and local labor. 
6. 
In  response  to  this  situation,  the  government  has  recently  established  a  "rural 
revitalization"  strategy  (2017),  a  long-term,  comprehensive  strategy  which  aims  at 
rebalancing  the  existing  divide  between  urban  and  rural  areas  by  accelerating  the 
development  of  rural  areas  and  making  them  attractive  for  living.  Key  strategies  for 
pursuing  and  sustaining  poverty  reduction  efforts  and  developing  rural  areas  include: 
agricultural  "industrialization"  (i.e.  the  development  of  lead  "industries"  through  the 
support of agro-enterprises and cooperatives), creation of employment opportunities, and 
comprehensive infrastructure development - among other strategies. 
Gender and social inclusion 
7.  The  propose  project  contributes  to  reduce  the  gender  gap.  As  of  end-2015,  women 
comprised  about  half  of  the  56  million  rural  poor  population  in  China.1    According  to 
State  Statistic  Bureau  survey  in  the  nationally  designated  poor  counties,  the  degree  of 
poverty  was  greater  among  women  than  among  men.    In  2010,  women’s  poverty 
incidence was 9.8% while men’s was 9.4%, and the incidence of low-income women was 
0.6 percentage points higher than that of men. Rural women’s average level of education 
in Midwestern China was 6.8 years, which was 0.8 years less than those in Eastern China.   
8.  The majority of labor force of female is engaged in agriculture, about 80.6%, mostly in 
primary industry as compared to 58.8% of male labor in 20172.According to National 
Bureau of Statistics of China, the education level of female labor in poor area was far 
behind that of male labor (Table ).   
Educatin level of Female/Male labor in poor area of China   
Female labor (%) 
3.  Male labor (%) 
1. 
4. 
7. 
Education level 
No school 
Primary school 
10.  Middle school 
13.  High school 
16.  College and above 
2. 
5. 
8. 
11.9 
39.4 
11. 
40.4 
14. 
5.9 
17. 
2.4 
6. 
9. 
3.7 
29.0 
12. 
51.7 
15. 
11.5 
18. 
4.1 
Source: Poverty Monitoring Report of Rural China 2018 
1  X.L. Wang and R. Gao. Poverty Reduction of Rural Women: Objective, Challenge and Policy Option. Collection of Women’s Studies, No. 6 
Ser. No. 138, Nov. 2016. Pages 5-8. 
2  Department of Household Surveys, National Bureau of Statistics of China. Poverty Mornitoring Report of 
Rural China (2018). China Statistic Press, Dec. 2018. 
Ethnic Minority and Poverty 
9.  There  are  fifty-five  ethnic  minorities  in  China  and  one  third  of  the  ethnic  minority 
population live in the Yunnan province. The main provinces home to ethnic minorities are 
eight  western  provinces  including  Inner  Mongolia,  Guangxi,  Guizhou,  Yunnan,  Tibet, 
Qinghai,  Ningxia  and  Xinjiang  named  Eight  Minority  Province/Autonomous  Region 
(Minzu Bashengqu). According to National Ethnic Affairs Commission, there were 421 
minority autonomous counties among 832 nationally designated poor county, accounting 
51%. Similarly eleven of fourteen contiguous poverty blocks (Sanqu Sanzhou) are located 
in the key minority area. The poverty incidence of key minority area has remained higher 
than the national average, and the share of key minority area in country poor population 
increased 3.5 percentage point between 2010 to 20173. 
Rural Youth 
10.  Presently, China doesn’t have an explicitly written, unified national youth policy or official 
executive mechanism for carrying out and monitoring national or regional youth affairs. 
Youth  policy  is  regarded  as  a  component  of  the  overall  policy  of  the  CPC  which  is 
ideologically oriented and politically dominated. Communist Youth League (CYL), the 
sole national organisation managing youth affairs in China, focuses its efforts on young 
people between 14 and 28 years. The literacy rate among youth is 99% in both sexes. Over 
last three decades the youth unemployment remained average of 9 to 10%. 
11.  Since 1980s when China economic reform started, rural labor has been being migrated to 
urban on a large scale majorly due to the income gap between rural and urban. According 
to NBS, there was 179.69 million rural labor migrated to urban by 20174. The rural labor 
under 40 years old was the majority of the labor migration, and 66% of them migrated to 
eastern  China5.  With  such  big  scale  rural  labor  migration,  China  rural  and  agriculture 
feminization and aging became a common phenomenon.   
12.  In September 2018, central government issued “Strategy Planning for Rural Revitalization 
(2018-2022)”, to promote rural revitalization of industry, human resource, culture, ecology 
and organization. Obviously, rural youth is the key human resource for rural revitalization, 
and achievement of rural revitalization will create opportunity to pull youth back to rural.   
13.  The  proposed  project  would  focus  on  fostering  local  youth,  facilitating  migrated  youth 
back  to  rural  by  giving  them  business  startup  ideas  and  opportunities.  In  addition,  the 
project  would  also  support  the  Chinese  government  ‘Mass  Rural  Youth  Volunteer 
Program’, which would facilitate sending over ten million of young volunteers from large 
cities to rural areas6. 
Nutrition Situation Analysis 
3  National Ethnic Affairs Commission. Poverty Monitoring Result of Minority Area (2017).   
http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2018-08/15/5313944/files/a0182850dccb49998471b5b3d584c279.pdf 
4  National Bureau of Statistics. 
http://data.stats.gov.cn/search.htm?s=2017%20%E5%85%A8%E5%9B%BD%20%E5%A4%96%E5%87%BA%E5%
8A%A1%E5%B7%A5%E5%8A%B3%E5%8A%A8%E5%8A%9B 
5 Xu Xiaohua, et al. The Trend Forecast and Management of the Chinese Agricultural Surplus Labor Transfer During 2014 —
2030. Management Review, Vol. 30, No. 1, Jan. 2018. 221-229 
6  Update on Key Developments in China, April 2019. 
14.  China has made significant progress in recent decades in improving malnutrition. Overall 
situation  is  improving  drastically.  China  reduced  the  level  of  undernourishment  in  the 
country from 23.9 percent in 1990-92 to 9.3 percent in 2014-16. 
Rates  of  child  malnutrition  are  also  dropping.  From  1990  to  2010,  the  number  of 
underweight children under 5 fell by 74 percent and rates of stunting dropped by 70 percent. 
Current levels are lower than most other developing countries.  
15.  Similarly  the  nutrition  status  of  children  and  adolescent  aged  5-19  has  improved 
remarkedly over the last 15 years as shown in graph below where the underweight reduced 
to 17% in year 2015 from 27% in 1999.    However the overweight and obesity has greatly 
worsened over the same period for same population group. 
16.  Rural-urban  disparities,  however,  have  a  big  impact  on  nutritional  status.  The  risk  of 
underweight and stunting is 3-4 times higher for children in rural areas than for those in 
cities.  According  to  WHO  World  Health  Report  2017,  (having  data  from  2013)  the 
prevalence of stunting, underweight and wasting among children under 5 were 8.1%, 2.4%, 
and 1.9% in the overall China showing great achievement in nutrition.   
17.  On the other end, better nutrition has significantly improved the health and quality of life 
of  Chinese  children.  Mortality  in  under  5s  due  to  malnutrition  dropped  from  22  to  13 
percent  between  2000  and  2010.   Meanwhile  The  food  supply  has  also  improved 
remarkably,  and  undernourishment  of  population  reduced  from  16%  in  2000  to  9%  in 
2016.  But  overweight  and  obesity  are  becoming  prominent  in  cities,  and  gradually 
appearing in rural areas: 23 percent of boys and 14 percent of girls under 20 were now 
found to be overweight or obese. The health and nutrition improvement in china population 
is also resulted from improved drinking water coverage and improved sanitation coverage. 
China's value in the Global Hunger Index fell from 25.1 in 1990 (serious hunger level), to 
7.6 in 2018 (low hunger level). 
Provincial context:   
18.  Yunnan  has  consistently  been  a  priority  area  of  the  Chinese  government’s  poverty 
reduction program given it hosts the largest share of poor people in the country (10.6% of 
the national poor in 2018). In 2018, 88 out of 129 counties (mostly in the Western and 
North-East  parts  of  the  province)  were  still  classified  as  nationally-designated  poor 
counties. Yunnan further distinguishes itself from other Chinese provinces by hosting one 
third of total 55 ethnic groups in the country. Although absolute poverty will be eradicated 
in  these  counties  by  2020,  they  will  remain  vulnerable  and  with  limited  income 
opportunities.   
19.  Project  Target  Area:  The  Project  will  be  implemented  in  seven  nationally-designated 
poor  counties  within  the  four  municipalities/prefectures  of  Zhaotong,  Dali,  Lijiang  and 
Nujiang  in  the  North-East  and  Western  part  of  Yunnan  province  (i.e.  Zhenxiong  and 
Suijiang  counties  in  Zhaotong  municipality;  Yunlong  and  Yongping  counties  in  Dali 
prefecture; Huaping and Yongsheng counties in Lijang municipality; and Lanping county 
in Nujiang prefecture).    Meanwhile, all seven counties are located in contiguous poverty 
block, where five counties -- Yunlong and Yongping of Dali, Huaping and Yongsheng of 
Lijiang and Lanping of Nujiangare belong to west Yunnan border mountain area, while 
other two counties of Zhaotong are from Wumeng mountain area. In addition, Dali and 
Nujiang are minority autonomous prefectures, and minority population takes more than 
60% in Lijiang Prefecture.   
1.1 Sociocultural context 
20.  The  province  of  Yunnan  located  in  the  southwest  of  China  is  characterized  by 
overlapping  mountainous,  ethnic  minorities,  border  and  poverty.  With  more  than  94% 
mountainous  territory  and  more  than  4,000  km  border  line  with  Myanmar,  Laos  and 
Vietnam, there are 16 prefectures in Yunnan, under them, there are 129 districts / cities / 
counties. 
21.  Poverty profile. There are 88 counties or 68.22% of counties in Yunnan are categorized 
as  poor  counties,  which  took  10.6%  of  that  in  China.  Simultaneously  with  the  poverty 
reduction achievement in China, poor population in Yunnan reduced from 8.04 million in 
2012  to  1.81million  in  2018,  while  poverty  incidence  decreased  from  21.7%  to  5.39% 
accordingly.  It  is  expected  48  poor  counties  will  be  out  of  poverty  until  2020,  which 
contributed to 11.1% of the country poverty reduction achievement.7 
22.  The total rural population of seven project counties was 2.98 million in 2018, and 15.6% 
of them live in the project area. Farmers’ net income per capita was CNY 9,408 in project 
area and CNY 10,272 in project counties, which was 87.4% and 95.4% of the provincial 
level. Besides, the average per capita farmland was 1.51 mu in project counties and 1.72 
mu in project area, and that of project area in Suijiang and Huaping even less that 1 mu. 
The average income from agriculture sector per household is around 30-50% and the rest 
come from migrant workers.  8 
23.  According to the poverty rate data provided by county PMOs, the poverty rate of project 
counties was estimated as 16.88% in 2018 with 0.50 million poor population, while that 
of project area was 22.53% and 0.097 million, and the project area shared 19.31% of the 
poor people in the project counties. The poverty rate varied greatly among counties and 
project  area.  However,  the  data  should  be  further  confirmed  in  appraisal.  Based  on  the 
present data, the poor population in seven project counties took account 27.6% of that in 
the province, and the poverty rate of the project counties was three times of the province 
level. 
24.  According  to  the  monitoring  of  local  government,  the  major  poverty  causes  included 
natural disaster (flooding, drought, etc), disability, illness, education cost, lack of skill, lack 
of labor, lack of investment. However, lack of skill is the leading reason caused poverty in 
the project area, then followed by illness and heavy burden of education cost beyond Nine-
year Compulsory Education. 
25.  The characteristics of different wealth categories. Village visits showed that the farm 
households in different location have slightly different livelihood pattern, and their wealth 
situation can be categorized into three groups.   
7  Yunnan Province statistics bureau and PMO office   
8  CPMO/PPMOs/Mission discussions   
Table 1.Households characteristics of different categories9 
Category 
Better-off 
% of HH  Characteristics 
10-15 
Good  housing  condition  with  good  decoration  and  enough 
electronic appliances. 
Each  household  has  CNY50,000-60,000  annual  cash  income 
from  comparatively  big  and  diversified  agricultural  products 
such as tobacco, tea, walnut, etc. 
Vulnerable 
60-70 
Poor 
20-30 
House  with  simple  decoration  and  necessary  electronic 
appliances.  Annual  income  of  CNY20,000  -  30,000  per 
household  mainly 
labor,  and  diversified 
agricultural  production  such  as  tea,  walnut,  pig,  tobacco, 
honeysuckle, etc. 
from  migrant 
Registered poor households greatly supported by the  Targeted 
Poverty  Alleviation  Policy.  Poor  skill,  health  condition  and 
housing condition. Annual income of CNY 10,000 - 15,000 per 
household  from  agricultural  products  and/or  seasonal  labor 
work. 
Information source: Interview and discussion in two villages. 
26.  Labour and Migration Situation. Migrant labour income dependency accounts to 48.25% 
of households due to low income from agriculture. About 0.74 million labour or 55.46% 
of the labour in project counties (except Yongping and Huaping) were engaged in migrant 
labour  work.  As  long  as  there  is  a  surplus  labour,  migrant  labour  income  is  significant 
source for poor households. Limited data showed that youth between 15 to 34 years old 
took more than half of migrant labour force in three project counties averagely.   
27.  Access to technology and credit. The Agro-Technical Extension Stations at county and 
township levels are the main technical service providers throughout the country. According 
to the available data from five project counties, only 17.70% rural labours were trained by 
the government extension system in 2018; 50.61% trainees were women, and 30.51% were 
ethnic  minorities.  There  are  evidence  of  credit  support  in  market  area  but  well  below 
national average. The labour with education of high school and above made up 1/4 in the 
project area, but only 16.35% in the project counties.     
Nutrition status.   
28.  Due  to  high  economic  growth  complementing  with  enormous  progress  in  poverty 
reduction over the past forty years, China has made significant progress in improving the 
food  security  and  nutritional  status  of  its  people.  Similarly  Yunnan  has  given  high 
importance to reducing child malnutrition in its ‘Yunnan Child Development Plan (2011-
2020)’,  and  clear  targets,  in  terms  of  prevalence  of  severe  malnutrition,  prevalence  of 
moderate to severe anemia, and anemia prevalence of primary and secondary students, are 
set for the province.   
  9  The table is summarized from interviews of Wenxing Bai Village and Jiaju Bai Village    in Yunlong County, 
and Dapingtan Village in Yongping County; all of them are poor villages identified by county poverty alleviation 
office. China official poverty line is $1.9 US per capita/day 
29.  Based on the data of National Children Nutrition and Health Monitoring Program, from 
2012 to 201810, the prevalence of anemia and stunting among children under 5 in rural 
Yunnan have decreased from 50.28% to 21.98% and from 17.84% to 3.69% respectively; 
and  the  prevalence  of  underweight  and  wasting  among  children  under  5  have  also 
decreased  to  1.16%  and  0.68%  respectively  in  2018.  Though  the  figures  are  still 
significantly higher than those of urban area, yet such great improvement is driven by the 
national  programs  of  health  management  for  children  under  6  and  publicity  of 
breastfeeding  and  reasonable  complementary  foods  since  2009,  and  children  nutrition 
improvement project in poor rural area in recent years.   
30.  Limited data from the three project counties visited during design (i.e. Suijiang, Yunlong, 
and  Yongping)  showed  that  some  of  the  targets  (e.g.  prevalence  of  moderate  to  severe 
anemia of children under 5 maintained under 12%) have already been achieved, suggesting 
the overall situation in the project area is not alarming and in line with the objectives of 
the provincial development plan. 
Rural youth.   
31.  Like  other  parts  of  country,  Yunnan  Communist  Youth  League  (CYL)  is  the  most 
extensive youth organization in the province ant at the county level that positioned itself 
as  the  sole  organization  systematically  serving  for  youth  development  widely  on  youth 
ideology  and  morality,  youth  education,  youth  health,    youth  career-orientation  and 
employment, youth social inclusion and participation and youth social security 
32.  About 55% of the workforce in the project area is engaged in migrant labour; more than 
half of the migrant workers are represented by youth between 15 to 34 years old of age. To 
revert this trend, a central pillar of the new rural revitalization strategy focuses on creating 
new  employment  opportunities  in  the  rural  areas  to  retain  or  attract  back  the  active 
population to the rural areas [1], particularly young people. The project will contribute to 
this  objective  by  (i)  providing  incentives  and  support  to  entrepreneurs  and  investors 
(particularly young and - considering women represent the majority of the workforce in 
the rural areas - women) to start their own business in the project area (Ref. Sub-component 
A.2); and (ii) facilitating women participation in supported cooperatives, including leading 
roles (Ref. Sub-component A.1). 
33.  According to a village head, it was not easy for poor labor to stay with urban job due to 
not enough skill, low pay, or inadaptation. However, labor migration is still one of the local 
government promotion to improve income of rural households, especially registered poor 
households. Even so, there was about 1/3  youth  could not find suitable job out of rural 
according to the head of    Yongping CYL. The literacy rate among  youth at the project 
counties are about 97%, compared to 99% in both sexes at national level. At national level 
over  last  three  decades  the  youth  unemployment  remained  average  of  9  to  10%  as 
compared to county level where 1/3 of youth could not find suitable jobs.   
10 X. Zhu, et al. Analysis of Nutrition and Health Condition Monotoring of Children 
under 5 Years Old in Urban and Rural Areas of Yunnan Province from 2012 - 2018. 
Chinese Journal of Children Health Care, Vol. 27, No. 5. May 2019. P571-573. 
Ethnic minorities.   
34.  Yunnan  is  widely  known  for  its  cultural  diversity  in  China  having  one  third  of  its 
population as ethnic minorities. The province has 25 native ethnic groups (46%) out of the   
55 ethnic minority groups of the country. Five of the seven project counties are located in 
the so-called "cultural diversity area" of Yunnan. Dali and Nujiang are classified "minority 
autonomous prefectures".  In Lijiang prefecture, 60% of the population belong to ethnic 
minority groups. Overall, about 29% of the population in the project area belong to ethnic 
minority groups. Main ethnic minority groups in the project area are: Hui, Bai, Yi, Miao, 
Lisu, Naxi, Lahu, Pumi, Dai and Nu people. These minority are now without traditional 
institutions and are in general well integrated in the existing socio-economic context. They 
have livelihood strategies similar to those of the other rural populations, are not excluded 
from existing economic opportunities, are not discriminated, and have no distinct needs 
from the rest of the population. They are vulnerable not because belonging to an ethnic 
minority group, but because they live in poor and not well developed areas. Government 
policies  targeting  rural  poor  and  vulnerable  households  in  Yunnan  province  do  not 
differentiate  based  on  ethnicity,  but  target  based  on  poverty  indicators. The  project 
engagement approach with  pro-poor cooperatives and agro-businesses will  be based on 
informed consultations to ensure that particular livelihood strategies of the different ethnic 
groups are taken into account, where existing. Even though an FPIC agreement will not be 
signed,  since  there  are  no  traditional  institutions  and  authorities  to  provide  for  a  such 
signature,  FPIC  principles  will  as  such  be  followed  in  the  planning  and  formulation  of 
project interventions.     
Gender.   
35.  There were 23.24 million women in Yunnan Province in 2018, which took 48.11% of the 
total population. There was 1.42 million women living in the project  counties, and that 
figure was 0.20 million in the project area11. However, the male-female ratio was differ 
county by county, and average proportion of women in seven project counties was lower 
than the provincial level. At household level, women with formal household head title took 
only 8.64% in project counties and 17.30% in project area, and the figure was very low in 
Yunlong County. In the project counties, women only took 9.90% and 16.51% of village 
leadership in the project counties and project area. While most of the rural male labors are 
engage in migrated works, most of the rural women have to stay taking care of the family 
and agricultural production, and they account for more than 70% of rural labors working 
on agriculture in the villages. 
36.  Decision  making  in  household  and  community.  Mostly  the  patrilineal  system  is 
practiced in the project  area. In general, the overall socio-economic status of women is 
poor  than  men  in  terms  of  education,  health  and  access  to  technical  and  information 
services. Most women still cultivate the land under their husbands’ name due to the practice 
of traditional marriage pattern where men are registered as family head. Therefore, women 
with formal household head title accounts only 6.14% in project counties and 17.53% in 
project area, number increased due to male outmigration.   
Following the common practice of official and uniform administration system in China, 
most  affairs  at  the  community  level  are  officially  managed  by  villagers’  committees  in 
administrative  villages  with  village  committee  head  where  men  are  the  major  decision 
11  PPMO/CPMOs Briefings 
makers at all levels. The women village leadership in the project counties accounts  only 
9.90% while 17.14% in project area. 
37.  Labour Division: Men generally play the key role in transactions and heavy manual work, 
while women take care of daily farming activities that require less manual labour but are 
more  constant  and  time  consuming.  Often  women  end  up  the  main  labour  for  farming 
activities due to migration of men. The overall women labour force in project counties are 
about 40% whereas almost 70% accounts in village agriculture labour force 
38.  Women’s participation in Farmers’ Cooperative. There are about 4,871 cooperatives 
in seven project counties mostly led by men and dominated by male members despite the 
fact that key labor force in the project area is dominated by women. Besides cultural reason, 
membership of women who is not registered as household head, would cause the difficulty 
to the cooperative when dealing with different agencies for cooperative establishment and 
operation,  as  the  agencies  require  the  membership  consistent  with  household  head. 
Nevertheless, field visit of the mission found that women are keen to play significant role 
in the cooperative. 
1.2 Natural resources condition and management 
39.  Geographical  condition.  Yunnan  is  the  only  low-latitude  plateau  area  in  China.  It  is 
located in the transition zone between the eastern monsoon region and the Qinghai-Tibet 
alpine region. The total area is 394,000 square kilometers, accounting for 4.1% of the total 
area of the country. It is a transitional zone affected by various monsoon circulation, which 
leads to frequent meteorological disasters and is one of the provinces with the largest types 
of meteorological disasters in China. 
40.  Yunnan is  a mountainous plateau terrain,  with a  mountainous area of 3,311,000 square 
kilometres, accounting for 84% of the total land area of the province;  a plateau area of 
39000 square kilometres, accounting for 10% of the total land area of the province; a basin 
area of 24000 square kilometres, accounting for 6.0% of the total land area of the province.   
41.  The terrain is divided into two parts: Yuanjiang Valley and Yunling mountain south wide 
valley. The eastern part of Yunnan is the eastern and central Yunnan Plateau, which is an 
integral  part  of  the  Yunnan  Guizhou  Plateau,  with  an  average  altitude  of  about  2000 
meters. It is characterized by undulating and gentle low mountains and round hills, and 
various types of karst (karst) landforms are developed; the western part is characterized by 
alternate  mountains  and  valleys,  with  steep  terrain,  and  the  relative  height  difference 
between mountains and valleys is more than 1000 meters.   
42.  Over 5000 meters of snow covers the top of the mountain all the year round, forming a 
strange and majestic mountain glacier landform. The altitude of the whole province is quite 
different. The highest point is 6740 meters above sea level. At the junction of Yunnan and 
Tibet, Kawagebo, the main peak of Meili Snow Mountain in Nushan Mountain in Deqin 
County, is 76.4 meters above sea level. At the junction of Nanxi River and Honghe River 
in Hekou County, there is a straight-line distance of about 900 kilometers and an altitude 
difference of more than 6000 meters. 
43.  The  terrain  and  landform  of  Yunnan  Province  are  complex,  and  the  mountainous  area 
accounts  for  94%  of  the  total  area.  It  declines  in  a  gradient  shape  from  northwest  to 
southeast. The mountainous areas with a slope greater than 25 degrees account for 39.3% 
of the province, while the northwest and north-eastern Yunnan account for 60-90% and 
the forest  coverage rate  is  about  44.3%. The mountainous areas, high mountains,  steep 
slopes,  less  vegetation,  concentrated  rainfall,  complicated  geological  structure  and 
differential movement of faults and faults lead to frequent landslides and debris flows in 
Yunnan due to rainstorms. Drought is serious in mountainous areas as well. 
44.  The climate of Yunnan basically belongs to the subtropical plateau monsoon type, with 
remarkable  three-dimensional  climate  features,  many  types,  small  annual  temperature 
difference, large daily temperature difference, distinct dry and wet seasons, and abnormal 
vertical change of temperature with the terrain. Northwest Yunnan has a cold zone climate, 
long winter without summer, short spring and autumn. In a province, there are three zones 
of cold, temperature and heat (including subtropics). The average temperature drops 0.6° 
C to 0.7° C every 100 meters above sea level.   
45.  Weather and Precipitation. The seasonal and regional distribution of precipitation in the 
whole province is very uneven. The dry and wet seasons are distinct, the wet season (rainy 
season) is from May to October, with 85% of the rainfall concentrated; the dry season (dry 
season) is from November to April of the next year, with only 15% of the annual rainfall. 
The  regional  distribution  of  precipitation  in  the  whole  province  is  quite  different.  The 
annual precipitation in the most places can reach 2200-2700 mm, the least is 584 mm, and 
the annual precipitation in most areas is more than 1000 mm (Yunnan met office). 
46.  There is a long frost free period in the whole province. The frost free period is 300-330 
days in the southern border area, about 250 days in the central area, and 210-220 days in 
the cold northwest and northeast of Yunnan(Yunnan met office) 
47.  Water Resources. According to the preliminary evaluation, Yunnan's self-produced water 
resources  account  for  7.0%  of  the  national  water  resources,  and  the  per  capita  water 
resources amount is 2.4 times of the national per capita water resources amount. Although 
Yunnan is a province with abundant water resources in terms of total amount and per capita 
water resources, the distribution of per capita water resources is quite different. 94% of the 
mountainous areas with fewer people, less land, but have more water. Only 6% of the dam 
area has more people, more land and less water.   
48.  The allocation of water and soil resources is extremely unbalanced, and the distribution of 
water  resources  is  extremely  inadaptable  to  the  needs  of  economic  development.  The 
shortage of water resources and water quality in important economic zones is serious. At 
the same time, because of the deep valleys in mountainous areas, it is difficult to develop 
and  utilize;  the  tributaries  of  flat  dam  are  short,  water  resources  are  scarce  and  water 
demand is large; the soil erosion in mountainous areas is serious and tends to aggravate; 
the contradiction between urban water supply and demand is prominent, water shortage 
and water pollution are serious. 
49.  Economic potentials. According to the three-dimensional climate model and rich natural 
resources,  Yunnan  vigorously  adjusts  the  agricultural  production  structure,  develops 
diversified management, and develops township enterprises, so as to gradually transform 
the  agricultural  economy  from  the  natural  economy  to  the  commodity  economy,  and 
transform the single grain production to the all-round development of agriculture, forestry, 
animal husbandry, fishing, industry and commerce. 
50.  In  addition  to  the  traditional  food  crop  planting,  the  areas  should  vigorously  develop 
characteristic industries such as Chinese herbal medicine, tobacco industry, Tang industry 
and tea industry, rubber industry and flower industry. In 2018, the province's added value 
of agriculture, forestry,  animal  husbandry  and fishery reached 255.278 billion  yuan, an 
increase of 6.3% year on year, ranking the second in the country. The grain planting area 
is 4.1746 million hectares, and the output is 18.61 million tons.   
51.  The comprehensive production capacity has been steadily improved for three consecutive 
years. 642,700 hectares of rice and wheat grain production functional areas and important 
agricultural product production and protection areas have been designated, and 162,600 
hectares of high-standard farmland have been constructed. The supply of main agricultural 
products  is  stable,  and  the  ratio  of  agricultural  product  processing  output  value  to  total 
agricultural output value is increased to 1.11:1.   
52.  The export volume of agricultural products reached 3.875 billion US dollars, ranked as the 
first place in the western region for many years in a row, and maintaining the position of 
the largest category of export commodities in the province. In 2017, 6384 reservoirs were 
built in the province, with a total reservoir capacity of 13.242 billion cubic meters. The 
irrigated area of arable land reached 1.8514 million hectares, accounting for 29.8% of the 
cultivated land area in the province (Yunnan statistic year book, 2018). 
53.  Considering that Yunnan has large mountainous areas but small flatland areas, in 2011, 
Yunnan Province put forward the strategy of propelling the urbanization to gentle rolling 
hills  and  aimed  at  the  goal  of  constructing  towns  toward  hillside  and  leaving  fertile 
farmland to descendants. In the future, mountains over 25° are prohibited to exploitation, 
and low-slope hilly lands within 6° and 25° will become the key development zones. 
54.  These farmlands are easily degraded during the traditional urban sprawl occurring in the 
Bazi  region  (Liu  et  al.,  2014a).  Besides  the  demand  for  farmland  protection,  natural 
ecosystems like Cangshan Mountain and Erhai Lake also put high ecological protection 
pressures on urban construction. 
55.  In  our  project,  seven  counties  proposed  the  development  strategy.  Suijiang,  Yongping, 
Huaping are assessed with relative lower ecosystem carrying capacity, contrast with the 
other 4 counties. This was due to less land area and less per capita water resources. Thus 
the study area can be grouped into 3 categories considering trade-offs between mountain 
development  and  ecological  protection.  That  is  priority  areas  for  development,  areas 
suitable for short-term conservation but long-term development, areas suitable for short-
term development but long-term conversation. 
1.3 Climate 
56.  Since the 1970s, the boundary of Yunnan's climate belt has moved northward, and the area 
of  tropical  and  subtropical  zone  has  been  expanding.  With  the  continuous  increase  of 
temperature, this trend became more evident after 1990s. The distribution of climate zones 
showed  a  trend  of  overall  expansion  to  high  altitude  and  northward  migration  to  high 
latitude under the situation of climate warming. 
57.  Climate  warming  has  improved  the  heat  resources  in  high  altitude  and  latitude  areas, 
promoted the adjustment of crop planting structure, changed the current planting system, 
reduced the area of one-cropping area, moved north in two-cropping area, and increased 
the proportion of three-cropping system. This has brought opportunities for the increase of 
multi-cropping system and the development of winter agriculture in Yunnan. At present, 
the region and scope of winter agricultural development in Yunnan have been expanded, 
and four dominant industrial belts of winter agricultural development have been gradually 
formed in southern hot areas, central Yunnan, northeast Yunnan and northwest Yunnan. 
58.  It should be noted, however, that the most significant season for warming is winter, and 
the warming range in summer is obviously small, which does not improve the growth and 
development  conditions  of  warm-season  crops.  As 
the 
evapotranspiration of soil moisture will increase, the available water resources of some 
crops will decrease, and the favourable factors for the increase of heat resources may not 
be fully utilized due to the lack of water resources, which has a more obvious effect on 
winter agriculture. 
temperature  rises, 
the 
59.  The increase of temperature in winter will be beneficial to the safe overwintering of pests 
and pathogens, increase the base number of pests and diseases in spring and summer next 
year, and lead to the expansion of damage area and aggravation of harm degree. Increasing 
temperature in spring and autumn will prolong the fertile period of pests and pathogens, 
which is conducive to the early onset of pests and diseases in spring, delayed dormancy in 
winter  and  prolonged  the  damage  period.  Increasing  accumulated  temperature  will 
increase  the  generation  of  pests  and  diseases  breeding  in  one  year  and  increase  the 
probability of crop damage. 
60.  The main agrometeorological disasters in Yunnan are drought and cold damage. Disaster 
analysis  shows  that  the  greenhouse  effect  has  a  tendency  to  further  aggravate  climate 
warming and increase meteorological disasters. Climate change in the future may change 
the original pattern of Agrometeorological disasters, and increase the risk of adjustment of 
agricultural planting structure due to northward migration of climate zone and expansion 
to high altitude. 
61.  The current mean climatic state and drought and flood of 7 counties, including Zhenxiong, 
Suijiang  in  the  northeastern  Yunnan  province  and  Yunlong,  Yongping,  Yongsheng, 
Huaping and Lanping in the northwestern Yunnan Province, were investigated by using 
the gridded meteorological observation data from 1981 to 2010. Based on current climate 
analysis, the future climate condition and change under RCP 8.5 in 7 counties, including 
mean state and drought and flood risk, were analyzed with the simulation of 5 ESMs (Earth 
System Models) in 1981-2010 and 2021-2050.   
62.  Meteorological  observation data and climate scenarios simulation  data are employed in 
this climate analysis. The meteorological observation data is the gridded daily dataset of 
CN05.1, which generated by Wu and Gao (2013) from National Climate Centre, based on 
interpolation from 2416 weather stations. As did by Xu et al. (2009), the CN05.1 dataset 
is constructed following the ‘anomaly approach’ during the interpolation.   
63.  In the ‘anomaly approach’, a gridded mean climatology is  first  calculated by thin-plate 
smoothing splines, then a gridded daily anomaly derived via an angular weighting method 
is  added  to  it.  The  geographic  coverage  of  the  dataset  is  69.75°E-140.25°E,  14.75°N-
55.25°N, in which the range of valid data is mainland China. The horizontal resolution of 
CN05.1 is 0.25°×0.25°, but in order to keep consistent with the resolution of the climate 
scenario  simulation  data,  its  grid  point  to  0.5°×0.5°  was  skipped.  It  used  the  daily 
temperature and precipitation of all grids in Yunnan province from 1981 to 2010. 
64.  Climate scenarios simulation data is derived from 5 ESMs used in Coupled Model Inter-
comparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5). The 5 ESMs simulate the global climate from 1951-
2099 under Representative Concentration Pathways 8.5 (RCP 8.5, for short) (van Vuurenet 
al., 2011a, 2011b; Riahi et al., 2011), and somevariables commonly used in climate change 
work  such  as  temperature,  precipitation  were  interpolated  into  0.5°  ×  0.5°  horizontal 
resolution  and  bias  corrected  with  respect  to  historical  observations  by  Hempel  et  al. 
(2013a,  2013b)  to  remove  systematic  errors.  The  5  ESMs  are  respectively  GFDL-
ESM2M,HadGEM2-ES,  IPSL-CM5A-LR,  MIROC-ESM-CHEM  and  NorESM1-M.  It 
calculate ensemble of 5 ESMs using the interpolated and corrected daily mean temperature 
and precipitation of 1981-2010 and 2021-2050. 
1.3.1  Current climate 
65.  Climate mean state. The current annual mean temperature and precipitation in 7 counties 
is moderate. The temperature is highest in summer and lowest in winter, but the annual 
range of temperature is not large. The dry and wet season are distinct. It rains more often 
in summer with a mild temperature. The mean temperature of the five counties in the north 
western  Yunnan  is  mostly  between  15-20℃  and  that  of  Zhenxiong  and  Suijiang  in  the 
northeast is between19-23℃ in summer, which is not easy to suffer from high temperature 
and heat damage and suitable for crop growth. Winter is the dry season, with little rainfall 
and low temperatures, which are not friendly to crops. 
Figure 1. Mean temperature and precipitation in Yunnan province from 1981-2010 
Left: mean temperature (℃); Right: precipitation (mm/d) 
From  top  to  bottom  are  the  mean  values  of  years,  spring,  summer,  autumn  and  winter 
respectively 
66.  Extreme  climate.  The  temporal  distribution  of  precipitation  are  relatively  balanced  in 
Zhenxiong, Yunlong, Yongping and Lanping, i.e. the disaster level is not high, especially 
Zhenxiong  is  unlikely  to  suffer  a  drought.  Suijiang  is  also  unlikely  to  drought,  but 
compared with other areas in Yunnan, its flood disaster level is higher than medium, which 
needs to  be paid  attention to.  Yongsheng, on the contrary, is  not  easy  to  flood, but  the 
drought level is moderate to higher. The most notable one is Huaping, where the temporal 
distribution of rain is unbalanced so that both flood and drought disasters should be paid 
more attention to, and, the drought is most severe in the province which requires special 
attention. 
Figure 2. Average drought and flood in Yunnan province from 1981 to 2010 
Left: rain for 5 consecutive days (mm/5d); Right: maximum consecutive dry days (d) 
1.3.2  Future climate and climate change 
67.  Climate mean state. The ensemble results of 5 ESMs show that, compared with 1981-
2010, the annual or seasonal mean temperature in 2021-2050 will all increase. In the four 
seasons,  except  Zhenxiong  and  Suijiang,  which  have  the  highest  temperature  rise  in 
autumn and the lowest in winter, all the other 5 counties have the highest warming in spring 
and the lowest in summer, and the warming in winter is greater than that in summer, so the 
annual range of temperature will be reduced in 5 counties. 
68.  Under RCP 8.5, annual precipitation will slightly increase in Yongping, Yongshengand 
Huaping, while will decrease in Zhenxiong, Suijiang and Lanping, and it will increase over 
some  areas  meanwhile  decrease  over  other  area  in  Yunlong.  In  general,  the  annual 
precipitation will change little with an amplitude no more than 4%. The precipitation in 
summer will increase slightly in Lanping and decrease on the whole in the other 6 counties, 
in which Zhenxiong and Suijiang have the biggest drop in precipitation, and in spring, the 
precipitation  in  all  7  counties  show  a  decreasing  trend,  and  the  maximum  decreasing 
amplitude in spring is -7% in Lanping. Spring is the sowing season for most crops, and 
rain  in  spring  has  a  great  impact  on  crop  growth.  Therefore,  future  changes  in  spring 
precipitation should be attached more importance to. Although the percentage change in 
autumn and winter is relatively large, it will have little influence on the total amount of 
precipitation because it is less in the dry season. 
69.  Under RCP 8.5, from 2021-2050, all 7 counties will have the highest temperature and most 
precipitation in summer and the lowest temperature and least precipitation in winter. The 
temperature in Lanping will be the lowest, less than 16℃ in summer and less than 4℃over 
coldest area in winter.   
Figure 3.Change of mean temperature in Yunnan province from 2021-2050 under RCP 8.5 
Left: the change of mean temperature of 2021-2050 relative to that in 1981-2010(℃);   
Right: mean temperature of 2021-2050(℃) 
From  top  to  bottom  are  the  mean  values  of  years,  spring,  summer,  autumn  and  winter 
respectively 
70.  As for annual precipitation under RCP 8.5, the 7 counties will have similar precipitation 
amount, among which the precipitation of Lanping will be slightly higher, about 3mm/d. 
The precipitation of Lanping will be distributed evenly in four seasons, about 5-6mm/d in 
summer  and  1mm/d  in  the  driest  winter.  However,  the  precipitation  of  Yongsheng  and 
Huaping  in  Lijiang  city  show  a  significant  seasonal  difference:  the  precipitation  in  the 
areas with heavy precipitation in summer will reach nearly 8mm/d, while it will be almost 
all below 0.5mm/d in winter. 
Figure 4.Change of precipitation in Yunnan province from 2021-2050 under RCP 8.5 
Left: the change of precipitation of 2021-2050 relative to that in 1981-2010 (%);   
Right: mean precipitation of 2021-2050 (mm/d) 
From  top  to  bottom  are  the  mean  values  of  years,  spring,  summer,  autumn  and  winter 
respectively 
71.  Extreme climate. Under RCP8.5, from 2021 to 2050, flood risk will increase in most areas 
of 7 counties, among which Huaping has the largest increase and Lanping has the smallest. 
Drought risk in most areas of 7 counties will increase, but the increase are not significant, 
basically within 3 days. 
72.  In the future, the flood risk in 7 counties will deserve more attention than the drought risk. 
Due to the uniform seasonal distribution of precipitation, the risk of flood and drought will 
be not obvious in Lanping. The most noteworthy is Huaping, which will have a higher risk 
of  drought  and  flood  so  that  needs  special  attention.  Then  is  Yongsheng,  which  also 
belongs to  Lijiang city as Huaping, where the risk of drought and flood should also be 
prevented because of its quite high risk. 
Figure 5.Changes of rain for 5 consecutive days in Yunnan province 
from 2021-2050 under RCP8.5 
Left: the change of precipitation of 2021-2050 relative to that in 1981-2010 (mm/5d);   
Right: mean precipitation of 2021-2050 (mm/5d) 
Figure 6.Changes of maximum consecutive dry days in Yunnan province   
from 2021-2050 under RCP8.5 
Left: the change of precipitation of 2021-2050 relative to that in 1981-2010 (d);   
Right: mean precipitation of 2021-2050 (d) 
2.  Potential project’s impacts and risks 
2.1 Key potential impacts of the project on social and environmental 
Project Structure 
73.  The  project  goal  is  to  sustainably  maintain  the  poor  and  vulnerable  households  in  the 
project area out of poverty. The development objective is to enhance the income generating 
opportunities  for  the  poor  and  vulnerable  households  in  the  project  area,  and  the 
inclusiveness of the benefit-sharing mechanisms from agro-industries.   
74.  This  will  be  achieved  by  (i)  strengthening  and  supporting  cooperatives,  committed  to 
poverty alleviation in terms of inclusiveness of poor households among their members and 
fair  shareholding  and  benefit  sharing  mechanisms,  to  become  more  competitive  and 
generate  more  revenues;  (ii)  stimulating  additional  and  more  diversified  income 
opportunities  in  the  project  areas,  by  providing  services  and  stimulating  local 
entrepreneurship,  and  attracting  new  investors  in  agricultural  or  (rural/resource-based) 
non-agricultural activities; (iii) improving access to finance; and (iv) addressing some of 
the major gaps in the current infrastructure system in the project area which may limit or 
constrain  the  implementation  of  the  proposed  project  activities.  Climate  change 
considerations will be mainstreamed throughout the project by strengthening the capacity 
of the government and beneficiaries to assess climate risks and identify adaptation options 
-  and  plan  and  decide  accordingly,  and  improving  the  climate-resilience  of  the 
infrastructure system. 
75.  The  Project  consists  of  3  components:  (1)  Component  A:  Supporting  Inclusive  Rural 
Development;  (2)  Component  B:  Climate-proofed  Public  Infrastructures  Planning  and 
Development;  and  (3)  Component  C:  Project  management,  M&E,  Knowledge 
Management, and Policy. 
76.  Component A will cover specific production and processing infrastructure of agribusiness 
entities in their respective investment plans, while Component B will mainly complete the 
gaps of the village level public infrastructure systems to support the proposed agribusiness 
development,  and  also  provide  public  services  to  local  villagers  particularly  support 
demonstration and development of climate proofed smart irrigation. Meanwhile the major 
public  infrastructure  systems  in  the  targeted  project  areas  will  be  covered  by  relevant 
government investments.     
77.  Key indicators: The impact of the project would be measured through the following key 
indicators:  (i) Number of rural  producers’ organizations engaged in  formal  partnership/ 
agreements or contracts  with public or private entities; (ii) Number of Pro-poor Farmer 
Professional Cooperatives meeting the operational standards; (iii) new jobs created; (iv) 
increase in cooperatives' profits; (iv) Percentage of supported rural enterprises reporting 
an increase in profit; (v) %age of people reporting adoption of environmentally sustainble 
and climate resillient tech and practices. Indicators will be disaggregated by gender, age, 
and ethnic group, when relevant. 
78.  Expected outcomes: Expected outcomes include: (i) Strengthening participation of poor 
and vulnerable population in rural economic growth; (ii) Up-grading/developing Pro-poor 
farmer  cooperatives;  (iii)  economic  opportunities  for  women  and  youth  enhanced;  (iv) 
resilience to the negative effects of climate change enhanced. 
Impact Evaluation 
79.  Social Impacts. In the context of rural revitalization strategy, most of project’s socially 
derived  impacts  are  expected  to  be  largely  positive.  The  Y2RDP  strategy  calls  for  the 
transformation  of poor  Yunnan project  areas  that  will be supported through the project 
mainly  through  increasing  post-production  agricultural  activities,  introducing  and 
improving value  addition  efficiencies, provision  of off-farm employment, promotion of 
greater market access and climate smart community smart development infrastructure.   
80.  All project activities will be supported through forming ‘new economic entities’ which, in 
the  China  revitalization  strategy  context,  are  cooperatives,  lead/big  households,  family 
farms and lead enterprise. Due to development of urban labour markets and male migration 
many of the beneficiaries remaining in project counties will be female and the elderly and 
priority will be given to youth and particularly the returnee young investors. At the village 
level adequate safeguards have been built into project design per PRC IFAD policies to 
ensure fair distribution benefits among these and other groups including ethnic minorities 
in the project areas. 
81.  At the village level major benefits derived from the project would include higher incomes 
and well-being derived from increased  and diversified sustainable production and post-
production practices driven by improvements in water management, construction of new 
and improvements of existing roads, land terracing and land levelling and provision of off-
farm employment opportunities and the capture of value-added associated with support for 
adopting a value chain approach based on one or more selected commodities. 
82.  At  the  household/individual  level  improved  health  conditions  will  be  achieved  through 
programme  support  for  provision  of  safe  drinking  water,  safer  use  of  agro-chemicals, 
reduced exposure to pollution from modernized agro-industries participating in the project, 
better worker conditions per existing PRC policies and nutrition enhancement. 
83.  Specifically,  the  project  would  assist  an  expected  414540  primary  beneficiaries 
(individuals) including 50% women, 30% youth and 60% ethnic minorities. In addition to 
these beneficiaries, the project would benefit 100% of the population in the participating 
villages as many of the Y2RDP’s investments in village access roads, drinking water, and 
other public investments would spread to other non-targeted village members   
84.  Gender focus is applied in the project design by responding to the needs of women due to 
their increasing role in household businesses. Every cooperative eligible for IFAD funds 
must  have  at  least  50%  of  women  membership.  Women  led  cooperatives  and  business 
entities  will  be  given  priorities.  With  improvement  of  economic  empowerment  by  the 
project activities, women will be more actively involved in post-production and marketing 
activities, which will improve their status in the household. Together with their collective 
participation in cooperative management, women through the project process will increase 
their  capacity  to  speak  out  in  the  community  and  gradually  strengthen  their  role  in  the 
community  decision-making.  Women’s  participation  in  programme  activities  will  be 
ensured by applying gender-sensitive M&E indicators. 
Environmental Impacts and Risks.   
85.  The Y2RDP Project targets 7 counties with a high level of poverty in 3 prefectures, namely 
Yunlong, Yongping  counties in  Dali Prefecture;  Lanping county in  Nujiang  Prefecture; 
and  Zhengxiong  and  Suijiang  counties  in  Zhaotong  City;  and  Yongsheng  and  Huaping 
counties in Lijiang Prefectures. It aims at supporting the Government in consolidating its 
achievements in poverty eradication and implementing rural revitalization strategies. 
86.  The targeted counties are located in the four prefectures (cities) in northeast and western 
Yunnan  where  ethnic  minorities  are  concentrated.  Common  nature  conditions  in  these 
areas are mountainous topography, high elevation level, comparatively rich precipitation, 
and land block due to mountains. Elevation level ranges from 380 meter to 4400 meter 
above  the  sea;  and  average  annual  precipitation  ranges  from  800  mm  to  1,100  mm. 
Traditionally, rain-fed agriculture is a dominant practice. Seasonal droughts, floods and 
landslides are a common phenomenon. Underdeveloped infrastructure systems, especially 
rural roads, agriculture water management systems and drinking water supply facilities, 
have been one of the major constraints to local agriculture and rural development. Slope 
cultivation is a major cause of soil and water erosion.   
87.  Benefited  from  increased  government  investment  in  the  past  decades,  including 
implementation  of  the  Plan  on  Poverty  Alleviation,  local  major  public  infrastructure 
systems have been largely improved in recent years, especially county and township level 
drinking  water  supply  systems,  and  rural  roads  connecting  administrative  villages  and 
townships  with  external  networks.  However,  development  of  village  level  public 
infrastructure systems is still lagging behind, especially, the lack of irrigation engineering.   
88.  31%-95% of the cultivated lands in the project counties are segmented slope lands, some 
even  steeper  than  25  degree,  which  hampered  mechanization,  caused  soil  and  water 
erosion, and affected enhancement of water use efficiency. Average about 68% of village 
are in lack of connecting roads to production bases. Some villages are still in lack of roads 
connecting  with  townships  and  other  villages.  And  about  112,093  village  farmers  and 
264,640 animals are lack of access to safe drinking water or not reach to standard. There 
is  an  urgent  need  to  enhance  soil  and  water  conservation,  improve  rural  roads,  and 
complete water supply systems in these areas in order to meet the demands of agricultural 
production, poverty reduction and livelihood improvement.   
89.  Local agricultural production requires both supplementary irrigation, especially for cash 
crops and economic trees. Surface water diverted from nature streams or water ponds or 
pumped from valleys is the major source for irrigation. Due to underinvestment in the past 
decades, water storage and delivery systems are limited. Only 22% to 67% of the cultivated 
lands  are  irrigated,  which  is  much  lower  than  the  provincial  and  national  average.  The 
limited existing irrigation systems are mainly developed several decades ago, facing some 
common issues in degraded water storage capacity, deteriorated water delivery and control 
systems, and low system performance. Associated drainage systems are either incomplete 
or deteriorated. These impose an urgent need in completing and improving irrigation and 
drainage systems in order to better meet the requirements of agricultural production and 
agribusiness development.     
90.  Climate change is future compounding the situation. From 1961 to 2010, mean temperature 
in the project area increased at a rate of 0.16o C per 10 year. Temperature increase is more 
obvious in winter and spring seasons. Precipitation decreased in spring and autumn, and 
increased in summer. Frequency and intensity of extreme whether events increased, which 
caused more serious seasonal droughts, floods and soil erosion.   
91.  Since the 21st century, the drought has changed from once in 1~3 years to 1~2 years. It is 
projected that by 2050, mean temperature will further increase by about 2o C; total annual 
precipitation is likely to increase, while seasonal variation will also increase. These will 
result  in  more  frequent  and  intensified  extreme  whether  events,  seasonal  drought  and 
floods, and soils erosion. In order to enhance climate resilience to effectively respond to 
these risks, development and improvement of climate-resilient infrastructure system in the 
project  area  is  crucial  to  enable  road  access,  improve  water  security,  and  prevent  soil 
erosion.     
Table 2.Status of Public Infrastructure System in the Project Counties 
Famland    Rural Roads 
Irrigation Area   
County 
(District)   
Percentage 
slope 
of 
land (%) 
Village 
lack 
of 
connceting 
road 
to 
production 
base (%)   
Village 
of 
lack 
connecting 
road (%)   
Total 
cultivated 
land  area 
(ha)   
Functional 
irrigation 
areas (%) 
of 
to 
Water Supply   
Number  of 
population 
lack 
access 
safe 
drinking 
water 
reach 
standard) 
persons 
(not 
to 
Number 
of 
animal 
lack  of 
access 
to  safe 
drinking 
water 
(heads)   
83.3 
74.4 
78.8 
72.8 
72.8 
Dali 
Prefecture   
Yonglong 
county 
Yongping 
county   
Sub-total 
(or 
average) 
Nujiang 
Prefecture   
Lanping 
county 
Sub-total 
(or 
average) 
Zhaotong 
City 
Zhengxiong 
county 
Suijiang 
county   
Sub-total 
(or 
average) 
Lijiang 
Prefecture       
Yongsheng 
county 
Huaping 
county 
Sub-total 
(or 
average) 
Total 
average) 
(or 
60 
90 
38 
80 
85 
49 
71.4 
80 
70 
75 
88 
88 
85 
83 
84 
0 
50 
25 
30 
40 
35 
48 
48 
90 
86 
88 
2 
41 
22 
36900 
41.1 
14246 
67.5 
8100 
5000 
7500 
5000 
51146 
54.3 
13100 
12500 
29526   
22.8 
1070 
0 
29526   
22.8 
1070   
0   
139818 
32 
70114 
16000 
13590   
23.6 
17676   
31560 
153408 
27.8 
87790 
47560 
33000 
9733 
62 
65 
4351 
0 
122380 
2200 
42733 
64 
4351 
124580 
68.6 
48.2 
276813 
42.1 
106311 
184640   
92.  Through Component B, the project also aims at improving infrastructure systems in the 
targeted  project  area  through  a  combination  of  physical  improvement,  institutional 
strengthening and technical assistance in order to promote sustainable and climate resilient 
agricultural production. This Component would support to following activities: 
a) 
Improvement  and  development  of  climate  proofed  smart  irrigation  systems, 
including water source structures (construction of water pools, water ponds) and 
pump station and delivery systems, which would provide irrigation water to both 
agribusiness  entities  and  village  farmers,  and  development  of  piloting  climate 
proofed  smart  irrigation  in  the  field,  including  sprinkler  and  drip  irrigation 
systems.  The  infrastructure  will  be  linked  to  the  needs  of  the  cooperatives 
supported  in  component  A  and  cannot  be  precisely  defined  at  this  stage.  An 
estimation  of  the  structures  to  be  supported  include  rehabilitation  and 
development  of  220  km  canals,  765  km  pressure  pipelines,  15  set  system,  12 
pumping stations, 15-30 water pond, 150 water cellar, 300 water pool, and 1,330 
km  water  pipeline.  These  interventions  would  contribute  to  enhancement  of 
agricultural  productivity,  agriculture  diversification,  climate  resilience  and 
farmers' income generation. 
b)  Development and improvement of village roads and production roads, which will 
serve both the agribusiness entities and village farmers. The project would support 
development of an estimated 190 km of village roads, 161 km production roads, 
216 km earth roads.   
c) 
Improvement and development of safe drinking water supply systems. The project 
would support development of and estimated 37 km of drinking water pipeline.   
d)  Land improvement and preparation. The project would support land levelling in 
order to enable safe and productive farming, soils and water conservation. This 
activity would support development of an estimated 500 ha land levelling.   
e)  Support to infrastructure O&M. The project would support (i) establishment an 
strengthening  of  infrastructure  O&M  organizations,  including  water  users’ 
association and other infrastructure management groups, through construction of 
office  buildings,  procurement  of  furniture  and  office  equipment,  provision  of 
technical assistance, and organization of workshops and meetings and training to 
O&M organizations and beneficiary farmers on O&M of infrastructure systems, 
systems;  and  (ii)  implementation  of  normative  O&M  of  infrastructure  systems 
improved and developed under the programme during the programme life time 
through provision of financial support. 
Table 3.Expected Sub-component B Outputs 
Farmlan
d 
area 
terraced 
and 
leveled 
(ha)   
Irrigatio
n 
area 
develope
and 
d 
improve
d (ha) 
of 
No. 
beneficiaries 
from  drinking 
water 
supply 
systems 
Pop
ulati
on 
Animal 
Length 
of 
electricit
y 
lines 
extende
d 
improve
d (km) 
and 
Length 
of 
rural 
roads 
develo
ped 
and 
improv
ed 
(KM) 
O&M  of  Public 
Infrastructure   
of 
No. 
O&M 
groups 
establish
ed   
No.  of 
people 
trained 
1200 
5210  4850 
1673 
2873 
10   
4850   
10   
5210 
50 
137.5 
187.5 
39 
2 
41 
500 
500 
300 
300 
18 
18 
8 
8 
78 
100 
178 
100 
100 
  40 
133 
173 
2666 
1000 
3666 
7012 
500 
207 
190 
397 
  3 
60   
5 
8 
240 
300 
36.8 
2 
41 
77.8 
680.3 
15 
17 
74 
113 
2800 
2913 
3491 
5210  4850 
10   
County 
(District)   
Dali 
Prefectur
e   
Yonglong 
county 
Yongping 
county   
Sub-total   
Nujiang 
Prefectur
e   
Lanping 
county* 
Sub-total 
Zhaotong 
City 
Zhengxion
g county* 
Suijiang 
county   
Sub-total 
Lijiang 
Prefectur
e   
Yongshen
g county 
Huaping 
county 
Sub-total 
Total 
93.  The  project  is  expected  to  enhance  crop  productivity  in  a  way  that  enhances  natural 
resource management and reduce erosion through soil and water conservation. The project 
would  invest  in  technologies  for  development  of  high  efficiency  irrigation,  farmland 
levelling, etc.   
94.  The  project  would  not  involve  any  large  infrastructure  schemes,  land  acquisitions, 
resettlements, or conversion of forest or other environmentally sensitive lands. It will not 
involve any involuntary taking or restriction on the use of land that may result in physical 
or economic displacement.  Not damaging or destroy any physical  resources of historic, 
religious or cultural significance. 
95.  The proposed projects are spread over seven counties and:   
(i) would not impact on any sensitive areas or result in loss natural habit and biodiversity, 
all of the agricultural development would be located on existing cultivated lands; 
(ii) some part of the project areas might be located in areas at high risk of geophysical 
hazards,  notably  earthquakes,  however  the  risks  to  agriculture  and  small-scale 
infrastructure are considered to be minimal;   
(iii) the project design is directed at environmentally sound and sustainable agriculture, 
the project will invest in rehabilitation and some new irrigation development with a high 
emphasis  on  sustainable  water  use  efficiency  and  strong  water  management.  Some 
increased  use  of  pesticides  is  envisaged  however  these  be  supported  by  guidance  and 
training in the safe and environmentally sound practices  for pesticide use, waste from 
agriculture and processing will be small scale and will include measures to ensure safe 
disposal, and where viable include recycling;   
(iii)  infrastructure  will  be  small  scale  irrigation  schemes  less  than  100  ha  including 
rehabilitation and new schemes, dams for water pond would be small (less than 5m); 
(iv) the projects would require only limited land acquisition mainly for farm roads, land 
requirements would small and dispersed and would require only a small percentage (less 
than  10%)  of  individual  owner  and;  and  (v)  the  project  design  is  aimed  at  ensuring 
vulnerable  and  socially  disadvantaged  groups  are  actively  engaged  in  the  project 
activities. 
2.2 Climate change and adaptation 
96.  There would be apparent impacts of climate change on achieving the project objectives. 
First, it is expected that there would be more climate extreme events with global warming, 
which  would  play  a  significant  impact  on  the  vulnerable  population,  such  as  women, 
children,  elders,  disadvantaged,  poverty  and  so  on.  For  example,  drought  risk  would 
increase in most areas of 7 counties under RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 scenarios, which would 
lead to yield loss of different crops, such as maize, rice, fruits and cash crops. The rural 
livelihoods  of  target  counties  most  depends  on  agriculture,  which  provides  food  and 
economic income. If drought hazards occur frequently in the future, it would impact the 
livelihoods of poverty-stricken families and general income families.   
97.  Second, it would require some changes in farming and processing in local regions, such as 
relocation  or  spatial  optimization  of  agricultural  production,  infrastructure  construction 
adjustment,  planting  structure  adjustment,  and  adjustment  of  agriculture  management 
measures.  Third,  it  would  have  an  impact  on  the  environment  and  ecosystem,  such  as 
increased pest and disease, soil degradation, and water shortage. 
98.  From the perspectives of poverty-stricken population, the treat of climate extreme events 
is bigger compared to general families; due to the poor source of income and poor survival 
and resilience capacities. The poor families have limited skills or resources to cope with 
the shock of climate extreme events. Therefore it is important to promote the adaptation 
and resilience capacities of poverty-stricken population (GongYazhen, et al). For example, 
many countermeasures are helpful to increase the resilience of poor families, such as the 
training on cultivation technologies of cash crops, the construction and improvement of 
farmland infrastructures, the resistant varieties application. 
3.  Environmental and social category 
99.  The  project  is  classified  as  Category  B,  as  far  as  environmental  and  social  risks  are 
concerned. The Project may to some extent have some adverse environmental and/or social 
impacts on human populations or environmentally significant areas. However, the possible 
impacts are site-specific and none has been identified as irreversible in nature, and can be 
readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures.   
100.Water infrastructures are smaller water harvesting ponds (15-100m3 serving 5-40 ha each), 
upgrading and rehabilitation of reservoirs (max. 130 000m3) and some pumping stations. 
The water sources are rainwater and mountain streams and the Jin Sha Jiang river which 
has a dry season streamflow of 400m3/second against which the water volume intake will 
be insignificant. Road works are all below the threshold for requiring an environmental 
assessment and the counties have experience in soil erosion control and proper drainage in 
mountain road construction.   
101.The infrastructure will entail some conversion of farmland, where all farmers impacted 
will lose less than 10% of the land they have user rights to through voluntary agreements. 
The increased production, can potentially increase pollution from pesticides and increase 
pressure on land resources against which farmers will be trained in IPM and soil fertility 
management.  All  these  possible  impacts  are  reversible  in  nature,  and  can  be  readily 
remedied by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures as outlined in the 
ESMP (PIM chapter 9). The farmer-cooperative-enterprise models for rural transformation 
has risks of elite capture and limited economic inclusion and benefits generated for poor 
and vulnerable households, women and youth. It is at the core of the design to support a 
pro-poor and inclusive development and implementation of these models and monitor the 
results (ref. component A).   
102.Some of the activities that have been preliminarily identified in the project that may have 
some impact on environment include construction or rehabilitation of rural roads in “non-
sensitive areas”, small-scale irrigation works, agricultural intensification and expansion of 
cropping  area  in  “non-sensitive  areas”,  livestock  development,  water  conservation 
measures. The project would adopt beyond the "cause no harm" safeguard principles, but 
expected to bring positive impacts social and environmental. The Project design mission 
confirmed that no infrastructure would trigger IFAD's "category A" classification.   
103.Similar  to  preliminary  assessment  during  the  Inception  Mission,  the  Design  Mission 
confirmed proposed activities does not see any resettlements required. According to IFAD 
policies, any economic or physical displacement caused by the project require additional 
assessments  and  application  of  specialized  tools  to  mitigate  potential  adverse  social 
impacts such as a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) agreed through participatory processes 
and applying the principle of Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC).   
4.  Climate risk category 
104.Climate  risk  classification.  The  potential  climate  risk  of  this  project  is  classified  as 
"moderate". The three key climate trends that may have a potential impact in the project 
area are: (i) Changes in rainfalls quantity and intensity: Decrease in rainfalls may affect 
the  viability  of  rain-fed  agriculture  in  the  absence  of  irrigation  or  water  harvesting 
technologies;  shorter  but  more  intense  rainy  seasons  may  increase  flood  risks  and 
landslides; (ii) Changes in rainfall patterns: Changes in the seasonality of the rainy seasons, 
particularly delays in the onset of the rainy season, may increase the risks of droughts and 
have  detrimental  consequences  for  the  agricultural  production;  (iii)  Increases  in 
temperatures: Higher temperatures in the dry season may increase the magnitude of dry 
spells and droughts.   
105.The  project  will  finance  a  series  of  hard  and  soft  investments  (i.e.  climate-proofed 
infrastructures, institutional strengthening, and technical assistance) aimed at reducing the 
risks  and  the  negative  impacts  associated  to  the  changing  of  weather  and  climate 
conditions,  and  promote  climate-resilient  production  (e.g.  Improving  climate-risk 
assessment,  planning  and  decision-making,  and  Piloting  climate-smart  irrigation 
investments  -  Ref.  Component  B).  To  further  reduce  the  potential  negative  impacts  of 
climate change on the project investments, the project would adopt adaptation measures, 
e.g. (i) the project will refrain from investments in headworks (i.e. intake weirs), which are 
prone to flood damage; (ii) all physical infrastructures, and particularly on-farm irrigation 
works and rural roads, will be climate-proofed.   
106.As  most  of  the  infrastructures  financed  by  the  project  will  be  relatively  small 
infrastructures, climate-proofing will be largely achieved by the implementation of good 
management, operation, and maintenance practices. Potential climate risks related to the 
project investments are mostly linked to changing rainfall patterns and rising temperature, 
which  in  turn  may  lead  to  (i)  landslides  on  steep  hillsides,  (ii)  flash  floods  and  water 
logging in lowlands, and (iii) droughts and extreme hot spells. 
107.In this report, the climate risk is classified into 3 levels, including higher level, moderate 
level and lower level considering the vulnerability and resilience level of the community. 
For higher level of climate risk, it is defined that the county is very likely to be attacked in 
most  frequent  and  intense  by  climate  extreme  events  with  the  possibility  of  biggest 
economic loss. For moderate level of climate risk, it is defined that the scale and frequency 
of climate extreme events faced by the county are in the middle level. For lower level of 
climate  risk,  it  is  defined  that  climate  extreme  events  faced  by  the  county  are  less  and 
smaller, which lead to the least possibility of loss among the counties. 
108.The  distributions  of  climate  risks  under  RCP  scenarios  from  2021  to  2050  in  Yunnan 
shows that the future challenges faced under climate change are the drought and rainstorm 
disasters. Comparing the risks under RCP scenarios, the higher risk area is concentrated 
on  several  regions,  including  Zhenxiong,  Lanping  and  Yongsheng.  Besides,  Yunlong, 
Yongping  and  Suijiang  are  under  moderate  risk;  the  climate  risk  is  lower  in 
Huapingcounty.   
109.In the next 30 years, Zhenxiong would be faced with moderate hazard of rainstorm and 
low  hazard  of  drought;  otherwise,  the  exposure  and  sensitivity  in  Zhenxiong  are  the 
highest, but the adaptation capacity is the lowest, so the vulnerability of Zhenxiong county 
is the biggest among the 7 counties; therefore, the integrated climate risk in Zhenxiong 
would be the highest.   
110.Lanping would be threatened by moderate hazard of rainstorm and drought in the future; 
the exposure in Lanping is moderate, the sensitivity is high, and the adaptation capacity is 
in the moderate level; so, the vulnerability of Lanping country is big; the integrated climate 
risk in Lanping would be in the higher level.   
111.Yongsheng  would  be  faced  with  higher  hazard  of  drought  and  moderate  hazard  of 
rainstorm; the exposure, sensitivity and adaptation capacity in Yongsheng are in moderate 
level, so the vulnerability of Yongsheng country is in moderate level; finally, the integrated 
climate risk in Yongsheng would be in higher level.   
112.Yunlong would be faced with moderate hazard of rainstorm and drought; the exposure in 
Yunlong is low, the sensitivity and the adaptation capacity are in the moderate level; so, 
the  vulnerability  of  Yunlong  country  is  in  lower  level;  the  integrated  climate  risk  in 
Yunlong would be in moderate level.   
113.Yongping would be threatened by moderate hazard of rainstorm and drought in the future; 
the exposure in Yongping is lower, the sensitivity the adaptation capacity are in higher 
level; so, the vulnerability of Yongping country is in lower level; the integrated climate 
risk in Yongping would be in moderate level.   
114.Suijiang  would  be  faced  with  low  hazard  of  drought  and  high  hazard  of  rainstorm;  the 
exposure in Suijiang is low, the sensitivity the adaptation capacity are in higher level; so, 
the vulnerability of Suijiang country is in lower level; therefore, the integrated climate risk 
in Suijiang would be in moderate level.   
115.Huaping  would  be  faced  with  high  hazard  of  drought  and  rainstorm;  the  exposure  and 
sensitivity  in  Huaping  are  low,  the  adaptation  capacity  is  in  higher  level;  so  the 
vulnerability  of  Huaping  country  is  the  lowest  among  the  7  counties;  therefore,  the 
integrated climate risk in Huaping would be the lowest. 
116.In  this  report,  climate  risks  in  different  counties  are  involved  in  many  factors,  such  as 
drought,  rainstorm,  exposure  indicators,  sensitivity  indicators,  and  adaptation  capacity 
indicators.   
5.  Recommended features of project design and implementation 
Introduction 
117.SECAP Project Assessments is conducted at project proposal development stage to assess 
the effect of a proposed development on the environment and socio-economic conditions 
and assess the vulnerability/sensitivity of the proposed development to climate risks. The 
assessment  is  directly  related  to  the  Project  development  and  should  enable  the 
identification of project-specific impacts and/or measures to manage climate risks. It has 
a  well-defined  beginning  and  end  and  focuses  on  informing  a  specific  decision  at  a 
particular  point  in  time  is  focused  on  the  minimization  of  negative  impacts  and  the 
enhancement of positive impacts.   
118.The SECAP Project  Assessment  should have a narrow perspective  and includes a high 
level of detail. Changes or introduction of new measures to the design have been made to 
eliminate or reduce potential adverse environmental, health and social impacts, or make 
better use of opportunities and synergies and complementarities between relevant national 
frameworks and key actors. 
119.The overall goal of the proposed project is to sustainably maintain the poor and vulnerable 
households in the project area out of poverty, while its development objective is to enhance 
the income generating opportunities for the poor and vulnerable households in the project 
area, and the inclusiveness of the benefit-sharing mechanisms from agro-industries. The 
project will support strengthening and supporting cooperatives, stimulating additional and 
more  diversified  income  opportunities,  and  addressing  some  of  the  major  gaps  in  the 
current  infrastructure  system  such  as  the  development  of  land  and  water  infrastructure, 
rural road, drinking water supply, and extending power supply system.   
120.The project is categorized as Category B and an Environmental and Social Management 
Plan (ESMP) has been prepared. The ESMP sets out the measures to be taken during the 
implementation and operation of the project/ to eliminate or offset adverse environmental 
and  social  impacts,  or  to  reduce  them  to  acceptable  levels;  and  (ii)  the  actions  needed 
(monitoring/supervision/reporting 
arrangements, 
requirements), 
institutional  responsibilities,  time  schedule  and  costs  to  implement  the  measures.  The 
ESMP requirements are described below and the ESMP is presented in Attachment 2.       
implementation 
5.1 Environment and social mitigation measures 
121.Social mitigation: The risk of project implementation includes gender issues and all forms 
of gender based discrimination and exclusion from project benefits and leadership roles, 
where  women,  youth  and  vulnerable  households  are  not  benefiting  from  the  project 
interventions. Continuous assessment of the participation of  all beneficiaries need to be 
fully  assessed  during  project  implementation.  Should  significant  populations  of  target 
groups be found to be excluded or cannot access the project benefits, the PMO should start 
to make any necessary corrective actions to address the issues. 
122.Environment mitigation measures. The activities under the project may have potential 
risks to the environment. The increased production with inadequate practices may increase 
soil  erosion,  pollution  from  agrochemicals  and  waste  from  processing  activities. 
Improvement or new development of irrigation schemes may impact on water ecological 
systems  from  overuse  of  the  water  source  to  the  downstream  areas.  Furthermore  the 
project, if not carefully managed, may trigger conversion of forest land to reservoirs and 
pumping stations. Therefore proper planning and mapping of infrastructure development 
are very essential. Moreover the project should closely monitor the potential environment 
impacts of the project during the implementation. 
123.  Major  risks  to  infrastructure  improvement  activities  under  the  project  include 
inappropriate  O&M  of  infrastructure  systems  resulted  from  inadequate  institutional 
capacity; damage of infrastructure systems due to floods, landslides or soil erosion; and 
inefficient use of irrigation water due to inappropriate irrigation practices. The project 
designed  activities  on:  incorporating  climate  change  considerations  into  infrastructure 
improvement to enhance the resilience to nature disasters and climate change impacts; 
infrastructure  management 
identification/establishment 
organizations  to  enhance  institutional  capacity  in  infrastructure  O&M;  and  technical 
training to disseminate water-saving irrigation technologies. Possible risks and measures 
for mitigation are summarised in Table below. 
strengthening  of 
and 
Table 4. Risks and Mitigation Measures 
Risks 
Inappropriate  O&M  of 
infrastructure 
systems 
resulted  from  inadequate 
institutional capacity 
Damage  of  infrastructure 
systems  due 
to  floods, 
landslides or soil erosion 
Inefficient use of irrigation 
water due to inappropriate 
irrigation practices 
Risk 
level 
Medium 
Risk mitigation measures 
and 
County  PMO,  supported  by  TA,  will 
the 
advise 
identification/establishment 
and 
strengthening  of  IMGs  for  sustainable 
O&M.   
assist 
Residual 
risk 
level 
Low 
to 
medium 
Medium  IMGs, supported by County PMO, will 
risk  management 
conduct  disaster 
following government strategies.   
Medium  County  PMO,  supported  by  TA,  will 
organize  trainings  to  WUA  staff  and 
farmers  on  productive  and  efficient 
water use. 
Low 
Low 
5.2 Climate change adaptation and mitigation 
124.  As  climate  variability  likely  affect  agricultural  productivity  (crops/livestock),  it  is 
necessary to take actions to increase climate resilience and decrease the negative impacts 
in climate vulnerable areas. Mainstreaming climate change and future uncertainty into 
agricultural  and  rural  development  planning  is  a  pressing  challenge,  as  the  process  is 
laying the foundation future events there is very limited information how to successfully 
operationalize adaptation pathways or how to evaluate the processes.   
125.  The project has been designed provide a strong foundation to climate change adaptation 
through;  (i)  incorporating  climate  change  adaptation  as  an  integral  part  of  the  project 
including through improving climate-risk assessment, planning and decision-making as 
well as improving infrastructures' climate resilience; (ii) the climate change adaptation 
will  be  participative  capacity  building  on  the  existing  small-scale  farmers  adaptation 
mechanisms together with the information from the science; (iii) building the skills and 
capacities of the farmer, cooperatives,  government institutions to proactively meet the 
needs of climate change adaptation; (iv) to develop linkages and partnerships with private 
sector; and (v) provide a base to upscale the project initiatives to wider areas. 
126.  The climate risk analysis will refer to any existing broader agricultural risk management 
analysis  as  well  as  project-level  risk  analysis  to  ensure  the  right  prioritization  and 
consistency with other sources of risk. Based on this analysis practical risk management 
and adaptation measures can be defined that can be integrated into the project design. 
127.  Developing initiatives to provide improved productivity and financial returns in parallel 
with  strengthening  the  institutional  base  and  laying  foundations  for  climate  change 
adaptation is critical; experience that many programs for climate change adaptation has 
been less successful as farmers are reluctant to change or invest in measures that may not 
be immediately apparent or may not occur. 
The  climate  adaptation  plan  has  also  been 
incorporated in the project design that includes   
128.  The  project  also  sees  digital  agriculture  is  an  alternative  adaptation  measure  that  can 
effectively  integrate  climate  resilience  measures  without  extensive  additional  costs. 
Digital  agriculture  is  a  comprehensive  product  of  modern  technology  and  multi-
disciplinary  integration.  With  the  knowledge  background  of  geography,  agronomy, 
ecology,  plant  physiology,  soil  science  and  other  basic  disciplines,  it  serves  for 
agricultural production. High and new technologies such as remote sensing, geographic 
information  system,  global  positioning  system,  computer  technology,  communication 
and  network  technology  and  automation  technology  are  adopted  to  provide  precise 
services for agricultural production.   
129.  Digital agriculture can realize real-time monitoring of crops and soil from macro to micro 
in  the  process  of  agricultural  production.  At  the same  time,  it  can  acquire  the  regular 
information of crop growth, development, diseases and pests, water and fertilizer, and 
the corresponding  environment, and generate the  dynamic spatial  information  system. 
Through the simulation of the phenomena and processes in agricultural production, we 
can  make  rational  use  of  agricultural  resources,  reduce  production  costs,  improve  the 
ecological environment, and improve the quality of agricultural products.   
130.  The purpose of improving the ecological environment and the quality of crop products. 
Using digital  agriculture, irrigation, fertilization and breeding of crop varieties can be 
efficiently  managed  according  to  the  real-time  forecast  of  meteorological  disasters. 
Under the condition of ensuring the healthy growth of crops, the use of inputs such as 
energy, fertilizer and water resources can be reduced, and the adaptability of crops to 
climate change can be improved and effectively reduce the adverse impacts of climate 
change. Digital agriculture has the synergistic effect of adaptation and mitigation. 
5.3 Multi-benefit approaches 
131.  The  project  offers  some  opportunities  to  promote  green  growth  and  multiple-benefit 
approaches  for  production,  poverty  reduction  and  the  environment,  including 
maintaining ecosystem services and biodiversity, reducing emissions, improving health, 
and building climate resilience. 
132.  For digital agriculture, it will not only decrease the use of inputs that has the synergistic 
effect of adaptation and mitigation. Digital agriculture is an approach which can promote 
green  growth  with  multiple-benefits.  Digital  agriculture  is  a  low-carbon  and  green 
integrated  agricultural  technology  system,  which  can  not  only  reduce  inputs  but  also 
increase crop yields through numerical intelligent technology. 
133.  Moreover, conservation tillage is a sustainable agricultural technology that can reduce 
soil  erosion,  protect  farmland  ecological  environment  and  achieve  coordinated 
development of ecological benefits, economic benefits and social benefits by means of 
comprehensive  supporting  measures  such  as  less  tillage,  no-tillage,  surface  micro-
topography transformation technology  and surface cover, rational  planting, etc.  In the 
application  process  of  digital  agriculture,  the  utilization  efficiency  of  inputs  can  be 
improved and the production cost can be reduced.   
134.  Optimized  agricultural  management  measures,  such  as  scientific  fertilization  and 
irrigation, can not only significantly improve agricultural production, but also reduce the 
excessive use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides and reduce environmental pollution. 
The application and development of digital agriculture will contribute to the production 
of more healthy agricultural products, so as to further improve the price of agricultural 
products, increase the income of farmers, and contribute to agricultural development and 
poverty alleviation. 
5.4 Incentives for good practices 
135.  Premium organic agriculture products can be an incentive to promote good agriculture 
practices  that  is  sustainable  and  environmental  friendly.  Framers  will  not  necessarily 
pursuing  the  highest  agriculture  productivity  that  may  create  negative  impacts  to  the 
environment, but aims to get the highest additional values and profits out of it. 
136.  Allowance  and  price  insurance  are  two  incentive  measures  as  tangible  benefits  for 
relinquishing  unsustainable  practices  (farming,  processing,  etc.),  reducing  risk,  and 
helping  smallholders  adopt  adaptation  and  mitigation  measure.  Allowance  is  a  direct 
incentive for smallholders to change their behaviours and take measures to tackle climate 
change issues, such as protecting ecological environment, reducing chemical fertilizer 
and pesticides, applying renewable energy in farming or processing. 
137.  Price insurance is an indirect incentive for smallholders. If price insurance of agricultural 
products is spread, the benefit of smallholders would be guaranteed, which could avoid 
the  loss  due  to  the  fluctuation  of  market.  Price  insurance  could  be  provided  by  local 
government for free. But if smallholders accept price insurance, they should also achieve 
the standards made by local government, such as relinquishing unsustainable practices, 
adopting adaptation and mitigation measures. 
5.5 Participatory processes 
138.  Community  Mobilization  Process.  A  strong  and  well-defined  social  mobilization 
process will facilitate the delivery of the project activities in an inclusive and effective 
manner.  It  will  ensure  that  the  project  is  able  to  target  and  include  its  intended 
beneficiaries and that the target group fully understand the opportunities presented by the 
project  as  well  as  the  obligations  and  responsibilities  for  those  who  chose  to  join  the 
project. It will enable project activities to be fine-tuned to respond to the ground realities 
and priorities of the households. 
139.  Suitable participatory approaches and tools to enhance stakeholder engagement and draw 
on local understanding of problems and potential solutions are very essential elements in 
project implementation. The aim of participatory process is to involve community and 
beneficiaries  in  a  multi-stakeholder  risk  analysis,  planning,  implementation  and 
monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  project.  It  also  helps  staff  members  and  partner 
organisations  to  engage  with  communities.  The  nature  of  the  participatory  process 
supports men and women to act as agents of their own development who, with the right 
resources  and  support,  can  solve  their  own  problems.  It  promotes  the  participation  of 
community, and women in particular, in risk analysis and decision-making process when 
it comes to  prioritising what  a community  need  to  do to  improve their livelihood and 
reduce its disaster risk. 
140.  Carry  out  a  participatory  capacity  building  and  vulnerability  assessment  should  be 
regarded  as  an  investment  that  needs  to  be  repeated  regularly  to  help  community  to 
achieve  progresses  and  enable them to  make any  necessary  changes  to strengthen the 
impacts of the project. Those activities include:   
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
to integrate disaster risk reduction (DRR) into an existing programme; 
to inform the design of a new programme using a DRR approach; 
to monitor and evaluate the impact of actions taken to reduce risk, and to plan new 
activities; 
to guide advocacy strategies for DRR. 
6.  Analysis of alternatives 
141.  The project design will focus to enhance the income generating opportunities for the poor 
and vulnerable households in the project area, and the inclusiveness of the benefit-sharing 
mechanisms from agro-industries. It may involve a number of commodities farmers will 
grow seasonally. 
142.  Alternatives analysis should include environmental objectives and reasons for choosing 
the  best  option.  Provide  where  relevant  a  comparison  of  alternatives  based  on 
environmental and social impacts, climate change vulnerability, technical feasibility and 
cost. Over time there maybe requirements to consider crop diversification to reduce risk 
and also adapt to climate and market changes.   
143.  Commodity prices  are now internationally led and although the project  is  designed to 
improve  efficiency  and  market  competitiveness  farmers  will  be  vulnerable  to  sudden 
changes  in  demand.  Similarly,  increased  temperatures  and  more  variable  rainfall  may 
affect viabilities of growing certain crops. The increase in temperature may impact on 
the lowland areas and open new opportunities in the upland areas. 
144.  The  objects  of  the  project  are  also  to  reduce  the  adverse  impacts  of  environment  and 
climate change and increase the farmer's income. Through knowledge sharing, such as 
farmers' schools and trainings, can improve farmers' awareness of the environment and 
climate  change,  and  increase  their  initiative  consciousness  of  disaster  prevention  and 
mitigation,  and  obtain  advanced  agricultural  development  model.  In  high  climate  risk 
counties such as Zhenxiong, Lanping and Yongsheng, it is suggested to do case study on 
Climate Risk Assessment and Digital Climate smart Agriculture Development. 
7.  Institutional analysis 
7.1 Institutional framework 
145.  Analysis on the environmental policies and decision-making chain of command to also 
include other sectors (e.g. health, gender ministries) that are key actors in environmental 
and social management has been conducted. It helps to identify needs for a gap analysis 
in case of SECAP requirements against co-financiers, as necessary. The project design 
also assessed borrower capacity to build resilience to climate change as well as identify 
roles and who would be responsible for the various activities. 
146.  At the national level, the National Development and Reform Committee (NDRC), the 
Ministries of Water Resources (MOWR), the Ministry of Transport (MOT) and the State 
Council Leading Group Office of Poverty Alleviation and Development (SCLGOPAD) 
is  responsible  for  overall  social-economic  development  planning,  irrigation  and  water 
resources  management,  rural  roads  and  poverty  reduction  respectively.  They  provide 
respective policy advice, technical guidance and programme supports to provincial and 
local governments and relevant institutions.   
147.  At  the  provincial  level,  the  Provincial  Development  and  Reform  Committee  (PDRC), 
Department  of  Water  Resources  (DOWR),  Department  of  Agricultural  and  Rural,  the 
Department of Transport (DOT) and the Provincial Government Lead Group Office of 
Poverty Alleviation and Development (PGLGOPAD) are the line agencies respectively. 
They  issue  provincial  sector  development  strategies,  policies,  plans  and  technical 
guidelines; formulate and implement work and budget plans for provincial government 
funded programmes and projects.   
148.  At  the  prefecture  and  county  levels,  the  counterpart  agencies  are  the  Bureau  of 
Development and Reform (BODR), the Bureau of Water Resources (BOWR), the Bureau 
of  Transport  (BOT)  and  the  County  Government  Leading  Group  Office  of  Poverty 
Alleviation  and  Development  (CGLGOPAD)  respectively.  They  formulate  and 
implement  prefecture  and  county  level  sector  development  plans  and  projects,  review 
and  approve  system  planning  and  project  designs  for  relevant  investment  activities, 
supervise their implementation, and advice system operation and management.       
149.  Various research, education and consultancy institutions at different levels in the area of 
irrigation, water resources management, agriculture, as well as transport are responsible 
for  providing  relevant  technical  services  and  capacity  building.  Water  Management 
Stations and Agricultural Extensions Stations at township level are responsible for water 
and  agriculture  services  and  technical  extension  at  field  level.  Public  and  private 
contractors are contracted for infrastructure construction and technical services following 
government procurement guidelines. Township Authorities and Village Committees are 
involved in project identification and planning, mobilization of beneficiary contributions. 
Village committees, water users’ associations, and farmers’ cooperatives are responsible 
for operation and maintenance of village level public infrastructure systems. 
7.2 Capacity- building 
150.  The Project would have a strong focus on building of capacity for the implementation at 
county and community levels. Capacity building/training would be provided to all key 
institutional  participants  and  the  principal  stakeholders  in  order  that  the  project  is 
properly  understood  and  the  different  parties  are  able  to  implement  their  assigned 
responsibilities. Key information and outreach materials would be produced according 
to the specific audience being addressed (e.g., government, cooperatives/private sector, 
community, smallholders).   
151.  The project  would identify community  and other stakeholder capacity-building needs, 
supported by effective information, education and communication activities. This include 
the  needs  for  specific  trainings  such  as  natural  resource  management  and/or  climate-
related issues, supervision and reporting needs, including measures (i.e. environmental 
approvals, local permits, compliance with specific international guidelines and standards, 
compensation, grievance mechanisms, etc.).   
7.3 Additional funding 
152.  During the implementation, the project may also explore the opportunities for linking the 
investment  with  multilateral  or  bilateral  environmental  and  climate  financing  sources 
(i.e.  Global  Environment  Facility,  Green  Climate  Fund,  Adaptation  for  Smallholder 
Agriculture  Programme)  for  enhanced  results  and  impact.  Other  complementary 
investment projects may also become potential co-financiers to increase the multiplier 
effects of the project impacts to the beneficiaries in the long run. 
8.  Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
153.  M&E plan should be developed as per the project logical framework. The log frame will 
be used to chart progress against activities, outputs and outcomes, using SMART key 
performance indicators. Establishment of baselines from which to measure progress will 
be  undertaken  in  the  period  of  project  initiation.  The  nominated  Project  Officer  and 
Research  Council  contact,  as  an  invited  representative  on  the  Group,  will  be  party  to 
M&E plans/activities and discussions relating to project progress. 
154.  The log frame would set out the indicators and their means of verification for outputs and 
impacts. They could combine traditional process indicators and approaches to measuring 
research  capacity,  with  indicators  derived  from  the  capacity  development  assessment 
tool. Impact indicators – these will be measured in terms of changes in planning within 
project study area and the ability of the project team and its scientific work to influence 
these decisions, and will be more fully developed during the inception period. 
155.  The outcomes of project relate to different aspects of developed capacity, and evaluation 
of  their  achievement  will  be  supported  by  the  capacity  development  assessment  tool 
(CDAT). The use of this score-card based tool will involve measuring the baseline (start-
of-project)  and  end-of-project  capacity  at  the  scales  of  individuals,  organizations  and 
networks,  scoring  against  a  set  of  elements  under  each  of  three  capacity  spheres: 
competencies, resources and enabling environment. The baseline assessment will help 
with the prioritization of capacity building needs. 
156.  Monitoring and evaluation for the Social Environmental and Social activities would be 
integrated with the overall project M&E described in the main report, and included in the 
Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM).  The  broad  details  of  the  monitoring  and 
evaluation are described below 
9.  Budgetary resources and schedule 
9.1. Meteorological Dynamic Monitoring System     
157.  Technical Implementation Scheme. In view of the dominant agricultural industry in 
selected  counties,  the  scheme  of  agrometeorological  dynamic  monitoring  system  is 
customized  and  designed;  monitoring  points  are  selected  in  representative  areas  of 
agricultural  production,  Agrometeorological  monitoring  equipment  is  deployed  and 
installed,  and  the  platform  of  agrometeorological  monitoring  Internet  of  things  and 
monitoring management system is constructed; and long-term positioning and dynamic 
observation of Agrometeorological environment is implemented. To establish and form 
a  meteorological  data  monitoring  database  with  the  characteristics  of  industrial 
development  to  provide  data  support  for  crop  precision  management  and  disaster 
monitoring and early warning. 
158.  Budget requirement to conduct such activities include:   
a)  Meteorological  dynamic  monitoring  system:  mainly  used  for  equipment 
acquisition, integration and deployment of construction costs, plans to select two 
representative  monitoring  points  with  industrial  development  characteristics, 
deploy and install two sets of Agrometeorological monitoring equipment, each of 
which  integrates  soil  temperature  and  humidity,  air  temperature  and  humidity, 
solar  radiation,  rainfall,  wind  speed  and  direction,  and  images.  And  video  and 
other sensors to form an agricultural meteorological monitoring system with real-
time data transmission function; US$ 20,000.                         
b)  Agrometeorological Monitoring Internet of Things and Monitoring Management 
System  Platform:  Mainly  used  for  software  customization  design  and 
industrial 
development  expenditure,  according 
development, in Yongsheng, Yunnan Province, to build the Agrometeorological 
Monitoring Internet of Things and Monitoring Management System Platform. US 
$40,000. 
the  characteristics  of 
to 
9.2. Early-warning system for climate related disasters on agriculture 
159.  Technical Implementation Scheme. The project needs to develop early-warning system 
for climate related disasters on agriculture that is based on the meteorological dynamic 
monitoring  data,  weather  forecast  data  of  meteorological  departments  and  extreme 
climate data, through applying the large data analysis method of multi-source data fusion, 
the characteristics of climate disasters would be analyzed, including spatial and temporal 
distribution law;  the agricultural  impacts  and losses  of dominant  agricultural  products 
would be evaluated, which are planted in seven counties of Yunnan Province under the 
influence  of  climate  change.  The  diagnostic  index  and  model  of  main  meteorological 
disasters in agriculture of Yunnan Province could be established; the disaster monitoring 
and  early  warning  service  system  would  be  constructed  in  representative  agricultural 
production areas of Yunnan Province; it would provide disaster early warning, disaster 
prevention  and  mitigation  information  service  for  local  agricultural  management 
departments, agricultural management collectives and farmers in combination with the 
main agricultural industries in the region. 
160.  The required budget for developing early-warning system for climate related disasters on 
agriculture are   
a)  expenditure on data acquisition costs: $20,000;   
b)  Expenditure on development of disaster index and model: $20,000; and   
c)  Expenditure  on  the  design  and  development  of  early  warning  service  system: 
$30,000 
9.3. Digital crop management (crop-soil-climate) 
161.  Technical implementation plan. The development of digital crop management consist 
of the following activities:   
a) 
Identification and management of high quality crop meteorological suitable area. 
In the vicinity of the demonstration cooperative, spatial analysis of high quality 
meteorological  conditions  of  crops  is  carried  out  to  identify  meteorological 
suitable areas with high accuracy;   
b)  Establishment of high-precision three-dimensional space database in cooperative 
scale.  To  build  a  three-dimensional  spatial  database  of  farmland,  crops  and 
environment with high temporal and spatial resolution in cooperative scale, which 
lays a foundation for the construction of "digital farm";   
c)  Construction of a management platform for efficient utilization of high-quality 
agricultural climate resources. Based on GIS technology and UVA data sources, 
the  inter-regional  high  frequency  and  high  precision  data  collection  and 
management  of  yield  and  quality  of  multiple  planting  parks  in  demonstration 
areas were established, which will support the IFAD to manage the production 
and quality of agricultural products in the project. 
162.  The proposed Budget to develop the digital crop management system are   
a)  the construction of high-precision three-dimensional spatial database: $20,000;   
b) the construction of a management platform for efficient utilization of high-quality;   
c)  agricultural climate resources. $30,000. 
9.4. Application of Production Management Technology (Output, Quality, Market) 
163.  Technical implementation plan. The application of production management technology 
include the following activities:   
a)  Construct the Relation between Crop Yield and Quality and Key Climate Factors; 
that is based on accumulated temperature, precipitation, extreme events, soil and 
other factors, combined with crop yield and quality data, construct the quantitative 
relationship model between key meteorological factors and crop quality;   
b)  Develop  a  digital  and 
Intelligent  Farmland  Management  Technology 
Management System, that is based on the real-time forecast data provided by the 
agricultural disaster early warning system and the monitoring results of soil and 
air temperature and humidity provided by the meteorological dynamic monitoring 
system, put forward the suggestions of farmland irrigation and fertilization, and 
develop  the  digital  and  intelligent  field  management  technology  management 
system. 
c)  Dynamic Prediction of Crop Yield and Quality, that is based on the quantitative 
relationship  between  crop  yield  and  quality  and  key  climatic  factors,  a  nested 
DSSAT/APSIM model will be used to dynamically predict the changes of crop 
yield and quality in different climatic years combined with intelligent farmland 
management techniques. 
d)  Crop Planting, Harvesting and Sales Strategy, that is based on the collection and 
analysis of regional crop yield and price information with big data, and according 
to the trend of crop yield and quality, forecast the future crop supply and demand 
and  their  price  changes,  and  provide  suggestions  on  planting,  harvesting  and 
marketing strategies for demonstration area. 
164.  The budget to conduct such activities are: 
a)  Construct the Relation between Crop Yield and Quality and Key Climate Factors, 
$20,000 
b)  Develop  a  digital  and 
Intelligent  Farmland  Management  Technology 
Management System $30,000 
c)  Dynamic Prediction of Crop Yield and Quality $30,000 
d)  Crop Planting, Harvesting and Sales Strategy $30,000 
References 
Gong  Yazhen,  Chen  Zhan,  Guan  Baozhu,  He  Guanying,  Yang  Xiaojing.  Behaviors  and 
affecting factors in farmers adaptation to climate change in poor regions of China. Journal 
of Beijing Forestry University (Social Sciences), 2016, 15(3): 42-49. 
Hempel, S., Frieler, K., Warszawski, L., Schewe, J., &Piontek, F. (2013a). Bias corrected GCM 
input data for ISIMIP Fast Track. GFZ Data Services. doi:10.5880/PIK.2016.001 
Hempel, S., Frieler, K., Warszawski, L., Schewe, J., &Piontek, F. (2013b). A trend-preserving 
bias correction – the ISI-MIP approach. Earth System Dynamics, 4(2), 219–236. 
Riahi K, Rao S, Krey V, Cho C, Chirkov V, Fischer G, Kindermann G, Nakicenovic N, Rafaj 
P. (2011). RCP8.5: a scenario of comparatively high greenhouse gas emissions. Climatic 
Change, 109: 33-57 
vanVuuren D P, Edmonds J A, Kainuma M, Riahi K, Weyant J. (2011a). A special issue on 
the RCPs. Climatic Change, 109: 1-4 
van Vuuren D P, Edmonds J A, Kainuma M, Riahi K, Thomson A, Hibbard K, Hurtt G C, 
Kram T, Krey V, Lamarque J-F, Masui T, Meinshausen M, Nakicenovic N, Smith S T, 
Rose  S  K.  (2011b).  The  representative  concentration  pathways:  an  overview.  Climatic 
Change, 109: 5-31 
Wu J, Gao XJ, (2013). A gridded daily observation dataset over China region and comparison 
with the other datasets. Chinese Journal of Geophysics, 56(4): 1102-1111 
Xu Y, Gao XJ, Shen Y, Xu CH, Shi Y, Giorgi  F, (2009).  A daily temperature dataset over 
China  and  its  application  in  validating  a  RCM  simulation.  Advances  in  Atmospheric 
Sciences, 26(4), 763–772. 
Attachment 1:   
Check  List  and  Preliminary  Screening  for  Environmental  and  Social  Categories  and 
Climate Change 
IFAD classifies all projects into one of three environmental and social categories (A, B or C) 
and one of three climate risk classifications (high, moderate and low). Where IFAD is jointly 
financing a project with other agencies, IFAD will cooperate with the partner agency and agree 
on a common approach for the assessment and the categorization of the project. 
Determination of the category and classification will also depend on the national requirements 
and  the  existing  national  capacity  to  promote  and  implement  environmental  and  social 
mitigation  measures.  The  determination  is  informed  by  existing  assessments  of  national 
frameworks and capacities. 
A positive response to any question between 1 and 23 will categorize the project as A. Similarly, 
a positive response to question 24 to 40 will categorize the project as B. In case all answers are 
negative, the project will be categorized as C. 
This list of questions can be used at different stages of the project design and should be used 
in conjunction with the respective guidance statements. 
The checklists for environmental and social and climate risks will: 
1.  initially be filled in during concept development to help guide in the identification of 
opportunities  and  possible  risks  and  activities  that  will  need  to  be  considered  in  the 
project design; 
2.  be attached to the SECAP review note; and 
3.  be reviewed during project design phases and updated as required. 
Project title: 
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
IFAD project no.: 
Country: 
Checklist  prepared  by 
(name, 
and 
institution) 
title 
China 
Version 
checklist:   
Date  of 
version: 
of 
Version 1 
this 
04/01/2020 
CAAS - IFAD Consultant 
In completing the checklist both short- and long-term impacts should be considered. This list 
of  questions  can  be  used  at  different  stages  of  the  project  cycle  and  should  be  used  in 
conjunction  with  the  respective  guidance  statements.  Capitalize  on  information  based  on 
reports and field visits during design. The details of the elaboration on issues that arise as a 
result of screening should be clearly articulated in the SECAP review note. 
Guiding  questions  for  environment  and 
social screening 
Yes/no 
Comments/explanation 
Category  A  –  the  following  may  have  significant  and  often  irreversible  or  not  readily 
remedied adverse environmental and/or social implications. 
Project location 
1.  Would the project develop any wetlands?  NO 
2.  Would the project cause significant adverse 
impacts  to  habitats  and/or  ecosystems  and 
their services (e.g. conversion of more than 
50 hectares of natural forest, loss of habitat, 
erosion/other  form  of  land  degradation, 
fragmentation and hydrological changes)?   
3.  Does the proposed project target area include 
ecologically  sensitive  areas 12 ,  areas  of 
global/national significance for biodiversity 
conservation,  and/or  biodiversity-rich  areas 
and  habitats  depended  on  by  endangered 
species? 
4.  Is  the  project  location  subjected  to  major 
destruction as a result of geophysical hazards 
(tsunamis, landslides, earthquakes, volcanic 
eruptions)? 
NO 
NO 
NO 
Natural resources 
5.  Would  the  project  lead  to  unsustainable 
natural 
resource  management  practices 
(fisheries, forestry, livestock) and/or result in 
exceeding carrying capacity. For example, is 
the  development  happening  in  areas  where 
little  up-to-date 
information  exists  on 
sustainable yield/carrying capacity?   
NO 
6.  Would  the  project  develop  large-scale 13 
aquaculture or mariculture projects, or where 
their  development 
significant 
alteration of ecologically sensitive areas? 
involves 
NO 
7.  Would the project result in significant use of 
agrochemicals  which  may  lead  to  life-
threatening  illness  and  long-term  public 
health and safety concerns?   
NO 
8.  Does 
and/or 
the  project  rely  on  water-based 
(groundwater 
surface  water) 
development where there is reason to believe 
that  significant  depletion  and/or  reduced 
flow has occurred from the effects of climate 
change or from overutilization? 
NO 
12  “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere 
reserves) and their buffer zones; areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats 
depended on by endangered species; natural forests; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion 
and other forms of land degradation, areas that include physical cultural resources (of historical, 
religious, archaeological or other cultural significance), and areas with high social vulnerability. 
9.  Does  the  project  pose  a  risk  of  introducing 
potentially  invasive  species  or  genetically 
modified  organisms  which  might  alter 
genetic traits  of indigenous species or have 
an adverse effect on local biodiversity? 
NO 
10. Does  the  project  make  use  of  wastewater 
(e.g. industrial, mining, sewage effluent)?   
NO 
Infrastructure development 
NO 
11. Does 
the 
project 
include 
the 
construction/rehabilitation/upgrade 
of 
dam(s)  and/or  reservoir(s)  meeting  at  least 
one of the following criteria? 
-    more than 15 metre high wall; 
-    more than 500 metre long crest; 
- 
capacity; or 
-    incoming flood of more than 2,000 m3/s 
  more  than  3  million  m3  reservoir 
12. Does 
13. Does 
involve 
large-scale 
the  project 
irrigation  schemes 
rehabilitation  and/or 
development  (more  than  100  hectares  per 
scheme)? 
project 
include 
construction/rehabilitation/upgrade  of  roads 
that entail a total area being cleared above 10 
km long, or any farmer with more than 10 per 
cent of his or her private land taken?   
the 
NO 
NO 
14. Does 
15. Does 
the  project 
include  drainage  or 
correction of natural waterbodies (e.g. river 
training)?   
the  project 
significant 
extraction/diversion/containment  of  surface 
water,  leaving  the  river  flow  below  20  per 
cent  environmental  flow  plus  downstream 
user requirements? 
involve 
NO 
NO 
Social 
16. Would 
the  project  result 
in  economic 
displacement64  or  physical  resettlement  of 
more than 20 people, or impacting more than 
10  per  cent  of  an  individual  household’s 
assets? 
17. Would the project result in conversion and/or 
loss of physical cultural resources?   
impacts 
18. Would the project generate significant social 
adverse 
local  communities 
to 
(including  disadvantaged  and  vulnerable 
groups  and  indigenous  people)  or  other 
project-affected parties 
Other 
NO 
NO 
NO 
19. Does the project include the manufacture and 
transportation  of  hazardous  and 
toxic 
materials which may affect the environment?   
NO 
20. Does the project include the construction of 
a large or medium-scale industrial plant? 
NO 
21. Does the project include the development of 
NO 
large-scale production forestry?   
Rural finance 
22. Does  the  project  support  any  of  the  above 
(Question  1  to  Question  21)  through  the 
provision  of  a  line  of  credit  to  financial 
service providers?   
NO 
Category  B  –  the  following  may  have  some  adverse  environmental  and/or  social 
implications which can be readily remedied. 
Location 
23.    Does the project involve agricultural 
NO 
intensification 
expansion  of 
and/or 
cropping  area  in  non-sensitive  areas  that 
may  have  adverse  impacts  on  habitats, 
ecosystems and/or livelihoods? 
Natural resource management 
24. 
rangeland 
  Do 
the  project  activities 
include 
Yes 
and 
development? 
livestock 
25.    Does the project involve fisheries where 
there  is  information  on  stocks,  fishing 
effort and sustainable yield? Is there any 
risk  of  overfishing,  habitat  damage  and 
knowledge of fishing zones and seasons? 
NO 
26.    Would the project activities include 
NO 
aquaculture  and/or  agriculture  in  newly 
introduced or intensively practiced areas? 
Do  project  activities  include  conversion 
of  wetlands  and  clearing  of  coastal 
vegetation, 
change  in  hydrology  or  introduction  of 
27.    Do the project activities include natural 
exotic species?   
resource-based 
development?   
  Do 
28. 
watershed 
29.    Does the project include large-scale soil 
and 
Infrastructure 
30.    Does the project include small-scale 
water conservation measures?   
management or rehabilitation? 
the  project  activities 
include 
value 
chain 
NO 
NO 
NO 
Yes 
irrigation  and  drainage,  and  small  and 
medium  dam  subprojects  (capacity  <  3 
million m3)?   
31.    Does the project include small and 
Yes 
microenterprise 
subprojects?   
development 
farms 
livestock 
China’s environmental regulations 
for 
including 
permits and periodic control visits   
will apply and Yunnan’s policy for 
recycling  animal  waste  will  be 
supported 
China’s environmental regulations 
will  apply  and  the  project  will 
support 
integration  of  climate 
change trends’ impact analysis on 
water availability and flows as part 
of  the  infrastructure  design  and 
operation 
32.    Does the project include the development 
of 
Yes 
agroprocessing facilities?   
33.    Would  the  construction  or  operation  of 
the 
Yes 
project  cause  an  increase  in  traffic  on 
rural roads?   
Social 
34.    Would any of the project activities have 
minor  adverse 
cultural resources?   
impacts  on  physical 
35.    Would the project result in physical 
resettlement of 20 people or less, or 
impacting less than 10 per cent of 
an individual household’s assets   
No 
No 
China’s environmental regulations 
will  apply  including  obtaining 
permits  when 
and 
supervision visits for verifying the 
implementation  of  environmental 
protection measures 
required 
Moderate Increase 
The project was designed based on 
local products. 
There is not related activity in the 
project. 
36.    Would the project result in short-term 
No 
Relevant issue was not found. 
public 
concerns?   
health 
and 
safety 
37.    Would the project require a migrant 
No 
workforce  or  seasonal  workers  (for 
and/or 
construction, 
harvesting)?   
planting 
Rural finance 
38.    Does the project support any of the above 
(Question 23 to Question 37) through the 
provision  of  a  line of credit to  financial 
service providers?   
Yes 
Financing  of  Agribusinesses  and 
marketing infrastructure 
Guidance for categorization: 
"Yes"  response 
to any questions 
between  1  and 
22 
''No'' responses to 
all  Q1-Q22  and 
"Yes" response to 
any 
questions 
between  23 and 
38 
"No"  response  to 
all 
questions 
between 1 and 38 
Environmental 
and 
category is A 
social 
social 
Environmental 
and 
category is B 
Environmental 
and 
category is C 
social 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment or an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
required  depending  on 
(full  or  specific) 
availability of information. 
is 
Also  some  specific  questions  would  require  the 
below specific actions: 
  Yes to Q16 – A Resettlement Action Plan or a 
Resettlement  Action  Framework  is  required 
depending on availability of information. 
  Yes  to  Q17  –  A  Physical  Cultural  Resources 
Management  Plan  is  required  that  includes 
provisions  for  managing  chance  finds  at 
implementation. 
  Yes to Q18 – Free, prior and informed consent 
should  be  obtained/Free,  Prior  and  Informed 
is  required 
Consent  Implementation  Plan 
depending on whether the affected communities 
are identifiable. In instances where indigenous 
peoples are affected an Indigenous Peoples Plan 
is  required.  A  Social  Impact  Assessment  is 
required. 
  Yes  to  Q8  and/or  Q15  –  A  water  resources 
management plan for the project is required. 
  Yes 
to  Q7,  Q9  and/or  Q19  –  A  Pest 
Management Plan is required. 
An environmental and social analysis to develop an 
Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan 
(ESMP) is required. 
No further analysis is required. 
In  case  projects  fall  under  both  Category A  and  B,  the  highest  category  will  be  taken  as 
reference.  The  determination  of  the  project  category  and  classification  will  depend  on  the 
magnitude of impacts and would depend on the scale of such activities; a cautious approach to 
the  concern  of  cumulative  impacts  is  considered  essential.  In  such  cases,  the  necessary 
environmental and social analysis and associated budget should be incorporated into project 
design. Such projects may be considered for Category B. 
Determining the environmental and social Category A, including the extent of assessments and 
studies to be conducted, will also take into account available information, i.e. recent studies 
and assessments, including other initiatives in the country, to the extent these are relevant to 
the proposed project. 
Declassification (from A to B or from B to C) may also be possible in case negative externalities 
are being addressed by other projects or activities implemented by third parties. 
Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
Yes 
No 
1.    Is  the  project  area  subject  to  extreme 
climatic  events,  such  as  flooding,  drought, 
tropical storms or heat waves? 
Yes 
2.    Do  climate  scenarios  for  the  project  area 
foresee  changes  in  temperature,  rainfall  or 
extreme  weather  that  will  adversely  affect 
the project impact, sustainability or cost over 
its lifetime? 
3.    Would the project make investments in 
low-lying coastal areas/zones exposed to 
tropical storms? 
Yes 
4.    Would  the  project  make  investments  in 
glacial areas and mountains zones? 
Yes 
that  have 
5.    Would  the  project  promote  agricultural 
in  marginal  and/or  highly 
activity 
degraded  areas 
increased 
sensitivity  to  climatic  events (such  as on 
hillsides, 
or 
deforested 
6.    Is the project located in areas where rural 
floodplains)? 
development  projects  have  experienced 
losses  and 
significant  weather-related 
damages in the past? 
slopes 
7. 
  Would 
the  project  develop/install 
infrastructure in areas with a track record of 
extreme weather events? 
Yes 
8. 
Is  the  project  target  group  entirely 
dependent  on  natural  resources  (such  as 
seasonal  crops,  rainfed  agricultural  plots, 
that  have  been 
migratory  fish  stocks) 
affected  by  in  the  last  decade  by  climate 
trends or specific climatic events? 
No 
No 
No 
No 
floods 
Additional 
explanation of “yes” 
response* 
Extreme weather events such as 
causing 
rainfalls 
heavy 
landslides 
are 
and 
occurring  occasionally  in  the 
project  counties  as  well  as 
droughts.  These  events  may 
increase  in  frequency  in  the 
future. 
The  above  mentioned  events 
may  affect  project  impacts  in 
extreme cases. 
in 
The  project  will 
mountain area not dependent on 
glacial water. 
invest 
invest 
in 
The  project  will 
construction/upscaling 
of 
processing infrastructure as well 
roads,  water  and 
as 
rural 
electricity. 
might 
occasionally  be  impacted  by 
heavy  rainfalls  which  will  be 
incorporating 
mitigated 
adaptation 
in 
engineering designs. 
measures 
These 
by 
Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
Yes 
No 
Additional 
explanation of “yes” 
response* 
9. 
  Would  climate  variability  likely  affect 
agricultural 
productivity 
(crops/livestock/fisheries), access to markets 
and/or the associated incidence of pests and 
diseases for the project target groups? 
Yes 
10.  Would  weather-related  risks  or  climatic 
extremes likely adversely impact upon key 
stages  of  identified  value  chains  in  the 
project (from production to markets)? 
Yes 
Effects  may  be  both  negative 
(floods  and  increase  in  pest  an 
diseases)  as  well  as  positive 
(increased  growth 
longer 
summers and milder winters 
in 
If  harvests 
are  negatively 
affected, the value chains would 
also  be  affected.  Floods  may 
temporarily  cut  of  access  to 
markets 
The  small  holder  rural  families 
in  Yunnan  have  diversified 
livelihoods  including  both  farm 
(sensitive to climate events) and 
nonfarm activities. The fact that 
they are not solely dependent on 
agriculture  makes  them  more 
resilience 
11.  Is the project investing in climate-
that  are 
livelihoods 
sensitive 
diversified? 
12.  Is the project investing in infrastructure 
that  is  exposed  to  infrequent  extreme 
weather events? 
13.  Is  the  project  investing  in  institutional 
development  and  capacity-building  for 
rural  institutions  (such  as  farmer  groups, 
cooperatives) in climatically heterogeneous 
areas? 
Yes 
No 
14.  Does  the  project  have  the  potential  to 
become more resilient through the adoption 
of green technologies at a reasonable cost? 
Yes 
15.  Does 
opportunities 
the  project 
intervention  have 
Yes 
to  strengthen 
management capabilities? 
indigenous  climate  risk 
Yes 
Effective  information  sharing, 
education and specific training   
E.g.  the  recycling  of  animal 
waste  for  manure  and  biogas 
energy  will  have  a  positive 
impact  as  well  as  positive 
impacts  from  climate  resilient 
water  and  soil  conservation 
infrastructure  contributing 
to 
disaster 
reduction  and 
adaptatio 
risk 
Indigenous  measure  will  be 
activities 
included 
in 
strengthening 
beneficiary 
families resilience capacities 
Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
Yes 
No 
Additional 
explanation of “yes” 
response* 
16.  Does  the  project  have  opportunities  to 
integrate climate  resilience aspects through 
policy  dialogue  to  improve  agricultural 
sector strategies and policies? 
No 
17.  Does the project have potential to integrate 
climate 
resilience  measures  without 
extensive  additional  costs  (e.g.  improved 
building  codes,  capacity-  building,  or 
including  climate  risk  issues  in  policy 
processes)? 
Yes 
18. Based on the information available would the 
project benefit from a more thorough climate 
risk and vulnerability analysis to identify the 
most  vulnerable  rural  population,  improve 
additional 
targeting 
to 
complementary 
manage climate risks? 
identify 
investment 
actions 
and 
The  project  will  support  the 
development 
adaptation 
of 
guidelines  for  the  design  of 
infrastructure  projects  linked  to 
key 
industries 
involving  smallholders  (water, 
roads, 
conservation, 
soil 
electricity, etc. 
agricultural 
No 
Except  in  the  case  of  bamboo 
plantations,  which  may  benefit 
from GHG emission accounting 
to access the carbon market. 
Attachment 2:   
Draft Environment and Social Management Plan 
Objective 
The objective of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is to make sure that 
all  environmental,  social  and  climate  change  risks  related  to  the  project’s  activities  and 
investments  are  properly  identified,  managed  and  mitigated.  For  more  details  on  the  risks 
related  to  the  project,  see  the  full  analysis  in  the  SECAP  main  document. The  below  table 
outlines  the  projects  interventions  and  related  risks  and  mitigation  measures,  how  their 
effectiveness  will  be  monitored  and  who  will  be  responsible,  and  the  related  budget.  This 
framework shall be finalized as part of the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) at project 
start up and updated and adjusted as need be during project implementation. 
Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM) 
The  project  will  follow  IFAD's  Complaints  Procedure  which  ensures  that  appropriate 
mechanisms are in place to allow individuals and communities to contact IFAD directly and 
file a complaint if they  believe they  are or might  be adversely affected by  an  IFAD-funded 
project/programme  not  complying  with  IFAD's  Social  and  Environmental  Policies  and 
mandatory aspects of SECAP. 
IFAD's Grievance and Redress Mechanism shall be fully explained to stakeholders during the 
programme's  start-up  workshop  and  to  beneficiaries  during  the  programme's  activities. The 
complainants should first bring the matter to the attention of the County Project Management 
Offices (PMOs) of the County Agriculture and Rural Development Agencies (CARAs) or the 
Provincial  Project  management  Office  (PPMO)  of  the  Provincial  Agriculture  and  Rural 
Development Agency (DARA). If the PMOs or PPMO do not adequately respond, the matter 
may be brought to the attention of IFAD. The issue may also be brought straight to IFAD if the 
complainants feel they might be subject to retaliation if they bring it first to the PMOs or the 
PPMO. 
Grievances shall be addressed at the field level by the project team which will be the first layer 
of redressal mechanism. If the grievance is not resolved at the field level, it will be escalated 
to the PPMO and then to IFAD who will be responsible for addressing grievances related to 
violations of the Programme's SECAP reflecting IFAD’s social anad environmental policies 
and standards. 
All grievances received and action taken to address them will be reported to the relevant PMO, 
PPMO and the Steering committee. The PMOs and the PPMO shall ensure that all complaints 
received and actions taken are included in the progress reports to IFAD. 
Interventions  Social,   
Mitigating Measure 
Monitoring 
All 
interventions 
Environmental  & 
Climate Risks 
Risks  not  mitigated 
causing 
adverse 
impacts on people and 
livelihoods 
the 
project area 
in 
  Make  sure  the  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism 
  Quarterly 
(GRM) is strictly applied.     
  Ensure  dissemination  of  the  GRM  to  local 
communities prior to starting project activities. 
  Maintain  solid  documentation  for  the  received 
complaints during the operation of the project and 
track  the  level  of  responsiveness  (provision  of 
feedback).   
review  of 
number 
complaints 
received. 
  Quarterly 
Responsible 
Institution 
Cost 
the 
of 
  PMOs 
and 
PPMO. If not 
then 
solved 
IFAD.   
  $2,000 
(PPMO 
admin 
budget) 
the 
the 
of 
review  of 
number 
complaints 
addressed, 
mechanisms 
the 
used  and 
time  it  took  to 
address them. 
  Annual  surveys. 
  PMOs 
PPMO 
and 
  $3,000 
(M&E 
budget) 
Social: 
Beneficiary 
Dissatisfaction 
Discrimination 
and 
  Collect  feedback  on  project  performance  and 
beneficiary satisfaction from women and men of 
various  ethnic  and  age  groups,  with  special 
representation  of  vulnerable  households,  through 
focus group discussions. 
All 
interventions 
All 
interventions 
Social: 
Gender  issues  and  all 
of  Gender 
forms 
Based  discrimination 
and  exclusion  from 
  PMOs  and  PPMO  to  have  gender  and  social 
inclusion experts and gender balance among their 
staff. All staff to have minimum gender training. 
  Achievement of gender quotas for beneficiaries of 
the  various  activities  (on  average  at  least  50% 
  Quarterly 
collecting 
gender 
disaggregated 
monitoring  and 
  PMOs 
and 
PPMO  M&E 
responsible 
 
Included 
in 
M&E  budget 
$5,000 
and 
(Capacity 
  
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
project  benefits  and 
leadership roles. 
women), as established in the Logframe and PIM, 
to be closely monitored. Corrective actions to be 
promptly taken if falling behind in achieving the 
targets. 
  Gender  training  for  men  and  women  raising 
awareness  on  gender  based  discrimination  and 
leadership  training  for  women  to  be  given  to 
cooperatives,  Water  Users 
members 
Associations  (or 
likes),  and  start-ups 
entrepreneur groups.   
their 
of 
Component A: Supporting Inclusive Rural Development 
Social:   
  Women,  Youth 
and 
vulnerable 
households are not 
from 
benefiting 
improved 
the 
business  of 
the 
cooperatives 
Meet 
Activity A.1.1: 
Upgrading 
Cooperatives 
to 
Operational 
Standards 
Activity A.1.2: 
Matching 
Grant 
Support 
for 
Certified  Pro-
Poor  Farmer 
Professional 
Cooperatives 
Social: (PIM chapter 3 attachment 1)   
  The  operational  standards  include  criteria  for 
inclusion  of  poor  households,  youth  and  women 
among the members and inclusion of women in the 
board 
  The operational standards include criteria for fair 
 
benefit sharing of profits. 
  Compliance with the standards will be verified by 
an independent third party 
  Business plan proposals to include an assessment 
of  all  social  exclusion  and  adverse  impact  risks 
and proper mitigation measures including measure 
to ensure inclusion and benefits to women youth 
and poor and vulnerable households     
Environmental: (PIM chapter 3 attachment 2) 
building 
budget) 
 
Independent 
third 
and 
and PPMO 
party 
PMOs 
  $5,000 
(M&E 
budget) 
able 
evaluation  data 
to 
the 
track 
extent  to  which 
have 
women 
been 
to 
participate  and 
from 
benefit 
project activities 
and take leading 
roles 
and 
positions.   
Initial 
verification  and 
annual 
follow 
up  verification 
compliance 
of 
with 
social 
inclusion 
standards 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
Environmental: 
 
Increased 
production  with 
inadequate 
may 
practices 
increase 
soil 
erosion,  pollution 
from 
agrochemicals 
and  waste  from 
processing 
activities 
  Business  plan  proposals 
to 
include:  1)  an 
assessment  of  all  environmental 
risks  and 
mitigation  measures  related  to  the  agricultural 
production and eventual processing activities; and 
2)  documentation  of  how  the  investments  in 
production  and  processing  activities  will  comply 
with  local  environmental  standards  and  required 
certificates 
  TAG and CARA to review the environmental risk 
assessment of the business plans and compliance 
with  IFAD  and  the  governments  environmental 
standards before the approval of the business plan 
and matching rant   
  Key  environmental  and  social  risk  mitigation 
measures 
the  Financing 
included 
Agreement  between  the  Cooperative  and  the 
county PMO 
to  be 
in 
  Training  and  technical  assistance  provided  as 
needed  to  the  cooperative  farmers,  livestock 
keepers and to operators and employees of related 
processing  plants  in:  improved  soil  and  water 
management  practices;  IPM;  other  practices 
increasing  production  sustainability  and  climate 
change 
good 
and 
manufacturing  practices  (waste  management  and 
resources  use  efficiency);  and  operation  of 
renewable energy technologies.     
adaptation 
resilience; 
  Annually 
social 
monitoring    of 
cooperative’s 
compliance with 
environmental 
and 
safeguards 
including 
mitigation 
measures 
included  in  the 
business  plans 
and 
financing 
agreements 
all 
  County 
PMOs  with 
periodic 
checks by the 
PPMO 
 
Independent 
third 
and 
and PPMO 
party 
PMOs 
  $5,000 
(Capacity 
building 
budget) 
 
Initial 
verification  and 
annual 
follow 
up  verification 
compliance 
of 
with 
social 
safeguards  and 
inclusion 
standards 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
Social: 
  Women,  Youth 
and 
vulnerable 
households are not 
benefiting 
from 
the 
various 
models 
  Elite capture 
Activity A.1.3: 
Cooperative 
Co-investor 
support 
Activity A.1.4: 
Company-
cooperative/h
ousehold 
models 
Activity A.1.5: 
Other 
Innovative 
Models 
Environmental: 
 
Increased 
production  with 
inadequate 
may 
practices 
increase 
soil 
erosion,  pollution 
Social: (PIM chapter 3 attachment 3) 
  Joint  investment  proposal  and  financing  plan 
investment  agreement  signed 
prepared  and 
between cooperatives, enterprise and the PPMO 
  The funding proposal and business plan must have 
a  clear  identification  and  socio-economic  profile 
of  beneficiary  households  (location,  number, 
poverty, ethnic minority, gender and age of main 
participant/beneficiary, farm size, etc.) 
  Project  funds  can  only  be  used  to  finance  the 
cooperative  or  household  investments  including 
joint  infrastructure  and  training  and  capacity 
building (no enterprise assets ca be funded) 
  No 
to 
funding  will  be  provided  directly 
enterprises,  but  will  be  channelled  through  the 
cooperatives or directly to farmers   
  The investment agreement to include agreement to 
third-party monitoring of the social safeguard and 
inclusion measures   
Environmental: (PIM chapter 3 attachment 2) 
 
Investment proposal and business plan to include: 
1)  an  assessment  of  all  environmental  risks  and 
mitigation  measures  related  to  the  agricultural 
production and eventual processing activities; and 
2)  documentation  of  how  the  investments  in 
production  and  processing  activities  will  comply 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
from 
agrochemicals 
and  waste  from 
processing 
activities 
with  local  environmental  standards  and  required 
certificates 
  TAG and CARA to review the environmental risk 
assessment of the business plans and compliance 
with  IFAD  and  the  governments  environmental 
standards before the approval of the business plan 
and matching rant   
  Key  environmental  and  social  risk  mitigation 
measures 
the  Financing 
included 
Agreement  between  the  Cooperative  and  the 
county PMO 
to  be 
in 
  Training  and  technical  assistance  provided  as 
needed  to  the  cooperative  farmers,  livestock 
keepers and to operators and employees of related 
processing  plants  in:  improved  soil  and  water 
management  practices;  IPM;  other  practices 
increasing  production  sustainability  and  climate 
change 
good 
and 
manufacturing  practices  (waste  management  and 
resources  use  efficiency);  and  operation  of 
renewable energy technologies. 
adaptation 
resilience; 
Activity A.1.6: 
Establishment 
of 
County 
Traceability 
System 
Activity A.1.7: 
Improving 
  No 
adverse 
environmental 
and  social  risks 
from 
foreseen 
these 
two 
activities 
  County 
PMOs  with 
periodic 
checks by the 
PPMO 
  Annually 
social 
monitoring    of 
cooperative’s 
compliance with 
environmental 
and 
safeguards 
including 
mitigation 
measures 
included  in  the 
business  plans 
and 
financing 
agreements 
all 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
Climate 
Information 
and 
Adaptation 
Advice. 
Activity A.2.1: 
Business 
Incubation/ 
Service 
Centres 
Activity A.2.2: 
Investment 
Support 
Start-ups 
for 
 
  County 
PMOs 
periodically 
checked  by 
the PPMO 
Social: 
  Not  achieving  to 
include 
50% 
women among the 
youth 
supported 
star-up 
by 
investment grants 
Social: 
  Application  of  concrete  targeting  strategies  to 
attract  young  women  to  the  Business  Incubation 
Service Centers (BISC) in collaboration with the 
All-China-Women-Federation. 
  Monitor closely the participation of women among 
the beneficiaries, and take action if below 50%. 
from 
Environmental: 
  Pollution 
improper 
of 
management 
the 
waste 
from 
start-up 
activity 
and inefficiency in 
use  of  water  and 
energy resources 
Environmental: 
  Business  plan  proposal  for  matching  grants  to 
include:  1)  an  assessment  of  all  environmental 
risks and mitigation measures related to the star-
up activity; 2) documentation of how the activity 
will  comply  with  local  environmental  standards 
and  eventual  required  certificates;  and  3)  when 
relevant  priority  shall  be  given  to  renewable 
energy sources and water and waste recycling.   
  Evaluation  committee  of  matching  grants  to 
review the assessment of environmental and social 
risks  of  the  business  plans  and  the  adequacy  of 
proposed mitigation measures. 
  Quarterly 
collecting 
gender 
disaggregated 
monitoring  and 
evaluation  data 
to 
the 
track 
extent  to  which 
young  women 
are  benefitting 
from 
the 
matching 
grants. 
  Annually 
and 
monitoring    of 
Start-up 
activities 
their 
compliance with 
environmental 
and  social  risk 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
Sub-
3.1.3 
component 
A.3: 
Improving 
access 
finance 
to 
in 
to  be 
  Key  environmental  and  social  risk  mitigation 
the  Financing 
included 
measures 
Agreement for the matching grant as needed 
  Training  and  technical  assistance  provided  as 
needed by the BISCs to the start-up entrepreneurs 
in: environmental and climate risk assessment and 
mitigation measures; proper management of solid 
waste  and  wastewater 
recycling; 
resources  use  efficiency;  and  operation  of 
renewable energy technologies.       
including 
Environmental: 
  Training 
in  environmental  and  social 
risk 
assessment to be included in the training of finance 
institutions 
  Environmental and social risks assessments to be 
included in the tools used by finance institutions to 
evaluate credit worthiness of credit applications   
mitigation 
measures 
 
  County 
PMOs   
periodically 
checked  by 
the PPMO     
  Annual 
monitoring 
of 
the  application 
the 
of 
assessment  tool 
by 
supported 
finance 
institutions 
Environmental: 
  Credit 
finance 
an 
in 
supports 
increase 
agricultural 
production  with 
inadequate 
practices 
increasing 
soil 
erosion,  pollution 
from 
agrochemicals 
and  waste  from 
processing 
activities 
  Credit 
finance 
an 
supports 
increase  in  non-
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
agricultural 
activities  causing 
pollution 
from 
improper 
of 
management 
waste 
and 
inefficiency in use 
of  water 
and 
energy resources 
& 
Social:   
  Economic 
Component B: Climate Proofed Public Infrastructure Planning & Development 
Activity B.1.1: 
Climate 
proofed 
irrigation 
planning, 
design 
decision 
making 
Activity  B.1.2 
Climate 
proofed 
Smart 
irrigation 
Social (PIM activity B.1.2 description) 
  Transparent, informed and documented discussion 
with  all  farmers  benefitting  from  the  planned 
to  reach  voluntary  signed 
irrigation  system 
consent  with  land user  rights  holders  for placing 
water ponds or pools on their land. Farmers may 
farmers  by 
decide 
transferring user rights to land from non-affected 
farmers.   
displacement  by 
of 
conversion 
farmland  to  water 
ponds  and  pools. 
Will  only  affect 
very  small  areas 
-100m2) 
(25m2 
farmer 
and  no 
affected  will  lose 
more than 10% of 
his/her land 
  Establishment of water users associations (WUA) 
or other O&M associations/groups at the irrigation 
infrastructure planning phase and involve them in 
the  design  of  the  irrigation  system  and  the 
development of an O&M plan, including roles and 
responsibilities,  budget  and  cost 
recovery 
mechanism. 
compensating 
affected 
Activity  B.2.2 
Improvement 
and 
development 
  Ad 
hoc 
organisation 
of 
O&M of irrigation 
and 
systems 
infrastructure may 
  Training  of    WUA  or  other  O&M  group  in 
rainfall 
irrigation  water  management  using 
of 
of 
  Six-monthly 
monitoring 
application 
environmental 
and  social  risk 
management 
measures   
 
  County  PMO 
backed up by 
the  County 
Water 
Bureaus 
needed 
as 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
safe 
of 
drinking 
water supply 
affect 
sustainability 
forecasts and operation and maintenance of water 
infrastructure 
Environmental: 
  Downstream 
land 
from 
the 
of 
to 
and 
impacts  on  water 
ecological 
systems 
overuse  of 
water source 
  Conversion 
forest 
reservoirs 
pumping stations 
  Drainage  water 
with 
polluted 
agrochemicals 
  Low  efficiency  in 
usage of irrigation 
water     
rainy  mountainous  province 
Environmental: 
  Surface water resources are in general plentiful in 
the 
(700-1100 
mm/year with moderate evapotranspiration with a 
mean  temperature  between  15-23  degrees).  The 
water source for the irrigation system investments 
will in most cases be water harvested and stored 
from  mountain  streams.  In  some  cases,  it  will 
pumped water from the Jin Sha Jiang river which 
has a dry season streamflow of 400m3/second. The 
water volume intake will in all cases be far below 
the  2m3/second  limit  above  which  approval  is 
needed from the Municipal Water Bureau14. There 
will be no pumping in the peak of the dry season 
where irrigation water will come from the stored 
water  in  ponds  and  reservoirs.  It  is  planned  the 
water  pumping  will  be  based  on  solar  energy. 
There  will  be  no  pumping  of  ground  water 
financed  by  the  project.  On  the  contrary,  the 
provision of irrigation based on surface water will 
facilitate 
and  unsustainable 
groundwater wells currently used by farmers can 
be closed 
irregular 
that 
14 Measures for the administration of water intake permit and water resource fee collection in Yunnan province (2009) 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
  The water harvesting and irrigation infrastructures 
financed  by  the  project  are  small  scale  and  low 
risks  with  ponds  from  15-100m3  serving  80-
200mu each15  and reservoirs of up to 130 000m3 
which  are  all  already  existing  but  a  few  will  be 
upgraded by the project. They will need approval 
from the County Water Bureaus16     
  Only limited land areas will be used for reservoirs 
and  pumping  stations.  Most  of  this  land  is 
currently  village  collectively  owned  barren  land. 
The biggest case will be the solar driven pumping 
stations,  which  will  cover  less  than  30  mu  (2 
hectares).  No  forest  with  any  protection  grade 
status will affected. 
In most cases drip and sprinkler irrigation will be 
used and only in few cases surface/flood irrigation 
will  be  used  for  paddy  fields,  where  proper 
drainage will be designed. 
 
  Farmers  to  be  trained  in  IPM  in  line  with  the 
government’s  action  plan  for  capacity  building 
and introduction of practices for reduction in the 
use  of  agrochemical,  which  has  already  led  to  a 
30%  reduction  in  pilot  examples  in  some  of  the 
project  counties.  An 
the 
production in the project areas are organic or green 
important  part  of 
15  1 hectares equals 15 Chinese mu 
16  Regulations on the Management of Water Conservancy Projects in Yunnan Province (March 2018) 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
production  certified  meaning  limited  use  of 
agrochemicals.     
  WUAs or other O&M associations/ group in areas 
of water scarcity will be trained in adaptive water 
management  for  water  use  efficiency  under 
different  climate  conditions  using  digital  water 
monitoring  of  water  productivity  and  use 
efficiency         
Activity B.2.1: 
Improvement 
and 
development 
of 
systems. 
road 
Social:   
  Economic 
displacement  by 
conversion 
of 
farmland to roads. 
Will affect limited 
areas 
no 
affected 
farmer 
lose  more 
will 
than 
of 
10% 
his/her land 
and 
  Ad 
hoc 
of 
organisation 
O&M  of 
rural 
roads  may  affect 
their sustainability 
Environmental: 
  Soil  erosion  and 
increased  risks  of 
Social (PIM activity B.1.2 description) 
  Transparent, informed and documented discussion 
with  all  farmers  benefitting  from  the  road  and 
affected  by  its  routing  to  reach  voluntary  signed 
consent with land user rights holders of farmland 
proposed for conversion to the road. Farmers may 
decide 
farmers  by 
transferring user rights to land from non-affected 
farmers.  Monetary  compensation  may  also  be 
used.   
compensating 
affected 
  Before the investment in any road infrastructure an 
operation and maintenance (O&M) plan for each 
section  of  the  roads  must  be  prepared,  including 
roles  and  responsibilities,  budget  and  sources  of 
funding 
Environmental: 
 
  County  PMO 
backed up by 
as 
CARAs 
needed 
of 
of 
  Six-monthly 
monitoring 
application 
environmental 
and  social  risk 
management 
measures   
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
from 
landslides 
improper drainage 
and  interventions 
and 
slopes 
on 
mountain 
sides 
removing 
vegetation   
  Conversion 
forest 
roads     
of 
to 
land 
  There will be a mixture of upgrading of existing 
roads and construction of new roads. Most of the 
roads  are  too  small  to  require  an  environmental 
assessment. The responsibility for rural roads has 
been transferred to  the CARA, who will oversee 
that proper erosion control and drainage measures 
are built into the biding process, contracts, and the 
engineering  design  before  they  give  the  final 
permission for the road construction.   
to 
  Township governments working with the County 
PMO  will  manage  the  contracting  process.  In 
addition 
the  constructing  company,  a 
supervision company will be contracted to oversee 
the  works  and  its  acceptance.  A  warranty  is 
included in the construction contract, which makes 
the  constructing  company  responsible  for  fixing 
any failures in the works, including the failure to 
apply  proper  soil  erosion  control  and  drainage 
measures, within the 1st year after the end of the 
project. 
  Most  of  the  roads  will  go  through  current 
agriculture  land  and  collectively  owned  barren 
land. In a few cases forestland will be impacted, 
which will require the assessment of impacts and 
approval from the forest Bureau. Forest land with 
any protection category should be avoided.         
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
Activity  B.2.4 
Land 
improvement 
and 
preparation 
Environmental 
  Loss  of 
when 
land 
constructing 
terraces. 
topsoil 
levelling 
and 
Environmental: 
  Addition of organic to the soil after the levelling 
should be applied as part of the land improvement 
approach.       
  Verification 
the field 
in 
  County 
PMOs 
CARAs 
 
and 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
Attachment 3: Climate Risk Analysis 
Analysis of Climate Trends in 7 counties of Yunnan Province for the IFAD project 
Zhenxiong County, Yunnan 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
Area：3,695 km2 
Population: 1,681,152 
Pop. Density:455/km2 
Cultivated  Land Area  (2018):  1398 
km2 
Percentage land cultivated: 37.8% 
Livestock  (2018):  2.92  M  (99.8  K 
cows,  45.1  K  sheep,  667.4  K 
pigs,2111.2  K 
Chickens/ducks) 
791head /km2 of total area 
Altitude: range from 2416m to 630m. 
Past Climate data 
Rainfall 
The trend of annual rainfall is around 886 
mm/y  and  doesn’t  show  any  significant 
change in time from 1980 although we can 
note  a  cycle  every  10  years.  Monthly 
rainfall  seems  to  decrease  over  time  in 
autumn  and  winter,  while  increase  in 
summer. 
Temperature 
The  trends  of  max  and  min  temperature 
seem  to  increase  for  both  seasons.  The 
monthly  mean  temperature  is  increasing 
over time for Dec, Jan, Feb and May. 
Suijiang County, Yunnan 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
Area：761 km2 
Population: 160100 
Pop. Density: 210/km2 
Cultivated  Land  Area 
135.90 km2 
Percentage land cultivated: 17.9% 
Livestock 
(2018):  277.2K  heads 
(5.1K cows, 9.9K sheep, 64.7K pigs, 
187.4K 
364 
heads/km2 of total area 
chickens/ducks) 
(2018): 
Past Climate data 
Rainfall 
The trend of annual rainfall is around 888 
mm/y  and  doesn’t  show  any  significant 
change in time from 1980 although we can 
note  a  cycle  every  10  years.  Monthly 
rainfall  seems  to  decrease  over  time  in 
autumn, winter and spring, while increase 
in summer. 
Temperature 
The  trends  of  max  and  min  temperature 
seem  to  increase  for  both  seasons.  The 
monthly  mean  temperature  is  increasing 
over time for Jan, Feb, while it showed a 
decrease trend in the other months. 
Huaping County, Yunnan 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
(2018): 
Area：2200 km2 
Population: 172,400 
Pop. Density: 78.4/km2 
Cultivated  Land  Area 
111km2 
Percentage land cultivated: 5.0% 
Livestock 
(5.1K 
pigs,187.4 
heads/km2 of total area 
Altitude:1160m 
(2018):  277.2K  heads 
sheep,64.7K 
126 
chicken/ducks) 
cows,  9.9K 
Past Climate data 
Rainfall 
The trend of annual rainfall is around 1085 
mm/y and show a decrease trend but  not 
reach up to a significant level in time from 
1980. That was due to the variation of each 
year, we can note a cycle around every 10 
years. Monthly rainfall seems to decrease 
over  time  in  winter  and  spring,  while 
increase in summer. 
Temperature 
The trends of max and min temperature do 
not  show  any  significant  change  in  time 
for  both  seasons.  The  monthly  mean 
temperature  is  increasing  over  time  for 
May and June, while it showed a decrease 
trend in the other months. 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
Yongsheng County, Yunnan 
Area：4950 km2 
Population: 406,256 
Pop. Density: 82/km2 
Cultivated  Land  Area  (2018):  330 
km2 
Percentage land cultivated: 6.7% 
Livestock  (2018):  919.9K  heads( 
377.1K pigs, 286K sheep) 
Past Climate data 
Rainfall 
The trend of annual rainfall is around 947 
mm/y and show an increase trend but not 
reach up to a significant level in time from 
1980. That was due to the variation of each 
year, we can note a cycle around every 8 
years. Monthly rainfall seems to decrease 
over  time  in  the  mostly  months,  while 
increase in July. 
Temperature 
The trends of max and min temperature do 
not  show  any  significant  change  in  time 
for  both  seasons.  The  monthly  mean 
temperature  is  increasing  over  time  for 
winter  and  spring,  while  it  showed  a 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
decrease trend in the summer and autumn. 
Lanping County, Yunnan 
Area：4372km2 
Population: 218340 
Pop. Density:49/km2 
Cultivated Land Area (2018): 414.9 
km2 
Percentage land cultivated: 9.5% 
Livestock  (2018):  705K  heads(55K 
cows, 188K sheep, 154K pigs) 
Past Climate data 
Rainfall 
The trend of annual rainfall is around 979 
mm/y and show an increase trend but not 
reach up to a significant level in time from 
1980. That was due to the variation of each 
year, we can note a cycle around every 6-
8  years.  Monthly  rainfall  seems 
to 
decrease  over  time  in  the  spring,  while 
increase in summer. 
Temperature 
The trends of max and min temperature do 
not  show  any  significant  change  in  time 
for  both  seasons.  The  monthly  mean 
temperature  is  increasing  over  time  for 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
winter  and  spring,  while  it  showed  a 
decrease trend in the summer and autumn. 
Yunlong County, Yunnan 
Area：4400 km2 
Population: 208900 
Pop. Density: 47/km2 
Cultivated  Land  Area 
369km2 
Percentage land cultivated: 16.8% 
Livestock 
(2018):  1.45M  heads 
(158.5K  cows,  298.7K  sheep,  310.7 
pigs) 
(2018): 
Past Climate data 
Rainfall 
The trend of annual rainfall is around 777 
mm/y  and  doesn’t  show  any  significant 
change in time from 1980 although we can 
note  a  cycle  around  every  6-8  years. 
Monthly  rainfall  seems  to  decrease  over 
time  in  the  winter  and  spring,  while 
increase in summer. 
Temperature 
The  trends  of  max  and  min  temperature 
seem  to  increase  for  both  seasons  and  is 
significant for the max temperature in both 
seasons. Indeed, we can see that monthly 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
mean temperature is increasing over time 
for  winter,  while  it  showed  a  decrease 
trend in the summer and autumn. 
Yongping County, Yunnan 
Area：2884km2 
Population: 185000 
Pop. Density: 64/km2 
Cultivated  Land  Area 
211km2 
Percentage land cultivated: 7.3% 
Livestock (2018): 1.98M (115k cows, 
160K sheep, 305K pigs) 
Altitude: 1620 m 
(2018): 
Past Climate data 
Rainfall 
The  trend  of  annual  rainfall  is  around  951 
mm/y  and  show  an  increase  trend  but  not 
reach  up  a  significant  level  in  time  from 
1980. This was due to the variation of each 
year,  we  can  note  a  cycle  around  every  6-8 
years.  Monthly  rainfall  seems  to  decrease 
over  time  in  the  winter  and  spring,  while 
increase in summer. 
Temperature 
The  trends  of  max  and  min  temperature  do 
not show any significant change in time from 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
CHINA - Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RRDP) 
1980.  The  monthly  mean  temperature  is 
increasing  over  time  for  June,  while  it 
showed  a  decrease  trend  in  the  spring  and 
autumn. 
China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Table: 1 First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB- 202-21)   
IFADGovBenOpeTotalIFADGovBenOpeTotal农发政府受益人经营主体合计农发政府受益人经营主体合计A.1A1.1 Upgrading cooperative meeting合作社标准化改造1. Payment to cooperative  meeting 改造费用支付份1,204.7               133.9                  -     -         1,338.5       120.5     13.4      -    -       133.9      10%2. Verification expenses 论证费用84.7                     9.4                       -     -         94.2          28.8      3.2       -    -       32.0       34%3. Investment on pro-poor cooperatives合格合作社的投资7,339.9               -      -     4,893.2               12,233.1      367.0     -       -    244.7     611.7      5%A1.2. Cooperative co-investment 一般合作社投资模式13,312.7             2,935.9               -     13,312.7             29,561.4      1,996.9   440.4     -    1,996.9   4,434.2    15%A1.3 Company-cooperative-householdsmodels 企业合作社农户模式16,019.8             10,679.9             -     16,019.8             42,719.4      2,403.0   1,602.0   -    2,403.0   6,407.9    15%A1.4 Other innovative models 其它创新模式5,339.9               5,339.9               -     5,339.9               16,019.8      801.0     801.0     -    801.0     2,403.0    15%A1.5. Product traceability system 产品追溯体系179.6                   20.0                     -     -         199.6         71.9      8.0       -    -       79.8       40%A1.6 Improving climate information|andadoptation advice 天气智慧生产服务1,416.7               157.4                  -     -         1,574.2       283.3     31.5      -    -       314.8      20%小 计 Subtotal44,898.1   19,276.4   -    39,565.7   103,740.1   6,072.3  2,899.4  -   5,445.5  14,417.3  14%A.2Stimulating entreprenuership andBusiness Services 创业孵化与服务A2.1. Business incubation / Servicecentres 孵化中心226.9                   25.2                     -             -                       252.1                      45.4      5.0       -    -       50.4       20%A2.2. Technical assistance to theservice centre 技术援助3,117.7               346.4                  -             -                       3,464.1                   311.8     34.6      -    -       346.4      10%A.2.3 Start up Investment 创业启动投资2,120.0               -                       -             2,120.0               4,240.0                   106.0     -       -    106.0     212.0      5%A2.4 Operation cost 运行费用958.3                   526.4                  -             -                       1,484.7                   191.7     105.3     -    -       296.9      20%小 计 Subtotal6,422.9               898.0                  -             2,120.0               9,440.9                   654.82   144.96   -   106.00   905.78    10%A.3Improving access to finance 金融服务A3.1 Strengthening financial capacity能力建设242.9                   27.0                     -             -                       269.9                      48.59     5.40      -    -       53.99      20%A3.2 Improving financial advisoryservices 改进咨询服务215.9                   24.0                     -             -                       239.9                      43.19     4.80      -    -       47.99      20%小 计 Subtotal458.9                   51.0                     -             -                       509.9                      91.78    10.20    -   -      101.97    20%51,779.9         20,225.3        -         41,685.7        113,690.9         6,818.9       3,054.6       -       5,551.5       15,425.0       14%表Table 1：                                      国际农发基金贷款云南乡村振兴示范项目 Y2RDP                                       2020-21AWPB by Component 项目实施与投资费用计划汇总表（按建设内容）报告单位：云南省项目办  By Provincial PMO                    报告日期：   2020 年1 M  月1  D日                                   Unit 单位：千美元 '000 USD项目目标 Project Total Budget 2020-2021 Plan 年度计划序号项目活动 Project Activities单位 Unit规模Number占目标%A、Improving Chanyefupin Model 改进产业扶贫模式规模 Number投资费用 Financier投资费用 Budget & FinancierTotal Component A 
IFADGovBenOpeTotalIFADGovBenOpeTotal农发政府受益人经营主体合计农发政府受益人经营主体合计B.1 气候智能基础设施发展Climate SmartIrrigation InfrastructureB1.1 Design and Planning 气候智能基设规划与设计347.138.6-             -                       385.7104.1    11.6       -    -        115.7     30%B1.2 Infrastructures 设施建设池塘 Pond个 set513        1,170.7130.1-             -                       1,300.7351.2     39.0        -    -          390.2      30%蓄水池 Storages个 set 404        370.941.2-             -                       412.1111.3     12.4        -    -          123.6      30%灌溉系统 Irrigation system目 mu8,010      2,248.5249.8-             -                       2,498.3674.6     75.0        -    -          749.5      30%管道 Pipeline公里 km2,304      9,118.21013.1-             -                       10,131.32,735.5   303.9       -    -          3,039.4    30%泵站 Pumping stations座 set28         2,175.6241.7-             -                       2,417.3652.7     72.5        -    -          725.2      30%灌溉渠道 Canal公里 km113        1,272.6141.4-             -                       1,414.0381.8     42.4        -    -          424.2      30%人畜饮水 Domestic water套 set16         654.872.8-             -                       727.6196.5     21.8        -    -          218.3      30%用水者协会 Support to WUA个 each17.21.9-             -                       19.15.2       0.6         -    -          5.7        30%渠配路 修复 Rural road, rehabilitation公里 km331        2,385.8265.1-             -                       2,650.9715.7     79.5        -    -          795.3      30%设施管护 O&M0.00.0687.0         -                       687.0-       -         137.4  -          137.4      20%小 计 Subtotal19,414.42,157.2687.00.022,258.55,928.4  658.7      137.4  -        6,724.6   30%B.2Public Rural infrastructure 公共基础设施B2.1设计监测费用 Infrastructure designand supervision-                       8,689.4               -             -                       8,689.4                   2,606.82    -    -          2,606.82   30%B2.2基础设施建设 Infrastructureinvestment农田道路 Rural/Farm road-                       37,928.6             -             -                       37,928.6                15,171.5    -    -          15,171     40%水源和水池 Water source and storages-                       10,226.0             -             -                       10,226.0                4,090.4     -    -          4,090.4    40%渠道管道等 Canals and pipelines-                       18,544.7             -             -                       18,544.7                7,417.9     -    -          7,417.9    40%其它公共设施 Other infrastructures-                       10,922.3             -             -                       10,922.3                4,368.9     -    -          4,368.9    40%小 计 Subtotal77,621.7             77,621.7                -      33,655.5   -    -        33,655.5  43%Total Component B19,414.36           79,778.80           686.98      -                       99,880.13              5,928.4  34,314.2   137.4  -        40,380.0  40%表Table 1：                                      国际农发基金贷款云南乡村振兴示范项目 Y2RDP                                       2020-21AWPB by Component 项目实施与投资费用计划汇总表（按建设内容）报告单位：云南省项目办  By Provincial PMO                    报告日期：   2020 年1 M  月1  D日                                   Unit 单位：千美元 '000 USD项目目标 Project Total Budget 2020-2021 Plan 年度计划序号项目活动 Project Activities单位 Unit规模Number占目标%B、公共基础设施和服务Improving infrastructure climate resilience规模 Number投资费用 Financier投资费用 Budget & Financier 
IFADGovBenOpeTotalIFADGovBenOpeTotal农发政府受益人经营主体合计农发政府受益人经营主体合计3.1 项目办设备 PMO equipment140.7145.30.00.0286.070.3        72.7        -    -          143.0      50%3.2 项目培训研讨能力建设等 Training,workshop etc.1710.3522.60.00.02232.9342.1       104.5       -    -          446.6      20%3.3 项目监测与评估 M&E and KM related1180.9553.90.00.01734.8236.2       110.8       -    -          347.0      20%3.4 项目办运行 Office operation0.02961.70.00.02961.7-         592.3       -    -          592.3      20%3.5 办公室人员 Office staff 0.02341.00.00.02341.0-         468.2       -    -          468.2      20%小 计 Subtotal3031.96524.50.00.09556.4648.6     1,348.5    -    -        1,997.1   21%3,031.91             6,524.49             -             -                       9,556.40                648.6     1,348.5    -    -        1,997.1   21%74,226.2   106,528.6  687.0  41,685.7   223,127.5   13,396.0  38,717.3   137.4  5,551.5    57,802.2  26%表Table 1：                                      国际农发基金贷款云南乡村振兴示范项目 Y2RDP                                       2020-21AWPB by Component 项目实施与投资费用计划汇总表（按建设内容）报告单位：云南省项目办  By Provincial PMO                    报告日期：   2020 年1 M  月1  D日                                   Unit 单位：千美元 '000 USD项目目标 Project Total Budget 2020-2021 Plan 年度计划Total component C Total合计序号项目活动 Project Activities单位 Unit规模Number占目标%3、项目管理与能力建设 Project Management 规模 Number投资费用 Financier投资费用 Budget & Financier 
China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex: 7 Procurement Plan for First 18 Months   
1.  A detailed procurement plan covering a period of 18 months is prepared and attached as 
table 1 (for Civil Works) and table 2 ( for Services). 
2. 
The main items of goods to be procured for project are office and technical equipment and 
furniture.  Other  goods  and  materials  will  be  procured  following  the  local  shopping  (LS)  as 
appropriate. Civil works will involve the improvement of rural infrastructure, including irrigation 
and drinking water supply facilities and village roads. They will be procured by using NBF and 
LCB or LS, depending on the nature of expenditure and the estimated value of the related contract. 
Technical  services,  training,  workshops  and  studies  for  the  project  will  be  procured  by  using 
Direct Contracting or NBF method. . 
The  following  Table  presents  a  summary  of  the  procurement  methods.  Figures  in 
3. 
parenthesis are the respective amounts financed by IFAD. 
3.    Procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  financed  by  the  project  will  be  carried  out  in 
accordance  with  the  Procurement  Law  of  the  People's  Republic  of  China  (2002)  and  its 
amendments  to  the  extent  that  they  are  consistent  with  the  provisions  of  IFAD’s  Project 
Procurement Guidelines and Handbook (2010) and its amendments. The procurement methods 
to be applied, prior review arrangements, and the thresholds for different procurement methods 
will depend on the expenditure and the estimated value of the contract and will be detailed in the 
letter to the borrower. 
ChinaY2RDP  PDRProcurement ArrangementsLocal(US$ '000)CompetitiveLocalDirectBiddingShoppingContractingN.B.F.TotalA. Civil work---86,311.186,311.1 B. Smart civil work20,482.9---20,482.9 (18,434.6)(18,434.6)C. Equipment and material-156.3-129.7286.0 (140.7)(140.7)D. Training, workshop, capacity building  & TA--8,781.2490.09,271.2 (7,903.1)(7,903.1)E. Goods, services and inputs-3,338.0-265.23,603.3 (3,004.2)(3,004.2)F. Grants and subsidy--85,818.018,955.7104,773.7 (44,132.3)(44,132.3)G. Salary and allowances---2,986.02,986.0 (580.5)(580.5)H. Operating costs---3,801.53,801.5 (377.9)(377.9)I. Operations and maintenance---2,769.02,769.0Total20,482.93,494.494,599.2115,708.1234,284.6(18,434.6)(3,144.9)(52,035.4)(958.3)(74,573.3)Note: Figures in parenthesis are the respective amounts financed by IFADProcurement Method 
Table 1: Procurement Plan for first 18 Months (Civil Works) 
表2 Table 2合同编号Contractnumber合同内容Contract contents单位 Unit估计数量 AmountEstimated预算成本（人民币千元）Budget(CNY'000)预算成本（美元千元）Budget(US$'000)采购方式Procuremethods是否前审（Y/N）priorreview预计执行期限Expectedexecutionperiod采购组织单位organization合计Total土建类合计Civil works 65,757.75      9,300.95   AB-W-20-XXX池塘 Pond个 set154            4,138.30        585.33        NCBN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX蓄水池 Storages个 set 121            1,311.18        185.46        NCBN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX灌溉系统 Irrigation system目 mu2,403          7,948.49        1,124.26      NCBY2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX管道 Pipeline公里 km691            32,232.88       4,559.11      NCBY2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX泵站 Pumping stations座 set8              7,690.67        1,087.79      NCBN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX灌溉渠道 Canal公里 km34             4,498.78        636.32        NCBY2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX人畜饮水 Domestic water套 set5              2,314.87        327.42      NCBN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX渠配路 修复 Rural road,rehabilitation公里 km             995,622.58        795.3         NCB Y2020.8 - 2021.12货物合计 Goods TotalAB-G-20-XXX县项目办办公设备 Officeequipments and supplies ofcountiesLot7746.03          105.5LSN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-G-20-XXX县孵化中心设备货物 Goodsequipment for county incubationcentersLot7802.45          113.5LSN2020.8 - 2021.12货物合计Total goods 1,548.47       219.02     备注：1、土建类合同编码为：AB县-W-年份+序号(序号为001开始，依此类推），例如镇雄土建第一合同编码为ZX-W-20-001 Note for numbering      2、货物类合同编码为：AB县-G-年份+序号(序号为001开始，依此类推），例如镇雄货物第一合同编码为ZX-G-20-001                                            国际农发基金贷款云南乡村振兴示范项目 Y2RDP                                  2020-21 年度项目采购计划汇总表（工程类）18 month Procurement Plan (Civil Works)  
Table 2: Procurement Plan for first 18 Months (Services) 
附表3合同编号 ContractNo.任务描述 Activities预算成本（人民币千元）Budget(CNY'00预算成本（美元千元）Budget(US$'000)选择方式 MethodPrior Review是否前审（Y/N）合同预期Executing Period执行期组织采购单位 Organizingparty咨询类 Consultancy6140.78868.57AB-C-20-XXX合作社达标论证 Coop certification325.2246.00CQSY2020.8 - 2021.12 AB-C-20-XXX孵化中心技术支持 TA forincubation centers3673.64519.61CQSN2020.4 - 2021.10 AB-C-20-XXX金融服务咨询 Rural Finance TA1081.42152.96CQSN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-C-20-XXX项目办技术咨询 TA for PMOs1060.50150.00CQSN2020.4 - 2021.10服务类 Service6419.18907.95AB-S-20-XXX项目基线调查 Baseline Survey473.6967.00QCBSY2020.4 - 2021.10AB-S-20-XXX监测评价服务 M&E service1604.89227.00LCN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-S-20-XXX管理信息系统开发MIS Development713.05100.86CQSY2020.4 - 2021.10AB-S-20-XXX地方工作人员培训 Local stafftraining2828.00400.00LCN2020.4 - 2021.10AB-S-20-XXX国内培训 Domestic training 799.55113.09LCN2020.4 - 2021.10合计Total12,559.96   1,776.51     备注：1、咨询类合同编码为：AB县-C-年份+序号(序号为001开始，依此类推），例如镇雄土建第一合同编码为ZX-C-20-001
Note for numbering       2、服务类合同编码为：AB县-S-年份+序号(序号为001开始，依此类推），例如镇雄土建第一合同编码为ZX-S-20-001 国际农发基金贷款云南乡村振兴示范项目 Y2RDP  2020-21 年度项目采购计划汇总表（咨询服务类）18 month Procurement Plan (Services) 
China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
DRAFT_PIM 
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration 
Project (Y2RRDP), China 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table of Contents 
Currency Equivalents ............................................................... 2 
Weights and Measures .............................................................. 2 
Abbreviations and acronyms ......................................................... 3 
Project area map ................................................................... 4 
Chapter 1: Introduction and Background ................................................ 5 
1.1 Country Context: ........................................................... 5 
1.2 Situation analysis of China regarding IFAD’s corporate mainstreaming priorities: ........ 7 
1.2.1 Gender and social inclusion ............................................. 7 
1.2.2 Ethnic Minority and Poverty ............................................. 7 
1.2.3 Rural Youth .......................................................... 8 
1.2.4 Nutrition Situation Analysis ............................................. 9 
1.3 Provincial Context (Yunnan) ................................................. 10 
1.4 Situation Analysis of Project Area regarding IFAD’s corporate mainstreaming priorities .. 11 
1.4.1 Gender Analysis of Project Area ......................................... 11 
1.4.2 Youth in the Project Area .............................................. 13 
1.4.3 Ethnic Minorities in Project Area ........................................ 14 
1.4.4 Nutrition in Project Area ............................................... 15 
1.5 Climate Change: ........................................................... 16 
Chapter 2: Project Summary ........................................................ 16 
2.1: Goals and Objectives ...................................................... 16 
2.2: Project area and Geographical targeting ........................................ 17 
2.3: Target groups and Targeting strategy .......................................... 18 
Chapter 3: Project Components/Outcomes, Activities and Implementation Strategy. ............. 20 
3.1 Component A. Supporting Inclusive Rural Development: ........................... 21 
3.1.1 Sub-component A.1: Improving chanye fupin models. ........................ 24 
3.1.2 Sub-component A.2: Stimulating entrepreneurship/attracting investors. .......... 37 
103.  3.1.3 Sub-component A.3: Improving access to finance. ..................... 41 
3.2 Component B; Description and Implementation Strategy ........................... 43 
3.2.1 Sub-component B.1: Improving infrastructures for enhanced climate resilience. ... 43 
3.2.2 Sub-component B.2: Public Rural Infrastructure Development. ................. 45 
3.3 Component C: Project Management, Knowledge Management, M&E, and Policy: ....... 48 
Chapter 4: Project Implementation Structure ............................................ 69 
4.1 Project management and coordination .......................................... 69 
4.2 Project Planning ........................................................... 72 
Chapter 5: Project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) .................................... 74 
Chapter 6: Knowledge Management and Communication ................................. 85 
Chapter 7: Project Costing and Financing .............................................. 88 
Chapter 8: Financial Management ................................................... 147 
Chapter 9: Project Procurement ..................................................... 250 
Chapter 10: Draft Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP) ...................... 257 
Chapter 11: Terms of Reference of Staff Key PMO Staff ................................. 275 
1 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Currency Equivalents 
Weights and Measures 
2 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
AC 
ABC 
ADB 
Agriculture Cooperative 
Agriculture Bank of China 
Asian Development Bank 
AII                          
Agricultural Information Institute 
AM 
Accounting Manual   
AWPB                   
Annual Work Program and Budget 
CAAS                     
China Academy of Agricultural Science 
CFI 
Corporate Financial Institutions 
COSOP                  
Country Strategic Opportunity Programme 
CPMO                   
County Project Management Office 
CYFP 
CYL 
Chanye Fupin (poverty reduction through industry) 
Communist Youth League 
DARA                    
Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs 
DLI                          
Disbursement-linked indicator 
EFA 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
EIRR                       
Economic Internal Rate of Return 
IPAS 
Public Sector Accounting Standard 
IRF                          
Integrated Risk Framework 
JIMAAPP             
Jiangxi Mountainous Areas Agribusiness Promotion Project 
KM                         
Knowledge Management 
MARA                   
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs 
3 
PIM Y2RRDP 
MOF                      
Ministry of Finance 
M&E                      
Monitoring & Evaluation 
MRV                      
Measuring, Reporting and Verification System 
NDRC                    
National Development and Reform Commission 
O&M                     
Operation & Maintenance 
PforR                     
Program for Results 
PMO                      
Project Management Office 
PPMO                   
Provincial Project Management Office 
RBL                         
Result-based lending 
SDG                       
Sustainable Development Goal 
SME                       
Small and medium enterprises 
SSADEP              
Shiyan Smallholder Agribusiness Development Project 
UNDAF 
United Nations Development Assistance Framework 
UNSDCF 
United Nations Sustainable Development Country Framework 
WB 
World Bank 
Y2RDP                   
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project 
Project area map 
4 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Chapter 1: Introduction and Background 
1.1 Country Context: 
1.  40 Years of politico-economic reforms and Opening up:  December 2018 marked 
the 40 years since Deng Xiaoping initiated China’s reforms and opening up with his 
famous speech: “Emancipate the mind, seeking truth from fact, and unite as one to face 
the future.” That triggered four decades of reforms that would bring China where it is 
now: the second largest economy in the world, more than 800 million people escaped 
poverty.  China’s  share  in  the  world  economy  rose  from  1.5  percent  in  1978  to  15 
percent today, and per capita income increased 25-fold from 300 dollars in 1978 to 
7,300 dollars in 2017. China is one of the few countries that will soon have made the 
journey from low income country to high income country. China continued strong GDP 
growth now accounts for one-third of global growth and country has achieved upper 
middle-income status1. 
2.  China under President Xi Jinping entered a new era of development, a needed transition 
to a more balanced and sustainable growth.    Identifying    poverty reduction as one of 
the three critical battles and pledging    to eradicating    poverty by 2020,    President 
Xi has embarked on economic reforms designed to rebalance from its early focus on 
domestic  infrastructure  investment  and  exports-led  economy  towards  a  supply-side 
structural  adjustment and innovation-based model  with  more domestic consumption 
and public expenditure in health, education and poverty reduction programs    aiming 
at    reducing urban-rural disparities, and rural revitalization. 
3.  Nevertheless,  inequality  and  disparities  remain  a  challenge,  despite  China’s 
economic and social gains. As of 2017, about 45 million Chinese still lived below the 
international  poverty  line  of  US$1.90  a  day.  With  reference  to  higher  international 
poverty lines, a relatively large number of people continued to live in moderate poverty 
and  were  vulnerable  to  poverty  shocks.  There  were  95.5  million  people  below  the 
“lower middle income” poverty line of US$3.20 a day (in terms of purchasing power 
parity) and 373.1 million people below the “upper middle income” line of US$5.50 a 
day. Most important is the need to address inequality, which is relatively high, with a 
Gini coefficient of 0.46 in 2015. 
4.  Geography explains much of the inequality in China. Several studies indicate that 
disparities between urban and rural areas represent the largest share of total inequality. 
Unequal access to infrastructure and municipal services, which is associated with rural-
urban disparity, is a significant contributor to overall inequality. Disparities between 
coastal  and  inland  provinces  are  also  high.  Substantial  state-led  investments  in  the 
interior provinces have reduced the income gap in recent years but at the cost of capital 
1 In February 2018, Chinese government released its ‘No. 1 Central Document’, 
traditionally indicator of policy priorities, entitled “Opinions on Implementing the 
Rural Revitalization Strategy”, which draws a road map for rural revitalization, 
highlighting explicitly a policy statement featuring a strategy that aims to 
revitalize China's vast rural region. 
5 
PIM Y2RRDP 
misallocation,  which  is  increasingly  evident.  The  challenge  to  create  sustainable 
income opportunities in the interior provinces thus remains. 
5.  Demographic transition and aging population are also boding ill to China socio-
economic  sustainability.  The  widening  urban-rural  population  gap  and  ageing 
population are becoming new challenges for China to meet social security and keep 
agriculture labour force intact which are backbone of china food security depending on 
250 million small farm holders. Today about 42 percent of the Chinese population are 
registered in rural areas, which is predicted to be down to 31% by 2030. Between 1950 
and 2015, the total fertility rate per woman declined from 6.11 to 1.6. over the same 
time, the overall mortality rate also declined significantly resulting in a steady increase 
in life expectancy. In addition, due to large scale rural labor migration, China rural and 
agriculture feminization and aging became a common phenomenon 
6.  The poverty context: The government of China is planning to eradicate extreme rural 
poverty, measured against the prevailing national poverty standards (i.e. approximately 
US$1.90/day), by 2020 - making China the first developing country to achieve SDG1, 
ten years ahead of the global target. However, sustaining this achievement, reducing 
inequalities (between costal and western provinces, urban and rural areas, and among 
population i.e. relative poverty), and avoiding that the people moved out of poverty fall 
back into poverty will remain priorities for the government in the years following 2020.   
7.  The rural development context. China is going through a fundamental transformation 
in rural areas. Over the past decades, China has experienced a massive migration of the 
active workforce from the rural to the urban areas due to the gap between the urban 
and rural salaries and the limited income-generating opportunities in the rural areas. 
Rural villages today are characterized by a population which mainly comprises elderly, 
some middle generation women taking care of the elderly parents (the so-called “left-
behind women”, who represent about 60% of the labour force in rural areas), young 
children,  and  sick  and/or  people  with  disabilities.  Rural  families  from  poverty 
vulnerable  households  are  often  dependent  on  the  remittances  provided  by  migrant 
worker family members, complemented by some income from production and local 
labour.   
8.  In response to this situation, the government has recently coined a "rural revitalization" 
strategy (2017),  a long-term,  comprehensive strategy  which  aims  at  rebalancing the 
existing divide between urban and rural areas by accelerating the development of rural 
areas and making them attractive for living. Key strategies for pursuing and sustaining 
poverty 
include:  agricultural 
"industrialization"  (i.e.  the  development  of  lead  "industries"  through  the  support  of 
agro-enterprises  and  cooperatives),  creation  of  employment  opportunities,  and 
comprehensive infrastructure development - among other strategies. 
reduction  efforts  and  developing 
rural  areas 
6 
PIM Y2RRDP 
1.2 Situation analysis of China regarding IFAD’s corporate mainstreaming priorities: 
1.2.1 Gender and social inclusion   
9.  The  propose  project  contributes  to  reduce  the  gender  gap.  As  of  end-2015,  women 
comprised about half of the 56 million rural poor population in China.2    According to 
State Statistic Bureau survey in the nationally designated poor counties, the degree of 
poverty  was  greater  among  women  than  among  men.    In  2010,  women’s  poverty 
incidence was 9.8% while men’s was 9.4%, and the incidence of low-income women 
was 0.6 percentage points higher than that of men. Rural women’s average level of 
education in Midwestern China was 6.8 years, which was 0.8 years less than those in 
Eastern China.   
10. The majority of labor force of female is engaged in agriculture, about 80.6%, mostly 
in  primary  industry  as  compared  to  58.8%  of  male  labor  in  2017 3 .According  to 
National Bureau of Statistics of China, the education level of female labor in poor area 
was far behind that of male labor (Table ).   
Educatin level of Female/Male labor in poor area of China   
Education level 
Female labor (%) 
Male labor (%) 
No school 
Primary school 
Middle school 
High school 
College and above 
11.9 
39.4 
40.4 
5.9 
2.4 
3.7 
29.0 
51.7 
11.5 
4.1 
Source: Poverty Monitoring Report of Rural China 2018. 
11. The  project  will  have  special  focus  on  prospective  all  poor  households,  women 
entrepreneurs and participation in farmer/specialized cooperatives.   
1.2.2 Ethnic Minority and Poverty 
12. There  are  fifty-five  ethnic  minorities  in  China  and  one  third  of  the  ethnic  minority 
population live in the Yunnan province. The main provinces home to ethnic minorities 
2 X.L. Wang and R. Gao. Poverty Reduction of Rural Women: Objective, Challenge and Policy Option. Collection 
of Women’s Studies, No. 6 Ser. No. 138, Nov. 2016. Pages 5-8. 
3 Department of Household Surveys, National Bureau of Statistics of China. Poverty 
Mornitoring Report of Rural China (2018). China Statistic Press, Dec. 2018. 
7 
PIM Y2RRDP 
are  eight  western  provinces  including  Inner  Mongolia,  Guangxi,  Guizhou,  Yunnan, 
Tibet,  Qinghai,  Ningxia  and  Xinjiang  named  Eight  Minority  Province/Autonomous 
Region (Minzu Bashengqu). According to National Ethnic Affairs Commission, there 
were 421 minority autonomous counties among 832 nationally designated poor county, 
accounting  51%.  Similarly  eleven  of  fourteen  contiguous  poverty  blocks  (Sanqu 
Sanzhou) are located in the key minority area. The poverty incidence of key minority 
area has been remained higher than the national average, and the share of key minority 
area  in  country  poor  population  increased  3.5  percentage  point  between  2010  to 
20174  . 
Table 4: Poverty Situation of Key Minority Area (2010-2017) 
Year 
Country 
poverty 
incidence 
2010 
17.2% 
2011 
12.7% 
2012 
10.2% 
2013 
8.5% 
2014 
7.2% 
2015 
5.7% 
2016 
4.5% 
2017 
3.1% 
Poverty incidence of eight 
minority provinces 
%  of  minority  in  poor 
population 
34.5% 
26.5% 
21.1% 
17.1% 
14.7% 
12.1% 
9.3% 
6.9% 
30.4% 
32.0% 
31.5% 
31.1% 
31.4% 
32.5% 
32.5% 
33.9% 
13.   
Source: National Bureau of Statistics 
14.  
1.2.3 Rural Youth 
15. Presently, China doesn’t have an explicitly written, unified national  youth policy or 
official  executive  mechanism  for  carrying  out  and  monitoring  national  or  regional 
youth affairs. Youth policy is regarded as a component of the overall policy of the CPC 
which is ideologically oriented and politically dominated. Communist Youth League 
(CYL),  the  sole  national  organisation  managing  youth  affairs  in  China,  focuses  its 
efforts on  young people between 14 and 28  years. The literacy rate among  youth is 
4 National Ethnic Affairs Commission. Poverty Monitoring Result of Minority Area 
(2017).  
http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2018-08/15/5313944/files/a0182850dccb49998471b5b3d584c279.pdf 
8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
99% in both sexes. Over last three decades the youth unemployment remained average 
of 9 to 10%. 
16. Since 1980s when China economic reform started, rural labor has been being migrated 
to  urban  on  a  large  scale  majorly  due  to  the  income  gap  between  rural  and  urban. 
According to NBS, there was 179.69 million rural labor migrated to urban by 20175. 
The rural labor under 40 years old was the majority of the labor migration, and 66% of 
them migrated to eastern China6. With such big scale rural labor migration, China rural 
and agriculture feminization and aging became a common phenomenon.   
17. In  September  2018,  central  government  issued  “Strategy  Planning  for  Rural 
Revitalization  (2018-2022)”,  to  promote  rural  revitalization  of  industry,  human 
resource, culture, ecology and organization. Obviously, rural youth is the key human 
resource  for  rural  revitalization,  and  achievement  of  rural  revitalization  will  create 
opportunity to pull youth back to rural.   
18. The proposed project would focus on fostering local youth, facilitating migrated youth 
back to rural by giving them business startup ideas and opportunities. In addition, the 
project  would  also  support  the  Chinese  government  ‘Mass  Rural  Youth  Volunteer 
Program’, which would facilitate sending over ten million of young volunteers from 
large cities to rural areas7. 
1.2.4 Nutrition Situation Analysis   
19. China  has  made  significant  progress  in  recent  decades  in  improving  malnutrition. 
Overall situation is improving drastically. China reduced the level of undernourishment 
in the country from 23.9 percent in 1990-92 to 9.3 percent in 2014-16. 
Rates  of  child  malnutrition  are  also  dropping.  From  1990  to  2010,  the  number  of 
underweight children under 5 fell by 74 percent and rates of stunting dropped by 70 
percent. Current levels are lower than most other developing countries.  
20. Similarly  the  nutrition  status  of  children  and  adolescent  aged  5-19  has  improved 
remarkedly  over  the  last  15  years  as  shown  in  graph  below  where  the  underweight 
reduced to 17% in year 2015 from 27% in 1999.    However the overweight and obesity 
has greatly worsened over the same period for same population group. 
Source: WHO World Health Report, 2017       
5 National Bureau of Statistics. 
http://data.stats.gov.cn/search.htm?s=2017%20%E5%85%A8%E5%9B%BD%20%E5%A4%96%E5%87%BA%E
5%8A%A1%E5%B7%A5%E5%8A%B3%E5%8A%A8%E5%8A%9B 
6 Xu Xiaohua, et al.  The Trend Forecast and Management of the Chinese Agricultural Surplus Labor Transfer During 
2014 —2030. Management Review, Vol. 30, No. 1, Jan. 2018. 221-229 
7 Update on Key Developments in China, April 2019. 
9 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Source: WHO World Health Report, 2017 
21. According to WHO World Health Report 2017, (having data from 2013) the 
prevalence of stunting, underweight and wasting among children under 5 were 8.1%, 
2.4%, and 1.9% in the overall China showing great achievement in nutrition.   
Source: WHO World Health Report, 2017 
22. , better nutrition has significantly improved the health and quality of life of Chinese 
children. Mortality in under 5s due to malnutrition dropped from 22 to 13 percent 
between 2000 and 2010.   Meanwhile The food supply has also improved remarkably, 
and undernourishment of population reduced from 16% in 2000 to 9% in 2016. But 
overweight and obesity are becoming prominent in cities, and gradually appearing in 
rural areas: 23 percent of boys and 14 percent of girls under 20 were now found to be 
overweight or obese. The health and nutrition improvement in china population is 
also resulted from improved drinking water coverage and improved sanitation 
coverage. China's value in the Global Hunger Index fell from 25.1 in 1990 (serious 
hunger level), to 7.6 in 2018 (low hunger level). 
1.3 Provincial Context (Yunnan) 
23. Province of Yunnan has consistently been a priority area of the Chinese government’s 
poverty reduction program given it hosts the largest share of poor people in the country 
(11%  of  the  national  poor  in  2018).  Located  in  southwest  China,  Yunnan  is 
characterized  by  difficult  terrain  of  overlapping  mountains,  ethnic  minorities  and 
nationally designated poor counties. With more than 94% mountainous territory and 
more  than  4,000  km  border  line  with  Myanmar,  Laos  and  Vietnam,  there  are  16 
10 
PIM Y2RRDP 
prefectures in Yunnan, under them, there are 129 districts / cities / counties. In 2018, 
88 out of 129 counties (mostly in the Western and North-East parts of the province) 
were still classified as nationally-designated poor counties. Although absolute poverty 
will  be  eradicated  in  these  counties  by  2020,  many  rural  households  will  remain 
vulnerable and with limited income opportunities. 
Table : Poor Population of Yunnan in China (2012-2018) 
in 
Poverty incidence 
% 
% of Yunnan rural poor 
in China 
Year 
Number  of  Rural  Poor 
Yunnan 
(million) 
8.04   
7.00   
5.74   
4.71   
4.48   
3.32   
1.81   
21.70% 
18.79% 
17.09% 
14.03% 
13.33% 
9.89% 
5.39% 
Source:    Yunnan Poverty Alleviation Office. 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
8.12% 
8.49% 
8.18% 
8.45% 
10.33% 
10.90% 
10.90% 
1.4  Situation Analysis  of  Project Area  regarding  IFAD’s  corporate  mainstreaming 
priorities   
1.4.1 Gender Analysis of Project Area 
Women accounts for 48.11% making 23.24 million women in Yunnan Province (2018). 
Among them, 1.42 million women are living in  the  project  counties and about  0.20 
million in the targeted project area. 
24. Decision  making  in  household  and  community.  Mostly  the  patrilineal  system  is 
practiced in the project area. In general, the overall socio-economic status of women is 
poor than men in terms of education, health and access to technical and information 
services. Most women still cultivate the land under their husbands’ name due to the 
practice  of  traditional  marriage  pattern  where  men  are  registered  as  family  head. 
Therefore,  women with  formal household  head title accounts only 6.14% in  project 
counties and 17.53% in project area, number increased due to male outmigration.   
25. Following the common practice of official and uniform administration system in China, 
most affairs at the community level are officially managed by villagers’ committees in 
administrative villages with village committee head where men are the major decision 
makers  at  all  levels. The  women  village  leadership  in  the  project  counties  accounts 
only 9.90% while 17.14% in project area. 
26. Labour Division: Men generally play the key role in transactions and heavy manual 
work, while women take care of daily farming activities that require less manual labour 
but are more constant and time consuming. Often women end up the main labour for 
11 
PIM Y2RRDP 
farming activities due to migration of men. The overall women labour force in project 
counties  are  about  40%  whereas  almost  70%  accounts  in  village  agriculture  labour 
force.   
27. Women’s  Access  to  Technology.    Yunnan  Agro-Technical  Extension  Stations  at 
county  and  township  levels  are  the  main  technical  service  providers  in  province. 
According to the limited data from five project counties, only 17.67% rural labors were 
trained by the government extension system in 2018. However, 50.61% trainees were 
women, and 30.51% were ethnic minorities. As evidenced from the field visits, there 
is  a  serious  shortage  of  human  resources  for  such  extension  servics  in  the  project 
counties  and  project  area.    Each  technician  is  covering  hundreds  of  households  on 
average. Furthermore, women do not represent an appropriate share of the technical 
extension system staff accounting less than 30%. 
28. Women’s access to credit. Government of China has recently initiated small business 
credit  program  (Daimian  Fubu)  managed  by  County  Employment  Bureau  where 
borrower can get low interest credit up to CNY150,000 for three  years only after if 
they are duly recommended by Women’s Federation (WF), Communist Youth League 
(CYL), Education Bureau, Labor Union, and Association of Industry and Commerce, 
etc.  Interestingly  borrowers  from WF’s  recommendation  took  more  than half  in  the 
program in some project counties, more than 70% of them are rural women. 
29. Women’s  participation 
in  Farmers’  Cooperative.  There  are  about  4,871 
cooperatives  in  seven  project  counties  mostly  led  by  men  and  dominated  by  male 
members despite the fact that key labor force in the project area is dominated by women. 
Besides  cultural  reason,  membership  of  women  who  is  not  registered  as  household 
head,  would  cause  the  difficulty  to  the  cooperative  when  dealing  with  different 
agencies  for  cooperative  establishment  and  operation,  as  the  agencies  require  the 
membership consistent with household head. Nevertheless, field visit of the mission 
found that women are keen to play significant role in the cooperative.   
Table : Cooperative situation in project area and project counties (2018) 
% of Coop. Membership 
among rural HH 
%  of  women-led  Coop. 
Among all 
of 
% 
membership in Coop. 
women’s 
County 
Project 
county 
NA 
82.29% 
Suijiang 
Zhenxion
g 
Yunlong 
5.73% 
Yongping  27.23% 
Yongshen
g 
NA 
Project 
area 
NA 
NA 
Project 
county 
0.71% 
Project 
area 
Project 
county 
Project 
area 
0.64% 
54.75% 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
6.70% 
14.23% 
16.63% 
6.77% 
NA 
25.81% 
30.23% 
7.60% 
NA 
23.70% 
NA 
40.50% 
NA 
NA 
NA 
12 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Huaping  NA 
Lanping 
14.42% 
NA 
NA 
NA 
2.82% 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Data source: CPMOs. 
30. Women’s organization. Yunnan Women’s Federation (YWF) is the dominant 
women’s organization in the Province and playing important role in gender 
mainstreaming and empowerment in project area. Established in 1950, YWF is 
catering for all ethnic with aim to create a bridge between women and government 
while making important decisions for safeguarding women’s rights, and promoting 
gender equality. YWF has offices and representatives at the provincial, prefecture and 
county levels, and has very strong linkages down to the grassroots levels with 
representatives in townships and administrative villages.    Since 2016, under the 
reform arrangement of ACWF, YWF has expanded its organization structure from a 
representative to the federation with elected members of 25 at township level and 15 
at village level. Consequently, YWF has stronger linkages with grass root women, 
and women’s mobility in the project area is ensured.   
31. Corresponding to the government poverty alleviation policies, YWF promoted 
poverty alleviation for rural women through following approaches, (a) Disseminating 
the government policies and experience of good practice; (b) Providing training on 
production and business skills; (c) Facilitating application of credit and business 
operation; (d) Promoting development of women’s handicraft based on minority 
tradition; (e) Establishing platform for employment opportunity; (f) Mobilizing 
resources for women and children’s healthcare. In May 2018, YWF issued “Working 
Plan on Women’s Action in Rural Revitalization”, besides the works mentioned 
above, the working plan also includes organizing rural women to participate rural 
governance and social improvement. 
1.4.2 Youth in the Project Area 
32. Like other parts of country, Yunnan Communist Youth League (CYL) is the most 
extensive youth organization in the province ant at the county level that positioned 
itself as the sole organization systematically serving for youth development widely on 
youth ideology and morality, youth education, youth health,    youth career-
orientation and employment, youth social inclusion and participation and youth social 
security 
33. About 55% of the workforce in the project area is engaged in migrant labour; more 
than half of the migrant workers are represented by youth between 15 to 34 years old 
of age. To revert this trend, a central pillar of the new rural revitalization strategy 
13 
PIM Y2RRDP 
focuses on creating new employment opportunities in the rural areas to retain or 
attract back the active population to the rural areas [1], particularly young people. 
The project will contribute to this objective by (i) providing incentives and support to 
entrepreneurs and investors (particularly young and - considering women represent 
the majority of the workforce in the rural areas - women) to start their own business 
in the project area (Ref. Sub-component A.2); and (ii) facilitating women 
participation in supported cooperatives, including leading roles (Ref. Sub-component 
A.1). 
34. Following the Central Committee of the Communist Young League, Yunnan CYL 
issued “Action Plan of Youth Contribution to Rural Revitalization (2019-2022)”. The 
relevant detail objectives include, 
(a) To facilitate 20,000 youth migrant labors employed annually; 
(b) To facilitate 10,000 college graduates from poor households employed; 
(c) To  facilitate  10,000  rural  youth  to  start  up  business  on  agriculture  through 
government support credit; 
(d) To establish at least one financial service station for youth in each county; 
(e) To establish 500 training bases of rural youth employment and entrepreneur; 
(f) To  establish  youth  entrepreneur  alliance,  and  provide  liaison  service  to  at  least 
10,000 rural youth; 
(g)   To help at least 5,000 youth employed or starting business on agriculture through 
e-commerce, and train at least 2 e-business pioneers in each township; 
(h) To  foster  at  least  one  outstanding  youth  under  45  years  old  who  positively 
mobilizing farmers on employment or agro-business in each village; 
(i) To foster 10,000 agricultural agent, artisan, and other capable youth; 
(j) To support 30,000 rural youth mastering agricultural policies and skills; 
(k) To  provide  support  and  service  to  at  least  5,000  college  graduates  and  migrant 
labors back to agriculture; and 
(l) To  provide  at  least  one volunteer  to  the  village  without  college-graduate  village 
official and each township CYL. 
1.4.3 Ethnic Minorities in Project Area 
35. Yunnan  is  widely  known  for  its  cultural  diversity  in  China  having  one  third  of  its 
population as ethnic minorities. The province has 25 native ethnic groups (46%) out of     
55 ethnic minority groups of the country. Five of the seven project counties are located 
in  the  so-called  "cultural  diversity  area"  of Yunnan.  Dali  and  Nujiang  are  classified 
"minority  autonomous  prefectures".  In  Lijiang  prefecture,  60%  of  the  population 
belong to ethnic minority groups. Overall, about 29% of the population in the project 
14 
PIM Y2RRDP 
area belong to ethnic minority groups. Main ethnic minority groups in the project area 
are: Hui, Bai, Yi, Miao, Lisu, Naxi, Lahu, Pumi, Dai and Nu people. These minority 
are now without traditional institutions and are in general well integrated in the existing 
socio-economic context. They have livelihood strategies similar to those of the other 
rural  populations,  are  not  excluded  from  existing  economic  opportunities,  are  not 
discriminated,  and  have  no  distinct  needs  from  the  rest  of  the  population. They  are 
vulnerable not because belonging to an ethnic minority group, but because they live in 
poor  and  not  well  developed  areas.  Government  policies  targeting  rural  poor  and 
vulnerable households in Yunnan province do not differentiate based on ethnicity, but 
target  based  on  poverty  indicators. The  project  engagement  approach  with  pro-poor 
cooperatives  and  agro-businesses will be based on informed consultations to  ensure 
that particular livelihood strategies of the different ethnic groups are taken into account, 
where existing. Even though an FPIC agreement will not be signed, since there are no 
traditional institutions and authorities to provide for a such signature, FPIC principles 
will as such be followed in the planning and formulation of project interventions. 
1.4.4 Nutrition in Project Area 
36. As said earlier, with high economic growth complementing with enormous progress in 
poverty  reduction  over  the  past  forty  years,  China  has  made  significant  progress  in 
improving the food security and nutritional status of its people. Similarly Yunnan has 
given  high  importance  to  reducing  child  malnutrition  in  its  ‘Yunnan  Child 
Development  Plan (2011-2020)’, and clear targets, in  terms  of prevalence of severe 
malnutrition,  prevalence  of  moderate  to  severe  anemia,  and  anemia  prevalence  of 
primary and secondary students, are set for the province.   
37. Based on the data of National Children Nutrition and Health Monitoring Program, from 
2012 to 20188, the prevalence of anemia and stunting among children under 5 in rural 
Yunnan  have  decreased  from  50.28%  to  21.98%  and  from  17.84%  to  3.69% 
respectively; and the prevalence of underweight and wasting among children under 5 
have also decreased to 1.16% and 0.68% respectively in 2018. Though the figures are 
still significantly higher than those of urban area, yet such great improvement is driven 
by the national programs of health management for children under 6 and publicity of 
breastfeeding and reasonable complementary foods since 2009, and children nutrition 
improvement project in poor rural area in recent years.   
8 X. Zhu, et al. Analysis of Nutrition and Health Condition Monotoring of Children 
under 5 Years Old in Urban and Rural Areas of Yunnan Province from 2012 - 2018. 
Chinese Journal of Children Health Care, Vol. 27, No. 5. May 2019. P571-573. 
15 
PIM Y2RRDP 
38. Limited  data  from  the  three  project  counties  visited  during  design  (i.e.  Suijiang, 
Yunlong, and Yongping) showed that some of the targets (e.g. prevalence of moderate 
to  severe  anemia  of  children  under  5  maintained  under  12%)  have  already  been 
achieved, suggesting the overall situation in the project area is not alarming and in line 
with the objectives of the provincial development plan. 
1.5 Climate Change:   
39. The average atmospheric temperature in China has increased by 0.91oC in the past 100 
years.  It  is  predicted  that,  with  the  continued  intensification  of  climate  change,  the 
occurrence of extreme weather events and natural disasters will continue to increase. 
As  poverty  areas  often  coincide  with  climate  and  ecologically  vulnerable  areas,  the 
effects of climate change will have a higher impact on rural, marginalized and natural 
resource-dependent  households,  who  have  higher  exposure  and  lower  adaptive 
capacity  -  increasing  their  overall  vulnerability.  The  project  area  is  moderately 
vulnerable to the effects of climate change. From 1961 to 2010, mean temperature in 
the project area has increased at a rate of 0.16oC per 10 years. Precipitations decreased 
in spring and autumn, and increased in summer. Frequency and intensity of extreme 
weather events increased, causing more seasonal droughts and floods, with an adverse 
impact on soil erosion.   
40. Future projections forecast that mean temperatures would further increase, total annual 
precipitation would increase, and seasonal variation would increase. This would result 
in more frequent and intensified extreme weather events. The project will contribute to 
reduce  the  risks  and  impacts  associated  to  the  changing  of  weather  and  climate 
conditions, in particular increase in variability and unpredictability, by strengthening 
the  capacity  of  the  government  and  beneficiaries  to  assess  climate  risks  (including 
through  better  access  to  climate  information  and  weather  forecasts),  and  plan  and 
decide accordingly, and improving the climate-resilience of the infrastructure system 
(Ref. Activity A.1.6 and Component B). 
Chapter 2: Project Summary 
2.1: Goals and Objectives 
41. Project goal and development objective: The project goal is to sustainably maintain 
the poor and vulnerable households in the project area out of poverty. The development 
objective is to enhance the income generating opportunities for the poor and vulnerable 
16 
PIM Y2RRDP 
households in the project area, and the inclusiveness of the benefit-sharing mechanisms 
from agro-industries.   
42. This will be achieved by (i) strengthening and supporting cooperatives, committed to 
poverty alleviation in terms of inclusiveness of poor households among their members 
and fair shareholding and benefit sharing mechanisms, to become more competitive 
and generate more revenues (Ref. Sub-component A.1); (ii) stimulating additional and 
more diversified income opportunities in the project areas, by providing services and 
stimulating  local  entrepreneurship,  and  attracting  new  investors  in  agricultural  or 
(rural/resource-based)  non-agricultural  activities  (Ref.  Sub-component  A.2);  (iii) 
improving access to finance (Ref. Sub-component A.3); and (iv) addressing some of 
the major gaps in the current infrastructure system in the project area which may limit 
or constrain the implementation of the proposed project activities (Ref. Component B). 
Climate  change  considerations  will  be  mainstreamed  throughout  the  project  by 
strengthening the capacity of the government and beneficiaries to assess climate risks 
and identify adaptation options - and plan and decide accordingly, and improving the 
climate-resilience of the infrastructure system. 
43. Key indicators: The impact of the project would be measured through the following 
key  indicators:  (i)  Number  of  rural  producers’  organizations  engaged  in  formal 
partnership/ agreements or contracts with public or private entities; (ii) Number of Pro-
poor  Farmer  Professional  Cooperatives  meeting  the  operational  standards;  (iii)  new 
jobs created; (iv) increase in cooperatives' profits; (iv) Percentage of supported rural 
enterprises reporting an increase in profit; (v) %age of people reporting adoption of 
environmentally sustainable and climate resilient tech and practices. Indicators will be 
disaggregated by gender, age, and ethnic group, when relevant. 
44. Expected  outcomes:  Expected  outcomes  include:  (i)  Strengthening  participation  of 
poor and vulnerable population in rural economic growth; (ii) Up-grading/developing 
Pro-poor  farmer  cooperatives;  (iii)  economic  opportunities  for  women  and  youth 
enhanced; (iv) resilience to the negative effects of climate change enhanced. 
45. Project duration: The project will be implemented over a period of 5 years. 
2.2: Project area and Geographical targeting   
46. Project  area:  The  project  will  be  implemented  in  seven  currently  nationally-
designated poor counties within the four municipalities/prefectures of Zhaotong, Dali, 
Lijiang  and  Nujiang  in  the  North-East  and  Western  part  of  Yunnan  province  (i.e. 
Zhenxiong and Suijiang counties in  Zhaotong municipality; Yunlong and Yongping 
counties in Dali prefecture; Huaping and Yongsheng counties in Lijang municipality; 
and Lanping county in Nujiang prefecture). Criteria for the selection of the counties 
included: poverty incidence (the county would need to be a nationally- or provincially-
designated  poor  county),  presence  of  industries  with  a  market  potential,  and 
17 
PIM Y2RRDP 
commitment of the local government to the objectives and proposed approach of the 
project. 
47. Ethnic minorities in project area:  Yunnan has  one-third of the 55 ethnic minority 
groups of the country. Five of the seven project counties are located in the so-called 
"cultural  diversity  area"  of  Yunnan.  Dali  and  Nujiang  are  classified  "minority 
autonomous prefectures". In Lijiang prefecture, 60% of the population belong to ethnic 
minority groups. Overall, about 29% of the population in the project area belong to 
ethnic minority groups. Main ethnic minority groups in the project area are: Hui, Bai, 
Yi, Miao, Lisu, Naxi, Lahu, Pumi, Dai and Nu people. 
2.3: Target groups and Targeting strategy 
48. Targeting strategy: The project will adopt the following targeting strategy: 
1.  Geographical  targeting:  the  project  will  target  current  or  former  nationally-
designated poor counties, or counties with high poverty incidence, and - within 
these  counties  -  priority  will  be  given  to  relative  backward  villages  and 
communities, i.e. villages and communities with a relatively high concentration 
(higher than county average) of registered- or formerly registered-poor. Based 
on the above criteria, 172 villages in 29 townships have been pre-identified for 
project  implementation,  which  represent  about  22.5%  of  the  villages  in  the 
project counties. The project would cover about 19% of the poor villages in the 
project counties. Poverty incidence in the project area is about 23%, about one-
third higher than county average (17%) and four-time higher than provincial 
average (5%). Net income per capita in the project area is about 13% lower than 
provincial average and 8% lower than county average. 
2.  Poverty targeting: within the project area, focus will be given on relative poor 
(i.e. households who have been registered at least once in the National  Poor 
Registration System since 2014). It is in fact expected that no more households 
will be in the NPRS after 2020. 
3.  Gender,  youth  and  ethnic  minorities 
the  project 
beneficiaries, specific focus will be given to vulnerable groups: (i) women; (ii) 
youth  (i.e.  people  between  18-45  years  of  age)9 ;  and  (iii)  ethnic  minorities. 
Particularly,  the  project  will  actively  favour  women  and  youth  participation 
to/benefit from project activities as follows: 
targeting:  among 
1.  Women  targeting  strategy:  (1)  Women  participation  in  supported 
cooperatives will be promoted as follows: (i) Women-led cooperatives 
9 China Communist Youth League define Youth between age 18 to 45. 
18 
PIM Y2RRDP 
will  be  encouraged:  the  project  will  support  at  least  two  women-led 
cooperatives per county; (ii) Gender eligibility criteria will be applied 
to select other cooperatives to be supported by the project: percentage 
of women in the cooperative should be higher than the percentage of 
women  in  the  local  village;  women  should  be  included  in  the 
cooperative's  board;  at  least  60%  of  the  participants  to  trainings  and 
(2)  Women 
capacity  building  activities  should  be  women; 
entrepreneurship will be favoured by awarding at least 25% of the start-
up investment support to women. 
2.  Youth 
targeting  strategy:  (1)  Youth  participation 
in  supported 
cooperatives  will  be  promoted  by  supporting  at  least  one  youth-led 
cooperative per county; (2) Youth entrepreneurship will be favoured by 
awarding  at  least  50%  of  the  start-up  investment  support  to  youth  of 
which 50% will be for young women. 
3.  Ethnic  minorities  targeting  strategy:  Ethnic  minorities  in  the  project 
area  are  in  general  well  integrated  in  the  existing  socio-economic 
context,  have  livellihood  strategies  similar  to  those  of  the  other  rural 
populations, are not excluded from existing economic opportunities, are 
not  discriminated,  and  have  no  distinct  needs  from  the  rest  of  the 
population.  They  are  vulnerable  not  because  belonging  to  an  ethnic 
minority group, but because they live in poor and not well developed 
areas.  Government  policies  targeting  rural  poor  and  vulnerable 
households do not differentiate based on ethnicity, but target based on 
poverty  indicators.  The  project  engagement  approach  with  pro-poor 
informed 
cooperatives  and  agro-businesses  will  be  based  on 
consultations  to  ensure  that  particular  livelihood  strategies  of  the 
different ethnic groups are taken into account, where existing. This will 
include  discussions  with  subgroups  (women,  youth  and  ethnic 
minorities)  to  insure  the  aspirations,  inclusion  barriers  and  needs  of 
these  groups  are  considered  in  the  cooperative  and  agro-business 
development strategies, activities and investment plans.   
49. Beneficiaries:  In  all,  the  project  is  expected  to  directly  benefit  an  estimated  91770 
individuals, out of which about 25% are formerly registered poor, 50% women, 30% 
youth, and 60% belong to ethnic minorities (i.e. direct beneficiaries). The project is 
expected to indirectly benefit about 414540 people inside the project area with 88200 
households (including direct beneficiaries).   
19 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Chapter 3: Project Components/Outcomes, Activities and Implementation Strategy.     
50. The  Project  is  organized  along  two  complementary  components:  (1)  Supporting 
Inclusive Rural Development; and (2) Climate-proofed Public Infrastructures Planning 
and  Development;  supported  by  a  third  cross-cutting  component  (3)  Project 
management, M&E, Knowledge Management, and Policy.   
51. The outline of the components is the following: 
Component A: Supporting inclusive rural development   
Sub-component A.1: Improving Chanye fupin models; activities include: 
A.1.1 upgrading cooperatives to meet operational standards 
A.1.2 cooperative co-investor support 
A.1.3 company-cooperative/household models 
A.1.4 Innovative models (other) 
A.1.5 establishment of county traceability systems 
A.1.6 improving climate information and adaptation advise 
Sub-component  A.2:  Stimulating  entrepreneurship/attracting  investors;  activities 
include:   
A.2.1 Business incubation/Service Centres 
A.2.2 Investment support for start-ups 
Sub-component A.3:    Improving access to financing; activities include:   
A.3.1 Financial capacity culturing 
A.3.2 Financial services improvement   
A.3.3 Establishing a financial advisory service center 
Component B: Climate-proofed Public Infrastructures Planning and Development 
Sub-component B1: Infrastructure for improved climate resilience; activities include: 
B.1.1Climate proofed irrigation planning, design & decision 
B.1.2 Piloting climate proofed smart irrigation investments   
20 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Sub-component B.2: Rural infrastructure; activities include: 
B.2.1 improvement and development of water source facility 
B.2.2 improvement and development of rural roads 
B.2.3 improvement and development of safe drinking water supply system   
B.2.4 land preparation 
Component C: Project management, M&E, Knowledge Management, and Policy 
These  components  and  related  sub-components  are  briefly  presented  below  along  with 
implementation strategy.   
3.1 Component A. Supporting Inclusive Rural Development:   
52. Rational:    The rural areas in the project counties in Yunnan like in most parts of rural 
China are experiencing a fundamental transformation. The traditional farms are mostly 
too small to provide a family income, which is sufficiently high to stay above poverty 
levels.  A  significant  part  of  the  former  agricultural  workforce  is  working  outside 
farming. Most families have at least one, often both middle generation family members 
outside for most of the year. The remaining population in the villages are elderly, some 
middle  generation  women  taking  care  of  elderly  parents,  young  kids  or  sick  and   
people with disabilities. For them maintaining traditional farming activities with low 
value  addition  and  ad  hoc  market  outlets  often  becomes  a  burden  rather  than  an 
attractive livelihood opportunity considering the remittances the family is receiving. 
This  offers  opportunities  for  other  part  of  the  rural  population  to  expand  their 
agricultural business or even for new investors to come in. At the same time, there is a 
need  to  improve  the  inclusiveness  of  agricultural  cooperatives  and  businesses  of 
women, staying in the rural areas. Likewise, opportunities for economic inclusion need 
to be created for migrant worker returnees and youth who prefer to stay in rural areas 
to be with their families and as access to services and connectivity are improving in the 
villages.  Within  this  context  this  component  is:  a)  promoting  improvements  in  the 
existing practices and models of rural development, which are implemented under the 
on-going poverty reduction through industrialization - Chanye Fupin (CYFP) strategy; 
b) supporting farmer organisations and production structures with high participation of 
smallholder households, and which are viable and competitive and give people choices 
suitable for their individual situation and risk perceptions such as a secure market outlet 
for their produce, leasing out their land, participating as shareholders in a cooperative 
or  an  enterprise,  or  earning  labour  income;  and  c)  generating  additional  and  more 
diversified  income  opportunities,  by  providing  service  and  stimulating  local 
21 
PIM Y2RRDP 
entrepreneurship and attracting new investors in agricultural or rural-resources-based 
non-agricultural activities (e.g. tourism, e-commerce, etc.).   
Component A Implementation Strategy:   
53. Responsibilities: The overall responsibility for the implementation of this component 
will be with the Department of Agriculture and Rural Development at the Provincial 
(DARA),  Prefecture  (PARA)  and  County  (CARA)  levels.  DARA/CARA  will 
coordinate  with  other  line  departments/offices  such  as  Finance,  Development  and 
Reform  Commission,  Water,  Forestry,  Roads,  Women  Federation,  Ethnic  Minority, 
Youth etc. to secure support and inputs for the project.             
54. Project implementation principles: The implementation of the project will follow the 
following principles: 
  Open and Transparent for all every eligible applicant and for the general public 
(through  public  advertisement,  invitation  for  proposals  and  public  disclosure  of 
support to cooperatives, investors and associated enterprises); 
  Business and Client Driven by cooperatives, investors and agro-enterprises (not 
by local Governments and County Development Plans) 
  Economically Efficient, Financially Viable and Sustainable, where all supported 
investments  to  private  entities  will  be  based  on  a  satisfactory  and  convincing 
business plan;   
  Environmentally  sustainable,  where  all  supported  production  and  processing 
activities  do  not  cause  soil  erosion  or  depletion  of  soil  nutrients,  pollution  from 
overuse  of  agrochemicals,  pollution  of  land  and  water  from  inadequate 
management of solid and liquid waste, and conversion of habitats critical for the 
local biodiversity to farmland, water reservoirs or roads; and 
  Focus on vulnerable groups; the project will focus on ensuring that the benefits 
generated  by  the  development  of  the  project  areas  (through  the  support  to  lead 
"industries",  the  creation  of  new  employment  opportunities,  and  comprehensive 
infrastructure  development)  primarily  benefit  identified  vulnerable  groups,  i.e. 
former  archived  poor  and  relative  poor  households,  women,  youth,  and  ethnic 
minorities. 
55. Preparatory  and  early  stage  implementation  activities:  While  each  county  has 
already proposed several detailed investment activities in support of one or several of 
their  key  industries  (value  chains),  the  project  would  take  a  step  back  and  follow  a 
sequence of preparatory and early stage implementation activities. Under the project 
the detailed investments activities will be defined or re-defined following a process of 
targeting,  awareness  building  and  informed  consultations  seeking  consent  from  the 
villages  and  value  chain  stakeholders,  cooperative  capacity  building,  training, 
facilitation, and preparation of investment proposals by each of the supported investors, 
cooperatives or agri-enterprises. The following preparatory steps will be undertaken: 
22 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  County Training & Awareness Workshops will be conducted to make all county 
PMO  staff  and  related  line  department  staff  aware  of  the  project  principles  and 
familiar  with  the  detailed  implementation  arrangements  (project  documents, 
manuals, safeguard requirements, logframe indicators and targets to be monitored 
and  achieved,  etc.).  Funds  for  this  activity  are  provided  under  the  Management 
Component for each county.   
  Project  Information  Disseminations  providing  full  project  information  to  the 
villages and stakeholders in the values chains; each county will ensure that project 
information is widely disseminated, and full project information is provided to all 
project villages, and to all stakeholders in the value chains including traders and 
processing companies in the counties. 
  Round Table Stakeholder Meetings will be conducted (at least one for each value 
chain)  in  each  county  over  the  first  2-3  months.  For  these  meetings  all  relevant 
private  and  public  sector  partners  (processing  companies,  traders,  existing 
cooperatives, 
line 
department representatives, etc., should be invited and informed about the project 
and discuss the development options for the value chains. The counties will keep 
records  and  provide  documentation  of  the  invited  and  participating  stakeholders 
and the minutes of such meetings. 
institutions,  government 
institutions),  research 
lending 
  Focus  group  discussions  with  smallholder  farmers,  women,  youth  and  ethnic 
minorities from the villages concerned with the proposed value chains to provide 
information and discuss their aspirations, barriers, and needs for their inclusion in 
the  different  activities  of  the  value  chains.  These  meetings  will  also  provide  a 
platform for the participation of these groups in the development of the investment 
plans for the cooperatives and the agribusinesses. The counties will keep records 
and provide documentation of the participants and the minutes of such meetings. 
  Technical  Advisory  Groups  (TAG);  as  an  outcome  of  the  above  stakeholder 
meetings each county will nominate and form a Technical Advisory Group (TAG), 
with at least one representative from each stakeholder group nominated or elected 
during the meetings. It is important that the TAG will not only include members 
from the Government line departments but include members from the private sector, 
farmers, businesses, rural finance institutions, etc. The role of the TAG will be to 
guide  and  advice  project  applicants  in  the  preparation  of  business  plans. 
Competence  in  general  business  development,  management  and  in  market 
development  is  an essential  element  for the TAGs. TAG members would  not  be 
hired  but  can  be  compensated  for  their  work  and  services  using  project  funds 
allocated under the Business Service Centre subcomponent.   
56. Formation,  Registration  and  Training  of  Cooperatives;  Since  the  project  will 
primarily focus on cooperatives as the main entry point for improving existing chanye 
fupin models (i.e. poverty reduction through agribusiness industry development), each 
county  PMO  will  start  to  mobilize  potentially  interested  farmer  cooperatives  in  the 
project areas. They will be informed about the pro-poor objective and eligibility criteria 
of the project and how these criteria  may be met. They will be provided training in 
23 
PIM Y2RRDP 
inclusive governance and management of the cooperative to enhance participation and 
benefits  for  women,  youth  and  vulnerable  households.  They  will  also  be  provided 
training in business development planning, financial management and development of 
business plan proposals to be supported by the project. 
3.1.1 Sub-component A.1: Improving chanye fupin models.   
57. Rationale. The concept of agricultural industrialization was introduced in the poverty 
reduction strategy in the previous 10-year strategy, when the Central Party Committee 
and the State Council issued the Outline of Rural Poverty Reduction (2011-2020). The 
concept  of  poverty  reduction  through  industrialization  -  Chanye  Fupin  (CYFP)  - 
literally,  to  use  agricultural  industrialization  to  alleviate  poverty,  was  officially 
proposed,  along  with  integrated  development  of  village  infrastructure  and  skills 
training, especially for migrant labor. The key principles in the CYFP approach are: i) 
agricultural enterprises and lead farmers/big households would join hands with poor 
households lagging the capacity to develop on their own; and ii) an integrated market 
oriented development  approach taking into account  the whole value chain  for value 
addition instead of focusing on production of primary products. With the next stage 
rural development strategy of rural revitalisation, the CYFP has been re-enforced as a 
central element for generating rural incomes. While the project is building on principles 
of  the  CYFP,  it  is  important  to  draw  from  the  experiences  and  improve  on 
shortcomings. 
58. Farmer cooperatives are explicitly promoted and play an important role in the CYFP 
approach. They  are  critical  to  help  organize  producers,  assist  farmers  to  respond  to 
consumer demand and apply standardized production methods. Such cooperatives can 
capture  part  or  all  benefits  from  value  chains  and  become  valuable  partners  for 
enterprises.  They  serve  as  nodes  and  entry  points  for  technology  extension  and 
agricultural  services  and  serve  as  stewards  for  food  safety  and  product  quality.  The 
Government  enacted  the  China  Farmers’  Professional  Cooperative  Law  (FPCL)  in 
2007 and subsequently revised it in 2018, Farmer cooperatives have since then been 
mushrooming in all rural China and the Government has recently promulgated to have 
at least one cooperative in every village. 
59. Low  management  capacity,  weakness  in  organizational  and  financial  management, 
limited  business  experience  and  business  attitude,  lead  capture,  and  general  non-
compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Cooperative  Law  are  the  most  common 
shortcomings  in  China’s  farmer  cooperatives,  which  is  also  seen  in Yunnan.  Many 
cooperatives  are  inactive  or  never  became  really  active  (called  empty  shell 
cooperatives).    Business  oriented  and  profitable  cooperatives  often  have  a  small 
number  of  individuals  who  have  made  largest  investments  usually  control  the 
24 
PIM Y2RRDP 
cooperative operations and their assets. Other cooperatives, attached or associated with 
existing enterprises, are generally controlled by such enterprises. In addition to the true 
farmer  professional  cooperatives  register  under  the  FPLC,  many  villages  have 
responded to the Government’s promotion of setting up cooperatives in every village 
and  have  set  up  cooperatives  under  the  village  administration  as  village  collective 
economic  entities.  Such  cooperatives  mostly  lack  reasonable  controls,  and  an 
independent business approach and financial transparency as required by the law. This 
makes such cooperatives unattractive for poor farmers as entities for encouraging self-
development and empowerment and unable to deliver sustained poverty alleviation as 
intended  under  the  CYFP  approach.  This  sub-component  is  designed  taking  on  the 
lessons  from  the  current  and  on-going  experiences  with  the  CYFP  and  provides 
improvements  in  particular  towards  a  more  business  oriented  and  inclusive 
development approach.   
60. Scope  of  work.  Major  activities  under  this  sub-component  include:  (i)  Upgrading 
Cooperatives to Meet Operational Standards; (ii) Cooperative Co-investor support; (iii) 
Company-cooperative/household  models; 
(v) 
Establishment  of  County  Traceability  Systems;  and  (vi)  Improving  Climate 
Information and Adaptation Advise:   
Innovative  Models; 
(iv)  Other 
61. Activity A.1.1:  Upgrading  Cooperatives  to  Meet  Operational  Standards.  The  total 
number of registered professional  farmer Cooperatives  in  the project  area are  about 
60,000 to 70,000. The project will support the development of about five cooperatives 
in each county, which could be existing cooperatives with interest and basic conditions 
or newly set up cooperatives, as cooperatives with model standards. They would up-
grade  their  operational  level  to  serve  as  ‘pro-poor  standard  operating  cooperatives’. 
The  minimum  operational  standards  of  such  cooperatives  including  participation  of 
poverty  and  vulnerable  household,  are  defined  by  a  set  of  indicators  as  shown  in 
Attachment  1.  The  needed  investment  to  meet  these  standards  will  mainly  be  for 
capacity  building  and  training  and  could  include  investment  in  IT  equipment  and 
software (e.g. for accounting), validation of assets, managerial and technical services, 
etc..  This  activity  will  be  implemented  piloting  a  Results  Based  Lending  (RBL) 
disbursement approach. Cooperatives achieving the agreed standards as verified by an 
reimbursed  on  basis  of  actual 
independent  verification  agency  will  be 
cost/expenditures.   
62. Regarding Result-based lending, it was acknowledged that the current IFAD policies 
prevent to implement the proposed activities to be disbursed piloting an RBL approach 
as initially conceived (i.e. adoption of an incentive-based pricing method to quantify 
the  amount  to  be  disbursed  upon  the  achievement  of  agreed  and  independently 
verifiable targets for a cooperative meeting defined pro-poor operational standards). It 
is agreed to maintain a small RBL pilot, where the amount to be disbursed against the 
25 
PIM Y2RRDP 
the  basis  of 
achievement of the agreed target (i.e. cooperatives that would meet defined pro-poor 
operational  standards)  would  be  determined  on 
the  actual 
costing/expenditures  of the activities needed to  reach this target10  evidenced by the 
documentation of the actual expenditures. Acknowledging that such method may not 
provide a sufficiently strong incentive to cooperatives to adopt the defined operational 
standards, it is agreed that – as an additional incentive – cooperatives that will meet the 
agreed operational standards would have a preferential access (e.g. amount, conditions, 
etc. – to be determined in the project implementation manual) to the resources allocated 
to finance business plan proposals under component A.1.2   
63. Implementation  Strategy  for  Upgrading  Cooperatives 
to  Meet  Operational 
Standards.  This  activity  will  turn  existing  or  develop  new  farmer  professional 
cooperatives  into  Pro-poor  Farmer  Professional  Cooperatives,  which  meet  the 
standards and conditions needed to achieve the expected economic performance and 
poverty  reduction  impact.  This  will  not  only  be  of  importance  for  the  cooperatives 
themselves but would create centers of excellence and demonstration models for other 
cooperatives.  In  addition  to  improved  business,  governance  and  benefit  sharing 
arrangements,  these  model  cooperatives  will  also  adopt  climate  adaptation  and 
mitigation activities as defined and listed in Attachment 1.   
64. The  achievement  of  this  outcome  (Pro-poor  Farmer  Professional  Cooperatives)  is 
defined as a Disbursement Linked Indicator (DLI). Disbursements are scalable and will be 
made against the number of farmer cooperatives which meet the agreed standards based 
on the costs for achieving the upgrading of each cooperative.     
65. The  DLI  baseline  for  cooperatives  which  meet  defined  operational  standards  is 
considered zero11  and the target is 50 cooperatives by 2022. These cooperatives could 
come  from  the  existing  pool  of  registered  and  non-registered  cooperatives  in  the  7 
program counties or could include new farmer cooperatives, which could be potentially 
established in the targeted counties. 
66. Verification protocol. The DLI is defined as number of pro-poor farmers professional 
cooperatives, registered in the Industry and Commercial Bureau under the Cooperative 
Law12, meeting defined operational standards, which means a set of standards related 
10 *Considered would be incremental management costs, e.g. hiring a professional manager, costs related 
to asset validation, registration/re-registration, expenses for lawyers, accounting systems (hardware, 
software, training) costs for accountants, management training, etc. Costs would be considered for a 
reporting period of maximum one year 
11 Field  observation  based  on  random  checks  and  targeted  checks  of  so-called  demo 
cooperatives supported by the Government as cooperatives with the highest standards but 
failing to meet the standards of Pro-Poor Farmer Professional Cooperatives.    
12 This registration is important to provide the legal basis for the business activities, 
assets  rights  management  and  for  protecting  the  members’  rights.  Currently  many 
26 
PIM Y2RRDP 
to  a  ‘pro-poor  farmer  cooperative’  in  line  with  the  government’s  policies  for 
cooperative  development  and  IFAD’s  poverty,  gender  and  youth  targeting  criteria. 
These  include  social  inclusive  and  pro-poor  standards  for  registration,  membership, 
financial  management,  and  decision-making  arrangements  (see  Attachment  1).  The 
pro-poor farmer professional cooperatives needs to be duly established under the laws 
of China and the DARA, registered in any of the  7 project counties, and at least 30 
percent  of  its  members  should  be  registered  poor  households  or  40  percent  of  all 
registered poor households in each of the covered administrative villages are members 
of the cooperative. 
67. The sub-component will be complemented by the preparation and installation of the 
computerized Management Information System (MIS) for farmer cooperatives to be 
prepared by the Yunnan Provincial Department of Agriculture and Rural Development.   
The Agricultural Bureaus or the Economic and Management Bureaus of DARA at the 
county levels will record the cooperative information in the data base on a regular basis 
and be responsible for the accuracy of the information. Cooperatives meeting all the 
agreed eligibility requirements will be reported to the PPMO on a semi-annual basis.   
68. An independent third-party Verification Agency (VA) will conduct a verification of all 
cooperatives  deemed  to  meet  the  agreed  operational  standards  in  a  given  DLI 
disbursement period (e.g. quarterly). The cooperatives will report to the VA who after 
verification will report to the PPMO according to the agreed check list. Verification 
that a DLI target has been achieved would be through a letter of confirmation to IFAD 
as the basis for disbursement. 
69. The Detailed implementation procedures would be as follows: 
DARA’s department for cooperatives will: 
 
Issue a guiding document explaining the approach and guiding the counties on the 
implementation procedures; 
  Prepare a Recording Format covering the verification criteria (see Attachment 1), 
plus eligible expenses to achieve the operational standards. Eligible expenses must 
have a relationship to the achievements of the operational standards as a pro-poor 
cooperative  and  could  include  incremental  management  costs  (e.g.  hiring  a 
manager),  costs  related  to  asset  validation,  registration/re-registration,  expenses 
for  layers,  accounting  (hardware,  software,  training,  costs  for  accountants), 
management training and hiring of facilitators to improve social inclusion (gender 
strategies,  women’s  participation  and  empowerment,  youth  strategies,  and 
strategies for inclusion of vulnerable households and people with disabilities), etc. 
Costs would be considered for a reporting period of maximum one year.   
cooperatives  are  set  up  by  the  villages  as  ‘villages  cooperatives’  not  under  the 
protection of the law. 
27 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  Design  of  a  computerized  Management  Information  System  (MIS) 
for 
cooperatives:  Based  on  the  agreed  recording  format  DARA  will  contract  the 
design and rolling out of a computerized MIS. This MIS would capture the basic 
information of a cooperative, all verification criteria (Attachment 1) in the form of 
checkboxes,  information  about  the  eligible  expenses  to  achieve  the  operational 
standards.  The  MIS  will  include  provisions  for  the  evidence  documentation  for 
each  of  the  criteria  (e.g.  scans  of  documents  related  to  registration,  licenses, 
shareholding agreements, meeting minutes, etc.) and include space for providing 
evidence  for  the  expenditures  also  with  evidence  provisions.    The  MIS  design 
company  will  roll  out  the  MIS  to  the  counties  and  provide  training  and  back-
stopping to the users.   
  Contract  a  Verification  agency.  The  provincial  PMO  will  recruit  a  third-party 
verification  agency  acceptable  to  IFAD,  which  would  verify  each  of  the 
cooperatives reported to have met the criteria.     
  Take  reference  to  Guangxi;  the  Yunnan  DARA  is  encouraged  to  contact  the 
Guizhou DARA related to the above tasks, as Guizhou is implementing a similar 
approach.     
70. The county PMOs: 
  Awareness  and  invitation  to  register;  the  county  PMOs  will  raise  awareness 
among cooperatives and encourage them to register their information in the MIS. 
The  registration  will  be  available  for  all  existing  and  newly  created  farmer 
professional cooperatives in the program counties. 
  Recording Responsibilities; the county PMOs will record or help the cooperatives 
to  record  the  information  in  the  MIS  on  a  regular  basis.  County  PMOs  will  be 
responsible  for  the  accuracy  of  the  information  and  conduct  pre-verification  in 
particular for cooperatives self-recording their information. 
  Closing Gaps in Meeting the Standards; the county PMOs will use the MIS data 
to identify gaps in the operational standards and advice registered cooperatives on 
the  required  actions  to  close  the  operational  performance  gaps  (e.g.  attending 
training, improving, financial transparency, record keeping, etc.). Following the 
RBL approach such activities need to be pre-financed by the beneficiaries. 
  Reporting  successful  cooperatives;  the  county  PMOs  will  report  cooperatives, 
which  show  that  they  achieved  the  required  performance  criteria  to  the  PPMO, 
which in turn will inform the verification and request verification.     
71. Verification Agency: 
  Field  verification;  the  verification  agency  will  be  periodically  (e.g.  quarterly) 
provided with the list of cooperatives reported to meet all criteria and conduct a 
field  verification,  which  will  include  the  verification  of  evidence  for  the 
documentation.   
72. IFAD Disbursement: 
 
IFAD disbursement will be triggered by a letter of confirmation to be forwarded 
to  IFAD  on  a  quarterly  basis  and  supported  by  the  corresponding  list  of  the 
cooperatives certified by the VA.   
28 
PIM Y2RRDP 
73. Activity A.1.2: Matching Grant Support for Certified Pro-Poor Farmer Professional 
Cooperatives. The cooperatives who have met the pro-poor standard will be eligible 
for  a  matching  grant  investment  based  on  an  agreed  business  plan  up  to  RMB  1.5 
million with a 60 to 40 percent matching arrangement (example: cooperative would 
contribute RMB 1 million and the project would finance RMB 1.5 million).   
74. Implementation Strategy for Matching Grant support for Certified Pro-Poor Farmer 
Professional  Cooperatives.  Successfully  certified  pro-poor  farmer  professional 
cooperatives  will  be  eligible  to  apply  for  a  matching  grant  from  the  project.  This 
funding will be provided based on an approved business plan (for contents and format 
see Attachment 2). The financing would be up to 60% (maximum RMB1.5 million for 
each eligible cooperative) from the project  and  at  least  40% from the cooperative’s 
own  financial  resources  and/or  from  commercial  loans.  The  financial  plan  (see 
Attachment 2, Appendix Table 2) would detail the investment items and contributions 
from different sources.   
75. IFAD  funding  could  be  used  for:  (a)  cooperative-level  start-up  or  up-grading 
investments  including  investments  in  production  systems  (e.g.  advanced  breeding 
stock, improved seedlings, re-grafting, technical assistance in improved soil and water 
management  practices,  IPM  and  other  practices  increasing  production  sustainability 
and climate change adaptation and resilience, etc.); (b) pre-processing and processing 
technologies  for  agriculture  and  related  products;  (c)  storage,  drying,  packaging,  or 
other  marketing  facilities  using  renewable  energy  when  possible;  (d)  market 
exploration  and  market  development  to  provide  access  to  new  and  higher-value 
markets (analysis, development of marketing strategies, etc.); (d) up-grading of quality 
standards, labelling and certification, branding, product tracing, logistics, food safety 
and others; and (e) general services and training. IFAD fund cannot be used for annual 
operating expenses (e.g. salaries, annual production inputs, fertilizer, farm labour, etc.) 
or  working  capital.  The  matching  contribution  from  the  cooperative  should  include 
new investments (already existing assets cannot be considered) and could also include 
working capital.   
76. Steps to be taken: 
  Notification of the eligibility by the county PMO; 
  Preparation of business plan proposal (investment plan) by the cooperative; 
 
Involvement of the TAG in reviewing and quality improvement of the business 
plan organised by the county PMO; 
29 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  Review  and  approval  of  the  business  plan  by  the  County  Department  of 
Agriculture and Rural Development; 
  Preparation and signing of a Financing Agreement between the Cooperative and 
the county PMO; 
  Notification of the PPMO about approved plan; 
 
Implementation by the cooperatives in close coordination with the county PMO. 
77. Activity  A.1.3:  Cooperative  Co-investor  support.  Many  existing  cooperatives  lack 
entrepreneur  skills,  market  access,  and  access  to  capital.  At  the  same  time  the 
Government  seeks  to  attract  interested  investors  and  entrepreneurs  from  a  pool  of 
interested  migrant  labor  returnees  and  talented  young  entrepreneurs,  which  are 
expected  to  bring  in  skills,  experience,  linkages  and  understanding  of  consumer 
markets  and  financial  capital.  But  these  investors  in  turn  lack  access  to  production 
resources (e.g. land, and primary production outputs), which the cooperatives would 
offer.  The  project  will  facilitate  a  match  between  investors  and  cooperatives  by 
encouraging  interested  pro-poor  standard  operating  cooperatives  (after  up-grading 
under Activity 1) to advertise for potential co-investors (as shareholders). They will 
prepare a joint investment plan, which the project would co-finance at a 1:1 ratio. The 
project funds up to RMB 1.2 million per cooperative co-investment would be converted 
into  shares  of  farmer  members  prioritising  poverty  and  vulnerable  households. The 
shares of the investors in a cooperative should not exceed a total of 40%. Co-investors 
can  only  be  private  individuals  not  enterprises  or  representatives  of  enterprises. 
Eligible items in the investment plan could include Technical assistance for improving 
production, cooperative assets, services, and working capital, while the proportion of 
working capital should not exceed 50% and should be financed from the co-investor.       
78. Implementation  Strategy  for  Cooperative  Co-investor  support.  This  activity  will 
address two main concerns restricting the development of farmer cooperatives in rural 
areas: a) the skill capacity problem (management capacity, entrepreneur and marketing 
skills);  and  b)  access  to  finance  and  lack  of  capital.  At  the  same  time,  it  should  be 
avoided that farmer cooperatives are fully taken over and captured by outside investors. 
Eligible  cooperatives  would  be  existing  registered  cooperatives  and  newly  created 
cooperatives. During the investment process such cooperative would be developed up 
to the standards defined as pro-poor farmer professional cooperatives (for the criteria 
see Attachment 1), while a minimum set of entry criteria will need to be met before 
IFAD funding can be provided. Such criteria would include No. 1 to including 11 of 
the list in Attachment 1). Eligible co-investors would be individuals (not enterprises or 
individuals  acting  on  behalf  of  enterprises).  Investors  could  be  one  or  several  per 
30 
PIM Y2RRDP 
cooperative if the investors total shares would not exceed 40% of the total shares in the 
cooperative.   
79. The investment from the project will be established in an agreed investment plan as 
part of an approved business plan and a signed tri-partite Financing Agreement. The 
maximum  investment  per  each  cooperative  would  be  RMB  1.2  million.  The  IFAD 
funds would need to be matched with the same or a higher amount from the investor(s). 
The IFAD funds would be used to generate additional cooperative assets (tangible or 
non-tangible, see below) and would be capitalized as shares of the cooperative farmer 
members  by  giving  preference  to  poor  household  members  in  a  ration  1.5  (poverty 
households) to 1 (ordinary farmer households). (Example: in a cooperative with 100 
members, of which 50 are poverty households, each ordinary household would receive 
0.8% shares, each poverty households would receive 1.2% shares).   
80. The  leading  role  in  the  implementation  of  this  activity  would  initially  be  with  the 
county PMO. As soon as the business incubation/service centres become operational, 
this function will be transferred to the centres. The approach would be as follows: 
 
Identification of interested/suitable cooperatives; the county PMOs (later centres) 
together  with  the  township  governments  will  through  the  public  awareness  and 
information  campaign  (see  above  general  preparatory  steps)  invite  and  identify 
interested cooperatives; 
  Preparation of a brief cooperative profile; the county PMOs (later centres) will 
prepare short profiles with the key features of each interested cooperatives and the 
potential areas for co-investments (social, age and gender constitution within the 
membership,  assets,  type  of  industry,  production  arrangements,  business 
arrangements, etc.);   
  Public invitation  and first  screening  of  potential investors;  based on a batch of 
cooperative  profiles  county  PMOs  (later  centres)  will  publicly  invite  interested 
investors to submit a short expression of interest in engaging in a co-investment 
and  their  capacities  and  background  to  be  brought  to  a  such  engagement.  The 
invitation  will  in  particular  address  young  entrepreneurs,  returnees,  women 
investors  with  a  suitable  background  and  capacity.  The  county  PMOs  (later 
centres) will do a screening and pre-select suitable candidates before arranging for 
‘match-making’ meetings cooperatives individually or in the form of roundtable 
meetings with several cooperatives (round-table stakeholder meetings, see above 
general preparatory steps); 
  Signing of Intentional Agreement; the cooperatives and investor(s) would sign an 
intentional agreement stating the principles including an agreement of both sides 
to work under the rules of the cooperative law and the agreement that the investors 
share(s) would be limited to a maximum of 40%. The county PMOs (later centres) 
would assist in the preparation of such agreement and prepare a standard format; 
  Preparation  of  a  business  plan/investment  proposal  and  financing  plan; 
Cooperative and investor(s) will jointly prepare an investment plan (format to be 
followed  see  Attachment  2).  The  eligible  investment  items  would  include:  (a) 
31 
PIM Y2RRDP 
cooperative-level start-up or up-grading investments in new production systems, 
including  field  level  production  (e.g.  advanced  breeding  stock,  improved 
seedlings, re-grafting, technical assistance in improved soil and water management 
practices, IPM and other practices increasing production sustainability and climate 
change  adaptation  and  resilience,  etc.);  (b)  pre-processing  and  processing 
technologies for agriculture and related products; (c) storage, drying, packaging, 
or  other  marketing  facilities  using  renewable  energy  when  possible;  (d)  market 
exploration and market development to provide access to new and higher-value 
markets  (analysis,  development  of  marketing  strategies,  etc.);  (d)  up-grading  of 
quality standards, labelling and certification, branding, product tracing, logistics, 
food  safety  and  others;  and  (e)  general  services  and  training.    IFAD  funds 
cannotbe  used  for  annual  operating  expenses  (e.g.  salaries,  annual  production 
inputs, fertilizer, farm labour, etc.) or working capital. The matching contribution 
from the cooperative and/or investor(s) should include new investments (already 
existing assets cannot be considered) and could also include working capital; 
  Technical support; the TAG will review and provide suggestions for improvement 
of the investment plan and comment on the technical and financial feasibility of 
the plan; 
  Review  and  approval  of  the  business  plan  by  the  County  Department  of 
Agriculture and Rural Development; 
  Preparation  of  a  tri-partite  Financing  Agreement  between  the  Cooperative,  the 
investor(s) and the county PMO; 
  Checking entry criteria and signing Financing Agreement; the county PMOs will 
verify that the minimum entry criteria (No. 1 to 11 in Attachment 1) are met before 
signing  of  the  tri-partite  Financing  Agreement  between  the  Cooperative,  the 
investor(s) and the county PMO: 
  Notification of the PPMO about approved plan; 
 
Implementation by the cooperatives in close coordination with the county PMO. 
81. Activity A.1.4:  Company-cooperative/household  models.    Most  of  the  agricultural 
industry  development  by  the  local  governments  focuses  on  investments  for  the 
expansion or up-grading of agricultural production with a limited consideration of the 
real demand and marketing opportunities. This activity is designed to support a fully 
demand  driven  company-cooperative/household  production  approach.  The  buyers 
(companies) and the producers (cooperatives or individual households) would engage 
in  an  up-front  agreement  and  jointly  prepare  an  investment  proposal,  where  the 
cooperative  part  would  be  partially  financed  by  the  project.  Some  of  the  guiding 
principles of such arrangements are outlined in Attachment 3. Project investments up 
to RMB 1.5 million per cooperative (matched by at least RMB 1.5 million from the 
beneficiaries)  would  focus  on  technical  assistance  and  the  investment  needs  at  the 
cooperative and household level identified in the investment proposal. They would be 
used  mainly  for  jointly  owned/operated  assets  by  the  cooperative  (e.g.  agricultural 
32 
PIM Y2RRDP 
machinery, preprocessing facilities, joint infrastructure such as water storage facilities 
and distribution pipes and canals, etc.) and land improvements (e.g. terracing, drainage, 
water  pipes). To  strengthen  the  cooperatives  as  partners  of  companies,  cooperatives 
would be given priority under this activity and households would only be supported in 
cases where cooperative formation is not appropriate.     
82. Implementation Strategy for Company-cooperative/household models. This activity 
will  link  farmer  cooperatives  and/or  individual  farmers  in  attractive  value  chains. 
Eligible companies must have proven business experience and technical, financial and 
management capacity and a ready market (more detailed criteria such as credit rating, 
minimum size, length of operational experience, etc., would still need to be defined in 
coordination with the implementing units).   
83. The project investment (IFAD) funding will be limited to finance the cooperative or 
household investments including joint infrastructure, training and capacity building (no 
enterprise  assets).  Project  funds  would  not  be  channelled  from  the  PMO  directly  to 
coop/farmers (not through the companies/enterprises. The maximum total investment 
per  beneficiary  household  would  be  RMB  30,000  with  a  total  investment  per  each 
business plan not exceeding RMB 5 million, of which a maximum of 50% would be 
financed  using  IFAD  funds.  The  remaining  at  least  50%  should  be  financed  as 
beneficiary contribution. The itemized financing plan should identify investment items 
to  be  financed  by  IFAD  and  items  financed  by  the  beneficiaries  (cooperatives, 
companies,  individual  households,  etc.).  Co-financing  from  the  beneficiaries  can 
include labour and in-kind contributions. Past investments prior to the approval of the 
investment  proposal  and  regular  operational  costs  cannot  be  considered  as  co-
financing.   
84. The  leading  role  in  the  implementation  of  this  activity  would  initially  be  with  the 
county PMO. As soon as the business incubation/service centres become operational, 
this function will be transferred to the centres. The approach would be as follows: 
 
Identification of interested/suitable companies; the county PMOs (later centres) 
will through the public advertisement and awareness workshops identify interested 
companies  and  present  the  general  objective,  eligibility  criteria,  conditions  and 
procedures to interested candidates; 
  Screening  of  potential  companies;  the  county  PMOs  (later  centres)  will  do  a 
screening and pre-select suitable candidates and provide a go-ahead to enter into a 
detailed participatory preparation of business plans/investment proposals; 
Identification  and  socio-economic  profiling  of  the  beneficiary  households 
(location,  number,  poverty,  ethnic  minority,  gender  and  age  of  main 
participant/beneficiary, farm size, etc.); 
 
  Participatory  preparation  of  a  joint  investment  proposal  and  financing  plan; 
Companies and farmer cooperatives or farmer households will jointly prepare an 
investment plan (format to be followed see Attachment 2). The eligible investment 
items would include: (a) cooperative-level start-up or up-grading investments or 
individual households investments in new production systems, including advanced 
breeding stock, improved seedlings, re-grafting technical assistance in improved 
33 
PIM Y2RRDP 
soil  and  water  management  practices,  IPM  and  other  practices  increasing 
production  sustainability  and  climate  change  adaptation  and  resilience,  etc.;  (b) 
pre-processing;  (c)  storage,  drying,  packaging,  or  other  pre-marketing  facilities 
using erenewable energy when possible; (d) up-grading of quality standards, costs 
related to achieving green food or organic certification at the farm level, product 
tracing,  logistics,  food  safety  and  others;  and  (e)  general  services  and  training.   
IFAD  fund  cannot  be  used  for  annual  operating  expenses  (e.g.  salaries,  annual 
production inputs, fertilizer, farm labour, etc.) or working capital. The matching 
contribution  from  the  cooperative  and/or  households  should  include  new 
investments (already existing assets cannot be considered) and could also include 
labour and working capital; 
  Technical support; the TAG will review and provide suggestions for improvement 
of the investment plan and comment on the technical and financial feasibility of 
the plan; 
  Review  and  approval  of  the  business  plan  by  the  County  Department  of 
Agriculture and Rural Development; 
  Preparation  of  a  tri-partite  Financing  Agreement  between  the  company, 
cooperative/households and the county PMO; 
  Notification of the PPMO about approved plan; 
 
Implementation  by 
cooperative/farmers and the company. 
county  PMO 
the 
in 
close 
coordination  with 
85. Activity A.1.5: Other Innovative Models. The project would support other innovative 
CYFP models to be proposed by the participating counties. Such models would need 
to feature the agreed guiding principles of the project in particular: i) a clear focus and 
identification  of  the  IFAD  target  group  as  the  main  beneficiaries  (poor,  or  poverty 
vulnerable smallholder households, women,  youth and/or ethnic minority); ii) a full 
participation of the target groups in the design, implementation and benefit sharing; 
and  iii)  a  reasonable  assurance  of  sustainability  and  scaling  up  opportunity.  Such 
innovative proposals would be individually reviewed and appraised by the IFAD team.   
86. Implementation  Strategy  for  Other  Innovative  Models.  The  project  provides  a 
window  for  supporting  other  innovative  CYFP  models  to  be  proposed  by  the 
participating counties. The implementation approach would be as follows: 
  The  county  PMOs  would  make  proposals  for  individual  investments  within  the 
scope of the project, while the investment intensity should not exceed RMB 30,000 
per beneficiary households and the total investment per proposal should not exceed 
RMB 2 million.   
  Counties  will  forward  the  suggested  investment  proposals  with  a  detailed 
investment plan to the PPMO, which would review and confirm that proposals are 
in line with the agreed principles of the project in particular: i) have a clear focus 
and identification of the IFAD targe agroups as  the  main beneficiaries (poor, or 
poverty vulnerable smallholder households, women, youth and/or ethnic minority); 
34 
PIM Y2RRDP 
ii) a full participation of the target groups in the design, implementation and benefit 
sharing; and iii) a reasonable assurance of sustainability and scaling up opportunity.   
  The  PPMO  would  forward  the  confirmed  proposals  to  IFAD  for  an  individual 
review and appraisal before the investments can be implemented. 
87. Activity A.1.6: Establishment  of County Traceability System. A trusted system  that 
allows for following a food product from the place of production to the table of the 
consumer is often considered critical for: i) ensuring that food safety requirements are 
met  and  eventual  breaches  can  be  precisely  identified  and  addressed;  ii)  generating 
consumer  trust  in  food  standards  and  certification  (e.g.  green,  organic,  fair  trade 
(produced with fair benefit sharing with smallholders), place of origin); and iii) adding 
value by giving consumers a notion of direct and personal relationship with and support 
for the involved producer. Current IT technologies provide the tools for such systems 
and  the  governments  at  various  levels  are  also  supportive  in  monitoring  food 
traceability.  Despite  the  availability  of  commercially  operated  or  agro-entities 
established  traceability  systems,  the  Ministry  of  Agricultural  and  Rural  Affairs 
(MARA)  has  been  promoting  the  synchronization  of  all  such  systems  with  the 
“National Agro-Products Traceability System”. The project would support the counties 
and related agro-entities in their application of the national traceability systems. This 
would include system access and registration, hard and software, and user training. 
88. Implementation Strategy Establishment of County Traceability System.     
The County Bureau of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (CARA) will be responsible for 
the implementation  of this  sub-component activity.    The  county PMO will identify 
the  appropriate  office  (the  “implementing  agency”)  within  CARA  for  the  specific 
undertaking of this activity. The implementation approach will be:   
  Awareness  building  and  mobilization.  The  implementing  agency  will  follow  up 
with the project supported agro-entities, to provide awareness training campaigning 
on  traceability  and  system,  explore  their  feasibility  products  and  desire  for 
embarking on food traceability practices;       
  Training and Registration: the interested agro-entities will be registered onto the 
national traceability systems, with the support of the implementing agency. Related 
training will be undertaken for the operating of the system;     
  Adopting  product  traceability.  The  enrolled  agro-entities  will  acquire  necessary 
equipment and materials for testing, labelling, QR printing and scanning and data 
processing to establish traceability.   
  Supervision and execution. County supervisory and executing agencies relating to 
food traceability will be supported with necessary equipment, training and testing 
supplies for undertaking of their supervisory duty. 
  Promotion.  County  implementing  agencies  and  registered  agro-entities  will  be 
supported  to  undertake  promotional  activities  in  marketing  and  consumer 
35 
PIM Y2RRDP 
awareness  building  of  the  agro-products  and  entities  that  have  adopted  food 
traceability.   
89. Activity A.1.7: Improving Climate Information and Adaptation Advice. To improve 
farmers access to actionable weather and climate forecast information and advice on 
adaptation  options  in  their  farming  practices,  the  project  will  finance  the  following 
activities; i) technical assistance to province level analysis of changes in crop climatic 
zones and identification of climate risks for different crops to improve information to 
counties for decision making on crop geographical suitability, and measures to reduce 
vulnerabilities of cropping systems; ii) upgrading of a few key meteorological stations 
to  agro-meteorological  stations  including  parameters  relevant  for  agriculture  (soil 
humidity and temperature, etc); iii) technical assistance to county level meteorological 
services, the agricultural agency, and the disaster risk reduction agency for improving 
seasonal and 10 days agricultural relevant forecasts and early warnings to farmers as 
well as advice on climate risks mitigation actions tailored to specific cropping systems; 
and iv) training of farmers in climate change risks and vulnerability management and 
options  of  adaptation  practices  to  be  applied  in  their  cropping  and  animal  raising 
systems. 
91. The  leading  role  in  the  implementation  of  this  activity  would  be  initially  with  the 
county  Meteorological  Bureau  (CMB).  Once  the  project  sub-areas  and  priority 
products  to  be  supported  are  identified,  the  county  Meteorological  Bureau  will  be 
assigned with the task of implementing the related activities. The main activities to be 
undertaken would be as follows: 
36 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Smart  agriculture:  when  desire  is  confirmed  with  specific  agro-entities,  CMB  in 
collaboration with CARA may also provide technical support to selected entities in 
their  establishment  of  smart  agricultural  platform,  by  developing  digital  farm 
management systems to provide optimal production strategies based on dynamic 
climate  and  production  correlation  modules.  Technical  assistance  from  external 
sources may also be explored for this purpose.. 
3.1.2 Sub-component A.2: Stimulating entrepreneurship/attracting investors.   
92. Rationale.  China’s  imbalanced  rural  and  urban  development  along  with  a  rapid 
urbanisation has resulted in a severe outflow of human and financial resources from 
rural  areas.  This  does  not  only  involve  the  active  workforce  of  the  middle-age 
generation  but  also  the  young  people  and  the  next  generation.  Money  earned  in 
agriculture  is  not  invested  back  in  the  rural  areas  to  create  or  sustain  attractive  job 
opportunities  encouraging  the  youth  and  the  middle  age  generation  to  stay,  but  is 
invested in the education of the children with the objective for them to move out of 
agriculture to better paid occupations in towns and cities. This combined outflow of 
money  and human resources has  rapidly eroded the attractiveness of  rural areas  for 
young  people. A  key  challenge  in  the  rural  revitalisation  program  is  to  break  this 
vicious cycle and provide incentives for young people to stay and/or attract business 
minded young people who has migrated back to start their own businesses including 
farm and non-farm business activities. This is equally important for young and middle 
generation  women  in  rural  areas,  which  constitute  a  significant  potential  for 
entrepreneurship and new business operations. Often, they have to stay in the villages, 
while the husband is migrating for work, and they have proven to be able to run highly 
successful rural businesses in their villages.       
93. Attracting  young people back into rural areas is a clear Government strategy with a 
high relevance for the rural revitalisation. The All-China-Women-Federation also runs 
programs to train women to become entrepreneurs and start their own business. The 
youth league is setting up finance and services facilitating centres for youth start-ups 
in  rural  areas.  However,  the  local  Governments  are  not  well  equipped  to  support 
entrepreneurship  programs  and  business  star-ups.  The  Government  has  no  suitable 
support  or  services  structure  and  facilities  in  place  and  the  understanding  and 
knowledge  of  Government  officials  of  business  entrepreneurship  and  related 
requirements is very limited. What is therefore suggested is to concentrate scattered 
training  activities  in  a  comprehensive  training  and  service  centre  with  professional 
37 
PIM Y2RRDP 
expert support, which would: a) provide a full range of business support services, and 
b) also act as a hub for communication and business facilitation.   
94. Scope of work. Major activities under this sub-component would include: (i) Business 
Incubation/Service  Centres  (BI/SC);  (ii)  Investment  Support  for  Start-ups;  and  (iii) 
Improved Access to Financing:   
95. ActivityA.2. 1: Business Incubation/Service Centres. The project would support the 
setting up and operation of comprehensive Business Incubation and Service Centres 
(BI/SC)  at  the  county  level,  eventually  in  collaboration  with  the  youth  and  women 
leagues centres, with a main focus on youth and women. The centres would provide 
services, training and advice in business development, management of climate risks, 
marketing  skills  and  enable  market  linkages  by  reducing  information  asymmetries, 
building trust, and creating shared value between value chain actors. They would also 
provide training for financial management skills and help enterprises with access to 
appropriate  financing  products  by  facilitating  linkages  with  partnering  financial 
institutions.    In  addition,  BI/SCs  will  offer  business  development  services  such  as 
training  (business  management,  business  planning,  loan  application),  and  provide 
assistance in navigating regulatory requirements, standards, and compliance and using 
ecommerce  opportunities.  Other  services  could  include  promotion  of  business 
networks,  study  tours  to  major  consumer  centres  and  regular  round  table  meetings 
between  producers/cooperatives  and  invited  buyers/processors.  Finally,  the  BI/SCs 
would offer office  facilities and meeting rooms for interested start-up entrepreneurs 
with  reliable  internet  connection  to  enable  sales,  procurement,  and  management 
functions needed to operate in a professional environment. The project would provide 
funding for the establishment (e.g. refurbishing of a rented building, equipment), rental 
and  office  operating  costs,  salaries  for  a  two-person  management  team,  and  TA, 
consultancy services and training.    The operating plan of the centres would introduce 
a gradual cost sharing and the Centres are expected to become financially sustainable 
over time through generation of their own revenues to reach a point where they can 
cover  their  on-going  operating  expenses  through  earned  revenues.  Project  funding 
would be reduced from 100% in the first 3 years to 50% in the last 2 years. The counties 
should inquire options,  whether these Centres could be attached to the E-commerce 
Centres  supported  by  the  Ministry  of  Commerce,  or  the  youth  and  women  centres 
supported by the youth league. 
96. Implementation  Strategy  for  Business  Incubation/Service  Centres.  The  Business 
Incubation/Service Centre (BISC) will provide services to all small and medium rural 
business and enterprises including farmer organisations existing or newly established. 
Particular  attentions  will  be  given  to  the  new  economic  entities  and  new  talents 
strategical supported in the rural revitalisation approach (encouraging entrepreneurship 
38 
PIM Y2RRDP 
of  college  graduates,  new  professional  farmers,  agricultural  professional  managers, 
science and technology experts, and new rural leaders).   
97. The  BISC  will  be  physically  located  at  the  recently  established  county  level  e-
commerce  centres  (established  under  the  Ministry  of  Commerce),  which  generally 
have sufficient office space, conference, meeting and communication facilities.   
98. The implementation approach would be as follows: 
  The county government will issue a document about the e stablishment of the BISC, 
role and functions, location and integration in the e-commerce centres; 
  County PMOs will recruit a manager and assistant manager through competitive 
public recruitment; 
  PMO/BISC  manager  will  contract  the  development  of  a  website  for  the  BISC, 
which would serve as advertisement of the services and interactive platform with 
the clients of services (e.g. enrolling in training courses, requesting expertise and 
special services, etc.); 
  BISC will develop a service program, which would include a calendar of regular 
services and events (e.g. quarterly training course in business accounting, training 
on business plan preparation, , counselling sessions with business lawyers, monthly 
training  on  loan  application,  roundtable  meetings  with  buyers,  etc.)  or  irregular 
events  (e.g.  special  study  tours  for  cooperative  chairmen)  or  subject  matter 
awareness raising and training events (e.g. impact of climate change on business 
decisions (how to manage climate and environmental rsks), and other business risk 
and  risk  mitigation  measures)  for  which  suitable  experts  would  be  invited.  The 
above  mentioned  website  would  allow  scoping  the  interest  from  the  client 
community and responding to emerging service needs; 
  The BISC service programs need to show a strong focus on the IFAD target groups 
(people  from  poor  or  poverty  poor  households,  women  and  youth);  they  would 
become part of the AWPB and would need IFAD approval; 
  BISC will establish, continuously up-date and maintain a database with all potential 
businesses and clients in the county to inform interested clients on services, up-
coming event; 
  The performance of the BISC and their managers would be measured according to 
the  use and satisfaction with  the  client  services provided  (events  and number of 
people  attending,  and  end  of  events  participant  satisfaction  surveys).  Detailed 
records would be kept including list of attendants, , their gender, age group,  ID, 
date/time, etc.;   
  The payment of the manager would include a performance-based element in his/her 
contract; 
  The  BISCs  will  not  employ  experts  or  trainers  in  addition  to  the  manager  and 
assistant but buy services through individual and institutional contracts procured 
under competitive procedures; 
  For  the  targeted  clients  (individuals,  youth,  women,  farmers  professional 
cooperatives (except RBL registered cooperatives), SMEs, etc.) the services would 
initially be provided for free (costs paid by the project). Non-project clients (e.g. 
39 
PIM Y2RRDP 
representatives  from  large  enterprises)  and  cooperatives  registered  as  RBL 
cooperatives would be charged for the services; 
  After  year  two  the  BISCs  will  prepare  a  gradual  cost  recovery  proposal/plan 
showing what services could be provided as paid services. The cost recovery plan 
should aim for a 50% cost recovery at year 3 of the project. 
99. Activity A.2.2: Investment Support for Start-ups. For youth and women entrepreneurs 
successfully participating in the business developing capacity building services under 
Activity 1 the project would provide start-up investment support as a matching grant. 
The investment would be based on an acceptable business plan and would cover up to 
50%  of  the  investment  costs  with  a  maximum  of  RMB  500,000  per  start-up.  The 
remaining funding should be financed from the investor’s own funds (minimum 10%) 
and from commercial loans. The investment support would be provided to agricultural 
or non-agricultural businesses (e.g. tourism, private e-commerce shops and services, 
agricultural machinery services, etc.).     
100. 
Implementation Strategy for Investment Support for Start-ups. For youth13  and 
women  entrepreneurs  successfully  participating  in  the  business  developing  capacity 
building  services  under  Activity  1  the  project  would  provide  start-up  investment 
support as a matching grant.   
101.  The responsibility for the implementation of this activity would be assigned to the 
BISCs. The investment would be based on an acceptable business plan and would cover 
up to 50% of the investment costs with a maximum of RMB 500,000 per start-up. The 
remaining funding should be financed from the investor’s own funds (minimum 10%) 
and for commercial loans. The investment support would be provided to agricultural 
or non-agricultural businesses (e.g. tourism, private e-commerce shops and services, 
agricultural machinery services, etc.) with the business to be registered in rural areas 
in  the  project  counties.  Registration  of  businesses  in  the  county  seats  would  not  be 
eligible. Joint business registration by several individuals up to a maximum of 3 people 
are  acceptable  as  long  as  all  individuals  meet  the  targeted  client  group  of  youth  or 
women. 
102. 
The implementation approach will be as follows: 
  The  BISCs  will  advertise  this  opportunity  through  websites  and  public 
announcements to interested candidates; 
  Awareness  workshops  will  be conducted for interested candidates,  which would 
pre-register; 
13 Youth entrepreneurs would be considered up to an age of 40 years (to be confirmed) 
at the time of application. 
40 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  Pre-registered candidates will participate in relevant training events organised by 
the BICS. A list of mandatory training events will be prepared by the BICS; 
  Candidates  successfully  trained  will  prepare  business  plan  proposals  with  a 
financing proposal. The BICS will provide technical support for the preparation of 
such  proposals  and  present  the  proposals/candidate  to  the  evaluation/approval 
committee;       
  The  county  PMOs  will  nominate  a  3-member  evaluation/approval  committee, 
which  would  evaluate  and  approve  proposals/candidates.  The  members  of  the 
committee will include a government representative (e.g. the county PMO director) 
and two non-government members (e.g. member of private business community, 
local banks) with no relationship or personal interests in the proposal/candidate; 
  For approved candidates the BISC will nominate a mentor, who will continue to 
provide periodic support to the start-up investor for at least a period of one year; 
Implementation/financing  will  be  based  on  a  signed  a  tri-partite  Financing 
Agreement between the start-up investor(s), PMO and the BISC; 
 
  Notification of the PPMO about approved candidate; 
 
Implementation by the investor in close coordination with the BISCs and PMO. 
103. 
3.1.3 Sub-component A.3: Improving access to finance. This sub-component 
will stimulate financial service innovations to improve access to finance in the project 
area in support of Sub-component A.1 and A.2. Key activities under this sub-
component include: 
  A.3.1: Strengthening financial capacity: The project will provide specific 
capacity  building  opportunities  (e.g.  trainings,  study  tours,  etc.)  to 
cooperatives, small- and medium-enterprises (SMEs), financial institutions, 
financial service agents, staff of the PMO, etc. on financial matters. 
  A.3.2:  Improving  financial  services:  The  project  will  enhance  the 
availability and capacity to provide financial services in the project area by 
(i) establishing one agribusiness credit system for the cooperatives, SMEs, 
and farmers; and (ii) establishing an information platform and developing 
digital micro-lending models in the counties willing to participate. 
  A.3.3:  Establishing  a  financial  advisory  service  center: The  project  will 
support the establishment of a financial advisory service center which will 
act as a bridge between the supply side (i.e. financial institutions) and the 
demand  side  (i.e.  cooperatives,  SMEs,  farmers)  to  provide  financial 
services.  This  center  could  be  combined  with  the  incubation/business 
service center. 
Implementation Strategy for Strengthening financial capacity 
104. 
A.3.1:  Building  capacity  for  financial  consumers  will  include:  (i)  developing 
training materials. Two types of training materials will be developed by the project for 
practical  financial  literacy  and  skills  that  meet  the  needs  of  farmer  cooperatives 
41 
PIM Y2RRDP 
(including SMEs) and households. The content should include the basic knowledge of 
finance, financial products and their usage (payment, financing, insurance, etc.), credit 
establishment  of  cooperatives  and  SMEs  (the  basic  requirements  in  the  credit 
evaluation,  how  to  improve  the  credit  of  cooperatives  and  SMEs),  financing  small 
investment (budgeting, sources for financing, return assessment and development of 
cash flow), how to ensure the financial health of cooperatives, SMEs and households. 
(ii)Training of trainers. The project will train 3-5 financial staff in training skills and 
knowledge  of  rural  financial  inclusion  in  each  county.  (iii)  All  project-supported 
cooperatives, SMEs and youths should be trained so to increase their access to credit 
lines in local banks. More than 30% households reached-by-project especially woman 
from these households should participated in financial capacity training. 
105. 
A.3.2:  Capacity  building  of  financial  inclusion  for  financial  institutions.  (i) 
Development of training materials for financial inclusion. The content includes basic 
knowledge of inclusive finance; financial needs of, tools to evaluate the financial credit 
of,  microfinance  risk  control  for  cooperatives,  SMEs  and  low-income  households; 
How  to  use  Fintech  to  improve  agricultural  financial  services.  (ii)  The  project  will 
provide a 5-days training for 5-10 financial staff from local financial institutions. 
106.  Mechanism  construction  of  inclusive  rural  finance.  (i)  project  will  support  in-
depth study of the needs of financial services (including financing, insurance, etc.) for 
cooperatives,  entrepreneurial  youth,  SMEs,  low-income  households.  Based  on  the 
results, solutions to the problem of “loan access difficulty” will be proposed especially 
by introducing FinTech in rural financial services. (ii) Workshops will be held annually 
to  provide  to  promote  dialogue  among  local  government,  regulators,  financial 
institutions, cooperatives, SMEs, and households. 
107. 
A.3.3: Regarding establishing a financial advisory service center, it should consist 
of 2-3 financial staff with rural financial work experience and will have the following 
tasks:  (i)  to  take  the  responsible  for  the  financial  capacity  building  of  cooperatives, 
SMEs and low-income households; (ii) to organize and support the credit evaluation 
of  cooperatives,  SMEs,  youth,  women  and  low-income  households  by  financial 
institutions;  (iii)  to  help  the  cooperatives,  SMEs,  youth,  women  and  low-income 
households in evaluating the risk of their investing projects; (iiii) to help them to apply 
for financial resources to finance their production and/or business activities. 
108. 
A.3.4: M&E tool will be developed for rural financial services. The data will be 
collected,  analyzed  and  reported  annually  on  the  demand-side  and  supply-side  to 
monitor the progress in financial inclusion. Indicators will be developed to measure 
financial accessibility, usage, quality and capacity. A base-line survey and after-project 
survey should be conducted to evaluate the project impact on financial inclusion.   
42 
PIM Y2RRDP 
3.2 Component B; Description and Implementation Strategy. 
Component B: Climate Proofed Public Infrastructure Planning & Development 
109. 
Objective. This component aims at improving common/village infrastructure, 
that  supports  the  resilience  of  cooperatives  and  village  families  against  increased 
variation in rainfall (through access to irrigation and terracing) and physical isolation 
and  loss  of  production  and  harvest  during  strong  climate  events  (through  improved 
climate proofed roads). The project will support the investments in the infrastructure 
improvements  and  expansion  as  well  as  the  needed    institutional  strengthening  for 
water,  irrigation  and  road  management,  operation  and  maintenance  adapted  to  the 
current and future challenges from climate change.   
110. 
Justification.  The  justification  of  the  component  relates  to  (i)  need  for 
improved public or common irrigation and road services that enhance the resilience of 
the  agricultural  production  against  the  increased  variability  in  rainfall,  increasing 
temperatures and extreme climate events; and (ii) the existence of insufficient village 
infrastructure that is required to improve agricultural production efficiency.   
111. 
The  targeted  project  counties  have  some  gaps  in  infrastructure  conditions, 
which  may  limit  implementation  of  the  proposed  cooperatives  development  and 
poverty  alleviation  activities,  including:  underdeveloped  and  deteriorated  irrigation 
systems,  lack  of    drinking  water  system  in  some  villages，incomplete  rural  road 
networks,  and  in  some  cases  lack  of  terracing  for  soil  conservation,  and  lack  of 
electricity  supply  facilities.  Improved  village 
their 
management, operation and maintenance will allow poor small scale producers to: (i) 
expand  and  improve  agricultural  production  in  line  with  market  requirements;  (iii) 
improve local livelihoods; and (iii) enhance resilience to climate variability and shocks.   
infrastructure  and 
level 
3.2.1 Sub-component B.1: Improving infrastructures for enhanced climate resilience.   
112. 
This sub-component will support the development and improvement of climate-
resilient infrastructure systems in the project area including improved climate-risk 
assessment, planning and decision-making and Piloting Climate adapted Smart 
irrigation. All infrastructures supported under this sub-component will be climate-
proofed. Key activities under this sub-component include: 
113. 
Activity  B.1.1:  Climate  proofed  irrigation  planning,  design  &  decision 
making.    The    project will (i) support the analysis of current and future climate trends 
43 
PIM Y2RRDP 
the identification and preparation of disaster risk reduction, adaptation 
and risks and   
and mitigation    measures  in  road,  land  improvement,  and  irrigation  infrastructure 
planning and design in the three most vulnerable counties (Yongsheng, Zhenxiong, and 
Lanping);  and  (ii)  support  the  development  of  adaptation  guidelines  for  the  design  of 
infrastructure projects linked to key agricultural industries involving smallholders (water, 
roads, and soil conservation). 
114. 
Activity B.1.2 Climate proofed Smart irrigation. 
All counties in programme areas are in lack of irrigation water supply systems and on-
farm  irrigation,  or  the  existing  systems  are  deteriorated,  with  limited  water  supply 
reliability  and  delivery  efficiency,  which  results  in  no  buffer  capacity  against 
prolonged dry periods. In some counties and areas irrigation is based on non-regulate 
and  unsustainable  pumping  of  groundwater  showing  clear  tendencies  of  over-
pumping.  This  activity  would  support  improvement  and  development  of  irrigation 
water supply systems based on available surface water resources (Jin Sha Jiang river 
and mountain streams), including water harvesting and storage facilities (construction 
of  water  pools,  water  ponds)  and  pumping  station  and  delivery  systems.  This  will   
provide  irrigation  water  to  both  agribusiness  entities,  cooperatives,  farmers,  and 
drinking water for some villages.   
115. 
This activity will also support selected cooperative, in areas with periodic water 
scarcity, in the development and implementation of pilot digital water monitoring and 
management systems that will allow for continuous adaptation of irrigation systems 
and water use to  the challenges  from increased temperature, and rainfall variability. 
Farmers and cooperatives will receive training and assistance to adopt sprinkler and 
drip irrigation systems to improve water use efficiency.   
116. 
This activity would support rehabilitation and development of 222 km canals, 766 
km pressure pipelines, 16 set system, 12 pumping stations,17 water pond, 150 water 
cellar,  295  water  pool,  and  1330  km  water  pipeline.  These  interventions  would 
contribute  to  enhancement  of  agricultural  productivity,  agriculture  diversification, 
climate resilience and farmers’ income generation. 
117. 
Total base cost of this activity is estimated as USD 45.88 million, which will be 
shared between  IFAD Loan (24.17%) and Government co financing (75.83%). Cost 
estimates for improvement and development of irrigation are based on data provided 
in the programme proposal prepared by the County governments and filed verification 
conducted  during  the  detailed  design  missions.  Average  unit  cost  is  estimated  as: 
22579.8 USD/km for canal development, 18539 USD/km for pressure pipelines, 98870 
USD/set for head control and system, 329770 USD/place for pumping stations,128780 
USD/place for water pond, 1129.9 USD/place for water cellar, 40888 USD/place for 
44 
PIM Y2RRDP 
water  pool,  and  5044  USD/km  for  water  pipeline. These  are  subject  to  adjustments 
during project implementation. 
118. 
Ownership  of  the  irrigation  and  the  water  source  facilities  improved  and 
developed under the 32 Township will belong to the beneficiary villages, water users’ 
associations or farmers’ cooperatives depending on the decision of respective county 
project management offices made during the programme implementation, based on the 
size and benefiting scope of the systems. To support the sustainability of the irrigation 
systems,  before  any  infrastructure  investments  are  made  Water  Users Associations 
(WUA)  or  other  O&M  associations/groups  should  be  formed  and  they  should  be 
involved  in  decisions  on  the  design  of  the  irrigation  system  taking  into  account  the 
future challenged from climate change. The WUA or other O&M group will be trained 
as needed in irrigation water management using rainfall forecasts and operation and 
maintenance  of  water  infrastructure. They  will  be  supported  in  the  preparation  and 
implementation of an operation and maintenance (O&M) plan for each section of the 
irrigation  system,  including  roles  and  responsibilities,  budget  and  cost  recovery 
mechanism. 
119.  WUAs or other O&M associations/group in areas of water scarcity will be trained 
in  adaptive  water  management  for  water  use  efficiency  under  different  climate 
conditions  and  supported  in  the  installment  of  a  network  of  digital  water  meters  in 
strategic places in the irrigation system and in the design of an instant water flow data 
registration and analysis system. The data on water flows will be combined with data 
collected on temperatures influencing crop water needs, crops and varieties cultivated 
in the various fields, their yields and type of irrigation equipment used. This will allow 
for monitoring and analysing water productivity and water use efficiency throughout 
the irrigation system and for implementing improved and adaptive water management 
and use efficiency. 
3.2.2 Sub-component B.2: Public Rural Infrastructure Development. 
120. 
This sub-component will address some of the major gaps in the current rural road 
infrastructure system  and land conservation structures on slopes  in  the project  area, 
which  may  limit  or  constrain  the  implementation  of  the  proposed  project  activities. 
Gaps in access to drinking water for some villages will also be filled.. Key activities 
under this sub-component include: 
121. 
Activity  B.2.1:  Improvement  and  development  of  road  systems.  Some  of  the 
programme  areas  are  in  lack  of  roads  between  villages  or  linking  villages  with 
production  areas  and  field  roads.  This  activity  would  support  development  and 
improvement  of  village  roads  and  production  roads,  which  will  serve  both  the 
agribusiness entities and village farmers.   
45 
PIM Y2RRDP 
This activity would support development of 190 km village raods,161 km production 
roads, 216 km earth roads. 
Total base cost of this activity is estimated as USD 40.42 million. Average unit cost is 
estimated as: 126,654 USD/km for village road, 43162 USD/km for production road, 
43615 USD/km for earth road. 
Before the investment in any road infrastructure an operation and maintenance (O&M) 
plan for each section of the roads must be prepared, including roles and responsibilities, 
budget and sources of funding 
122. 
Activity B.2.2 Improvement and development of safe drinking water supply 
systems. Some villages in the programme area are in lack of access to safe drinking 
water or the existing systems/facilities are deteriorated.   
This activity would support development of 37 km water pipeline. Total base cost of 
this  activity  is  estimated  as  USD  0.71  million.    Average  unit  cost  is  estimated  as: 
19086 USD/km for water pipeline. 
123.  Activity B.2.3 Land improvement and preparation. Some of the farmlands in the 
programme areas are sloping lands, segmented, unlevelled or unprotected with serious 
soil erosion, and reduced soil water storage capacity. This activity would support land 
levelling in order to enable safe and productive farming, soils and water conservation. 
This activity would support development of 500 ha land levelling. 
Total base cost of this activity is estimated as USD 2.74 million. Average unit cost is 
estimated as: 536.7 USD/ha. 
Implementation Strategy for Component B   
124. 
Implementation arrangements. The activities will be implemented at selected sites 
in the Programme counties linked to the supported cooperatives and value chains in 
component  A  and  based  on  local  infrastructure  constraints  for  agribusiness 
development  and  poverty  alleviation.  Engineering  design  and  construction  will  be 
conducted by contractors selected through proper procedure in line with government 
and IFAD procurement guidelines involving and collaborating closely with WUAs and 
O&M  associations.  The  PPMO  will  be  responsible  for  overall  supervision  and 
coordination.  Its  sub-ordinate  offices  at  prefecture  level  will  be  responsible  for 
supervision  and  coordination  of  Sub-component  activities  within  their  respective 
prefectures. The sub-ordinate offices at county level will be responsible for detailed 
implementation  of  sub-component  activities  within  their  respective  counties.  The 
project  covers  a  large  scope  of  activities,  including  the  development  of  irrigation 
facilities,  construction  of  village  roads,  land  improvements,  and  drinking  water 
systems.  Implementation  of 
trainings  for 
beneficiaries  and  the  development  of  operation  and  maintenance  mechanisms  of 
including  related 
these  activities, 
46 
PIM Y2RRDP 
project  outputs,  will  remain  with  the  implementing  agencies  at  each  level.  Close 
cooperation will be established with county bureaus of water, transport and power in 
order to ensure their compliance with government strategies and policies.   
125. 
Technical  standards.  System  planning  and  engineering  design  of  the  proposed 
infrastructure systems will follow the relevant standards and technical guidance. Close 
cooperation will be established with county bureaus of agricultural water, household 
water  and  transport in  order to ensure their compliance with  government  standards, 
strategies and policies. Qualified experts will be mobilized for technical assistance and 
training.  Procurement  of  civil  works,  goods  and  services  will  follow  relevant 
government and IFAD guidelines and processes. Suitable infrastructure management 
organization,  such  as  the  WUAs  and  the  road  maintenance  group,  will  be 
identified/established before the commencement of each infrastructure improvement 
work and be involved in the whole process of system planning, design and construction 
supervision, and take over the O&M responsibility after completion of construction. 
126. 
Integrating climate considerations. Sustainable and climate-smart approach will 
be mainstreamed at each phase of the program cycle. During preparation the impacts 
of climate change on water availability, water demands, flood and drought frequency 
and intensity will be assessed and incorporated into system planning. Environmental-
friendly practices will be adopted during construction to avoid and mitigate potential 
impacts  before 
negative 
implementation,  and  protection  of  trees  and  vegetation  (see  details  in  the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)).   
including  assessment  of  environmental 
impacts, 
127. 
The  composition  of  PMO  personnel.  The  construction  of  public  infrastructure 
involves  irrigation  projects,  drinking  water  supply  projects,  land  improvement,  and 
roads. At present, PPMO personnel come only from the agricultural institutions. PPMO 
personnel are as such not familiar with water engineering construction, water balance 
calculation of supply and demand, irrigation system management, road and drinking 
water  systems  engineering,  and  operation  management  and  maintenance  of  the 
infrastructure. PMO should therefor integrated personnel from multiple departments. 
128.  Management of public infrastructure. Reservoirs, pumping stations, water pipes 
and field irrigation facilities need routine maintenance. Reasonable water management 
and irrigation plans need to be developed based on crops, meteorology, soil, etc. The 
management agencies should be established, and relevant management systems should 
be developed, and operating management maintenance funds should be provided. 
129. 
Investment in field works. The experience of China is that governments should 
invest in and manage key water projects such as reservoirs, main canals, branch canals 
and water pipelines. For irrigation projects in the field, most of the investment should 
come from the government, farmers should also invest part of the money, which can 
enhance the responsibility of farmers to manage the irrigation system. 
47 
PIM Y2RRDP 
3.3  Component  C:  Project  Management,  Knowledge  Management,  M&E,  and 
Policy:   
130. 
This  component  will  support  the  planning,  coordinating,  monitoring,  reporting 
and  overall  management  functions  of  the  project  management  offices  (PMOs)  at 
provincial  and  county  level. An  important  partnership  will  be  established  with  the 
Agricultural Information Institute, Center of International Agricultural Research of the 
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science (AII-CAAS) for the provision of support in 
monitoring and evaluation functions, knowledge management, and policy engagement. 
48 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Component A 
132.  Attachment 1: Operational Standards of Pro-Poor Farmer Professional 
Cooperatives:   
The  following  checklist  would  be  used  for  the  initial  certification  of  a  pro-poor  farmer 
professional  cooperative.  Other  parameters  indicate  the  standards  for  continuing 
operations of the cooperatives. All indicators would be continued to be monitored of the 
performance of pro-poor cooperatives.  If the essential compliance parameters are met a 
cooperative  would  also  be  eligible  for  further  support  under  the  project  (e.g.  for  co-
financing partners). 
Assessment content and standards 
1. Registration at the Industrial and Commercial Bureau 
under the Law of farmers' specialized cooperatives in the 
Peoples  Republic  of  China  from  2006  as  amended  in 
2017 effective July 1, 2018 
2.  Business  license,  Organization  Code  certificate,  tax 
registration certificate, Bank account   
3. Ordinary Farmer members are at least 80% of the total 
number of members, and other members of  enterprises, 
institutions or social organizations shall not exceed 5%. 
4. Each member has a clearly defined share. A complete 
list is available. The sum of all Members' shares is 100%. 
5.  Fixed  assets 
(buildings  and  equipment)  are 
appropriately validated. Cash contributions are deposited 
in  the  cooperatives’  account.  Land  contributions  are 
clearly  recorded  and  validated  in  agreements  with  the 
cooperative’s general assembly decisions making. 
6. Cooperative has at least 20 members. 
7.  A  full  membership  list  is  maintained  including 
information  such  as  name  of  the  member,  gender,  ID 
number,  occupation,  home  address,  poverty  status, 
shareholding ratio, contact information. 
8. Ordinary farmer members hold total shares of at least 
60% of the cooperation shares. 
9.  The  cooperative  has  a  written  and  clear  profit 
distribution system. 
Required  for  ‘pro-
poor coop’ 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
10. The profit distribution arrangements are adopted by  yes 
49 
(i)  Formal 
registration 
(ii) 
Genuine 
farmers' 
cooperative
s 
(iii)  Asset 
recognition 
(iv) 
Member 
information 
(v)  Shares 
compositio
n 
(vi) 
Distributio
n of profits 
s
g
n
i
t
t
e
S
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
p
O
,
p
i
h
s
r
e
b
m
e
M
,
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
s
i
g
e
R
.
I
PIM Y2RRDP 
(vii) 
Participatio
n  of  poor 
households 
(viii) 
(ix) 
Participatio
n of women 
and youth 
(x) 
Inclusion 
of  women 
in  decision 
making 
(viii) 
Environ 
mental 
standards 
l
a
i
c
n
a
n
i
F
.
I
I
(i) 
Accounting 
(ii) 
Financial 
software 
(iii) 
Financial 
records 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
M
all  members  prior  to  the  commencement  of  each  fiscal 
year, the distribution of profits explains the reserves (non-
distributed  profits),  distributable  profits  by  means  of 
distribution  such  as  volumes  traded,  capital  shares 
owned) with clear percentages allocated. 
11.  At  least  thirty  percent  (30%)  of  the  cooperative’s 
members  are  Registered  Poor  Households  or  forty 
percent (40%) of all Registered Poor Households in each 
of the covered administrative villages are members of the 
cooperative. (Only one of the two criteria need to be met). 
Any household in Registered Poor Household data base 
since 2015 qualifies.     
12.  The  percentage  of  young  (18-35  years  old) 
cooperative  members  is  the  same  as  the  percentage  of 
young people in the covered administrative villages or at 
least 25% of the cooperative’s members are young. (Only 
one of the two criteria need to be met). 
13.  The  percentage  of  women  cooperative  members  is 
higher  than  the  percentage  of  women  in  the  covered 
the 
administrative  villages  or  at 
cooperative’s members are women. (Only one of the two 
criteria need to be met). 
least  40%  of 
yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
14. At leads 30% of the members of the board are women 
and women in leading positions is encouraged   
15.  The  cooperative  adheres  to  Good  Agricultural 
Practices (GAP) or follows national standards and good 
practices regarding agricultural waste management, soil 
erosion  control  and  water  management,  recycling  of 
resources  (e.g. nutrients, biomass,  materials),  minimum 
use  of  chemical  fertilizers  and  pesticides,  and  other 
sustainable  and  climate  resilient  agriculture/livestock 
practices and technologies. 
16.  The  cooperative  has  a  qualified  accountant  or 
entrusted  the  rural  management  agencies  or  other 
accounting agencies with bookkeeping, accounting. 
17.  The  cooperative  uses  a  computerized  accounting 
software for bookkeeping 
soon 
As 
applicable 
as 
yes 
yes 
18.  Accurate  recording  of  financial  information  and 
timely data updates (records are computerized not more 
than one month after transactions occurred). 
soon 
As 
applicable 
as 
50 
PIM Y2RRDP 
(iv) 
Financial 
statements 
(i) 
Meetings 
(ii)  Trans-
parency 
g
n
i
k
a
m
n
o
i
s
i
c
e
D
d
n
a
e
c
n
a
n
r
e
v
o
G
:
I
I
I
19. Interim financial reports can be produced at any time 
and are available to the Board of Supervisors for review. 
20. Clear annual financial statements are prepared at the 
end  of  the  fiscal  year  including  a  profit  and  loss 
statement, a simple balance sheet and a profit distribution 
table. 
21. Members (representatives) the General Assembly, the 
Council, the Board of Supervisors and other institutions 
are sound and operate effectively. 
22.  At  least  the  mandatory  meetings  of  the  General 
Assembly,  Council,  and  the  Board  of  Supervisors  are 
conducted with minutes available   
23.  Regular  meetings  (including  the  three  mandatory 
yearly  meetings)  are  conducted,  with  minutes  prepared 
and recorded. 
24.  Summary  financial  information,  asset  information 
and  earnings  and  loss  information  is  disclosed  and 
publicly  displayed  not  less  than  one  months  after  the 
closing of the financial year. 
soon 
As 
applicable 
soon 
As 
applicable 
soon 
As 
applicable 
yes 
soon 
As 
applicable 
soon 
As 
applicable 
as 
as 
as 
as 
as 
51 
PIM Y2RRDP 
133.  Attachment 2: Annotated Outline of the Business Plan:   
Each  Business  Plan  (investment  proposals)  should  follow  a  common  outline  and  be 
presented in a paper with a length of 10 to 15 pages plus annex tables and should cover 
the following sections: 
1.  Proposing Unit: (all information provided here should refer to the existing situation 
and not to future plans) 
1.1. Name of the Cooperative 
1.2. Village(s) 
1.3. Date of registration 
1.4. Current  business  activities  (please  indicate  the  main  business  activities  of  the 
proposing unit, type of business, size of operation including volumes of products 
produced/traded/processed during the past years, main area of operations (e.g. 
township, county, national, etc.;   
1.5. Current financial situation (registered capital, annual turn-over, annual profits, 
existing loans incl. types and maturity, dept/equity ratio, etc.) 
1.6. Current business relationships (in what way is the proposing unit already linked 
to  down-  and  up-stream  partners  such  as  formal  or  informal  contracts  with 
farmers or farmer cooperatives, who are the major buyers/processors, ,   
2.  Background Situation of the Related ‘Industry’: Explain the relevant background 
situations related to the proposed investment. Current production/trading/processing 
arrangements,  technologies,  etc.  What  is  wrong  or  inefficient  with  the  current 
situation, in particular in terms of technologies, organizational arrangements, benefit 
sharing in the value chain, etc. Are there any market failures preventing the private 
sector to develop the proposed production system? 
3.  Objective  and  Targets  of  the  Proposed  Investment:  This  section  should  explain 
what is going to be achieved with the proposed investment and how the achievement 
would be measured. The objective and targets should be concrete, measurable and in 
particular realistic: e.g. ‘the net production value would be increased by xxx million 
RMB, this incremental production value would be shared between the enterprise and 
the  farmers  with  the  farmers  receiving  at  least  xx%  of  the  incremental  value’.  It  is 
important that the objective and targets are realistic. They will be monitored, and the 
investment will be considered a failure, if the objective is not achieved, in which case 
financing will also be stopped.   
4.  Rational of the Proposal: This section should explain why this specific investment is 
necessary,  what  would  happen  without  the  project,  what  alternatives  have  been 
52 
PIM Y2RRDP 
considered  and  why  can’t  the  above  stated  objective  not  be  achieved  without 
implementing this investment in the proposed way. 
5.  Main beneficiaries:   
5.1. Direct Beneficiaries: Who would directly benefit from this investment? Farmers? 
Company? Cooperative? How many farmers disaggregated by gender and age? 
How would poor farmers, women farmers and youth farmers be targeted? How 
many poor farmers would directly benefit from the investment and what would be 
the benefits?     
5.2. Indirect Beneficiaries: What other benefits are expected from this investment and 
who would indirectly benefit? In what way 
6.  Description of the Investment: This section should provide a detailed description of 
the proposed investment activities; this section should explain how the money would 
be used, who would be the owners of each of the investments and who would have the 
farmers,  cooperatives, 
responsibilities 
for  operation  and  maintenance  (e.g.: 
enterprises, etc.); the section could be structured as follows:   
6.1. Investment in Production Facilities, type, areas (mu), households (No.), 
6.2. Investment in Processing and Marketing facilities, type, size, location, etc. 
6.3. Investment in Other Infrastructure, type, size, location, etc. 
6.4. Investment  in  Services  and  Training,  including  who  is  providing  services  and 
training, contents, timing, number of households receiving services/training, etc. 
6.5. Investment  in  Other  Activities,  please  describe  here  any  other  proposed 
investments not covered already in the above sections.   
6.6.   Detailed Cost Tables, Following the same structure above (6.1. to 6.5.) a detailed 
cost table should be presented showing all investment activities, units, quantities, 
unit costs and total costs. The format for the detailed cost table, which needs to be 
used, is attached (Attachment 1). 
7.  Financing  Arrangements:  A  table  should  be  provided  here  showing  the  proposed 
financing arrangements for each investment activity (see Sample Table: Attachment 2) 
8.  Organizational  Arrangements:  This  section  should  describe 
the  proposed 
organizational arrangements; what steps have already been taken and what steps will 
be implemented to achieve these organizational  arrangements. It should cover such 
items as formations of farmer groups/cooperatives, contractual arrangements among 
land 
farmers  or  between  companies  and 
leasing/contracting,  etc.  Evidence  of  organizational  arrangements  (e.g.  copies  of 
farmers,  services  agreements, 
53 
PIM Y2RRDP 
contracts, registration of cooperatives, etc.) should be provided in an attachment to 
the proposal). 
9.  Cash flow and financial analysis.      To understand whether the proposed investment 
is really profitable and competitive a detailed cash flow and financial analysis needs 
to be provided separately for each major stakeholders in the value chain. This needs 
to include crop or livestock models at the farm level (example tables are provided in 
Attachment 2) and cash flow analysis at the company/enterprise level (details will be 
explained  at  the  project  preparation  workshop).  It  is  very  important  that  the 
assumptions  used  in  the  crop  models  and  business  cash  flow  tables  are  realistic 
reflecting  the  true  field  situations.  Many  yield  and  price  assumptions  used  by  the 
Governments  are  highly  optimistic  as  they  refer  to  best  case  scenarios  and  do  not 
reflect  average  field  observations.  This  is  not  acceptable  as  such  false  assumption 
expose farmers to high risks.   
10. Benefit Sharing and Poverty Impact. This section should quantify the benefit sharing 
between different stakeholders and the impact, which the proposed investment would 
have on poverty alleviation. 
11. Market analysis and comparative production cost analysis. Each of the proposals 
promoting the development or expansion of a product/industry need to be supported 
by a detailed market analysis showing were the markets for the product are and what 
quantities  these  market  are  likely  to  absorb  at  what  prices.  This  needs  to  take  into 
account  developments  in  other  production  areas.  Often  the  same  product  is  also 
expanded  in  other  areas.  To  assure  longer  term  competitiveness  of  a  product  the 
production costs in the main producing areas should be compared with the production 
costs  in  the  project  areas  (comparative  production  cost  analysis).  If  the  production 
costs in other main producing areas are significantly lower, it must be assumed that 
these areas will expand production and out-compete the produce from project areas. 
12. Safeguards. This  section should assess all potential  environmental and social risks 
related  to  the  proposed  investment,  and  include  all  safeguard  and    mitigation 
measures for these risks and to avoid any negative social and environmental impacts.   
12.1 Environmental safeguards: Assess all risks including but not limited to the risks 
relate  to  land  conversion  from  natural  habitats,  soil  erosion  and  land  degradation, 
contamination from agrochemicals and climate vulnerabilities and include mitigation 
measures. For proposals involving agro-processing assess all risks including but not 
limited to risks related to solid and liquid waste, land conversion from natural habitats, 
energy  and  water  consumption  and  sources  and  include  safeguard  ad  mitigation 
54 
PIM Y2RRDP 
measures.  State  national  environmental  standards  and  approval  requirements  that 
applies.. In case of approvals already granted (e.g. by the environmental protection 
bureaus) copies of the approval should be attached. 
State whether the proposal meets the sub-project screening standard for environment 
management and the location screening standard for environment management. If the 
proposal already has an environment  impact  assessment  the Chinese  version  of  the 
environment  impact  assessment  report  must  be  attached.  If  the  proposal  has  been 
cleared  by  the  local  environment  evaluation  authority,  the  approval  document  by 
county or city environmental production bureau should be attached. The county PMO 
need to provide the review, approval opinion and conclusion to the proposal (cleared, 
rejected or resubmitted for review and approval after revision) from the perspective of 
environment safeguard.     
12.2 Social Safeguards (In compliance with relevant stipulations of the Environmental 
and Social Management Plan of the project). Assess all social safeguard issues and 
propose mitigation measures including the following issues:   
i.  Land  Issue.  In  case  the  project  involves  land-use  changes,  explanation  should  be 
given to specify the current use and user rights for the land, scale (mu) of the land 
implicated,  instrument  used  to  allow  for  the  land-use  change  (land  adjustment  or 
acquisition). For new land acquisition, the time of acquisition by the village or town 
shall be specified. In case of land-use an user rights adjustment after consultation, all 
the procedures should be in place with documentation of the village committee meeting 
minutes  (with  seal  of  village  committee)  for  voluntary  land  adjustment,  and  the 
commitment letter with villagers’ thumb print (archives for check) 
ii. Poverty targeting. Specify number of Project Beneficiaries (specify the number of 
cooperative  farmers  and  that  of  non-cooperative  farmers).  Number  of  beneficiaries 
fromy poor household (specify the number of poor households and poverty probability 
in the project area, the number of poor households joined in the cooperative and its 
proportion to the total number of the poor households in the project area).   
iii. Ethnic Minority Population. State the participating minority people group, number 
as well as the name and number of main minority groups in the project area. Included 
are the following: the proportion of minority people to the total population in project 
area;  the  proportion  of  participating  minority  people  among  the  proposed  project 
beneficiaries;  the  proportion  of  minority  people  in  the  managerial  staff  of  the 
cooperative. 
iv.  Women  participation.  Specify  the  proportion  of  women  among  the  farmers  and 
workers, that will benefit from the project, and what the project proponent will do to 
increase  this  proportion  if  below  50%.  Specify  the  proportion  of  women  in  the 
managerial staff of the cooperative, and what the project proponent will do to increase 
this number if currently below 30%. State the strategy that will be used to facilitate 
that women’s voice are heard (with actions arranged) and that they are given full roles 
in management and operation. 
55 
PIM Y2RRDP 
v. Inclusion of youth. Specify the proportion of youth (8-35 years) among the farmers 
and workers, that will benefit from the project, and what the project proponent will do 
to increase this proportion. Specify the proportion of youth in the managerial staff of 
the cooperative, and what the project proponent will do to increase this number. State 
the strategy that will be used to facilitate that youth’s voice are heard (with actions 
arranged). 
vi.  Capacity  building  &  training.  Specify  training  plan,  contents,  arrangement  and 
number of trainees. Efforts should be made to ensure equal participation of women, 
youth  and  minority  groups.  Specify:  number  of  cooperative  managerial  staff  to  be 
trained including number and proportion of women, number and proportion of youth, 
and number and proportion of people from minority groups. Specify number of farmers 
to be trained, including number and proportion of women, number and proportion of 
youth,  number  and  proportion  of  people  from  poor  households,  and  number  and 
proportion of people from minority groups. 
56 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Appendix Table 1:    Format and Example for Detailed Cost Table   
2020-2024 Investment Plan for XXX Farmer Cooperative   
Cost Estimate by Year 
Base Cost by Year 
Unit:thousand 
yuan 
Unit 
2020  2021  2022  2023  2024  Total 
2020  2021  2022  2023  2024  Total 
Unit 
Cost 
of 
of 
M2 
Set 
Set 
Project Activity 
I. Investment Cost 
1.Establishment 
Cooperative 
1.1  Office 
1.2 
Equipment 
1.3  Office Furniture 
Sub-total 
2.Development 
Cooperative 
Farming (Livestock) 
2.1 
2.2  Nursery 
mu (head) 
mu 
Greenhouse 
2.3 
M2 
Seedling 
ten 
thousand     
57 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Supplementary 
Fertilizer 
(Organic Fertilizer) 
Sticky  plates  as  Insect 
Trap 
pieces 
ton 
ten 
pieces 
thousand 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
2.7 
2.8 
Sub-total 
3．Value-added Incremental 
3.1  New Water Tank 
3.2  Cold Storage 
3.3 
3.4 
Extension 
Processing Plant 
Setting up of Internet 
of 
M3 
M3 
M2 
set 
3.5  Machinery Equipment    piece 
Processing 
Equipment 
Plant 
piece 
3.6 
3.7 
Sub-total 
Incremental 
of  Value-added 
58 
PIM Y2RRDP 
4.Market  Survey 
Development 
4.1  Agro-market 
4.2 
and 
piece 
Trading Market 
Brand 
Development 
Promotion 
Food Safety Test 
Verification, 
and 
piece 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
Sub-total of Market 
5.Technical Support 
5.1 
5.2 
Hiring  of  Technical 
Experts 
Test  and  Identification 
of Products 
Person/days 
Person/days 
5.3 
Peer Training 
Person/times 
Study  Tour  to  Main 
Markets 
Person/years 
5.4 
5.5 
Sub-total 
6.Risk  Prevention  and 
Mitigation 
59 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Insurance 
6.1 
6.2 
Sub-total 
7.Stand-by Investment 
2~3 years 
7.1 
20%－30% 
8.Enterprise Investment 
8.1 
Plants and Buildings 
total 
8.2 
Testing Lab 
Equipment 
8.2  Boiler 
8.3 
8.4  Others 
8.5 
Sub-total 
Investment 
of 
Enterprise 
3 
II. Other Costs 
1 
2 
Labor 
Farm Manure 
Self-raised 
Cooperative Members 
Management Cost 
4 
5 
Operational Cost 
Sub-total of Other Costs 
Total of Investment 
by 
total 
total 
total 
total 
total 
number 
ton 
60 
PIM Y2RRDP 
The  cooperative  development  and  investment  plan  has  been  discussed  and  confirmed  by  the  cooperative 
assembly and opened to the public. 
Commitment of Cooperative 
Witness Signature of Cooperative Assembly of Board Directors and Supervision Members: 
Cooperative Facilitator Signature: 
Cooperative Seal: 
Opinions 
of 
Advisory Group 
Technical 
Signature/Seal of Reviewer (Expert) :              Day        Month        Year 
Opinions of County PMO 
Seal of County PMO    :                                  Day        Month        Year 
61 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Appendix Table 2: The Financing Arrangement of xxx Farmer Cooperative 
Unit: Thousand Yuan 
Total 
Cost 
Project Activities 
IFAD  Cooperative  Enterprise 
Farmer  Other 
(Please 
Specify) 
Total 
Financing 
(RMB 000’)   
I.Project Investment Cost 
1.Establishment of Cooperative   
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
Office 
Equipment 
Office Furniture 
Sub-total of Establishment 
2. Development of Cooperative 
2.1 
2.2 
  2.3 
  2.4 
  2.5 
  Farming 
(Livestock) 
Nursery 
Greenhouse 
Seedling 
Supplementary 
Fertilizer 
62 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  2.6 
  2.7 
  2.8 
(Organic 
Fertilizer) 
Sticky  Plates  as   
Insect Trap 
Sub-total of Development 
3．Value-added Incremental 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.7 
New Water Tank 
Cold Storage 
of 
Extension 
Processing Plant 
Setting up of Internet     
Machinery 
Equipment   
Processing 
Equipment 
Plant 
Sub-total of Value-added Incremental 
4.Market Survey and Development 
4.1   
4.2   
Agro-Market 
Trading Market 
63 
PIM Y2RRDP 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
Sub-total 
5.Technical Support 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
5.5 
Brand  Verification, 
Development 
and 
Promotion 
Food Safety Test 
Hiring  of  Technical 
Experts 
Test 
Identification 
Product 
and 
of 
Peer Training 
Main Market Survey 
Sub-total 
6.Risk Prevention and Mitigation 
Insurance fee 
6.1 
6.2 
Sub-total 
7.Stand-by Investment 
64 
PIM Y2RRDP 
7.1 
20%－30% 
8.Enterprise Investment   
8.1 
8.2 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
Plants and Buildings     
Testing Lab 
Boiler 
Equipment 
Others 
Sub-total of Enterprise Investment 
II. 
Other Cost 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Labor 
Farm Manure 
Self-raised 
Cooperative 
Members 
by 
Management Cost 
Operation Cost 
Sub-total of Other Cost 
Total of Investment 
Appendix Table 3: Cooperative Input & Output Analysis 
65 
PIM Y2RRDP 
** Cooperative Input & Output 
No. 
I、 
1、 
2、 
3、 
4、 
II、 
1、 
III、 
1、 
2、 
3、 
Project 
Productive Inputs 
Seed 
Fertilizer 
Pesticide 
Land Rental Fee 
Labor Cost 
Salary 
Fixed Assets Input 
Office Room 
Machinery Equipment 
Depreciation 
…
…
IV、  Management Cost 
1、 
Office Cost 
2、 
Financial Cost 
…
…
V、 
Other Cost 
Quantity 
Unit 
Price 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
2028 
2029 
66 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Tax Fee 
VI、 
1、 
2、 
VII、  Sales Revenue 
1、 
2、 
VIII、  Gross Profit 
IX、  Reserve 
X 
Product 1 
Product 2 
Distributive Profit 
67 
PIM Y2RRDP 
134. 
Attachment 3: Guiding Principles for Company-Cooperative/Household (CC/H) 
models under the project.   
The project would develop guidelines for CC/H support models, which would cover the following 
principles: 
  Suitable companies should have proven business experience and technical, financial and 
management capacity (clear criteria would be defined); 
  Company can prove that it has a sufficiently large and secure market for the product;   
  A clear identification and socio-economic profile of the beneficiary households (location, 
number,  poverty,  ethnic  minority,  gender  and  age  of  main  participant/beneficiary,  farm 
size, etc.); 
  A  joint  investment  proposal  and  financing  plan  to  be  prepared  based  on  a  documented 
consultation  process  with  the  involved  cooperatives/households  and  written  samples  of 
sustainable and fair purchasing arrangements; 
  A  financing  plan  showing  the  enterprise  investment  if  applicable,  and  the  cooperative 
farmer technical assistance and investment needs; 
  Project  funds  would  be  provided  based  on  a 
(enterprise/coop/PMO); 
tri-partied  financing  agreement 
  Project  funds  can  only  be  used  to  finance  the  cooperative  or  household  investments 
including joint infrastructure and training and capacity building (no enterprise assets); 
  Cost  sharing should be applied (e.g. project  funds 50% for productive assets,  100% for 
training and capacity building); 
  Project  funds  would  not  be  channelled  through  the  enterprise  but  provided  directly  to 
coop/farmers; 
  a  set  of  quantified  targets  (e.g.  number  of  smallholder  farmers/poverty  households 
engaged, volume of products to be procured, minimum prices to be paid, etc.) with a written 
commitment by the enterprise to achieve these targets as part of the trip-partied financing 
agreement;   
  arrangements and an agreement for a third-party monitoring. 
68 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Chapter 4: Project Implementation Structure 
4.1 Project management and coordination   
135. 
Lead Implementing Agency: For successful implementation of the Project, a project 
management system, PMOs, will be established at county levels and at province level which 
will operate under the guidance of Provincial Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs as 
lead agency. Specifically the Farmland Enhancement Division within DARA would take lead 
responsibility for project implementation management, supervision and evaluation, and will 
act as the Provincial Project Management Office (PPMO). Additional support will be 
mobilized from the Division of Cooperative Economy of DARA, and other division 
whenever needed.   
136. 
County Project Management Offices: Major implementation responsibilities of the 
project lie with the counties. County Project Management Offices (CPMOs) will be 
established at the County Bureau of Agriculture and Rural Affairs. Relevant technical 
bureaus in the counties (such as water conservancy, metrological, transportation bureaus, 
etc.) will be mobilized to support the project implementation in the related activities of the 
project as per need.   
137. The prime responsibilities of a PMO, inter alia, are to consolidate annual work plan and 
budget (AWPB) at their respective level, coordinate project implementation, manage the 
project resources, monitor project implementation, report on implementation progress on a 
six-monthly basis and project impact on required basis, and to ensure that project’s 
implementation strategy is effectively applied in all activities. Generally, the overall 
responsibilities of the CPMO/PPMO staff are similar to that of a project management office. 
However, each PMO staff has his/her specific tasks and responsibilities in accordance with 
the post he/she holds. 
138. Role of the Department/Bureaus of Finance: The Department/Bureau of Finance at 
Provincial/County level will be responsible for administering project resources, 
including the IFAD loan and counterpart funds. 
139. Implementing Support Units: Implementing Support Units will be established in the 
project townships to facilitate project implementation, targeting and related 
monitoring activities. 
140. Project Joint Meeting: At provincial level, a coordinating committee comprising 
at least the Provincial Department of Finance (DOF), the Provincial Department of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs (DARA), the Provincial Development and Reform 
Commission (PDRC), and the Provincial Office of Poverty Alleviation may be 
established to provide overall guidance and coordination of the project 
implementation. Involvement of the Women Federation, Youth League, the 
Meteorological Service, and Work Bureau is also recommended. Similar coordination 
committees led by the county mayors should be established at county level 
69 
PIM Y2RRDP 
141. 
Independent third-party Verification Agency: An independent third-party 
verification agency will be contracted by the project to verify that the disbursement-linked 
indicator target set for the activity that would pilot the result-based lending approach (A.1.1 - 
Promoting pro-poor farmer cooperatives) (i.e. number of cooperatives that meet defined 
operational standards) is achieved.   
142. Verification protocol: The Agricultural Bureaus or the Economic and Management 
Bureaus of DARA at the county levels will record the cooperative information in a 
database on a regular basis and be responsible for the accuracy of the information. 
Cooperatives meeting all the agreed eligibility requirements will be reported to the 
PPMO on a semi-annual basis. The independent third-party Verification Agency (VA) 
will conduct a verification of all cooperatives deemed to meet the agreed operational 
standards in a given DLI disbursement period (e.g. quarterly). The cooperatives will 
report to the VA who after verification will report to the PPMO according to the 
agreed check list. Confirmation that the disbursement-linked indicators (DLI) target 
has been achieved would be through a letter of confirmation to IFAD. 
143. 
Role of the County Meteorological Bureaus:  The County Meteorological Bureaus 
will take the lead in implementing the Improving climate information and 
adaptation advice activity (Ref. Activity A.1.7). 
144. 
145. 
The role of the Agricultural Information Institute of the Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Science: IFAD and the Agricultural Information Institute, Center of 
International Agricultural Research of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science (AII-
CAAS) are entering into an agreement by which CAAS would provide support to IFAD in 
monitoring and evaluating the IFAD portfolio in China, extracting relevant knowledge from 
IFAD portfolio, and utilizing it to inform policy making. Within this context, the project 
would enter into an agreement with AII-CAAS for carrying out major functions related to 
M&E, knowledge management and policy dialogue, i.e. carrying out baseline, midline, and 
end line surveys, analysis of data, impact evaluations, policy notes, etc. 
146. 
147. 
Procurement of goods, works and services financed by the project will be carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Law of the People's Republic of China (2002) and its 
amendments to the extent that they are consistent with the provisions of IFAD’s Project 
Procurement Guidelines and Handbook (2010) and its amendments. The procurement 
methods to be applied, prior review arrangements, and the thresholds for different 
procurement methods will depend on the expenditure and the estimated value of the contract, 
and will be detailed in the letter to the borrower. 
70 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Project Organizational Structure 
MOF 
IFAD 
Provincial DARA 
Provincial Farmland 
Enhancement Division  
Provincial Cooperative 
Economy Division  
Provincial PMO 
County BoARA 
County PMO 
Implementing agencies ( water 
conservancy, metrological, 
Farmer cooperatives/ WFs  
Township PMO 
VIG 
Villages & farmer households/ Cooperative Members/ 
Young Entrepreneurs/ enterprisers  
Legend: 
Implementation & 
M&E contact 
Financial 
management & 
supervision 
Endorse & 
approve 
Daily contact 
with IFAD 
Macro contact 
71 
PIM Y2RRDP 
4.2 Project Planning   
148. 
Planning will follow current practices for the IFAD-funded projects in China: planning 
will be done on annual basis through the development of annual work plan and budgets 
(AWPBs). AWPBs will be developed through participatory approach. AWPBs would 
include, among other things, a detailed description of the planned activities and required 
budget, a procurement plan, and a plan for the implementation of the activities. AWPBs 
would need to receive IFAD's "no objection". 
149. 
The AWPB  is  an  essential  covenant  in  the  legal  Financing Agreement.  The  failure  to 
prepare  it  on  a  timely,  annual  basis,  may  lead  to  delay  or  suspension  of  loan  and  grant 
disbursements  on  the  part  of  IFAD.    AWPB  serves  both  as  a  tool  for  guiding  project 
implementation  and  as  a  collection  of  benchmarks  against  which  actual  implementation 
progress can be measured throughout the year. A poorly thought-through and prepared AWPB 
may cause a loss of purpose and direction in implementation, give rise to the need for resource- 
consuming  ad-hoc  problem  solving  when  unforeseen  (but  foreseeable)  obstacles  to 
implementation surface during the year, and make it difficult to ascertain if implementation 
progress is on track.   
150. 
The AWPB is the outcome of the annual project planning process. Through annual work 
planning, the project decides what activities will be carried out over the next 12 months, by 
whom, the resources and the time needed to complete them. The AWPB is therefore a planning 
and management tool that specifies what is expected to be done during the year, how and at 
what cost. The AWPB should be results-oriented and with clear descriptions of the results that 
the project is expected to achieve in the AWPB period.The draft AWPB will be sent to IFAD 
for review and no-objection 60 days prior to start of each year of implementation. 
151. 
The  PPMO  will  prepare  the Annual Workplan  and  Budget  Report  using  the  following 
table of contents: 
A. Introduction 
-    Project Outline 
-    The Annual Planning Process and This AWPB 
B. Implementation Progress and Performance   
C. Project Strategy and Focus for the Coming Year 
-    Key Constraints and Required Actions 
-    Overall Strategic Focus 
-    Components 
D. Consolidated Annual Budget 
Annexes: 
Annex 1. The Logical Framework 
Annex 2. Procurement Plan 
Annex 3. Staff Development Plan 
Annex 4. Detailed Work Plans and Budgets 
72 
PIM Y2RRDP 
152.  Monitoring and evaluation (M&E): Monitoring and evaluation is an essential function 
that would support project management. M&E will be supported by a management 
information system (MIS) which will be specifically developed for the project, and that will 
integrate information regarding project management, financial management and physical 
progress, allowing real-time reporting. see for details in chapter 5 
153. 
Learning and knowledge management (KM): The project knowledge management 
strategy would be built on the following key elements: (i) an effective M&E framework will 
be established to monitor implementation progress, and would provide the evidence for 
learning; (ii) a baseline, mid-line, and endline survey will be conducted at the beginning, 
mid-term, and completion of the project; (iii) workshops at different levels will be held 
regularly to share knowledge, experiences, innovations, and best practices; (iv) study tours, 
exposure and exchange visits, both in the country and outside the country will be encouraged 
as a vehicle for sharing knowledge; (v) an agreement with the Agricultural Information 
Institute, Center of International Agricultural Research of the Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Science (AII-CAAS) will be signed for the provision of support in M&E, and 
knowledge management. See details in Chapter 6 
154. 
Innovations: One of the main objectives of the project is to introduce, test, pilot, and 
demonstrate innovative models, approaches, mechanisms that, that - if successful - could be 
replicated and scaled-up, and inform policy-making. Anticipated innovations include: (a) 
Innovative chanyie fupin benefit sharing mechanisms (Ref. Sub-component A.1); (b) 
Inclusive finance models: Possible application of digital finance services (including 
remittances) in the project area and to the project target group is being assessed (Ref. Sub-
component A.3); (c) Climate proofed design of infrastructure (Ref. Component B); (d) 
Disbursement against results: Disbursing project funds allocated for a sub-set of activities 
(Ref. Activity A.1.1) against the achievement of agreed and independently verifiable targets 
or milestones that are considered important towards contributing to the achievement of the 
project objectives. The achievements of the agreed targets or milestones, or disbursement 
linked indicators (DLIs), will be verified by an assigned independent agency following 
agreed verification protocols. The disbursement against results will be piloted on a small 
scale by the project, and replication at a larger scale could be considered at mid-term on the 
basis of the positive results and lessons generated during implementation; (e) Performance-
based budget allocation among counties: Include a criteria linked to "performance" in the 
overall allocation of resources to the counties. 
73 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Chapter 5: Project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 
155.  Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system for Y2RDP will be developed by the PPMO 
with the assistance of IFAD within the first year of the project as a tool for effective project 
implementation management. The M&E system will enable IFAD, the Chinese government 
and the stakeholders to monitor Project’s internal performance. The objective of the tool is to 
collect  reliable  data  and  information  for  measuring  performance  and  progress  towards 
achievement  of  results;  and  to  provide  information  about  success  and  failures,  so  that 
corrective measures can be taken for successful implementation of project activities. It will be 
also used as a learning tool to provide information for critical reflection on project strategies 
and operations and supporting decision-making at various levels as a basis for results based 
management. During the initial years, the project monitoring system will provide information 
to see how the project activities are being implemented and what adjustments are required to 
be made in the course of implementation, and later as a tool to assess achievement of outcomes 
and impacts. 
Results Based Approach and Managing for Impact 
156. 
The  results-based  approach  will  be  adopted,  involving  regular  recording  of,  and 
accounting for progress against AWPB targets; and routine, periodic assessments of movement 
towards beneficiary impact. The M&E and Knowledge Management unit will be responsible 
for all M&E activities, based on the IFAD Guideto orient the selection of indicators, baseline 
data, methods for data collection, synthesis and a communication strategy for lessons learned. 
Service  providers,  contractors,  and  beneficiary  groups  will  be  the  prime  sources  of  data 
emanating from grass roots activities. This will be prepared in a participatory manner as part 
of the start-up activities in line with the logical framework. 
157.  Managing  for  impact  means  to  respond  to  changing  circumstances  and  increased 
understanding  by  adapting  the  project  so  that  it  will  be  more  likely  to  achieve  its  intended 
impacts. This is only possible if there is reliable information about the progress of activities 
and their outcomes, the reasons for success and failure, and the context in which activities are 
taking place. This information is the output of the M&E procedures. Analyzing this information 
with key stakeholders can support good decisions that improve the project. Box 1. illustrates 
how to assess how well the project is doing in terms of managing for impact. 
Box 1 Managing for Impact 
Elements 
Project that manages for impact  Project that does not manage 
A  focus  on 
rural 
revitalization 
implementing 
The 
partners, 
including  primary  stakeholders, 
collect  data  on  impact  and  meet 
regularly to consider if impacts can 
be  seen  and  whether  they  meet 
leaves 
to 
for impact 
impact 
The  project 
assessment 
outside 
organizations and only focuses 
on 
the 
monitoring 
implementation of activities   
74 
PIM Y2RRDP 
expectations   
Project  and  partner  staff  and 
primary stakeholders regularly and 
openly  discuss  progress 
and 
problems.  Problems  and  mistakes 
are  the  basis  for  learning  how  to 
work  better.  People  feel  safe 
enough  to  share  their  ideas  and 
higher 
with 
observations 
authorities and peers.   
A 
learning 
environment 
Effective 
operations 
A  supportive 
M&E system 
Clear  systems  exist  for  tracking 
staff performance, equipment use, 
etc.  People  are  clear  about  their 
responsibilities and deadlines, and 
the resources they need to do their 
work are  available. The  managers 
allocate  sufficient  budget  and  are 
building capacity where needed.   
The project manager has quick and 
easy  access  to  information  about 
and  partners 
progress.  Staff 
about 
generate 
outcomes 
impact 
achievements.  Information  about 
progress  is  shared  regularly  with 
all  stakeholders 
in  a  visually 
appropriate  way. The  walls  of  the 
project  office  show  up-to-date 
information,  graphs,  pictures  etc. 
about project progress. Studies are 
to 
undertaken 
any 
emerging 
Project 
problems. 
reports  make  interesting  reading 
and tell both the good and bad and 
how improvements will be made.   
information 
and 
explain 
only 
on 
focus 
Staff 
implementing 
activities, 
without  asking  if  they  are 
relevant to local poverty needs. 
organization 
Project/Partner 
staff  feel  that  their  ideas  and 
observations  are  not  valued 
and do not speak up when they 
see 
things  going  wrong. 
Primary stakeholders are rarely 
asked their opinions.   
People are often unclear about 
what  they  should  be  doing, 
when and where. Vehicles and 
resources  are  poorly 
other 
coordinated  and  often  not 
available on time. Much time is 
wasted  inactivity.  No  efforts 
are made to fill capacity gaps.   
Few  people  know  what  the 
project  has  achieved  to  date. 
There  is  little  evidence  about 
whether all the activities of the 
project  are  leading  anywhere. 
M&E  is  seen  largely  as  an 
function. 
reporting 
external 
are 
Project 
uninteresting, 
not 
analytical,  and  exaggerated 
success  while  not  mentioning 
problems. Little information is 
shared 
project 
with 
stakeholders.   
reports 
are 
158. 
Setting up the M&E system 
The M&E system is the set of planning, information gathering and synthesis, reflection and 
reporting processes, along with the necessary supporting conditions and capacities required for the 
outputs of M&E to make a valuable contribution to decision-making  and learning. Key project 
75 
PIM Y2RRDP 
stakeholders need to develop the different elements of the system together if they are all to use the 
outputs to improve implementation. 
Setting up an M&E system involves six steps that need to be dealt with twice  - generally at 
initial design and in detail at start-up: 
1.  Establishing  the  purpose  and  scope  -  Why  do  we  need  M&E  and  how  comprehensive 
should our M&E system be? 
2.  Identifying performance questions, information needs and indicators - What do we need to 
know to monitor and evaluate the project in order to manage it well?   
3.  Planning  information  gathering  and  organizing  -  How  will  the  required  information  be 
gathered and organized? 
4.  Planning  critical  reflection  processes  and  events  -  How  will  we  make  sense  of  the 
information gathered and use it to make improvements? 
5.  Planning for quality communication and reporting - What, how and to whom do we want 
to communicate in terms of our project activities and processes?   
6.  Planning for the necessary conditions and capacities - What is needed to ensure that the 
M&E system actually works? 
159. 
These steps can be used when initiating a new project or when revising and expanding 
the M&E system of an existing project. Existing projects might have planned for some of these 
M&E elements but miss or undervalue others, so M&E does not perform optimally. This might 
seem like a lot to remember but in practice is often quite clear.   
160. 
The purpose of monitoring the activities and the different components of the project is to 
enable the management to track the progress or any obstacles facing the project and modify 
the plan if required. This requires designing a plan for monitoring and evaluation including the 
actual activities that are implemented and their indicators. In developing the M&E system, it 
was taken into consideration the IFAD requirements that were provided in the project design 
and the project implementation manual. In the following the tasks required for the monitoring 
and evaluation will be presented with highlighting the IFAD requirements. 
The role of M&E in IFAD projects 
161. 
The following table summarizes the expected M&E tasks during the different stages in 
IFAD projects life cycle.   
design 
Phase 
Early 
phase 
(formulation  and 
appraisal)   
Tasks 
  Establish the scope and purpose of the M&E system. 
  Indicate  key  performance  questions  and  indicators,  plus  associated 
monitoring mechanisms. 
  Identify organizational arrangements for M&E. 
  Develop terms of reference for M&E staff. 
  Indicate the process for how M&E is to be established during start-up. 
  Establish an indicative M&E budget. 
  Document the above in the M&E framework. 
76 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Start-up  prior  to 
loan  effectiveness 
(with  the  Special 
Operating Fund) 
  Revise  performance  questions,  indicators  and  monitoring  mechanisms 
after reviewing the project strategy. 
  Organize training with staff and partners likely to be involved in M&E. 
  Initiate baseline studies, as appropriate. 
Start-up 
after 
loan effectiveness   
  Review project design in relation to M&E with key stakeholders.   
  Develop  a  detailed  M&E  plan,  taking  into  consideration  existing 
mechanisms with partners.   
  Put  in  place  necessary  conditions  and  capacities  for  M&E  to  be 
implemented. 
Main 
implementation 
  Ensure information needs for management are met. 
  Coordinate information gathering and management. 
  Facilitate informal information gathering and communication. 
  Support regular review meetings and processes with all implementers. 
  Prepare for supervision missions. 
  Prepare for and facilitate the annual project review. 
  Conduct focused studies on emerging questions.   
  Communicate results to stakeholders.   
  Prepare annual progress reports.   
Mid-term  review 
(MTR) 
  Collate information for the mid-term review. 
  Facilitate the internal review process to prepare for the external review 
process. 
  Help respond to MTR feedback. 
  Adjust the M&E system, as necessary. 
Three-wave 
survey   
  Take  place  in  three  stages:  a)  a  baseline  survey  in  2020,  b)  a  midline 
survey in 2022, c) an endline survey in 2024 
  Develop a detailed sampling and design methodology of the survey 
  Tailor the questionnaires to project objectives 
  Collect and analyze the detailed data from survey 
  Prepare three-wave survey reports 
Phasing-out  and 
completion   
  Assess what the implementers can do to sustain impact and sustain M&E 
after closing down - and implement these ideas. 
  Hold  workshops  and  do  field  studies  with  key  stakeholders  to  assess 
impacts. 
  Identify lessons learned for the next phase and/or other projects. 
162.  Operational Results Management System (ORMS) 
77 
PIM Y2RRDP 
163. 
A revised Results and  Impact  Management System  (RIMS), including new output and 
outcome  Core  Indicators  (CIs),  was  approved  by  the  Executive  Management  Committee 
(EMC) in January 2017 and endorsed by the Evaluation Committee and Executive Board in 
March and April 2017, respectively. The new RIMS CIs consist of a set of new and improved 
output and outcome indicators, that measure the more recurrent results achieved through IFAD 
operations.  The  new  CIs  and  related  measurement  approaches  have  been  developed  to  be 
consistent with and complementary to IFAD’s impact assessment programme, thus ensuring 
that the performance of IFAD operations is measured across the results chain, i.e. at the output, 
outcome and impact levels.   
164. 
The ORMS is a full-fledged online system that builds on interconnected templates for the 
online  presentation,  analysis,  reporting,  and  approval  of  project  design,  supervision  and 
completion documents. Although, the data entered into the system for the project will be done 
at IFAD level, yet the project will have to provide this data on an annual basis.   
On an annual basis, the M&E unit will compile the progress of all indicators under the project 
log frame and send it to IFAD no later than the 31 January of the following year.   
165. 
Annual Outcome SurveysThe annual outcome survey (AOS) is a simple household 
survey that will be undertaken annually by project staff and will cover a small sample of at 
least 300 households selected randomly. The survey will be conducted exclusively in villages 
targeted  by  the  project  or  receiving  project  interventions,  and  will  include  both  project 
beneficiaries and non beneficiaries (the latter used as control group). Overall, the exercise is 
expected to take no more than 3 months and can be implemented by project staff and extension 
officers, with or without external support. The main objectives of the survey are to: (i) measure 
changes happening at the household level in terms of livelihoods and food security during the 
project life; (ii) assess targeting efficiency; (iii) provide evidence of project success or failure; 
and (iv) provide timely performance information necessary to undertake corrective actions.   
166. 
The AOS will provide information on “why” and “how” some outcomes were or were not 
achieved.  The  project  will  use  the  standard  AOS  questionnaire  as  the  main  frame  for 
conducting  the  survey  and  will  modify  it  accordingly  as  per  the  project  thematic  areas  of 
intervention. The AOS will be implemented staring from the end of PY2. 
167. 
Progress Reporting 
The progress reports are to be prepared annually and, at a minimum, should address (i) quantitative 
and  qualitative  progress  made  in  implementing  the  Project  and  achieving  its  objectives,  (ii) 
problems  encountered  during  the  reporting  period,  (iii)  steps  taken  or  proposed  to  be  taken  to 
remedy these problems, and (iv) the proposed programme of activities and the progress expected 
during the following reporting period. Sufficient information must be made available about what 
money is spent on, how much is spent on what, and what the results are. 
168. 
The main functions of progress reports are: 
78 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Preparation of Progress Reports 
169. 
Each County Program Management Office (CPMO) will submit annually progress report 
to PPMO. The reports will record the financial and physical activities against Annual Work 
Plan & Budget (AWPB) targets. The PPMO will prepare the reporting formats and contents to 
be  submitted  and  be  responsible  for  the  compilation  of  annual  reports. The  reports  will  be 
submitted to IFAD with the format and content described in the following section, no later than 
two months after the end of each reporting period. The Project Progress Report will have the 
following format and content. 
170. 
Format of Progress Reports 
Section A – Introduction: A brief summary of the Project Objectives and the design features 
1. 
as is given in the Project Design Report will be presented in this section. It will be written once 
and used for all future Progress Reports, with minor changes as may be necessary. 
Section  B  -  Executive  Summary: A  brief  summary  of  the  content  of  the  report  will  be 
2. 
presented in this section, highlighting performance during the project period and to date; trends; 
explanations for large variations from the initially set Project Design Report targets and objectives; 
problems and issues, if any; and proposed action during the next reporting period and beyond. 
Section C - Detailed Report: This section will include the following: (a) Descriptions of 
3. 
the Progress made during the reporting period and to date (by components, sub-components and 
activities); (b) Sources and Uses of Funds Statement; (c) Statement of Use of Funds by Expenditure 
Type and by Components; (d) Reconciliation of the IFAD funded Special Accounts; (e) Output 
Monitoring  Report;  (f) Procurement  Report;  and  (g)  Other  Relevant  Reports.  The  information 
contained  in  the  above  statements  and  tables  will  provide  the  linkages  between  physical  and 
financial progress.     
79 
PIM Y2RRDP 
 Organization and Staffing:    The progress report will include the latest organization 
chart of the Project. The Chart will give the names, titles, and gender of all senior 
staff and any changes in the senior management and project compensation details 
will be reported.       
  Accounts and Audit:    This part will describe the status of the books of accounts, 
preparation of quarterly accounts, readiness for the accounts for annual audit and 
progress or completion of the audit (during the appropriate quarter). Where audits 
findings,  observations,  qualifications,  and 
have  been  completed,  key 
recommendations of the auditors will be provided in this part of the progress report. 
  Compliance with Conditionality/Legal Covenants: Status of compliance with all 
stipulated  conditions  included  as  covenants  in  the  loan  agreement  will  be  given. 
Problem relating to non-compliance of any legal covenant will also be highlighted 
with suggested resolution. 
171. 
Other key aspects 
Mid Term Review and Three-wave surveys 
80 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annual  Supervision  and  the  milestone  Mid  Term  Review  and  Completion  Review  will  be 
organized by IFAD. These reviews are based on the AOS and three-wave surveys: a) a baseline 
survey in 2020, b) a midline survey in 2022, c) an endline survey in 2024. Annual reviews will be 
mainly based on AOS as mentioned above. This part is mainly about the Mid Term Review and 
the relevant three-wave surveys. 
172.  Mid-term Review   
The Yunnan Agricultural and Rural Affairs Department, as the lead project agency and IFAD will 
jointly carry out a review of Project implementation at the end of project year three, (Mid-term 
Review), based on the following terms of reference:   
The main thrust of the Mid-term Review (MTR) will be to evaluate the overall progress of project 
implementation, particularly in achieving its goals and objectives and make recommendations for 
the remaining project period. In particular, MTR will: 
81 
PIM Y2RRDP 
The MTR will largely be based on, inter-alia, the Project Design Report; Environmental and Social 
Impact  Assessment  Reports,  Procurement  Plans,  the  Reports  of  Supervision  and  Follow  Up 
Missions; the Project’s Annual Work Plans and Budgets as well as Progress Reports; and Financing 
Agreements;  evolving  government  policies  and  strategies;  and  additional  data  and  information 
collected  through  commissioned  studies.  The  MTR  will  include  extensive  field  visits  and 
consultations with key implementation agencies at the national, district and local levels, in addition 
to  interacting  and  conducting  interviews  with  beneficiary  households  in  the  three  project 
governorates. 
The  findings  of  the  MTR  will  be  communicated  promptly  to  the  implementing  agencies  and 
discussed jointly between the  Chinese  government and  IFAD.  On the basis of conclusions and 
recommendations of the MTR, necessary adjustments will be made in the Project design and the 
Financing Agreements to remove constraints and put the Project on track to achieve its objectives. 
The  Chinese  government  will  ensure  that  the  recommendations  resulting  from  the  Mid-term 
Review are implemented within the specified time and to the satisfaction of IFAD. 
173. 
Three-wave Survey 
The three-wave survey will be conducted by Agricultural Information Institute (AII) of Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS). Data collection will take place in three stages: a) a 
baseline survey in 2020, b) a midline survey in 2022, c) an endline survey in 2024. Data from the 
baseline, midline and endline surveys will cover both beneficiary households and cooperatives as 
well  as  control  households  and  cooperatives  with  a  representative  sample  size.  CAAS  will  be 
responsible for collection/analysing data from the surveys. 
Household 
  Demographics 
  Asset ownership 
 
  Agricultural production stats 
Income, expenditure and consumption 
82 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  Project details 
  Women empowerment 
  Youth participation 
  Degree of satisfaction and influence     
  Cooperatives   
  Basic information 
  Operation and development 
  Training and technical assistance   
  Project practice and impact 
  Assistance requiring from IFAD 
Control  group:  In  order  to  better  understand  the  attribution  of  the  project  interventions  on 
beneficiaries, a control group (counterfactual) will also be used. This group will be identified based 
on  similar  characteristics  of  the  beneficiaries  (nearby  locations  with  similar  demographics). 
However,  care  would  be  taken  to  ensure  that  this  group  does  not  include  indirect  project 
beneficiaries.   
174. 
Baseline survey. The baseline survey will provide information that will fit into the M&E 
system; basically baseline data for the programme M&E indicators. The survey will cover both 
beneficiary villages as well as control villages with a representative sample size. Data from the 
baseline for the M&E indicators will be updated on survey basis to track the different project 
indicators over time, including for the MTR. Under the M&E system the data will be analysed 
to ensure that Y2RDP activities are on the right directions and assess whether or not the targets 
for the indicators will be achieved. 
The  goal  of  the  baseline  study  is  to  understand  the  level  of  poverty,  agricultural  activities, 
community development, gender inequality of the population, with special focus on women and 
youth within the seven targeted counties.   
The survey should: (i) focus on key indicators required to measure the outcomes and impact of the 
planned  activities  as  it  was  mentioned  in  the  Project’s  Logical  Framework;  (ii)  not  duplicate 
existing available data; (iii) not require an excessive amount of interviewees time; (iv) generate 
accurate and reliable results based on sound statistical best practice, and; (v) allow disaggregation 
by gender, age, and targeting categories.   
175. 
Endline  Survey/Project  completion  survey.  Programme  completion  survey  (impact 
evaluation) can be conducted with the endline survey which will use the same questionnaires 
used for the baseline to allow for comparison against baseline results. Analysis will be done by 
beneficiary status, region and gender of household head. 
The impact evaluation will assess the project impact using the same indicators (ORMS and project 
specific derived from the Log frame) as the baseline survey. The key elements of the Survey will 
include both socio-economic characteristics of the Project primary target group and status of social 
and economic infrastructure. The Survey will be aimed to measure the changes brought about by 
the Project in the socio-economic development of its beneficiaries. It is anticipated that the Survey 
83 
PIM Y2RRDP 
will combine a formal household sample survey with a more qualitative and in-depth study. The 
Survey will also compare the socio-economic situation of beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries in 
order  to  better  attribute  the  impact  to  the  project.  Detailed  analysis  will  be  undertaken  of  the 
changes observed between baseline survey and the impact survey. Where possible, panel data will 
be used i.e. some of the beneficiaries interviewed during the baseline survey will also be included 
in the sample of the impact survey. 
176. 
Staffing for M&E 
177. 
The Monitoring and Evaluation unit at the PPMO will be responsible for ensuring that a 
responsive  M&E  system  is  established  and  regular  monitoring  and  progress  reporting  is  in 
place for Project activities. The county-level office will summary and report to the municipal 
project  management  office.  The  village-level  implementation  team  members  should  be 
responsible for collecting the monitoring data of the farming households and avoid repetitive 
counting, especially for important data regarding gender and youth participants, beneficiary 
farmers of different activities and other required indicators. The monitoring data of relevant 
institutions and staff training will be collected by the implementing agencies. The municipal 
project management office will summarize the monitoring data reported by the county project 
management  office,  and  submit  to  IFAD  through  provincial  project  semi-annually  and 
annually. 
178. 
All  Project  staff  are  expected  to  be  active  participants  in  the  M&E  system  where  the 
overall coordination of information  collection and flow will be guided by  the M&E unit at 
PPMO  and  IFAD.  Quantitative  and  qualitative  information  will  be  collected  at  beneficiary 
level by the young professionals using M&E indicators that have been developed by the M&E 
unit based on the M&E plan.   
179. 
Clear  reporting  lines  will  be  established  with  PPMO. The  objective  is  to  develop  and 
operate a systematic Management information system (MIS) that focuses on strategic analysis, 
rather than on data compilation with limited transformation into information. The task will be 
to go from outputs, up the monitoring scale, to outcomes by transforming the information into 
knowledge  about  Project’s  impact.  The  accurate  dissemination  and  reporting  of  the 
transformation will be dependent on the M&E staff’s capacity to generate narratives on the 
why and how of the changes documented. 
84 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Chapter 6: Knowledge Management and Communication 
180. 
Knowledge Management (KM) and Learning is the integrated approach of identifying, 
capturing, evaluating, retrieving and sharing information. It is the using of knowledge more 
effectively with 5 interconnected functions: 
  Learning  and  Adaptation:  Seeking  regular  feedback,  learning  lessons  to  improve 
performance, regular reviews for collective decision making, documentation of decision that 
leads to change, flexibility for the use of knowledge and new innovation. 
  Learning oriented M&E: Setting benchmarks, indicators and learning question; collective 
qualitative and quantitative data, analyzing data, monitoring process, continuous follow up of 
progress and performance. 
  Internal and External Communication: Internal communication to support learning, foster 
teamwork and joint responsibility, culture of feedback and appreciation, creating visibility and 
advocacy, sharing lessons across projects and organizations 
  Innovation  and  Experimentation:  Sourcing  new  ideas  and  innovations,  seeking  and 
embracing new opportunities, enriching new ideas through Communities of Practice (CoPs) 
groups of people who focus on particular aspects and trying out new ideas. 
  Information  management:  Electronic  archives  with  reports  and  lessons,  capturing  and 
documenting information, systematizing and organizing information, packaging information 
to suit the targeted audience into websites and blogs as well as keeping data banks. 
85 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Figure 1 Integrated Knowledge Management and Learning System 
181. 
Building  on  lessons  from  IFAD  country  programme,  special  attention  will  be  put  on 
making  sure:  (i)  programme  launch  is  effective  for  visibility  (ii)  knowledge  management 
indicators are included in the M&E system; (iii) of setting up solid information management 
systems  (e.g.  electronic  archives);  (iv)  clarifying  roles  and  responsibilities  in  knowledge 
management  in  the  programme  management  and  implementation  teams;  (v)  facilitating 
internal  programme  learning  and  cross-project  exchanges;  (vi)  organising  exchanges  with 
86 
PIM Y2RRDP 
other projects and agencies, organising targeted workshops, and other activities to disseminate 
results and attract the interest of government and development partners for improvement of 
their practices, replication and scaling up of tested and documented innovations. 
182. 
In order to enhance the learning process and the dissemination of results, a knowledge 
management and communication strategy (KMC strategy) will be developed and integrated 
into  the  management  of  the  programme. The  strategy  will  include  which  thematic  areas  of 
learning  the  programme  will  be  focusing  on. The  strategy  will  outline  how  the  knowledge 
generated will be disseminated and will identify most appropriate channels. 
Knowledge Management and Communication 
183. 
The KMC strategy will be formulated based on the IFAD’s knowledge management and 
learning framework which recognizes 5 interconnected functions which include: learning for 
adaptation, learning oriented monitoring and evaluation, internal and external communication, 
information management and innovation and experimentation.   
Knowledge product 
184. 
The  knowledge  products  are  suggested  but  not  limited  as  follows:  (i)  a  systematic 
Management information system (MIS); (ii) an official account on WeChat to facilitate internal 
and  external  KMC;  (iii)  publicity  material  including  newsletters,  radio  and  television 
programmes;  (iv)  studies  and  publications  on  lessons  learned;  and  (v)  Policy  dialogue  and 
Policy brief produced and submitted. 
185. 
The project follows the guidelines of IFAD's supervision and evaluation to establishes a 
Management Information System (MIS) from the provincial project management office, the 
municipal  project  management  office,  the  county  project  management  office,  the  township 
project  management  office,  and  the  village-level  implementation  team.  The  project  will 
employ  a  third-party  to  build  the  system.  Experts  and  consultants  from AII  of  CAAS  will 
provide support in designing the system.   
87 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Chapter 7: Project Costing and Financing 
186. 
Project costs: The total project cost is estimated at US$ 234.28 million, including 
contingencies. The total base cost is US$ 224.58 million; physical and price contingencies 
account for an estimated US$ 9.70 million (i.e. 4.32% of the total base cost or 4.14% of the 
total project cost). Project costs are allocated among the three components as follows: (A) 
Supporting Inclusive Rural Development (49% of the total base cost); (B) Climate-proofed 
public infrastructure planning and development (47% of total base cost); and (C) Project 
Management, Knowledge Management, M&E, and Policy (4% of the total base cost). Costs 
per component and sub-component, and financier are summarized in below cost tables.   
187. 
Project financing and co-financing: The provincial government of Yunnan requested 
IFAD to contribute to the project with a loan in the estimated amount of US$ 75 million 
(31.8% of the total project cost). The Government will contribute US$ 115.27 million (49.2% 
of the total cost), and participating enterprises and cooperatives are expected to contribute 
approximately US$ 41.69.80 million (17.8% of the total cost). The beneficiaries’ 
contribution is expected to be approximately US$ 2.76 million (1.2% of the total cost).   
188. 
Co-financing ratio: The IFAD loan has a co-financing ratio of approximately 1:2. This 
is well-above the IFAD11 target of 1:1.4 (and well-above the 1:0.8 target for domestic co-
financing). 
189. 
Assumptions: Key assumptions used in estimating the project costs include (i) price 
contingencies assumed at 5% and applied on all items, except for Grant and Subsidies 
category; (ii) exchange rate at CNY 7.07 per USD; (iii) taxes as prevailing at the time of 
design and broadly based at 10%; (iv) a FIVE year implementation phase and the project 
starting in April 2020; (v) all unit costs are input in Chinese Yuen, i.e. CNY and the price 
contingencies at 2% based on an average annual inflation rate in China; (vi) taxes excluded 
from IFAD financing rules and (vii) cost tables are presented in China fiscal year which 
corresponds to Calendar Year. 
190. 
Unit costs: Unit costs for all detailed Tables were provided by the respective counties, 
in particular for the Component-2: Climate proofed public infrastructure activities. 
Operations and maintenance costs for these interventions have been assumed at 1% of annual 
investment costs. Unit costs for Component 1: Support to inclusive rural development were 
developed in consultation with the respective Counties during the field visits and refined with 
the Provincial PMO. In doing so, some adjustments have been made but otherwise, total 
average expenditure for this component is more or less identical. Unit costs for the 
Component 3, Project Management, M&E, KM and Policy were provided by the Provincial 
PMO. 
191. 
Costab accounts:    Costab accounts are organised into following three accounts: (i) 
procurement accounts, (ii) disbursement accounts and (iii) expenditure accounts. Following 
accounts have been created in accordance with the project expenditure categories and the 
project financing arrangements: 
88 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Procurement  accounts  (PA) 
a/ 
Disbursement 
(DA)   
accounts 
Expenditure accounts (EA)   
Civil work_PA 
Civil work_DA 
Civil work_EA 
Smart Civil work_PA 
Smart Civil work_DA 
Smart Civil work_EA 
Equipment 
materials_PA 
and 
Equipment 
materials_DA 
and 
Equipment 
materials_EA 
and 
Training,  capacity  building 
and TA_PA 
Training,  capacity  building 
and TA_DA 
Training,  capacity  building 
and TA_EA 
Goods, 
inputs_PA 
services 
and 
Goods, 
inputs_DA 
services 
and 
Goods, 
inputs_EA 
services 
and 
Grants and subsidy_PA 
Grants and subsidy_DA 
Grants and subsidy_EA 
Salary and allowances_PA 
Salary and allowances_DA 
Salary and allowances_EA 
Operating costs_PA 
Operating costs_DA 
Operating costs_EA 
Operations 
maintenance_PA 
and 
Operations 
maintenance_DA 
and 
Operations 
maintenance_EA 
and 
a/  in  Summary  and  Detailed  tables,  these  accounts  will  end  up  with  PA,  DA  &  EA 
respectively 
192.  Y2RDP  Project  accounts:  The  project  has  three  expenditure  components  including  the 
project management and 5 sub-components. Cost Tables have according organised, prepared 
and provided in following pages: (i) first Summary Tables for components, (ii) detailed Tables 
by Components and sub-components and (iii) Detailed Tables by Counties.   
193.  Summary Tables: These Tables  are presented summarising all components  by financiers 
(that is GOC, IFAD, PRIVATE SECTOR and BENEFICIARIES) under the project in thousand 
USD currency units. (Tab file: Y2RDP_components.tab) 
194.  Detailed  Cost  Tables:  Each  Detailed  Table  contains  the  following  data  and  information 
relating to the project interventions and activities. These are description of an activity, unit, 
physical quantities by year, unit cost in CNY and USD, base costs in thousand USD currency 
unit, total costs including contingencies in thousand USD, percentage of disbursement account 
and  financing  rule  (ie  %  of  financing  by  Government,  IFAD,  private  sector  and  the 
beneficiaries). 
89 
PIM Y2RRDP 
195.   
Components 
Sub-components 
Support  to  Inclusive  Rural 
Development 
Improving chanye fupin models 
Stimulating entrepreneurships 
Improving access to finance 
Cost 
Table 
reference 
# 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
public 
Climate-proofed 
infrastructure  planning  and 
development 
Project  Management,  M&E, 
KM and Policy 
Improving infrastructure climate resilience    2.1 
Improving rural infrastructure system 
2.2 
Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 
3.1 
196. 
County  Detailed  Cost  Tables:  There  are  7  counties  under  FOUR  Prefectures. 
Detailed  cost  tables  for  each  county  have  been  prepared  and  these  are  presented  in 
following pages. 
Prefecture 
County 
Table reference # 
Zhaotong 
1. Zhengxiong 
Dali 
Nujiang 
Lijiang 
2. Suijiang 
3. Yongping 
4. Yunlong 
5. Lanping 
6. Yongsheng 
7. Huaping 
1.1 to 1.7 
2.1 to 2.7 
3.1 to 3.7 
4.1 to 4.7 
5.1 to 5.7 
6.1 to 6.7 
7.1 to 7.7 
Prefecture PMO costs are given in Table 8.1 
PMO costs are given in Table 9.1 
Abbreviations used in costab Tables 
SCW 
CW  
TWC 
GAS 
GSI  
EAM 
SAA  
Smart Civil work carried out under climate resilience 
Civil work 
Training, workshop, capacity building and TA 
Grant and subsidy 
Goods, services and inputs 
Equipment and materials 
Salary and allowances 
90 
PIM Y2RRDP 
OPC  
OAM 
DA   
Office operating costs 
Operations and maintenance 
Disbursement account 
197. 
Retroactive financing    As an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural 
Development  Financing,  IFAD  will    be  seeking  IFAD  Executive  Board  approval  that  for 
retroactive financing from the loan    up to a maximum of 10% of the total IFAD financing ( 
i.e  US$7.5  million)  for  eligible  expenditures  incurred  as  from  the  date  which  the  design 
document  got  approval  by  Quality  assurance  group  to  the  date  of  the  entry  in  force  of  the 
financing  agreement.  Eligible  expenditures  for  retroactive  financing  are  considered  those 
incurred  to  finance  the  start-up  and  preparation  project  activities  such  as  :  (i)  purchase  of 
essential  items  (including  equipment  and  procurement  of  MIS  system)  for  the  PMOs;  (ii) 
recruitment of project staff; (iii) costs related to tendering, selection, and recruitment of service 
providers;  (iv)  costs  related  to  the  finalization  of  the  program  implementation  manual, 
customization  of  accounting  software  to  fit  IFAD  requirement  and  license  fees,  start-up 
trainings and workshops; (v) establishment of the M&E system, including carrying-out of the 
baseline survey and development of MIS; (vi) exposure visits for knowledge and experiences 
sharing;  (vii)  surveys  and  feasibility  studies;  (viii)  training  and  technical  assistance  for 
cooperatives,  including  recruitment  of  service  providers,  cooperative  support  field  officers, 
technical  advisors  for  business  plans  development,  brokers/facilitators  for  linkages  with 
supermarkets; and value-chain officers and monitoring & evaluation officers; and (ix) business 
plans.   
198. 
Financing of taxes: In order to improve the efficiency of funds flow and better support 
project implementation, IFAD’s funds may be used to finance taxes that are not  “excessive, 
discriminatory  or  otherwise  unreasonable”.  In  case  the  Government  intends  to  use  IFAD 
financing to finances taxes that is impossible or impractical to exempt, the Government would 
need to formalize such request in writing. 
91 
PIM Y2RRDP 
PIM – Y2RDP: Project cost and financing   
Summary tables Y2RDP (from Component costables) 
Y2RDP Components by Financiers 
92 
China Y2RDP  PDR Components by Financiers (US$ '000) Govt of ChinaIFADPrivate sectorBeneficiariesTotalDuties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%TaxesA. Components 1. Comp-1: Supporting inclusive rural development a. Improving Chanye fupin model 19,276.418.644,898.143.339,565.738.1--1,03,740.144.3320.6b. Stimulating entreprenuership 898.09.56,422.968.02,120.022.5--9,440.94.0371.6c. Improving access to finance 51.010.0458.990.0----509.90.251.0Subtotal Comp-1: Supporting inclusive rural development 20,225.317.851,779.945.541,685.736.7--1,13,690.948.5743.32. Comp 2:  Climate-proofed public infrastructure a. Improving infrastructure climate resilience 2,195.79.719,761.587.3--687.03.022,644.29.72,195.7b. Improving rural infrastructure 86,311.197.6----2,082.02.488,393.137.78,631.1Subtotal Comp 2:  Climate-proofed public infrastructure 88,506.879.719,761.517.8--2,769.02.51,11,037.347.410,826.83. Comp 3 Project management, M&E, KM and policy a. Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 6,524.568.33,031.931.7----9,556.44.1425.4Total PROJECT COSTS 1,15,256.649.274,573.331.841,685.717.82,769.01.22,34,284.6100.011,995.4 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Y2RDP Disbursement Accounts by Financiers 
93 
China Y2RDP  PDR Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (US$ '000) Govt of ChinaIFADPrivate sectorBeneficiariesTotalDuties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Taxes1. Civil work 86,311.1100.0------86,311.136.88,631.12. Smart civil work 2,048.310.018,434.690.0----20,482.98.72,048.33. Equipment and materials 145.350.8140.749.2----286.00.128.64. Training, workshop, capacity building and TA 1,368.114.87,903.185.2----9,271.24.0927.15. Goods, services and inputs 599.016.63,004.283.4----3,603.31.5360.36. Grants and subsidy 18,955.718.144,132.342.141,685.739.8--1,04,773.744.7-7. Salary and allowances 2,405.580.6580.519.4----2,986.01.3-8. Operating costs 3,423.690.1377.99.9----3,801.51.6-9. Operations and maintenance ------2,769.0100.02,769.01.2-Total PROJECT COSTS 1,15,256.649.274,573.331.841,685.717.82,769.01.22,34,284.6100.011,995.4 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Y2RDP Expenditure accounts by financiers 
94 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Y2RDP Project components by year –total including contingencies 
95 
China Y2RDP  PDR Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) Totals Including Contingencies20202021202220232024TotalA. Components 1. Comp-1: Supporting inclusive rural development a. Improving Chanye fupin model 11,904.226,649.134,052.827,201.33,932.71,03,740.1b. Stimulating entreprenuership 1,203.11,998.72,038.72,079.42,121.09,440.9c. Improving access to finance 98.099.9101.9104.0106.1509.9Subtotal Comp-1: Supporting inclusive rural development 13,205.328,747.736,193.429,384.76,159.81,13,690.92. Comp 2:  Climate-proofed public infrastructure a. Improving infrastructure climate resilience 6,570.89,499.25,507.4831.8234.922,644.2b. Improving rural infrastructure 21,401.926,566.922,957.412,555.54,911.388,393.1Subtotal Comp 2:  Climate-proofed public infrastructure 27,972.736,066.128,464.813,387.35,146.21,11,037.33. Comp 3 Project management, M&E, KM and policy a. Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 2,179.31,834.22,007.71,884.61,650.69,556.4Total PROJECT COSTS 43,357.366,648.166,666.044,656.612,956.62,34,284.6 
PIM Y2RRDP 
PIM: DETAILED COST TABLES BY COUNTIES (generated from county costables) 
Table 1.1: Zhengxiong-Improving Chanye fupin models 
96 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 1.1. Zhengxiong Improving Chanye fupin model Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 1. Payment to cooperative  meeting   operational standard coop-69--15200,00028,531-1,236.21,891.4--3,127.7TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )2. Verification expenses Verification agency LS1111-415,0002,14015.215.515.816.1-62.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )MIS for RBL LS-111147,5001,070-7.77.98.08.231.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Verification expenses 15.223.223.624.18.294.33. Investment on pro-poor cooperatives Project grant support coop--24281,500,000213,980--3,152.46,430.93,279.812,863.1GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private investments coop--24281,000,000142,653--2,101.64,287.32,186.58,575.4GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop--24281,000,000142,653--2,101.64,287.32,186.58,575.4GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Investment on pro-poor cooperatives --7,355.615,005.57,652.830,013.9Subtotal Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 15.21,259.49,270.715,029.67,661.033,235.9B. Matching grant for cooperative co-investers Project grant support coop-464-141,200,000171,184-4,945.07,565.85,144.7-17,655.5GAS_DAIFAD (100% )Private investment coop-464-141,200,000171,184-4,945.07,565.85,144.7-17,655.5GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop-464-14------GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Matching grant for cooperative co-investers -9,889.915,131.610,289.5-35,311.0C. Company-cooperative-households models 1. Company-cooperative-household models Project grant model355--131,500,000213,9804,545.07,726.57,881.0--20,152.5GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector participation model355--131,500,000213,9804,545.07,726.57,881.0--20,152.5GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Support from Govt model355--131,500,000213,9804,545.07,726.57,881.0--20,152.5GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Company-cooperative-household models 13,635.023,179.523,643.1--60,457.62. Other innovative models Project support model355--13500,00071,3271,515.02,575.52,627.0--6,717.5GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector model355--13500,00071,3271,515.02,575.52,627.0--6,717.5GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance model355--131,000,000142,6533,030.05,151.05,254.0--13,435.0GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Other innovative models 6,060.010,302.010,508.0--26,870.0Subtotal Company-cooperative-households models 19,695.033,481.534,151.1--87,327.6D. Product traceability system Promotion and user registration LS1111-42,5003572.52.62.62.7-10.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Training of Govt staff and agro-entity LS-111147,000999-7.27.47.57.729.7GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Equipment support /a LS-1111425,0003,566-25.826.326.827.3106.2GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Operating costs, supervision LS-1234105,000713-5.210.516.121.953.6GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Product traceability system 2.540.746.853.156.8199.9E. Improving climate information|and adoptation advice LS-111-3500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9-1,576.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total 19,712.745,186.659,125.625,908.07,717.81,57,650.8\a Such as bar-code printer, computer set, scanner, data hardware, fast-testing tools, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-1.2: Zhengxiong-Stimulating entrepreneurships/ attracting investors 
97 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 1.2. Zhengxiong Stimulating entreprenuership Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Business incubation / Service centres centre1----1250,00035,663252.5----252.5GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Technical assistance to the service centre TA support from the project LS/year111115660,00094,151666.6679.9693.5707.4721.53,469.0TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )C. Startup investments Project support each-22228500,00071,327-1,030.21,050.81,071.81,093.34,246.1GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector support each-22228500,00071,327-1,030.21,050.81,071.81,093.34,246.1GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Subtotal Startup investments -2,060.42,101.62,143.62,186.58,492.2Total Investment Costs 919.12,740.32,795.12,851.02,908.112,213.7II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary Manager pers/year11111574,88010,68275.677.178.780.381.9393.6SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Adminstrator pers/year11111548,0006,84748.549.450.451.452.5252.3SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Staff salary 124.1126.6129.1131.7134.3645.9B. Other operating costs Rental costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAGOVTOther operating costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Other operating costs 161.6164.8168.1171.5174.9841.0Total Recurrent Costs 285.7291.4297.3303.2309.31,486.8Total 1,204.83,031.83,092.43,154.23,217.313,700.5 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-1.3: Zhengxiong-Improving access to finance 
98 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 1.3. Zhengxiong Improving access to finance Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Improving access to finance Strengthening financial capacity LS11111590,00012,83990.992.794.696.598.4473.0TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Improving financial advisory services LS11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Total 171.7175.1178.6182.2185.9893.5 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-1.4: Zhengxiong-Improving infrastructure climate resilience  
99 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 1.4. Zhengxiong Improving infrastructure climate resilience Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Climate resilient infrastructure Planning and design LS/year1111-412,5001,78312.612.913.113.4-52.0SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Pond each15----15100,00014,2651,515.0----1,515.0SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Pipeline km45----4530,0004,2801,363.5----1,363.5SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Support to WUA each7----710,0001,42770.7----70.7SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Training persons60606060603002002912.112.412.612.913.163.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 90% )Rural road, rehabilitation km668--20900,000128,3885,454.05,563.17,565.8--18,582.9SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 8,427.95,588.37,591.526.313.121,647.2II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance Annual maintenance lumpsum-86.0144.6225.0229.8685.4OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -86.0144.6225.0229.8685.4Total 8,427.95,674.37,736.2251.3242.922,332.6 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-1.5: Zhengxiong-Improving rural infrastructure system 
100 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 1.5. Zhengxiong Improving rural infrastructure Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Road design and management per year1111151,200,000171,1841,212.01,236.21,261.01,286.21,311.96,307.3CK_DAGOVTB. Rural infrastructure Rural road, new construction km4.95.39.64.85.9530.551,300,000185,4496,433.77,098.113,114.06,688.28,456.341,790.3CK_DAGOVTNew lateral road km34.122.122.161.613900,000128,3882,727.03,820.02,004.92,083.61,574.312,209.8CK_DAGOVTRehabilitation of lateral road km5774-23600,00085,5923,030.04,326.84,413.42,572.4-14,342.6CK_DAGOVTMiscellaneous structures mu-300300400-1,0003,000428-927.2945.71,286.2-3,159.1CK_DAGOVTSubtotal Rural infrastructure 12,190.716,172.120,478.112,630.310,030.671,501.8Total Investment Costs 13,402.717,408.321,739.013,916.511,342.577,809.1II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance Annual maintenance lumpsum-136.7331.1573.8741.91,783.5OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -136.7331.1573.8741.91,783.5Total 13,402.717,545.022,070.114,490.312,084.479,592.6 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-1.6: Zhengxiong-County Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 
101 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 1.6. Zhenxiong County PMO Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Office equipment /a LS1----1155,00022,111156.6----156.6EAM_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Staff training General management training person55555251,0001435.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )FM & procurement training person44-4-121,0001434.04.1-4.3-12.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Social safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Environmental safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Other Technical training person101010101050500715.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas training team-11--250,0007,133-51.552.5--104.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Staff training 16.268.063.017.110.9175.3C. Study tours Within the region persons1313131313652,50035732.833.534.234.835.5170.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Outside the region LS/year33---65,00071315.215.5---30.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas study tour LS--2--250,0007,133--105.1--105.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Study tours 48.048.9139.234.835.5306.5D. Consultants & short-term staff Project planning and design LS1111-4200,00028,531202.0206.0210.2214.4-832.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Short-term staff pers_month222221036,0005,13672.774.275.777.278.7378.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Consultants & short-term staff 274.7280.2285.8291.578.71,211.0E. Workshops and meetings Lumpsum444442010,0001,42740.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )F. Monitoring and evaluation and KM LS/year111115250,00035,663252.5257.6262.7268.0273.31,314.0GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 788.3695.9792.8654.3442.23,373.6II. Recurrent Costs Staff salary (three staff) per year111115274,60039,173277.3282.9288.6294.3300.21,443.3SAA_DAGOVTVehicle hiring charges per year11111550,0007,13350.551.552.553.654.7262.8OPC_DAGOVTOffice operating costs per year111115300,00042,796303.0309.1315.2321.5328.01,576.8OPC_DAGOVTTotal Recurrent Costs 630.8643.5656.3669.5682.83,282.9Total 1,419.21,339.41,449.21,323.81,125.16,656.6 _________________________________\a Such as computer, printers, photo copier, projector, laptops, digital and video cameras, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-1.7: Zhengxiong-Summary cost  
102 
China Y2RDP  PDR Components by Financiers (US$ '000) Govt of ChinaIFADPrivate sectorBeneficiariesTotalDuties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%TaxesA. Zhengxiong county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 6,086.027.18,828.439.37,575.033.7--22,489.49.671.3Stimulating entreprenuership 128.36.61,220.462.4605.731.0--1,954.40.853.1Improving access to finance 12.710.0114.790.0----127.50.112.7Subtotal Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 6,227.025.310,163.541.48,180.733.3--24,571.310.5137.12. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 308.89.72,779.287.2--97.83.13,185.81.4308.8Improving rural infrastructure 11,099.797.8----254.42.211,354.14.81,110.0Subtotal Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 11,408.578.52,779.219.1--352.22.414,540.06.21,418.83. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 516.454.4433.145.6----949.60.448.1Subtotal Zhengxiong county 18,152.045.313,375.933.48,180.720.4352.20.940,060.817.11,604.0China Y2RDP  PDR Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) Totals Including Contingencies20202021202220232024TotalA. Zhengxiong county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 2,812.16,446.08,434.53,695.91,101.022,489.4Stimulating entreprenuership 171.9432.5441.1450.0459.01,954.4Improving access to finance 24.525.025.526.026.5127.5Subtotal Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 3,008.46,903.58,901.14,171.81,586.524,571.32. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 1,202.3809.51,103.635.834.73,185.8Improving rural infrastructure 1,911.92,502.93,148.42,067.11,723.911,354.1Subtotal Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 3,114.23,312.34,252.02,102.91,758.514,540.03. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 202.4191.1206.7188.8160.5949.6Subtotal Zhengxiong county 6,325.110,406.913,359.86,463.63,505.540,060.8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 2.1: Suijiang-Improving Chanye fupin models 
103 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 2.1. Suijiang: Improving Chanye fupin model Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 1. Payment to cooperative  meeting   operational standard coop-23--5200,00028,531-412.1630.5--1,042.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )2. Verification expenses Verification agency LS1111-415,0002,14015.215.515.816.1-62.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )MIS for RBL LS-111147,5001,070-7.77.98.08.231.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Verification expenses 15.223.223.624.18.294.33. Investment on pro-poor cooperatives Project grant support coop--12141,500,000213,980--1,576.23,215.51,639.96,431.6GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private investments coop--12141,000,000142,653--1,050.82,143.61,093.34,287.7GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop--1214------GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Investment on pro-poor cooperatives --2,627.05,359.12,733.110,719.3Subtotal Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 15.2435.33,281.15,383.22,741.311,856.1B. Matching grant for cooperative co-investers Project grant support coop-343-101,200,000171,184-3,708.75,043.93,858.6-12,611.1GAS_DAIFAD (100% )Private investment coop-343-101,200,000171,184-3,708.75,043.93,858.6-12,611.1GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop-343-10------GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Matching grant for cooperative co-investers -7,417.410,087.77,717.1-25,222.3C. Company-cooperative-households models 1. Company-cooperative-household models Project grant model2332-101,500,000213,9803,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector participation model2332-101,500,000213,9803,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Support from Govt model2332-101,000,000142,6532,020.03,090.63,152.42,143.6-10,406.7GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Company-cooperative-household models 8,080.012,362.412,609.68,574.6-41,626.62. Other innovative models Project support model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Other innovative models 3,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0Subtotal Company-cooperative-households models 11,110.016,998.317,338.311,790.0-57,236.6D. Product traceability system Promotion and user registration LS1111-42,5003572.52.62.62.7-10.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Training of Govt staff and agro-entity LS-111147,000999-7.27.47.57.729.7GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Equipment support /a LS-1111425,0003,566-25.826.326.827.3106.2GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Operating costs, supervision LS-1234105,000713-5.210.516.121.953.6GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Product traceability system 2.540.746.853.156.8199.9E. Improving climate information|and adoptation advice LS-111-3500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9-1,576.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total 11,127.725,406.831,279.325,479.32,798.296,091.2_________________________________\a Such as bar-code printer, computer set, scanner, data hardware, fast-testing tools, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-2.2: Suijiang-Stimulating entrepreneurships/ attracting investors 
104 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 2.2. Suijiang: Stimulating entreprenuership Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Business incubation / Service centres centre1----1250,00035,663252.5----252.5GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Technical assistance to the service centre TA support from the project LS/year111115660,00094,151666.6679.9693.5707.4721.53,469.0TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )C. Startup investments Project support each-11114500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9546.62,123.0GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector support each-11114500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9546.62,123.0GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Subtotal Startup investments -1,030.21,050.81,071.81,093.34,246.1Total Investment Costs 919.11,710.11,744.31,779.21,814.87,967.6II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary Manager pers/year11111574,88010,68275.677.178.780.381.9393.6SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Adminstrator pers/year11111548,0006,84748.549.450.451.452.5252.3SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Staff salary 124.1126.6129.1131.7134.3645.9B. Other operating costs Rental costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAGOVTOther operating costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Other operating costs 161.6164.8168.1171.5174.9841.0Total Recurrent Costs 285.7291.4297.3303.2309.31,486.8Total 1,204.82,001.62,041.62,082.42,124.19,454.4 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-2.3: Suijiang-Improving access to finance 
105 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 2.3. Suijiang Improving access to finance UnitOther AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostCostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Improving access to finance Strengthening financial capacity LS11111545,0006,41945.546.447.348.249.2236.5TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Improving financial advisory services LS11111540,0005,70640.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Total 85.987.689.391.192.9446.8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-2.4: Suijiang-Improving infrastructure climate resilience  
106 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 2.4. Suijiang: Improving infrastructure climate resilience Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Climate resilient infrastructure Planning & design LS1111-4122,00017,404123.2125.7128.2130.8-507.9SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Pond each1515---3080,00011,4121,212.01,236.2---2,448.2SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Pipeline km1515---3020,0002,853303.0309.1---612.1SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Irrigation system mu-8,000---8,0001,250178-10,302.0---10,302.0SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Drip irrigation system mu-2,000---2,0003,500499-7,211.4---7,211.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 1,638.219,184.4128.2130.8-21,081.6II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance lumpsum-16.7212.7218.3224.0671.7OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -16.7212.7218.3224.0671.7Total 1,638.219,201.1340.9349.0224.021,753.3 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-2.5: Suijiang-Improving rural infrastructure system 
107 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 2.5. Suijiang: Improving rural infrastructure Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Road design and management per year1111151,000,000142,6531,010.01,030.21,050.81,071.81,093.35,256.1CK_DAGOVTB. Rural infrastructure Fire-contro observation tower each6----6200,00028,5311,212.0----1,212.0CK_DAGOVTFarm road km102525--60558,40079,6585,639.814,381.614,669.2--34,690.7CK_DAGOVTTractor road km12.512.512.512.5-50713,500101,7839,007.99,188.19,371.99,559.3-37,127.2CK_DAGOVTCanal road km7.57.57.57.5-30300,00042,7962,272.52,318.02,364.32,411.6-9,366.4CK_DAGOVTSubtotal Rural infrastructure 18,132.325,887.626,405.411,970.9-82,396.2Total Investment Costs 19,142.326,917.827,456.213,042.71,093.387,652.3II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance lumpsum-195.3473.7763.2911.52,343.8OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -195.3473.7763.2911.52,343.8Total 19,142.327,113.127,929.913,806.02,004.889,996.0 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-2.6: Suijiang-County Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 
108 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 2.6. Suijiang County PMO Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Office equipment /a LS1----1155,00022,111156.6----156.6EAM_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Staff training General management training person55555251,0001435.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )FM & procurement training person44-4-121,0001434.04.1-4.3-12.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Social safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Environmental safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Other Technical training person101010101050500715.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas training team-11--250,0007,133-51.552.5--104.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Staff training 16.268.063.017.110.9175.3C. Study tours Within the region persons1313131313652,50035732.833.534.234.835.5170.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Outside the region LS/year33---65,00071315.215.5---30.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas study tour LS--2--250,0007,133--105.1--105.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Study tours 48.048.9139.234.835.5306.5D. Consultants & short-term staff Project planning and design LS1111-4200,00028,531202.0206.0210.2214.4-832.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Short-term staff pers_month222221036,0005,13672.774.275.777.278.7378.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Consultants & short-term staff 274.7280.2285.8291.578.71,211.0E. Workshops and meetings Lumpsum444442010,0001,42740.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )F. Monitoring and evaluation and KM LS/year111115250,00035,663252.5257.6262.7268.0273.31,314.0GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 788.3695.9792.8654.3442.23,373.6II. Recurrent Costs Staff salary (three staff) per year111115274,60039,173277.3282.9288.6294.3300.21,443.3SAA_DAGOVTVehicle hiring charges per year11111550,0007,13350.551.552.553.654.7262.8OPC_DAGOVTOffice operating costs per year111115300,00042,796303.0309.1315.2321.5328.01,576.8OPC_DAGOVTTotal Recurrent Costs 630.8643.5656.3669.5682.83,282.9Total 1,419.21,339.41,449.21,323.81,125.16,656.6 _________________________________\a Such as computer, printers, photo copier, projector, laptops, digital and video cameras, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-2.7: Suijiang-Summary cost  
109 
China Y2RDP  PDR Components by Financiers (US$ '000) Govt of ChinaIFADPrivate sectorBeneficiariesTotalDuties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%TaxesB. Suijiang county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 2,268.416.56,059.644.25,379.839.2--13,707.75.841.6Stimulating entreprenuership 128.39.5917.668.0302.922.5--1,348.70.653.1Improving access to finance 6.410.057.490.0----63.7-6.4Subtotal Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 2,403.015.97,034.546.55,682.637.6--15,120.26.4101.02. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 300.79.72,706.687.2--95.83.13,103.21.3300.7Improving rural infrastructure 12,503.997.4----334.32.612,838.25.51,250.4Subtotal Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 12,804.680.32,706.617.0--430.22.715,941.46.81,551.13. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 516.454.4433.145.6----949.60.448.1Subtotal Suijiang county 15,724.149.110,174.331.85,682.617.8430.21.332,011.213.61,700.3China Y2RDP  PDR Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) Totals Including Contingencies20202021202220232024TotalB. Suijiang county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 1,587.43,624.44,462.13,634.7399.213,707.7Stimulating entreprenuership 171.9285.5291.2297.1303.01,348.7Improving access to finance 12.212.512.713.013.363.7Subtotal Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 1,771.53,922.44,766.13,944.8715.415,120.22. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 233.72,739.148.649.832.03,103.2Improving rural infrastructure 2,730.73,867.83,984.31,969.5286.012,838.2Subtotal Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 2,964.46,606.94,032.92,019.3317.915,941.43. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 202.4191.1206.7188.8160.5949.6Subtotal Suijiang county 4,938.410,720.39,005.76,152.91,193.932,011.2 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 3.1: Yonping-Improving Chanye fupin models 
110 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 3.1. Yongping: Improving Chanye fupin model Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 1. Payment to cooperative  meeting   operational standard coop-23--5200,00028,531-412.1630.5--1,042.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )2. Verification expenses Verification agency LS1111-415,0002,14015.215.515.816.1-62.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )MIS for RBL LS-111147,5001,070-7.77.98.08.231.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Verification expenses 15.223.223.624.18.294.33. Investment on pro-poor cooperatives Project grant support coop--12141,500,000213,980--1,576.23,215.51,639.96,431.6GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private investments coop--12141,000,000142,653--1,050.82,143.61,093.34,287.7GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop--1214------GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Investment on pro-poor cooperatives --2,627.05,359.12,733.110,719.3Subtotal Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 15.2435.33,281.15,383.22,741.311,856.1B. Matching grant for cooperative co-investers Project grant support coop-343-101,200,000171,184-3,708.75,043.93,858.6-12,611.1GAS_DAIFAD (100% )Private investment coop-343-101,200,000171,184-3,708.75,043.93,858.6-12,611.1GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop-343-10------GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Matching grant for cooperative co-investers -7,417.410,087.77,717.1-25,222.3C. Company-cooperative-households models 1. Company-cooperative-household models Project grant model2332-101,500,000213,9803,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector participation model2332-101,500,000213,9803,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Support from Govt model2332-101,000,000142,6532,020.03,090.63,152.42,143.6-10,406.7GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Company-cooperative-household models 8,080.012,362.412,609.68,574.6-41,626.62. Other innovative models Project support model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Other innovative models 3,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0Subtotal Company-cooperative-households models 11,110.016,998.317,338.311,790.0-57,236.6D. Product traceability system Promotion and user registration LS1111-42,5003572.52.62.62.7-10.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Training of Govt staff and agro-entity LS-111147,000999-7.27.47.57.729.7GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Equipment support /a LS-1111425,0003,566-25.826.326.827.3106.2GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Operating costs, supervision LS-1234105,000713-5.210.516.121.953.6GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Product traceability system 2.540.746.853.156.8199.9E. Improving climate information|and adoptation advice LS-111-3500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9-1,576.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total 11,127.725,406.831,279.325,479.32,798.296,091.2_________________________________\a Such as bar-code printer, computer set, scanner, data hardware, fast-testing tools, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-3.2: Yonping-Stimulating entrepreneurships/ attracting investors 
111 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 3.2. Yongping: Stimulating entreprenuership Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Business incubation / Service centres centre1----1250,00035,663252.5----252.5GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Technical assistance to the service centre TA support from the project LS/year111115660,00094,151666.6679.9693.5707.4721.53,469.0TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )C. Startup investments Project support each-11114500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9546.62,123.0GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector support each-11114500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9546.62,123.0GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Subtotal Startup investments -1,030.21,050.81,071.81,093.34,246.1Total Investment Costs 919.11,710.11,744.31,779.21,814.87,967.6II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary Manager pers/year11111574,88010,68275.677.178.780.381.9393.6SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Adminstrator pers/year11111548,0006,84748.549.450.451.452.5252.3SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Staff salary 124.1126.6129.1131.7134.3645.9B. Other operating costs Rental costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAGOVTOther operating costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Other operating costs 161.6164.8168.1171.5174.9841.0Total Recurrent Costs 285.7291.4297.3303.2309.31,486.8Total 1,204.82,001.62,041.62,082.42,124.19,454.4 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-3.3: Yonping-Improving access to finance 
112 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 3.3. Yongping: Improving access to finance UnitOther AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostCostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Improving access to finance Strengthening financial capacity LS11111545,0006,41945.546.447.348.249.2236.5TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Improving financial advisory services LS11111540,0005,70640.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Total 85.987.689.391.192.9446.8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-3.4: Yonping-Improving infrastructure climate resilience  
113 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 3.4. Yongping: Improving infrastructure climate resilience Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Climate resilient infrastructure Design and planning lumpsum1111-4125,00017,832126.3128.8131.4134.0-520.4SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Pond each363636--10838,9005,5491,414.41,442.71,471.5--4,328.6SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Pipeline km61616161-24454,5007,7753,357.73,424.93,493.43,563.3-13,839.3SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Irrigation canal km1----150,0007,13350.5----50.5SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Pumping stations each22---4750,000106,9901,515.01,545.3---3,060.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 6,463.96,541.75,096.33,697.2-21,799.1II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance lumpsum-65.9134.0188.6230.1618.7OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -65.9134.0188.6230.1618.7Total 6,463.96,607.65,230.33,885.9230.122,417.8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-3.5: Yonping-Improving rural infrastructure system 
114 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 3.5. Yongping: Improving rural infrastructure Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Road design and management per year1111155,127,000731,3845,178.35,281.85,387.55,495.25,605.126,947.9CK_DAGOVTB. Rural infrastructure Pumping stations each7----7842,900120,2435,959.3----5,959.3CK_DAGOVTPipeline km55---10280,00039,9431,414.01,442.3---2,856.3CK_DAGOVTElectricity transmission line km55---10600,00085,5923,030.03,090.6---6,120.6CK_DAGOVTFarm road, transportable km1399--311,580,600225,47820,753.314,655.014,948.1--50,356.4CK_DAGOVTTractor road km15101010-45100,00014,2651,515.01,030.21,050.81,071.8-4,667.8CK_DAGOVTCross-drainage structures each11---21,000,000142,6531,010.01,030.2---2,040.2CK_DAGOVTSubtotal Rural infrastructure 33,681.621,248.315,998.91,071.8-72,000.6Total Investment Costs 38,859.926,530.121,386.46,567.05,605.198,948.5II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance lumpsum-396.4674.9906.1991.72,969.1OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -396.4674.9906.1991.72,969.1Total 38,859.926,926.522,061.37,473.26,596.81,01,917.6 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-3.6: Yonping-County Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 
115 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 3.6. Yongping County PMO Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Office equipment /a LS1----1155,00022,111156.6----156.6EAM_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Staff training General management training person55555251,0001435.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )FM & procurement training person44-4-121,0001434.04.1-4.3-12.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Social safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Environmental safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Other Technical training person101010101050500715.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas training team-11--250,0007,133-51.552.5--104.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Staff training 16.268.063.017.110.9175.3C. Study tours Within the region persons1313131313652,50035732.833.534.234.835.5170.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Outside the region LS/year33---65,00071315.215.5---30.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas study tour LS--2--250,0007,133--105.1--105.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Study tours 48.048.9139.234.835.5306.5D. Consultants & short-term staff Project planning and design LS1111-4200,00028,531202.0206.0210.2214.4-832.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Short-term staff pers_month222221036,0005,13672.774.275.777.278.7378.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Consultants & short-term staff 274.7280.2285.8291.578.71,211.0E. Workshops and meetings Lumpsum444442010,0001,42740.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )F. Monitoring and evaluation and KM LS/year111115250,00035,663252.5257.6262.7268.0273.31,314.0GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 788.3695.9792.8654.3442.23,373.6II. Recurrent Costs Staff salary (three staff) per year111115274,60039,173277.3282.9288.6294.3300.21,443.3SAA_DAGOVTVehicle hiring charges per year11111550,0007,13350.551.552.553.654.7262.8OPC_DAGOVTOffice operating costs per year111115300,00042,796303.0309.1315.2321.5328.01,576.8OPC_DAGOVTTotal Recurrent Costs 630.8643.5656.3669.5682.83,282.9Total 1,419.21,339.41,449.21,323.81,125.16,656.6 _________________________________\a Such as computer, printers, photo copier, projector, laptops, digital and video cameras, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-3.7: Yonping-Summary cost  
116 
China Y2RDP  PDR Components by Financiers (US$ '000) Govt of ChinaIFADPrivate sectorBeneficiariesTotalDuties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%TaxesC. Yongping county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 2,268.416.56,059.644.25,379.839.2--13,707.75.841.6Stimulating entreprenuership 128.39.5917.668.0302.922.5--1,348.70.653.1Improving access to finance 6.410.057.490.0----63.7-6.4Subtotal Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 2,403.015.97,034.546.55,682.637.6--15,120.26.4101.02. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 311.09.72,798.787.5--88.32.83,198.01.4311.0Improving rural infrastructure 14,115.397.1----423.52.914,538.96.21,411.5Subtotal Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 14,426.381.32,798.715.8--511.82.917,736.97.61,722.53. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 516.454.4433.145.6----949.60.448.1Subtotal Yongping county 17,345.851.310,266.430.45,682.616.8511.81.533,806.614.41,871.6China Y2RDP  PDR Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) Totals Including Contingencies20202021202220232024TotalC. Yongping county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 1,587.43,624.44,462.13,634.7399.213,707.7Stimulating entreprenuership 171.9285.5291.2297.1303.01,348.7Improving access to finance 12.212.512.713.013.363.7Subtotal Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 1,771.53,922.44,766.13,944.8715.415,120.22. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 922.1942.6746.1554.332.83,198.0Improving rural infrastructure 5,543.53,841.23,147.11,066.1941.114,538.9Subtotal Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 6,465.64,783.83,893.21,620.4973.917,736.93. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 202.4191.1206.7188.8160.5949.6Subtotal Yongping county 8,439.58,897.28,866.05,754.01,849.833,806.6 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 4.1: Yunlong-Improving Chanye fupin models 
117 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 4.1. Yunlong: Improving Chanye fupin model Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 1. Payment to cooperative  meeting   operational standard coop-23--5200,00028,531-412.1630.5--1,042.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )2. Verification expenses Verification agency LS1111-415,0002,14015.215.515.816.1-62.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )MIS for RBL LS-111147,5001,070-7.77.98.08.231.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Verification expenses 15.223.223.624.18.294.33. Investment on pro-poor cooperatives Project grant support coop--12141,500,000213,980--1,576.23,215.51,639.96,431.6GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private investments coop--12141,000,000142,653--1,050.82,143.61,093.34,287.7GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop--1214------GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Investment on pro-poor cooperatives --2,627.05,359.12,733.110,719.3Subtotal Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 15.2435.33,281.15,383.22,741.311,856.1B. Matching grant for cooperative co-investers Project grant support coop-343-101,200,000171,184-3,708.75,043.93,858.6-12,611.1GAS_DAIFAD (100% )Private investment coop-343-101,200,000171,184-3,708.75,043.93,858.6-12,611.1GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop-343-10------GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Matching grant for cooperative co-investers -7,417.410,087.77,717.1-25,222.3C. Company-cooperative-households models 1. Company-cooperative-household models Project grant model2332-101,500,000213,9803,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector participation model2332-101,500,000213,9803,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Support from Govt model2332-101,000,000142,6532,020.03,090.63,152.42,143.6-10,406.7GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Company-cooperative-household models 8,080.012,362.412,609.68,574.6-41,626.62. Other innovative models Project support model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Other innovative models 3,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0Subtotal Company-cooperative-households models 11,110.016,998.317,338.311,790.0-57,236.6D. Product traceability system Promotion and user registration LS1111-42,5003572.52.62.62.7-10.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Training of Govt staff and agro-entity LS-111147,000999-7.27.47.57.729.7GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Equipment support /a LS-1111425,0003,566-25.826.326.827.3106.2GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Operating costs, supervision LS-1234105,000713-5.210.516.121.953.6GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Product traceability system 2.540.746.853.156.8199.9E. Improving climate information|and adoptation advice LS-111-3500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9-1,576.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total 11,127.725,406.831,279.325,479.32,798.296,091.2 _________________________________\a Such as bar-code printer, computer set, scanner, data hardware, fast-testing tools, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-4.2: Yunlong-Stimulating entrepreneurships/ attracting investors 
118 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 4.2. Yunlong: Stimulating entreprenuership Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Business incubation / Service centres centre1----1250,00035,663252.5----252.5GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Technical assistance to the service centre TA support from the project LS/year111115660,00094,151666.6679.9693.5707.4721.53,469.0TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )C. Startup investments Project support each-11114500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9546.62,123.0GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector support each-11114500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9546.62,123.0GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Subtotal Startup investments -1,030.21,050.81,071.81,093.34,246.1Total Investment Costs 919.11,710.11,744.31,779.21,814.87,967.6II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary Manager pers/year11111574,88010,68275.677.178.780.381.9393.6SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Adminstrator pers/year11111548,0006,84748.549.450.451.452.5252.3SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Staff salary 124.1126.6129.1131.7134.3645.9B. Other operating costs Rental costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAGOVTOther operating costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Other operating costs 161.6164.8168.1171.5174.9841.0Total Recurrent Costs 285.7291.4297.3303.2309.31,486.8Total 1,204.82,001.62,041.62,082.42,124.19,454.4 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-4.3: Yunlong-Improving access to finance 
119 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 4.3. Yunlong: Improving access to finance UnitOther AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostCostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Improving access to finance Strengthening financial capacity LS11111545,0006,41945.546.447.348.249.2236.5TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Improving financial advisory services LS11111540,0005,70640.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Total 85.987.689.391.192.9446.8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-4.4: Yunlong-Improving infrastructure climate resilience  
120 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 4.4. Yunlong: Improving infrastructure climate resilience Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Climate resilient infrastructure Design and planning lumpsum1111-4125,00017,832126.3128.8131.4134.0-520.4SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Pipeline km113130---24349,5007,0615,649.46,629.3---12,278.8SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Irrigation canal km142023--57167,40023,8802,367.03,449.14,045.8--9,862.0SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Domestic water supply unit each11---22,500,000356,6332,525.02,575.5---5,100.5SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 10,667.712,782.74,177.2134.0-27,761.6II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance lumpsum-108.8241.4288.8295.9934.9OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -108.8241.4288.8295.9934.9Total 10,667.712,891.54,418.5422.8295.928,696.5 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-4.5: Yunlong-Improving rural infrastructure system 
121 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 4.5. Yunlong: Improving rural infrastructure Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Road design and management per year1111151,270,000181,1701,282.71,308.41,334.51,361.21,388.46,675.2CK_DAGOVTB. Rural infrastructure Farm road, transportable km15151515-60572,00081,5988,665.88,839.19,015.99,196.2-35,717.0CK_DAGOVTWater source development lumpsum-1---12,759,400393,638-2,842.7---2,842.7CK_DAGOVTIrrigation canal km-324747-126167,40023,880-5,518.68,267.58,432.9-22,219.0CK_DAGOVTPipeline km-8989--17849,5007,061-4,538.54,629.3--9,167.9CK_DAGOVTSubtotal Rural infrastructure 8,665.821,739.021,912.717,629.1-69,946.6Total Investment Costs 9,948.523,047.323,247.318,990.31,388.476,621.8II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance lumpsum-101.5338.6582.5787.81,810.4OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -101.5338.6582.5787.81,810.4Total 9,948.523,148.823,585.819,572.82,176.378,432.2 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-4.6: Yunlong-County Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 
122 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 4.6. Yunlong: County PMO Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Office equipment /a LS1----1155,00022,111156.6----156.6EAM_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Staff training General management training person55555251,0001435.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )FM & procurement training person44-4-121,0001434.04.1-4.3-12.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Social safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Environmental safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Other Technical training person101010101050500715.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas training team-11--250,0007,133-51.552.5--104.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Staff training 16.268.063.017.110.9175.3C. Study tours Within the region persons1313131313652,50035732.833.534.234.835.5170.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Outside the region LS/year33---65,00071315.215.5---30.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas study tour LS--2--250,0007,133--105.1--105.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Study tours 48.048.9139.234.835.5306.5D. Consultants & short-term staff Project planning and design LS1111-4200,00028,531202.0206.0210.2214.4-832.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Short-term staff pers_month222221036,0005,13672.774.275.777.278.7378.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Consultants & short-term staff 274.7280.2285.8291.578.71,211.0E. Workshops and meetings Lumpsum444442010,0001,42740.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )F. Monitoring and evaluation and KM LS/year111115250,00035,663252.5257.6262.7268.0273.31,314.0GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 788.3695.9792.8654.3442.23,373.6II. Recurrent Costs Staff salary (three staff) per year111115274,60039,173277.3282.9288.6294.3300.21,443.3SAA_DAGOVTVehicle hiring charges per year11111550,0007,13350.551.552.553.654.7262.8OPC_DAGOVTOffice operating costs per year111115300,00042,796303.0309.1315.2321.5328.01,576.8OPC_DAGOVTTotal Recurrent Costs 630.8643.5656.3669.5682.83,282.9Total 1,419.21,339.41,449.21,323.81,125.16,656.6 _________________________________\a Such as computer, printers, photo copier, projector, laptops, digital and video cameras, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-4.7: Yunlong-Summary cost  
123 
China Y2RDP  PDR Components by Financiers (US$ '000) Govt of ChinaIFADPrivate sectorBeneficiariesTotalDuties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%TaxesD. Yunlong county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 2,268.416.56,059.644.25,379.839.2--13,707.75.841.6Stimulating entreprenuership 128.39.5917.668.0302.922.5--1,348.70.653.1Improving access to finance 6.410.057.490.0----63.7-6.4Subtotal omp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 2,403.015.97,034.546.55,682.637.6--15,120.26.4101.02. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 396.09.73,564.387.1--133.43.34,093.71.7396.0Improving rural infrastructure 10,930.497.7----258.32.311,188.64.81,093.0Subtotal omp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 11,326.474.13,564.323.3--391.62.615,282.36.51,489.13. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 516.454.4433.145.6----949.60.448.1Subtotal Yunlong county 14,245.945.411,031.935.25,682.618.1391.61.231,352.013.41,638.2China Y2RDP  PDR Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) Totals Including Contingencies20202021202220232024TotalD. Yunlong county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 1,587.43,624.44,462.13,634.7399.213,707.7Stimulating entreprenuership 171.9285.5291.2297.1303.01,348.7Improving access to finance 12.212.512.713.013.363.7Subtotal omp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 1,771.53,922.44,766.13,944.8715.415,120.22. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 1,521.81,839.0630.360.342.24,093.7Improving rural infrastructure 1,419.23,302.33,364.62,792.1310.511,188.6Subtotal omp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 2,941.05,141.33,994.92,852.4352.715,282.33. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 202.4191.1206.7188.8160.5949.6Subtotal Yunlong county 4,914.99,254.78,967.76,986.01,228.631,352.0 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 5.1: Lanping-Improving Chanye fupin models 
124 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 5.1. Lanping: Improving Chanye fupin model Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 1. Payment to cooperative  meeting   operational standard coop-23--5200,00028,531-412.1630.5--1,042.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )2. Verification expenses Verification agency LS1111-415,0002,14015.215.515.816.1-62.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )MIS for RBL LS-111147,5001,070-7.77.98.08.231.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Verification expenses 15.223.223.624.18.294.33. Investment on pro-poor cooperatives Project grant support coop--12141,500,000213,980--1,576.23,215.51,639.96,431.6GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private investments coop--12141,000,000142,653--1,050.82,143.61,093.34,287.7GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop--1214------GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Investment on pro-poor cooperatives --2,627.05,359.12,733.110,719.3Subtotal Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 15.2435.33,281.15,383.22,741.311,856.1B. Matching grant for cooperative co-investers Project grant support coop-343-101,200,000171,184-3,708.75,043.93,858.6-12,611.1GAS_DAIFAD (100% )Private investment coop-343-101,200,000171,184-3,708.75,043.93,858.6-12,611.1GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop-343-10------GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Matching grant for cooperative co-investers -7,417.410,087.77,717.1-25,222.3C. Company-cooperative-households models 1. Company-cooperative-household models Project grant model233--81,500,000213,9803,030.04,635.94,728.6--12,394.5GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector participation model233--81,500,000213,9803,030.04,635.94,728.6--12,394.5GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Support from Govt model233--81,000,000142,6532,020.03,090.63,152.4--8,263.0GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Company-cooperative-household models 8,080.012,362.412,609.6--33,052.02. Other innovative models Project support model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Other innovative models 3,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0Subtotal Company-cooperative-households models 11,110.016,998.317,338.33,215.5-48,662.0D. Product traceability system Promotion and user registration LS1111-42,5003572.52.62.62.7-10.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Training of Govt staff and agro-entity LS-111147,000999-7.27.47.57.729.7GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Equipment support /a LS-1111425,0003,566-25.826.326.827.3106.2GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Operating costs, supervision LS-1234105,000713-5.210.516.121.953.6GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Product traceability system 2.540.746.853.156.8199.9E. Improving climate information|and adoptation advice LS-111-3500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9-1,576.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total 11,127.725,406.831,279.316,904.72,798.287,516.7 _________________________________\a Such as bar-code printer, computer set, scanner, data hardware, fast-testing tools, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-5.2: Lanping-Stimulating entrepreneurships/ attracting investors 
125 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 5.2. Lanping: Stimulating entreprenuership Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Business incubation / Service centres centre1----1250,00035,663252.5----252.5GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Technical assistance to the service centre TA support from the project LS/year111115660,00094,151666.6679.9693.5707.4721.53,469.0TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )C. Startup investments Project support each-11114500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9546.62,123.0GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector support each-11114500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9546.62,123.0GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Subtotal Startup investments -1,030.21,050.81,071.81,093.34,246.1Total Investment Costs 919.11,710.11,744.31,779.21,814.87,967.6II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary Manager pers/year11111574,88010,68275.677.178.780.381.9393.6SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Adminstrator pers/year11111548,0006,84748.549.450.451.452.5252.3SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Staff salary 124.1126.6129.1131.7134.3645.9B. Other operating costs Rental costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAGOVTOther operating costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Other operating costs 161.6164.8168.1171.5174.9841.0Total Recurrent Costs 285.7291.4297.3303.2309.31,486.8Total 1,204.82,001.62,041.62,082.42,124.19,454.4 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-5.3: Lanping-Improving access to finance 
126 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 5.3. Lanping: Improving access to finance UnitOther AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostCostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Improving access to finance Strengthening financial capacity LS11111545,0006,41945.546.447.348.249.2236.5TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Improving financial advisory services LS11111540,0005,70640.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Total 85.987.689.391.192.9446.8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-5.4: Lanping-Improving infrastructure climate resilience  
127 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 5.4. Lanping: Improving infrastructure climate resilience Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Climate resilient infrastructure Design and planning lumpsum1111-4125,00017,832126.3128.8131.4134.0-520.4SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Pond lumpsum233--8100,00014,265202.0309.1315.2--826.3SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Storage reservoirs each81010--28100,00014,265808.01,030.21,050.8--2,889.0SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 1,136.31,468.01,497.4134.0-4,235.7II. Recurrent Costs A. Annual maintenance lumpsum-11.626.831.944.8115.1OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -11.626.831.944.8115.1Total 1,136.31,479.61,524.2165.944.84,350.8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-5.5: Lanping-Improving rural infrastructure system 
128 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 5.5. Lanping: Improving rural infrastructure Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Road design and supervision per year1111-41,000,000142,6531,010.01,030.21,050.81,071.8-4,162.8CK_DAGOVTB. Rural infrastructure Farm road, transportable km8----8300,00042,7962,424.0----2,424.0CK_DAGOVTLand leveling mu110150150100-51038,0005,4214,221.85,872.15,989.64,072.9-20,156.4CK_DAGOVTPipeline km24353224-115320,00045,6497,756.811,538.210,760.28,231.6-38,286.9CK_DAGOVTInstallations LS2331-91,000,000142,6532,020.03,090.63,152.41,071.8-9,334.8CK_DAGOVTUnspecified each-11--2300,00042,796-309.1315.2--624.3CK_DAGOVTSubtotal Rural infrastructure 16,422.620,810.020,217.513,376.3-70,826.4Total Investment Costs 17,432.621,840.221,268.314,448.1-74,989.2II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance Annual maintenance lumpsum-177.2404.1629.2789.11,999.6OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -177.2404.1629.2789.11,999.6Total 17,432.622,017.421,672.415,077.3789.176,988.9 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-5.6: Lanping-County Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 
129 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 5.6. Lanping: County PMO Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Office equipment /a LS1----1155,00022,111156.6----156.6EAM_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Staff training General management training person55555251,0001435.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )FM & procurement training person44-4-121,0001434.04.1-4.3-12.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Social safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Environmental safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Other Technical training person101010101050500715.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas training team-11--250,0007,133-51.552.5--104.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Staff training 16.268.063.017.110.9175.3C. Study tours Within the region persons1313131313652,50035732.833.534.234.835.5170.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Outside the region LS/year33---65,00071315.215.5---30.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas study tour LS--2--250,0007,133--105.1--105.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Study tours 48.048.9139.234.835.5306.5D. Consultants & short-term staff Project planning and design LS1111-4200,00028,531202.0206.0210.2214.4-832.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Short-term staff pers_month222221036,0005,13672.774.275.777.278.7378.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Consultants & short-term staff 274.7280.2285.8291.578.71,211.0E. Workshops and meetings Lumpsum444442010,0001,42740.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )F. Monitoring and evaluation and KM LS/year111115250,00035,663252.5257.6262.7268.0273.31,314.0GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 788.3695.9792.8654.3442.23,373.6II. Recurrent Costs Staff salary (three staff) per year111115274,60039,173277.3282.9288.6294.3300.21,443.3SAA_DAGOVTVehicle hiring charges per year11111550,0007,13350.551.552.553.654.7262.8OPC_DAGOVTOffice operating costs per year111115300,00042,796303.0309.1315.2321.5328.01,576.8OPC_DAGOVTTotal Recurrent Costs 630.8643.5656.3669.5682.83,282.9Total 1,419.21,339.41,449.21,323.81,125.16,656.6 _________________________________\a Such as computer, printers, photo copier, projector, laptops, digital and video cameras, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-5.7: Lanping-Summary cost  
130 
China Y2RDP  PDR Components by Financiers (US$ '000) Govt of ChinaIFADPrivate sectorBeneficiariesTotalDuties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%TaxesE. Lanping county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 1,962.615.75,600.944.94,921.139.4--12,484.55.341.6Stimulating entreprenuership 128.39.5917.668.0302.922.5--1,348.70.653.1Improving access to finance 6.410.057.490.0----63.7-6.4Subtotal omp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 2,097.215.16,575.847.35,223.937.6--13,897.05.9101.02. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 60.49.7543.887.6--16.42.6620.60.360.4Improving rural infrastructure 10,697.597.4----285.32.610,982.74.71,069.7Subtotal omp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 10,757.992.7543.84.7--301.72.611,603.44.91,130.23. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 516.454.4433.145.6----949.60.448.1Subtotal Lanping county 13,371.650.67,552.828.65,223.919.8301.71.126,449.911.31,279.3China Y2RDP  PDR Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) Totals Including Contingencies20202021202220232024TotalE. Lanping county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 1,587.43,624.44,462.12,411.5399.212,484.5Stimulating entreprenuership 171.9285.5291.2297.1303.01,348.7Improving access to finance 12.212.512.713.013.363.7Subtotal omp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 1,771.53,922.44,766.12,721.6715.413,897.02. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 162.1211.1217.423.76.4620.6Improving rural infrastructure 2,486.83,140.93,091.62,150.8112.610,982.7Subtotal omp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 2,648.93,351.93,309.12,174.5119.011,603.43. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 202.4191.1206.7188.8160.5949.6Subtotal Lanping county 4,622.97,465.48,281.95,084.9994.926,449.9 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 6.1: Yongsheng-Improving Chanye fupin models 
131 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 6.1. Yongsheng: Improving Chanye fupin model Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 1. Payment to cooperative  meeting   operational standard coop-23--5200,00028,531-412.1630.5--1,042.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )2. Verification expenses Verification agency LS1111-415,0002,14015.215.515.816.1-62.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )MIS for RBL LS-111147,5001,070-7.77.98.08.231.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Verification expenses 15.223.223.624.18.294.33. Investment on pro-poor cooperatives Project grant support coop--12141,500,000213,980--1,576.23,215.51,639.96,431.6GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private investments coop--12141,000,000142,653--1,050.82,143.61,093.34,287.7GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop--1214------GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Investment on pro-poor cooperatives --2,627.05,359.12,733.110,719.3Subtotal Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 15.2435.33,281.15,383.22,741.311,856.1B. Matching grant for cooperative co-investers Project grant support coop-343-101,200,000171,184-3,708.75,043.93,858.6-12,611.1GAS_DAIFAD (100% )Private investment coop-343-101,200,000171,184-3,708.75,043.93,858.6-12,611.1GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop-343-10------GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Matching grant for cooperative co-investers -7,417.410,087.77,717.1-25,222.3C. Company-cooperative-households models 1. Company-cooperative-household models Project grant model2332-101,500,000213,9803,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector participation model2332-101,500,000213,9803,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Support from Govt model2332-101,000,000142,6532,020.03,090.63,152.42,143.6-10,406.7GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Company-cooperative-household models 8,080.012,362.412,609.68,574.6-41,626.62. Other innovative models Project support model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Other innovative models 3,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0Subtotal Company-cooperative-households models 11,110.016,998.317,338.311,790.0-57,236.6D. Product traceability system Promotion and user registration LS1111-42,5003572.52.62.62.7-10.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Training of Govt staff and agro-entity LS-111147,000999-7.27.47.57.729.7GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Equipment support /a LS-1111425,0003,566-25.826.326.827.3106.2GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Operating costs, supervision LS-1234105,000713-5.210.516.121.953.6GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Product traceability system 2.540.746.853.156.8199.9E. Improving climate information|and adoptation advice LS-111-3500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9-1,576.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total 11,127.725,406.831,279.325,479.32,798.296,091.2 _________________________________\a Such as bar-code printer, computer set, scanner, data hardware, fast-testing tools, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-6.2: Yongsheng -Stimulating entrepreneurships/ attracting investors 
132 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 6.2. Yongsheng: Stimulating entreprenuership Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Business incubation / Service centres centre1----1250,00035,663252.5----252.5GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Technical assistance to the service centre TA support from the project LS/year111115660,00094,151666.6679.9693.5707.4721.53,469.0TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )C. Startup investments Project support each-11114500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9546.62,123.0GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector support each-11114500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9546.62,123.0GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Subtotal Startup investments -1,030.21,050.81,071.81,093.34,246.1Total Investment Costs 919.11,710.11,744.31,779.21,814.87,967.6II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary Manager pers/year11111574,88010,68275.677.178.780.381.9393.6SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Adminstrator pers/year11111548,0006,84748.549.450.451.452.5252.3SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Staff salary 124.1126.6129.1131.7134.3645.9B. Other operating costs Rental costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAGOVTOther operating costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Other operating costs 161.6164.8168.1171.5174.9841.0Total Recurrent Costs 285.7291.4297.3303.2309.31,486.8Total 1,204.82,001.62,041.62,082.42,124.19,454.4 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-6.3: Yongsheng -Improving access to finance 
133 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 6.3. Yongsheng: Improving access to finance UnitOther AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostCostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Improving access to finance Strengthening financial capacity LS11111545,0006,41945.546.447.348.249.2236.5TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Improving financial advisory services LS11111540,0005,70640.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Total 85.987.689.391.192.9446.8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-6.4: Yongsheng -Improving infrastructure climate resilience  
134 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 6.4. Yongsheng: Improving infrastructure climate resilience Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Climate resilient infrastructure Design and planning lumpsum1111-4125,00017,832126.3128.8131.4134.0-520.4SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Pipeline km303638--104400,00057,06112,120.014,834.915,972.2--42,927.1SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Irrigation system each------------SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 12,246.314,963.716,103.6134.0-43,447.5II. Recurrent Costs A. Annual maintenance lumpsum-124.9280.0449.9460.31,315.1OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -124.9280.0449.9460.31,315.1Total 12,246.315,088.616,383.6583.9460.344,762.6 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-6.5: Yongsheng -Improving rural infrastructure system 
135 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 6.5. Yongsheng: Improving rural infrastructure Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Road design and supervision per year1111151,280,000182,5961,292.81,318.71,345.01,371.91,399.46,727.8CK_DAGOVTB. Rural infrastructure Farm road, transportable km10155--30300,00042,7963,030.04,635.91,576.2--9,242.1CK_DAGOVTPipe line km224237--101------CK_DAGOVTPond, 5000m3 capacity lumpsum21---35,146,500734,16510,395.95,301.9---15,697.9CK_DAGOVTPond 1000 m3 capacity each102010--401,125,000160,48511,362.523,179.511,821.5--46,363.5CK_DAGOVTCanal rehabilitation km203530--85400,00057,0618,080.014,422.812,609.6--35,112.4CK_DAGOVTSubtotal Rural infrastructure 32,868.447,540.126,007.4--1,06,416.0Total Investment Costs 34,161.248,858.827,352.41,371.91,399.41,13,143.7II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance Annual maintenance /a lumpsum-177.2404.1629.2789.11,999.6OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -177.2404.1629.2789.11,999.6Total 34,161.249,036.027,756.62,001.12,188.51,15,143.3 _________________________________\a assumed at 1% of total investment costs 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-6.6: Yongsheng -County Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 
136 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 6.6. Yongsheng: County PMO Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Office equipment /a LS1----1155,00022,111156.6----156.6EAM_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Staff training General management training person55555251,0001435.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )FM & procurement training person44-4-121,0001434.04.1-4.3-12.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Social safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Environmental safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Other Technical training person101010101050500715.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas training team-11--250,0007,133-51.552.5--104.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Staff training 16.268.063.017.110.9175.3C. Study tours Within the region persons1313131313652,50035732.833.534.234.835.5170.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Outside the region LS/year33---65,00071315.215.5---30.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas study tour LS--2--250,0007,133--105.1--105.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Study tours 48.048.9139.234.835.5306.5D. Consultants & short-term staff Project planning and design LS1111-4200,00028,531202.0206.0210.2214.4-832.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Short-term staff pers_month222221036,0005,13672.774.275.777.278.7378.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Consultants & short-term staff 274.7280.2285.8291.578.71,211.0E. Workshops and meetings Lumpsum444442010,0001,42740.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )F. Monitoring and evaluation and KM LS/year111115250,00035,663252.5257.6262.7268.0273.31,314.0GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 788.3695.9792.8654.3442.23,373.6II. Recurrent Costs Staff salary (three staff) per year111115274,60039,173277.3282.9288.6294.3300.21,443.3SAA_DAGOVTVehicle hiring charges per year11111550,0007,13350.551.552.553.654.7262.8OPC_DAGOVTOffice operating costs per year111115300,00042,796303.0309.1315.2321.5328.01,576.8OPC_DAGOVTTotal Recurrent Costs 630.8643.5656.3669.5682.83,282.9Total 1,419.21,339.41,449.21,323.81,125.16,656.6 _________________________________\a Such as computer, printers, photo copier, projector, laptops, digital and video cameras, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-6.7: Yongsheng -Summary cost  
137 
China Y2RDP  PDR Components by Financiers (US$ '000) Govt of ChinaIFADPrivate sectorBeneficiariesTotalDuties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%TaxesF. Yongsheng county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 2,268.416.56,059.644.25,379.839.2--13,707.75.841.6Stimulating entreprenuership 128.39.5917.668.0302.922.5--1,348.70.653.1Improving access to finance 6.410.057.490.0----63.7-6.4Subtotal omp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 2,403.015.97,034.546.55,682.637.6--15,120.26.4101.02. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 619.89.75,578.187.4--187.62.96,385.52.7619.8Improving rural infrastructure 16,140.398.3----285.31.716,425.67.01,614.0Subtotal omp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 16,760.173.55,578.124.5--472.92.122,811.19.72,233.83. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 516.454.4433.145.6----949.60.448.1Subtotal Yongsheng county 19,679.650.613,045.833.65,682.614.6472.91.238,880.916.62,383.0China Y2RDP  PDR Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) Totals Including Contingencies20202021202220232024TotalF. Yongsheng county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 1,587.43,624.44,462.13,634.7399.213,707.7Stimulating entreprenuership 171.9285.5291.2297.1303.01,348.7Improving access to finance 12.212.512.713.013.363.7Subtotal omp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 1,771.53,922.44,766.13,944.8715.415,120.22. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 1,747.02,152.42,337.283.365.76,385.5Improving rural infrastructure 4,873.26,995.13,959.6285.5312.216,425.6Subtotal omp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 6,620.29,147.66,296.7368.8377.922,811.13. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 202.4191.1206.7188.8160.5949.6Subtotal Yongsheng county 8,594.113,261.011,269.54,502.41,253.838,880.9 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 7.1: Huaping-Improving Chanye fupin models 
138 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 7.1. Huaping: Improving Chanye fupin model Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 1. Payment to cooperative  meeting   operational standard coop-23--5200,00028,531-412.1630.5--1,042.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )2. Verification expenses Verification agency LS1111-415,0002,14015.215.515.816.1-62.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )MIS for RBL LS-111147,5001,070-7.77.98.08.231.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Verification expenses 15.223.223.624.18.294.33. Investment on pro-poor cooperatives Project grant support coop--12141,500,000213,980--1,576.23,215.51,639.96,431.6GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private investments coop--12141,000,000142,653--1,050.82,143.61,093.34,287.7GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop--1214------GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Investment on pro-poor cooperatives --2,627.05,359.12,733.110,719.3Subtotal Upgrading cooperative meeting   operational standard 15.2435.33,281.15,383.22,741.311,856.1B. Matching grant for cooperative co-investers Project grant support coop-343-101,200,000171,184-3,708.75,043.93,858.6-12,611.1GAS_DAIFAD (100% )Private investment coop-343-101,200,000171,184-3,708.75,043.93,858.6-12,611.1GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance coop-343-10------GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Matching grant for cooperative co-investers -7,417.410,087.77,717.1-25,222.3C. Company-cooperative-households models 1. Company-cooperative-household models Project grant model2332-101,500,000213,9803,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector participation model2332-101,500,000213,9803,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Support from Govt model2332-101,000,000142,6532,020.03,090.63,152.42,143.6-10,406.7GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Company-cooperative-household models 8,080.012,362.412,609.68,574.6-41,626.62. Other innovative models Project support model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Govt assistance model2332-10500,00071,3271,010.01,545.31,576.21,071.8-5,203.3GAS_DAGOVTSubtotal Other innovative models 3,030.04,635.94,728.63,215.5-15,610.0Subtotal Company-cooperative-households models 11,110.016,998.317,338.311,790.0-57,236.6D. Product traceability system Promotion and user registration LS1111-42,5003572.52.62.62.7-10.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Training of Govt staff and agro-entity LS-111147,000999-7.27.47.57.729.7GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Equipment support /a LS-1111425,0003,566-25.826.326.827.3106.2GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Operating costs, supervision LS-1234105,000713-5.210.516.121.953.6GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Product traceability system 2.540.746.853.156.8199.9E. Improving climate information|and adoptation advice LS-111-3500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9-1,576.4GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total 11,127.725,406.831,279.325,479.32,798.296,091.2 _________________________________\a Such as bar-code printer, computer set, scanner, data hardware, fast-testing tools, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-7.2: Huaping -Stimulating entrepreneurships/ attracting investors 
139 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 7.2. Huaping: Stimulating entreprenuership Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Business incubation / Service centres centre1----1250,00035,663252.5----252.5GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Technical assistance to the service centre TA support from the project LS/year111115660,00094,151666.6679.9693.5707.4721.53,469.0TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )C. Startup investments Project support each-11114500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9546.62,123.0GAS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Private sector support each-11114500,00071,327-515.1525.4535.9546.62,123.0GAS_DAPRIVATE ( 100% )Subtotal Startup investments -1,030.21,050.81,071.81,093.34,246.1Total Investment Costs 919.11,710.11,744.31,779.21,814.87,967.6II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary Manager pers/year11111574,88010,68275.677.178.780.381.9393.6SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Adminstrator pers/year11111548,0006,84748.549.450.451.452.5252.3SAA_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Staff salary 124.1126.6129.1131.7134.3645.9B. Other operating costs Rental costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAGOVTOther operating costs per year11111580,00011,41280.882.484.185.787.5420.5OPC_DAIFAD ( 90% )Subtotal Other operating costs 161.6164.8168.1171.5174.9841.0Total Recurrent Costs 285.7291.4297.3303.2309.31,486.8Total 1,204.82,001.62,041.62,082.42,124.19,454.4 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-7.3: Huaping -Improving access to finance 
140 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 7.3. Huaping: Improving access to finance UnitOther AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostCostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Improving access to finance Strengthening financial capacity LS11111545,0006,41945.546.447.348.249.2236.5TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Improving financial advisory services LS11111540,0005,70640.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Total 85.987.689.391.192.9446.8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-7.4: Huaping -Improving infrastructure climate resilience  
141 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 7.4. Huaping: Improving infrastructure climate resilience Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Climate resilient infrastructure Design and planning lumpsum1111-415,0002,14015.215.515.816.1-62.4SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Pumping stations each221--52,706,000386,0205,466.15,575.42,843.5--13,885.0SCW_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 5,481.35,590.92,859.216.1-13,947.5II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance Annual maintenance /a lumpsum-55.9114.1145.5148.6464.0OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -55.9114.1145.5148.6464.0Total 5,481.35,646.82,973.3161.6148.614,411.5 _________________________________\a assumed at 1% of total investment costs 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-7.5: Huaping -Improving rural infrastructure system 
142 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 7.5. Huaping: Improving rural infrastructure Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Road design and supervision per year111115920,000131,241929.2947.8966.7986.11,005.84,835.6CK_DAGOVTB. Rural infrastructure Farm road km8888-32700,00099,8575,656.05,769.15,884.56,002.2-23,311.8CK_DAGOVTSprinkler sets mu3,0003,0003,0003,0002,00014,0001,5002144,545.04,635.94,728.64,823.23,279.822,012.5CK_DAGOVTPond each15151515157570,0009,9861,060.51,081.71,103.31,125.41,147.95,518.9CK_DAGOVTStorages each30303030301508,0001,141242.4247.2252.2257.2262.41,261.5CK_DAGOVTPumping stations each12---32,601,000371,0412,627.05,359.1---7,986.1CK_DAGOVTPipeline km101010101252200,00028,5312,020.02,060.42,101.62,143.62,623.810,949.5CK_DAGOVTSubtotal Rural infrastructure 16,150.919,153.514,070.314,351.77,313.971,040.2Total Investment Costs 17,080.120,101.315,037.015,337.78,319.775,875.8II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance Annual maintenance /a lumpsum-174.2382.7543.8711.11,811.8OAMBEN ( 100% )Total Recurrent Costs -174.2382.7543.8711.11,811.8Total 17,080.120,275.515,419.715,881.59,030.877,687.6 _________________________________\a assumed at 1% of total investment costs 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-7.6: Huaping-County Project management, M&E, KM and Policy 
143 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 7.6. Huaping: County PMO Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Office equipment /a LS1----1155,00022,111156.6----156.6EAM_DAIFAD ( 90% )B. Staff training General management training person55555251,0001435.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )FM & procurement training person44-4-121,0001434.04.1-4.3-12.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Social safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Environmental safe-guard training person11-1-31,0001431.01.0-1.1-3.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Other Technical training person101010101050500715.15.25.35.45.526.3TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas training team-11--250,0007,133-51.552.5--104.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Staff training 16.268.063.017.110.9175.3C. Study tours Within the region persons1313131313652,50035732.833.534.234.835.5170.8TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Outside the region LS/year33---65,00071315.215.5---30.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Overseas study tour LS--2--250,0007,133--105.1--105.1TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Study tours 48.048.9139.234.835.5306.5D. Consultants & short-term staff Project planning and design LS1111-4200,00028,531202.0206.0210.2214.4-832.6TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Short-term staff pers_month222221036,0005,13672.774.275.777.278.7378.4TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Consultants & short-term staff 274.7280.2285.8291.578.71,211.0E. Workshops and meetings Lumpsum444442010,0001,42740.441.242.042.943.7210.2TWC_DAIFAD ( 100% )F. Monitoring and evaluation and KM LS/year111115250,00035,663252.5257.6262.7268.0273.31,314.0GSI_DAIFAD ( 90% )Total Investment Costs 788.3695.9792.8654.3442.23,373.6II. Recurrent Costs Staff salary (three staff) per year111115274,60039,173277.3282.9288.6294.3300.21,443.3SAA_DAGOVTVehicle hiring charges per year11111550,0007,13350.551.552.553.654.7262.8OPC_DAGOVTOffice operating costs per year111115300,00042,796303.0309.1315.2321.5328.01,576.8OPC_DAGOVTTotal Recurrent Costs 630.8643.5656.3669.5682.83,282.9Total 1,419.21,339.41,449.21,323.81,125.16,656.6 _________________________________\a Such as computer, printers, photo copier, projector, laptops, digital and video cameras, etc 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-7.7: Huaping -Summary cost  
144 
China Y2RDP  PDR Components by Financiers (US$ '000) Govt of ChinaIFADPrivate sectorBeneficiariesTotalDuties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%TaxesG. Huaping county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 2,268.416.56,059.644.25,379.839.2--13,707.75.841.6Stimulating entreprenuership 128.39.5917.668.0302.922.5--1,348.70.653.1Improving access to finance 6.410.057.490.0----63.7-6.4Subtotal omp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 2,403.015.97,034.546.55,682.637.6--15,120.26.4101.02. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 199.09.71,790.787.1--66.23.22,055.90.9199.0Improving rural infrastructure 10,823.997.7----258.52.311,082.44.71,082.4Subtotal omp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 11,022.983.91,790.713.6--324.72.513,138.25.61,281.43. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 516.454.4433.145.6----949.60.448.1Subtotal Huaping county 13,942.447.79,258.331.75,682.619.5324.71.129,208.012.41,430.5China Y2RDP  PDR Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) Totals Including Contingencies20202021202220232024TotalG. Huaping county 1. Comp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development Improving Chanye fupin models 1,587.43,624.44,462.13,634.7399.213,707.7Stimulating entreprenuership 171.9285.5291.2297.1303.01,348.7Improving access to finance 12.212.512.713.013.363.7Subtotal omp 1: Supporting inclusive rural development 1,771.53,922.44,766.13,944.8715.415,120.22. Comp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure Improving infrastructure climate resilience 781.9805.5424.223.021.22,055.9Improving rural infrastructure 2,436.52,892.42,199.72,265.61,288.311,082.4Subtotal omp 2: Climate-proofed public infrastructure 3,218.53,697.92,623.82,288.61,309.513,138.23. Comp 3: Project management, KM, M&E County PMO 202.4191.1206.7188.8160.5949.6Subtotal Huaping county 5,192.47,811.37,596.66,422.22,185.429,208.0 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-8.1: PREFECTURE PMOs (Total for 4 Prefectures) 
145 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 8.1. Prefecture management offices Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Fin.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Rule I. Investment Costs A. Equipment and materials (4 sets) lumpsum4----4100,00014,265404.0----404.0EAM_DAGOVTB. Workshop and training Management workshop lumpsum44444205,00071320.220.621.021.421.9105.1TWC_DAGOVTM&E and KM workshops prefecture44444205,00071320.220.621.021.421.9105.1TWC_DAGOVTSubtotal Workshop and training 40.441.242.042.943.7210.2C. Knowledge management events National study tours prefecture44444205,00071320.220.621.021.421.9105.1TWC_DAGOVTKnowledge documents sharing prefecture44444205,00071320.220.621.021.421.9105.1TWC_DAGOVTSubtotal Knowledge management events 40.441.242.042.943.7210.2Total Investment Costs 484.882.484.185.787.5824.5II. Recurrent Costs A. staff salary (4 staff from each Prefecture) per year202020202010030,0004,280606.0618.1630.5643.1656.03,153.6SAA_DAGOVTB. Other operating costs Travel costs per year444442025,0003,566101.0103.0105.1107.2109.3525.6OPC_DAGOVTOffice operating costs per year444442025,0003,566101.0103.0105.1107.2109.3525.6OPC_DAGOVTSubtotal Other operating costs 202.0206.0210.2214.4218.71,051.2Total Recurrent Costs 808.0824.2840.6857.5874.64,204.9Total 1,292.8906.6924.7943.2962.15,029.4 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table-9.1: PROVINCIAL PMO 
146 
China Y2RDP  PDR Table 9.1. Provincial PMO Other AccountsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (CNY '000)Disb.Fin.Unit20202021202220232024Total(CNY)(US$)20202021202220232024TotalAcct.Rule I. Investment Costs A. Office equipment lumpsum1----1500,00071,327505.0----505.0EAM_DAGOVTB. Staff training Management workshop & training lumpsum111115200,00028,531202.0206.0210.2214.4218.71,051.2TWC_DAGOVTGender focus training lumpsum1-1--260,0008,55960.6-63.0--123.6TWC_DAGOVTM&E and KM training lumpsum111115100,00014,265101.0103.0105.1107.2109.3525.6TWC_DAGOVTSubtotal Staff training 363.6309.1378.3321.5328.01,700.5C. Knowledge management Study tours lumpsum11111570,0009,98670.772.173.675.076.5367.9TWC_DAGOVTKnowledge documents & sharing lumpsum111115100,00014,265101.0103.0105.1107.2109.3525.6TWC_DAGOVTSubtotal Knowledge management 171.7175.1178.6182.2185.9893.5D. Women federation capacity building Capacity building lumpsum11111530,0004,28030.330.931.532.232.8157.7TWC_DAGOVTKnowledge document & sharing lumpsum11111550,0007,13350.551.552.553.654.7262.8TWC_DAGOVTSubtotal Women federation capacity building 80.882.484.185.787.5420.5E. Monitoring, evaluation and policy Baseline suyrvey0, lumpsum1-11-3300,00042,796303.0-315.2321.5-939.8GSI_DAGOVTMIS set up lumpsum1----1700,00099,857707.0----707.0GSI_DAGOVTPolicy activities lumpsum-1111450,0007,133-51.552.553.654.7212.3GSI_DAGOVTSubtotal Monitoring, evaluation and policy 1,010.051.5367.8375.154.71,859.1Total Investment Costs 2,131.1618.11,008.8964.6656.05,378.6II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff salary ( 5 staff) per year111115600,00085,592606.0618.1630.5643.1656.03,153.6SAA_DAGOVTB. Other operating costs Travel per year111115500,00071,327505.0515.1525.4535.9546.62,628.0OPC_DAGOVTVehicle hiring per year111115400,00057,061404.0412.1420.3428.7437.32,102.4OPC_DAGOVTOther operating costs per year111115400,00057,061404.0412.1420.3428.7437.32,102.4OPC_DAGOVTSubtotal Other operating costs 1,313.01,339.31,366.01,393.41,421.26,832.9Total Recurrent Costs 1,919.01,957.41,996.52,036.52,077.29,986.6Total 4,050.12,575.53,005.33,001.12,733.115,365.1 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Chapter 8: Financial Management   
Project: Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RDP) 
IFAD Loan: xxxxxxxx 
147 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Main Contents Chapter 8 
1.0  Introduction  
1.1 Project Overview   
1.2 Organizational Framework 
1.3 Project Management Office 
1.4 Anticorruption policy   
2.0 Budgeting and Planning 
2.1 Development of the AWPB 
2.2 Review of the AWPB   
3.0 Accounting system 
3.1 Designing the project accounting system. 
3.2 The Selection of an Accounting Software 
3.3 Accounting Manual 
Recording    and processing of transactions  
4.0  Records Management 
4.1 Filing of the financial records   
4.2 Storage of financial records 
4.3 Archiving of financial records   
4.4 Back- up procedures   
5.0  Internal controls   
5.1 Segregation of duties   
5.2. Authorization 
5.3 Reconciliations and Checks 
5.4 Restricted Access  
5.5 Monitoring and Review 
6.0 Flow of funds, cash and bank account management 
6.1 Flow of Funds, opening of special accounts and    project accounts 
6.2 Petty cash account 
6.3 Bank reconciliation 
7.0 IFAD Disbursement Procedures 
7.1 Evidence of Authority to Sign Withdrawal Applications 
7.2 The Designated Account 
7.3 Withdrawal of Financing Proceeds and Supporting Documentation 
7.4 Use of Statements of Expenditures (SOE) and SEO Thresholds 
8.0 Processing of payments 
8.1 General instructions 
8.2 Processing of payments for Civil Works and Goods   
8.3 Processing of payments    for Consultants' Services 
8.4 Processing of Payments for    Office Supplies and Other Operating Costs 
8.6 Travel Arrangements & Processing of Travel Related Expenditures 
9.0 Financial Reporting 
9.1 Monthly Reports   
9.2 Periodic Progress Reports   
9.3 Cash Flow Forecast 
9.4 Annual Financial Statements and Audit Reports   
10.0 Fixed Asset Management  
10.1 Purchase of Equipment 
10.2 Asset Register 
10.3 Asset Verification Review 
10.4 Vehicle Maintenance and Fuel 
148 
PIM Y2RRDP 
11.0 Audit Arrangements   
11.1 The Audit Cycle and Appointing the Auditor 
11.2. TORs of the Auditors and the Engagement letter 
11.3 The Audit Report 
12.0 IFAD Supervision 
12.1 Supervision missions by the Fund  
13.0 Loan completion and Closing   
13.1 Recovery plan 
13.2 Loan Completion 
13.3 Loan Closure 
149 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annexes: 
Annex I: Sample Job descriptions related to Financial Management and    Administration 
Annex II: Sample Annual Work Plan and Budget   
Annex III: Sample chart of account   
Annex IV: Sample TORs for an accounting software 
Annex V: Sample Monthly Budget Execution Report   
Annex VI: Sample Periodic Financial Progress Report   
Annex VII: Fixed asset register 
Annex VIII A: Petty Cash Request Form 
Annex VIII B: Petty Cash Reconciliation Form 
Annex IX A: Vehicle Log 
Annex IX B: Vehicle History Record 
Annex X : Sample Terms of Reference for the Audit of Project 
Annex XI: Required Aide Memoire tables for IFAD Supervision missions   
Table 1:    Cumulative expenditures by component and Financier - 
Table 2: Budgeted Expenditures and Performance against previous year’s    AWPB   
Table 3A: Financial performance by financier   
Table 3 B. Financial performance by financier by component   
Table 3 C: Expenditures by category –   
Annex XII: Sample recovery plan  
Annex XIII: Designated account reconciliation statement (Imprest account ) 
Annex XIV Checklist for Withdrawal Application 
Annex XV : Sample of financial statements   
Table 1: Sample Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments by Category     
Table 2: Financial performance per expenditure category and    financier 
Table 3: Financial performance per component and per financier 
Table 4: Project Cash Flow Forecast 
Table 5: SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement. 
Table 6: Signed Contract Listing 
Table 7: Physical Progress Report 
150 
PIM Y2RRDP 
1.0 Introduction 
199. 
The following manual outlines the financial procedures to be followed by the Project 
Management    Offices (PMOs) during the following stages of the project cycle: i) 
preparation and planning, ii) implementation and iii) completion of the project. The 
manual aims to describe in detail the necessary steps to be undertaken by the relevant 
project staff and the Finance Manager (FM) (interchangeably identified as the Finance 
Controller - FC) in particular,    when undertaking actions related to a) planning and 
budgeting, b) accounting, c) records management, d) internal controls, e) flow of funds, f) 
withdrawal of financing proceeds, g) processing of payments,    h) financial reporting, i) 
fixed asset management, j) audit arrangements, k) supervision by IFAD and l) project 
completion and loan closure.   
200. 
This manual is to be considered a living document and it is to be reviewed and 
updated at least once a year. It is to be read together with the Project Implementation 
Manual, the Procurement Manual, and the HR-manual. It is also important to note this 
manual makes references to the following IFAD key documents: Financing Agreement, 
IFAD General Conditions, Letter to the Borrower, IFAD Handbook for Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD- Financed Projects as well as the Disbursement 
Handbook. Therefore, it is fundamental that the project staff, especially the PD and the 
FM master these documents before the implementation of the project begins. The generic 
IFAD documents listed above are available at http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm. 
151 
PIM Y2RRDP 
1.1 Project Overview 
Project name: Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project (Y2RDP) 
Project loan number: xxxxx 
Effective date: xxxxx 
Completion date: xxxxx 
Closing date: xxxxx 
Project objectives: (refer to Chapter 2 (2.1)) 
Project Area and Selection Criteria: (refer to Chapter 2 (2.2) ) 
Project target group: (refer to Chapter 2 (2.3) ) 
Project beneficiaries: (refer to Chapter 2 (2.3)) 
Project components (refer to Chapter 3 ) 
Project costs: The Borrower and IFAD have agreed within the Financing agreement (FA) to 
allocate the financing to categories of eligible expenditures shown in the Schedule 2 of the FA. 
The schedule 2 also specifies the percentages of such eligible expenditures to be financed by 
the Financing: 100% net of tax ( this will be updated after the loan negotiations)   
Category 
IFAD loan   
Total   
I. Works 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
II. Consultancies /a 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
III. 
Services 
Inputs 
Goods, 
and 
xxxxxx 
Eligible 
expenditures 
(%) net of Tax 
100% 
100% 
100% 
IV.  Grants 
Subsidies /b 
and 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
100% 
V. Operating Costs 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
VI. Training 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
100% 
100% 
VII. Results Based 
Lending 
xxxxxx 
Total 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
(Table  1:  Schedule  2  of  the  financing  agreement  -  eligible  expenditures  by  expenditure 
152 
PIM Y2RRDP 
category) 
201. 
In addition to IFAD financing the Project will also receive counterpart financing 
from the Government, equivalent to approximately USD xxxx million. The counterpart 
financing will include xxxxx million in the form    taxes and duties and USD xxxxx 
million in cash from the Government’s budget. The project beneficiaries will also 
contribute approximately USD xx million to the project 
202. 
193.1.2 Organizational Framework   
(a)  Ministry of Finance. As the authorised representative of the Borrower of IFAD loans, 
the Ministry of Finance (MOF) will receive and pass on the IFAD loan proceeds to the 
Department of Finance (DOF) of Yunan Province and subsequently to the Bureaux of 
Finance (BOFs) of the project counties for financing the project. MOF will carry out its 
oversight responsibilities through the DOF and BOFs.   
(b) The lead project agency is the Provincial Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs 
(DARA)  through  the  provincial  project  leading  group  (PLG)  for  the  overall 
coordination and supervision of project activities. 
(c)  Project leading groups. A Project Leading Group (PLG) are established at province, 
prefecture,  and  county  levels  where  the  project  will  be  implemented,  and  where 
appropriate, to provide overall guidance and coordination of project implementation. 
Each PLG will be led by a senior official of government of the same level and composed 
of representatives from the related departments/bureaux and institutions, as appropriate. 
PLGs  shall  provide  overall  guidance  and  coordination  support  for  project 
implementation at their respective levels. Their key responsibilities include: (i) overall 
supervision of the operations and project performance; (ii) coordination of counterpart 
funds for carrying out  the project; (iii) review and approval  of project Annual Work 
Plan and Budgets (AWP/Bs), and progress and financial reports; and (iv) coordination 
of implementing agencies in project implementation.   
(d) Department/Bureaux of Finance. The primary responsibilities of DOF/BOFs are as 
following:  (i)  assume  the  opening  and  management  of  the  Project  Accounts;  (ii) 
administer the project resources including the IFAD loan and the counterpart funds; (iii) 
review and approve the financing needs for project implementation; (iv) oversee the 
use  of  project  resources;  (v)  ensure  the  effective  flow  of  funds  for  project 
implementation; (vi) provide appropriate training to the financial officers of the PMOs 
in terms of financial management; and (vii)  prepare Withdrawal Applications (WAs) 
and reimburse eligible project expenditures on time.   
(e)  Project  Management  Offices  (PMOs).  Department 
  of  Agriculture  and  Rural 
Affairs(DARA) as the Lead Project Agency (LPA), will have the overall accountability 
for the project, including fiduciary aspects. DARA would take lead responsibility for 
project design, management, supervision and evaluation, and will act as the Provincial 
Project  Management  Office  (PPMO).The  Project  will  establish  a  Provincial  Project 
Management Offices (PPMO) in Kunming, county PMOs in the seven project counties, 
and  where  appropriate,  a  township  PMO  in  each  of  the  project  areas.  These  are 
153 
PIM Y2RRDP 
dedicated structures located within existing offices of the Department of Agriculture 
and Rural Affairs, the Bureaux of Agriculture and Rural Affairs. The Provincial PMO 
(PPMO) and each county PMOs (CPMOs) will be staffed with qualified and full-time 
staff in adequate numbers, at a minimum comprising of a director, a deputy director, an 
accountant,  a  cashier,  a  planning  officer,  an  M&E  officer,  an  implementation 
coordinator, and a gender coordinator.   
(f)  The PPMO will be responsible for coordinating project implementation across the 7 
counties.  Its  responsibilities include,  among  others: (i)  consolidation  of AWPBs;  (ii) 
establishment  of  a  project  M&E  system;  (iii)  monitoring  and  supervision  of  project 
implementation;  (iv)  provision  of  appropriate  training  to  CPMOs  and  implementing 
agencies (IAs) in terms of project implementation and management; (v) consolidation 
of Statements of Expenditures (SOEs) and the preparation of withdrawal applications 
(WAs)  with  a  computerized  accounting  system;  (vi)  coordinate  prior  review 
procurement  requests  in  NOTUS  under  the  project;  (vii)  project  reporting;  (viii) 
organising project baseline and RIMS surveys; and (ix) promoting project knowledge 
management.   
(g) CPMOs will be responsible for coordinating project implementation at county level. 
Their  responsibilities  include,  among  others:  (i)  development  of  AWPBs  through 
participatory  approaches;  (ii) monitoring and supervision  of project implementation; 
(iii)  provision  of  appropriate  training  to  IAs,  township  PMOs  (TPMOs)  and  village 
implementing  groups (VIGs) in  terms  of project  implementation; (iv) preparation of 
SOEs and claim documents; (v) transfer of project funds to implementing agencies (IAs) 
on  time;  (vi)  organising  of  project  procurement;  (vii)  project  reporting;  (viii) 
undertaking project RIMS surveys; and (ix) promoting project knowledge sharing.   
(h) TPMOs will be established within the local governments at township level, utilising 
existing facilities and staff on a part-time basis. Designated staff will provide support 
to the CPMO and IAs for implementation of project activities at village level on an as-
required basis. Its key responsibilities are as follows: (i) oversee the works of VIGs; (ii) 
identify  eligible  villages  that  could  participate  in  project  activities;  (iii)  facilitate 
village-level  participatory  planning  activities  to  determine  what  activities  will  be 
implemented  in  the  villages;  (iv)  review  village  implementation  work  plans,  (v) 
coordinate  the  township  technical  stations/centres  in  project  implementation;  (vi) 
consolidate the M&E data collected by VIGs and report to CPMOs; and (vii) facilitate 
the liaison with target villages.   
(i)  Village Committee (VC). Before project villages are identified, VC is responsible for 
disseminating  project  information  to  the  villagers,  organizing  villagers  meeting  or 
villagers’  representatives  meeting  to  make  decision  on  application  of  project 
participation to the township government, and providing relevant information and data. 
(j)  Village  Implementing  Groups  (VIGs). VIGs  will  be  set  up  at  each  of  the  targeted 
administrative village. The VIG will be headed by the director of the village committee 
154 
PIM Y2RRDP 
and composed of 8-10 people, including all the village committee members and 4-5 
farmer  representatives  from  different  household  categories  of  well-being.  Farmer 
representatives will be elected by local farmers and they will be no less than 50% of 
total members of the VIG. Of the farmer representatives, women will be no less than 
50% and at least two thirds will be from the poor and vulnerable households.   
(k) The VIGs’  major  responsibilities  include:  (i)  a  regular  participatory  perceived  well-
being  ranking  of  households  within  the  village;  (ii)  identifying  project  modules  and 
activities prioritized by eligible groups through participatory approaches, and reporting 
to the PMOs for the development of AWPBs; (iii) organizing the poor and vulnerable 
households  to  participate  in  project  activities;  (iv)  assisting  PMOs  monitor  project 
implementation and collecting M&E data as required; and (v) organising the operation 
and maintenance of community infrastructure built by the project. 
(l)  The  project  will  (i)  establish  a  control  framework  integrating  periodic  internal  audits, 
independent external audits, and social safeguards to be adopted based on IFAD policies; (ii) 
adopt a good governance and mutual accountability framework to strengthen accountability and 
transparency in line with international best practices.(iii) outline the project specific financial 
management  procedures  and  disbursement  requirements  in  the  PIM.    (iv)  establish  a 
Management Information System (MIS) to support the core project management functions 
1.3 Project Management Office 
203. 
A dedicated provincial PMO (PPMO) shall be set up within the Farmland 
Enhancement Division, DARA. It will be responsible for project coordination, 
management support, monitoring and reporting, ensuring adherence to agreed standards, 
guidelines, and procedures, providing overall guidance on operational aspects to the 
various implementing units, and facilitating intra-knowledge transfer among project 
provinces and with external domestic and international agencies.     
204. 
PMOs are staffed with officers who need to have experience in project management, 
financial management, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation. They will also be 
assisted by officers from the technical line bureaus of Water Resources, Agriculture, 
Forestry, and Finance at the corresponding level. PPMOs and CPMOs will be in charge of 
day to day management of project activities, overseeing project designs, implementing 
and supervising project activities, arranging for counterpart-funding and local labor 
contribution, preparing annual work plans, financial plans, procurement plans, monitoring 
and reporting on project progress, outputs, and outcomes.   
205. 
To implement the project and it components,    the    will receive funds from the 
financiers (IFAD, the government and beneficiaries), which will be channelled through 
designated and project accounts to cover project expenditures, in accordance to the 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) and the expenditure categories as per the 
schedule 2 of the FA.   
155 
PIM Y2RRDP 
(Chart 2:The Financial operations environment of the PMO) 
206. 
PMO and the CPMOs    will assign financial staff and to support the Financial 
Division for the financial management of the project. The financial division at each level 
is composed of    three or more professional staff (Finance Manager, released on a full-
time basis, to be assisted by an Accountant and    Accounts Assistants). 
207. 
The PPMO organization structure is composed of the director who has overall 
responsibility and a Finance Manager who has financial responsibility overseeing an 
accountant and a cashier. The technical officers in the PMOs will have review and pre-
approval functions, similarly in the counties PMOs. 
208. 
Financial Manager (accountant in professional title) is responsible for the project 
financial management.    The manager will be assigned who has accumulated rich 
experiences in managing projects of international cooperation in the years implementation 
of the World Bank and ADB projects. 
Budgeting  staff    are  responsible  for  the  allocation  of  project  plan  funds.  procurement 
personnel  ,  accountants  are  responsible  for  calculating  and  reviewing  the  fund  inflow  and 
disbursement 
Financial accountants are personnel of state organisations, all of whom have been selected and 
recruited through examinations. 
156 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Project Director
Finance Manager
Accountants
Technical Officers
Budgeting Staff
(Chart 3: Organogram of the    staff involved in financial operations) 
209. 
In order to ensure that the financing proceeds are used for the intended purpose and 
as efficiently as possible, it is essential that the FM sets up and maintains adequate 
financial management arrangements in each stage of the project cycle: i) preparation and 
planning, ii) implementation as well as iii) completion and closing, as illustrated in the 
chart below.   
(Chart 4: Financial management arrangements in the different stages of the project cycle) 
   Sample  Job  descriptions  for  the  PD,  Financial  Manager,  Deputy  FM,  Programme 
Assistant  (Finance),  Documentation  Officer  are  provided  in  annex  I.  A  sample  staff 
development plan is provided in annex II: Table 6 of the AWPB. 
1.4 Anticorruption policy 
210. 
The management of the project funds shall be sufficiently rigorous to safeguard 
against Fraud and Corruption. Fraud and corruption include, but are not limited to: 
157 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  corrupt practice - offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting, directly or indirectly, anything 
of value to influence improperly the actions of another party 
 
fraudulent practice - any act or omission, including a misrepresentation, that knowingly 
or  recklessly  misleads,  or  attempts  to  mislead,  a  party  to  obtain  a  financial  or  other 
benefit or to avoid an obligation 
  collusive practice - an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve an 
improper purpose, including influencing improperly the actions of another party 
  coercive practice - impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or 
indirectly, any party or the property of the party to influence improperly the actions of a 
party 
211. 
IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or 
coercive actions in projects financed through its loans and grants. ‘Zero tolerance’ means 
that IFAD will pursue all allegations falling under the scope of this policy and that 
appropriate sanctions will be applied where the allegations are substantiated. IFAD takes 
all possible actions to protect individuals who submit allegations of fraudulent or corrupt 
practices in its activities from reprisal. The IFAD anticorruption policy is available on 
IFAD website at www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/index.htm). The IFAD website 
also provides instructions on how to report any alleged wrongdoing to the Office of Audit 
and Oversight (http://www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm). 
It  is  the  PD’s  and  the  Financial  Manager’s  responsibility  to  make  sure  that  all        staff 
including  the  financial  department  are  aware  of  IFADs  and  the  lead  project  agency’s 
anticorruption policy and whistle blowing procedures. 
2.0 Budgeting and Planning 
212. 
China has undertaken extensive reforms to its budgeting system over the past 10 
years. These have encompassed the entire budgeting cycle: formulation, approval, 
implementation and audit. The early challenge was fundamentally to create the 
institutional infrastructure for a modern budget process where none had previously 
existed. Under its budgeting system,    provincial, and local government. All activities of 
the government are predetermined and are set out in plans and programs. The annual 
estimates of expenditure detail the financial commitment of the government for the next 
year’s program of activities.   
213. 
The AWPB is expected to contain several key elements such as: 
i) 
ii) 
Introduction and brief background; 
Strategic focus and outputs; 
iii)  Major risks and mitigation actions; 
iv) 
Budget and Financing plan; 
v) 
Procurement plan; 
vi) 
Training and technical assistance schedule and,   
158 
PIM Y2RRDP 
vii) 
PMO staff development plan 
214. 
The LPA should make adequate annual budgetary provisions for IFAD funds and 
Counterpart funds in the National Budget, based on the AWPB of the Project. 
Counterpart  funding  will  consist  of  allocations  made  by  the  project  province  and 
counties/districts. Government will ensure that counterpart funds are contained in the domestic 
fiscal  allocations  for  the  counties,  and  that  they  are  released  for  the  project  on  time.  The 
counterpart  funding  maintain  in  the Treasury Accounts  of  the  counties  will  be  used  to  pre-
finance the project expenditures as well. 
Budget allocations will be made to enable the function of the provincial and county PMOs, 
to cover investment and recurrent expenses, office and training equipment, capacity building, 
M&E, knowledge management, and agribusiness facilitation services. Modest project support 
will also be reserved for function at township where existing government staff and facilities 
will be used. Recurrent costs for all PMOs will be ensured by government counterpart funding, 
which  will  cover  staff  salaries,  travel  costs,  administrative  costs,  and  operation  and 
maintenance of vehicles etc.. 
215. 
The budget and financing plan can be described as a detailed statement of the 
expected resources available to the project and the planned use of those resources for the 
upcoming project year.    The AWPB and especially the budget and financing plan is an 
important tool for managing the financial performance of the project and to ensure 
sufficient cash flow.     
The budgeting and planning process comprises of the following parts: 
  Preparation  of  annual,  semi-annual,  quarterly  and  even  monthly  financial  plans 
including procurement, receipts, expenditures and cash flows. 
  Review of past performance against budgets and the procurement plan, to promote an 
understanding of the project cost base; 
 
Identification of potential efficiency savings; and 
  Review of the main expenditure headings in light of the project implementation plan, 
procurement plan, and expected variations in cost e.g. pay increases, inflation and other 
anticipated changes.   
159 
PIM Y2RRDP 
(Chart 5:    The project budget cycle ) 
2.1 Development of the AWPB   
216. 
During the last quarter of the previous year - before the beginning of each fiscal year 
for the project, The PPMO, after consultations with project stakeholders, shall prepare its 
annual budget, linking all the planned activities to the cost categories outlined in Schedule 
II of the Financing Agreement; this exercise will take place in advance of the preparation 
of the national budget, to ensure that the required Government funds will be allocated and 
available on time. All financing contributions should be clearly stated in the budget to be 
submitted to internal for approval and to IFAD for non –objection.   
217. 
The budget and financing plan should be prepared and presented on a quarterly 
basis. The data on the number of activities to be implemented in the coming year and the 
estimates of the total funds needed to finance them should be presented by component 
and sub-component, by expenditure category as well as by financier. The estimates 
should be based on the project’s (up to date) cost tables. In addition to the financial 
information described above, the budget should also take into account the physical 
outreach of the project (number of farmer’s to be trained etc.). 
218.  When preparing the AWPB the following aspects should be taken into consideration: 
  Consistency  with  other  financial  reports:  It  is  practical  to  prepare  the  budget  and 
financing plan in the same format as the periodic (financial) progress reports and the 
project financial statements of the project. 
  Contingency  provisions  (physical  and  price)  and  allocation  of  funds  from  the 
unallocated expenditure category. 
  Post implementation activities e.g. arrangements for after life      of project, disposal of 
project assets (computers, vehicles etc.), future repair and maintenance.   
  Availability for funds and arrangements for all audits.   
219. 
After preparing the draft AWPB, the FM will send it to the PD and Steering 
Committee/LPA for review and clearance/approval before sending it to IFAD for no 
objection. In accordance with the FA, a draft AWPB has to be submitted to IFAD no later 
than 60 days before the beginning of the relevant fiscal year of the project. If required the 
/LPA could propose adjustments in the AWPB during the relevant project year, which 
would become effective after IFAD’ approval. 
220. 
The AWPB must be accompanied by a procurement plan prepared by the 
Procurement Officer. The first Procurement plan should cover the first 18 months of the 
project lifecycle while the subsequent procurement plans should cover 12 months of the 
project lifecycle.   
  A sample of a budget and financing plan, procurement plan as well as a staff development 
plan is provided in Annex II. 
2.2 Review of the AWPB 
221. 
Every quarter, the FM should review the costs incurred during this time period. In 
case of differences between the planned and actual costs presented in the Annual Budget, 
the FM and the Programme Mangers heading each component should collectively 
160 
PIM Y2RRDP 
identify the reasons for those differences and detail them in the periodic Financial Reports 
presented to IFAD. In case of internal problems identified during the costs review, the 
FM and Programme Managers should take the necessary steps to eliminate them. 
Otherwise, the budget for the next quarters should be readjusted to reflect the difference 
between actual and planned figures. 
3.0 Accounting system 
222. 
The majority of project activities result in the receipt, commitment or expenditure of 
funds. The accounting system records, processes and organises this data in order to 
produce useful financial information in form of AWPB, Financial Reports, Withdrawal 
Applications, Financial Statements etc. needed by the Project Financiers (IFAD, 
Government, Co-financiers, Beneficiaries) as well as the    management. The accounting 
system should reflect the project’s needs and be designed to provide the financial 
information required by all interested parties (DOF/BOFs, PPMOs, CPMOs and IFAD). 
It should also fulfil all the legal and regulatory requirements of the borrower. The 
accounting system is a critical part of the project’s financial management system and its 
design. 
(Chart 6: The operating environment of the project accounting system) 
The  FM  is  responsible  for  the  following  key  areas  related  to  the  accounting  system  of  the 
project: 
  Designing the accounting system of the project   
  Selection and maintenance of an accounting software. 
  Development of an accounting manual 
161 
PIM Y2RRDP 
3.1 Designing the project accounting system. 
223.  When designing the accounting system of the project the FM must undertake the 
following steps: 
Step one: Identify the different kind of reports the system is expected to generate, based on the 
different  stakeholders  requirements.  -  What  information  and  in  what  format  needs  to  be 
produced by the PMU? As a minimum requirement the Accounting system will need to produce 
the following reports:   
  Statement of cash receipts and payments (by category and by financier),   
  Statement of cash receipts and payments (by component),   
  Statement of comparative budget and actual amount by component,   
  Statement of Special Account movements,   
  Statement of Special Account Reconciliations,   
  SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement. 
Step  two:  List  the  transactions  and  activities,  which  the  system  must  account  for.  As  a 
minimum requirement the accounting system must include: 
a)  Purchase  orders,  receipts,  check  books  and  other  similar  documents 
evidencing receipt, commitment or expenditure of funds. 
b)  A  journal  for  primary  entry  of  all  transactions,  including  adjustments, 
destined to be posted to the ledger. 
c)  A petty cash book (PCB) for small cash expenditures below a certain low 
threshold. The credit side of the PCB should be analyzed into columns, one 
for  each  project  component,  The  totals  to  be  posted  to  ledger  accounts 
monthly. 
d)  A bank cash book (one for each source of financing). The credit side should 
also be analyzed into columns, one for each project component (like PCB). 
Total of these columns should be posted to their respective ledger accounts 
monthly. 
e)  A ledger containing separate ledger accounts for each project component. 
The  debit  side  of  each  ledger  account  should  be  analyzed  into  the 
expenditure  categories  defied  in  the  IFAD  Financing  Agreement  (Civil 
Works, Equipment, Goods and vehicles, Technical Assistance and Studies, 
Training and Workshops, Credit Line, PMU Management cost). The ledger 
accounts  should  be  closed  and  trial  balance  prepared  at  the  end  of  each 
month. 
f)  Fixed  asset  register  to  record  location,  price  and  date  of  acquisition  (or 
completion) of all buildings, vehicles, computers, printers, major equipment 
and furniture. There register should have a separate section for each type of 
fixed asset. 
162 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Step Three: Design the specific accounting books, including a chart of accounts and records 
to be maintained, the transactions to be recorded therein and the precise accounting entries on 
the occasion of each transaction.   
Step  Four:  Incorporate  the  systemic  accounting  issues  as  agreed  with  IFAD  and  the 
government including the used accounting standards and valuation criteria. -    In accordance 
with the project design document, all project accounts will be kept on a double entry system 
and the used accounting standards will be IPSAS Cash.   
Step  Five:  Resolve  accounting  issues  (if  any)  rising  from  the  fact  that  the  project  is  being 
implemented and expenditures are being incurred in different locations (HQ vs. field office). - 
The field office is to provide monthly reports and to HQ by electronically by using the internet 
connection or by hand carrying a USB-stick. 
Step Six: Determine a tentative list of users and user rights for each staff member in line with 
their terms of reference in order to maintain a proper level of security.   
Step Seven: In the light of steps 1-5 decide, select and procure the accounting software that is 
able to satisfy the needs of the project. The FM needs to have an answer to steps from 1 to 5 
before approaching a software company.   
Step Eight: Incorporate all decisions of the previous seven steps in an accounting manual. This 
manual will need to be reviewed and updated once a year.   
3.2 The Selection of an Accounting Software 
224. 
The accounting software of the Project is an important tool for collecting, analysing, 
storing,  and  disseminating  information  that  is  vital  for  decision  making.  In  addition,  it 
enhances transparency and accountability of the project activities, provides timely reports, 
helps detecting errors and shortfalls during project implementation and indicates necessary 
corrections.   
When choosing an accounting software the FM should ensure that the software is able to 
meet the following criteria:   
  Reflect project needs and be designed to provide the minimum financial information 
required  by  all  interested  parties  (PPMO/CPMOs,  LPA,  IFAD)    including  the 
provision of accurate, timely, complete, reliable and consistent information and reports 
as well as fulfil the legal and regulatory requirements of MOF/MOA; 
  The accounting software should be configured as a modular solution and the different 
modules  should  be  suitably  integrated.  The  software  should  contain  the  following 
modules: i) general ledger module, ii) accounting module incl. petty cash, iii) budget 
module, iv) fixed asset module, v) contract management and procurement management 
module. - The integration of budgeting module accounting module/system is important 
to enable comparison of the actual performance with budgets/targets (quarterly, annual, 
and cumulative for the Project).   
  Ability to account under different bases of accounting (cash,modified accural, accural) 
  Use the double-entry system of transactions; 
  Have multi-currency and multi-lingual capabilities and reporting; 
  Allow for multi-period and multi-user processing and reports; 
163 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  Able to output financial reports in a variety of formats including hard copy printouts, 
as an excel spread sheet and as an HTML file; 
  Provide adequate documentation and complete audit trail to facilitate audit. 
  Have security settings and different access levels for different users 
  Be user friendly. Technical support, training and installation & configuration should be 
offered by the supplier and be easily accessible during project implementation.       
  For  procurement  needs,  the  accounting  software  should  capture  and  report  on  the 
following:  Prior  review  thresholds;  Procurement  methods  thresholds;  Procurement 
reference;  Activity  description;  Component  (as  per  the  description  schedule  of  the 
Loan);  Category  (as  per  disbursement  schedule);  Estimated  amount;  Procurement 
method used; Prior/Post review; Date of issuance of advertisement; Bank no objection 
on bidding documents (Goods/works) or RFP (consultants); Date of bid (Goods/works) 
or RFP (consultants) submission; Bid opening date (goods/works) or Financial Proposal 
opening date(consultants); Bank No objection to evaluation report; Bank no objection 
to  contract  draft;  Date  of  submission  to  the  Fund  of  the  Copy  of  signed  contract; 
Contract related data (date of signature, date of completion, contract amount, contract 
amendments and payments terms). 
225. 
In  the  installation  phase  of  the  accounting  system,  FM  will  need  to  determine  the 
following: 
  access level and different user rights e.g.    (i) active use for inputting/editing of data 
for different modules; (ii) read-only use; or (iii) no-access.   
 
Information storage and back-up 
  Design of the chart of accounts and the detailed list ledger accounts required to account 
for transactions under the project. 
  Design the detailed formats of various accounting books, records, and statements (e.g., 
cash and bank books, journals, various ledgers, trial balance, voucher formats, etc.). 
  A sample of a TORs for an accounting software is provided in annex IV 
3.3 Accounting Manual 
226. 
The Accounting Manual is an integral part of the financial management manual of 
the project. It is to be prepared by the FM and the DFM and will become effective after it 
has been approved by the Steering Committee of the project. The accounting manual is to 
be reviewed and updated once a year.   
227.  When developing the accounting manual, it is essential that the FM and the DFM are 
familiar with the following: 
  National 
legislation  and  IFAD  Financing  agreement 
including 
the  reporting 
requirements 
164 
PIM Y2RRDP 
 
International    Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPAS)- accrual basis       
  The features and user manual of the procured accounting software. 
228. 
The accounting manual should as a minimum address the following subtopics: 
Used accounting standards: 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPAS)- accrual basis       
Chart of Accounts   
The Chart of Accounts is used to: (i) capture the financial data under the appropriate headings 
and (ii) classify and group financial data for the various financial reports. The structure of the 
Chart of Accounts caters data to be captured by: (i) the Project components, sub-components, 
activities  (ii)  expenditure  items  under  each  component  and  sub-component,  (iii)  The  IFAD 
expenditures  categories  for  the  Project,  and  (iv)  sources  of  funding.  Expenditure  categories 
may  also  be  recorded  by  using  “cost  centre”  functionality  which  is  commonly  available  in 
accounting software’s.       
The structure of the Chart of Accounts should conform closely to the project cost tables (as 
presented  in  the  project  design  report)  to  enable  comparison  of  actual  project  costs  during 
implementation with those estimated during the project preparation.   
Budgeting and budgetary control 
The  project  budget  will  be  recorded  in  the  budget  module  of  the  accounting  software. 
Budgeting is discussed more in detail in section 2 of this manual 
Recording    and processing of transactions 
229.  Whenever  a  transaction  takes  place  under  the  Project,  it  should  be  recorded  and 
processed  using  the    accounting  software  that  meets  the  project’s  specific  accounting 
requirements. Processing of payments is discussed in detail in section 8 of this manual. 
The recording of transactions under the Project follows the Cash basis of accounting with 
allows for the recognition of cash inflows in the period they are received and the reporting of 
expenses in the period those expenditures are paid.   
Individual  records  of  transactions  are  treated  as  source  documents.  For  the  project 
accounting purposes, the following source documents are considered:   
  Purchase orders/ Contracts 
  Purchase invoices 
  Service invoices 
  Consultants/engineers’ reports 
230. 
All  transactions  occurred  should  be  registered  in  the  accounting  software  in 
accordance with the date of occurrence and under the form of journals. The journal should 
contain  sufficient  and  detailed  information  about  the  date  of  the  transaction,  its  type, 
amount and reference to the source document. All the transactions should be entered on the 
accounting software using the principle of double entry, which means that each transaction 
165 
PIM Y2RRDP 
should be recorded twice, once on the debit side of the transaction and once on the credit 
side  of  the  transaction.  The  accounting  software  will  automatically  process  those 
transactions and post them to the ledger accounts, which are accounts where all transactions 
of similar type are recorded. This processing of transactions also allows for the production 
of timely reports.   
231. 
The DFM should reconcile the project accounts on a monthly basis. In case certain 
adjustments of entries in the accounting process have to be made, the DFM should produce 
a memorandum in which the reasons and the way in which the adjustment has been made 
is explained. The memorandum will be authorized by the PD after being cleared by the FM. 
Petty cash management ( not applicable if the project will not use petty cash) 
The  DFM  will  manage  and  periodically  reconcile  the  petty  cash  account.  The  petty  cash 
account is discussed more in detail in the section 6.2 of this manual. 
Bank account reconciliations 
The DFM will need to  perform monthly bank  account  reconciliations between the different 
accounts. The reconciliation is discussed more in detail in section 6.3 of this manual. 
Withdrawal of funds 
The DFM will be responsible for preparing withdrawal applications to be submitted to IFAD. 
The  necessary  procedures  are  explained  in  section  7  of  this  manual  and  in  the  IFAD 
disbursement Handbook.   
Financial reporting: 
The DFM is not only in charge for recording the financial transactions on a daily basis but also 
for summing up the expenditures made under each component and sub-component and for each 
activity under those and posting the data on accounting/financial reports on a periodic basis 
during  the  reporting  periods  specified  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  and  in  the  Financing 
Agreement. The DFM will  also  need to  keep track and report on the availability of project 
funds in the different accounts (Designated accounts, project accounts and petty cash) as well 
as the commitments made by the PMU. The produced reports will be approved by the PD after 
being  cleared  by  the  FM.  The  different  financial  reports  are  discussed  more  in  detail  in   
section 9 of this manual. 
Fixed asset register 
The DFM needs to maintain a fixed asset register recording all fixed assets in the fixed asset 
module  of  the  accounting  software.  Fixed  asset  management  is  discussed  more  in  detail  in 
section 8 of this manual. 
Period for which records are to be kept     
The  DFM  needs  to  file  the  original  records  in  an  organised  way  to  be  maintained  by  the   
PMU/LPA  for  a  minimum  10  years  after  the  project  completion.  Record  management  is 
discussed more in detail in section 4 of this manual. 
Access Levels   
The access to the accounting system should be governed by the privileged metrics defining the 
levels of access by different users: (i) active use for inputting/editing of data; (ii) read-only use; 
or (iii) no-access. This would allow a separated and controlled access to the Accounting module 
(i.e. Journal recording, posting to the General Ledger). Each accounting transaction records the 
user’s ID, preventing unauthorized access to the system and an adequate level of protection 
against the input of false data or the destruction of the records.    At the same time, the data-
sharing nature of the system involves a strict coordination and active data exchange among its 
166 
PIM Y2RRDP 
various users (primarily the PMU). In this respect the system should ensure the reliability in 
information storage and fast data processing. 
Revision of accounting manual 
The accounting manual is to be reviewed and updated once a year.   
4.0 Records Management 
232. 
Financial records must be created and preserved for every financial transaction 
performed under the project. Financial records are defined as any financial information 
including written, computer data, internal forms, e-mails, or any other form of storage 
information originated from the PMU such as internal forms, journal vouchers financial 
reports (Monthly & quarterly) copies of checks and withdrawal applications etc. or 
received by the PMU such as supplier invoices and receipts, bank statements, IFAD 
documents etc. within the framework of the project's official activities. The objective of 
this procedure is to preserve the financial records and files for further official use by the 
LPA, for financial audit and for review by the Fund during the supervision missions. The 
projects financial records are the property of the LPA/MoF and cannot be removed or 
destroyed.   
 It  is  important  to  note  that  in  accordance  with    the  IFAD  general  conditions,  the 
recipient/borrower has to maintain the original records for a minimum 10 years after the project 
completion. 
4.1 Filing of the financial records 
233. 
The DFM is responsible for filing the financial records created or received by the 
project. To fulfil this responsibility, the DFM must maintain chronological files in which 
the financial documents have to be filed for future reference. Filing should be performed 
daily to prevent the accumulation of papers and to ensure that the financial records are 
maintained in an up-to-date manner at all times. Each financial record should be filed 
under its code in a chronological order, with a sequential number assigned to every 
document. Any kind of additions or amendments to the financial document should be 
filed in a chronological order immediately following the principal document. 
4.2 Storage of financial records 
234. 
The financial records of the project should be stored in the PMU office, at the LPA 
for a minimum 10 years after the project completion. The data should be stored within the 
accounting software, as paper copies, as scanned copies and as computer disc copies. The 
Financial Officer should allocate an appropriate storage area for the financial records in 
paper format and maintain them in locked cabinets, safe from water and fire, to which 
access is controlled and limited. The Financial Officer should also classify the financial 
records as "Confidential", or "General". All important correspondences should be filed. 
4.3 Archiving of financial records 
235. 
In order to prevent an unnecessary pile-up of files in a limited office space, the FM 
should make sure that    the financial records are archived on a regularly basis. Once a 
year, the FM should make sure that the completed or inactive files are archived    in a 
167 
PIM Y2RRDP 
manner that will allow for easy retrieval of the files in case they are required at some 
future date.   
4.4 Back- up procedures 
236. 
To avoid the loss or damage of financial data, the information should be kept in two 
copies: i) at the computer server of the PMU/LPA and ii) in the locked cabinets of the 
PMU office. Only the PD, the FM and the DFM are allowed to access the financial 
records without authorization. The access of external persons is prohibited except for the 
auditors & IFAD staff.   
5.0 Internal controls 
237. 
Designing, Installing, and maintaining a system of internal financial control is an 
integral part of the Financial management function. Internal financial controls aim to 
ensure) efficiency, ii) reliability, of financial reports and iii) compliance with applicable 
laws and regulations including the conditions set forth in the financing agreement. The 
key features of the internal control system are summarised below: 
  Segregation of duties; 
  Authorization; 
  Reconciliations and checks; 
  Restricted access; and 
  Monitoring and review. 
5.1 Segregation of duties 
238. 
An important element in any control system is the separation of those duties which 
would, if combined, enable one individual to record and process a complete transaction. It 
is the FM’s responsibility to ensure that the following duties are segregated under the 
project: preparation, authorisation, execution, custody, recording and the and operation of 
systems. 
Person A (e.g. 
Accountant) 
prepares the 
document: 
payment order, 
WA, financial 
report, etc.
Person B (e.g. 
Financial 
Controller) 
reviews and 
clears the 
document: 
payment order, 
WA, financial 
report, etc
Person C (e.g. 
the Project 
Director) 
approves the 
document: 
payment order, 
WA, financial 
report, etc
(Chart 7: Example of Segregation of duties) 
168 
PIM Y2RRDP 
5.2. Authorization 
239. 
Authorization controls require the certification that a transaction or event is 
acceptable for further processing. Several types of authorization are in effect at the 
project, mainly in the procurement cycle, payment cycle, bank and cash management 
cycle including reconciliation. The FM should ensure that the authorizations of PMU staff 
ensure efficient implementation while keeping the risk as low as possible. The 
authorization of project staff should be in line with their respective job descriptions. 
5.3 Reconciliations and Checks 
240. 
Reconciliations between independent, corresponding sources of data are a key 
control for identifying errors and discrepancies in balances. The FM should perform the 
following reconciliations each month: 
  Bank reconciliation   
  Reconciliation between system and special account receipts and payments statement   
  Any  reconciling  or  balancing  amounts  should  be  promptly  cleared.  Unusual  or  long 
outstanding reconciling items must be brought to the attention of the financial officer.   
The financial officer will review and sign all reconciliations as evidence of his review.   
In addition physical checks should be performed on assets held and on petty cash. 
5.4 Restricted Access 
241. 
All data, records and assets should be kept in a physically secure environment. This 
should cover safe keeping of finance records such as official order forms and bank 
details. In addition, any petty cash should be kept securely. Financial data and other 
records should also be protected in the form of back up procedures. All work should be 
regularly backed up and copy records stored securely off site   
5.5 Monitoring and Review 
242. 
As detailed in financial reporting section 9, periodic financial reports must be 
prepared and submitted to the fund. For the purposes of internal control the same 
information should be prepared and monitored by the PD on a monthly/quarterly basis. 
The reports should be prepared on a timely basis and should normally be available for 
distribution two weeks after the end of the reporting period to which they relate. The 
periodic reports should be reviewed by the finance officer and the PD as a minimum. 
Where necessary, corrective action should be taken to ensure the authorized budget and 
procurement plan is not exceeded.   
6.0 Flow of funds, cash and bank account management 
243. 
The IFAD Loan will be disbursed over project duration of xx years. The Loan 
Closing Date is the xx anniversary of the date when the project was declared effective. 
IFAD disbursement procedures and the accompanied forms are outlined in detail in the 
Letter to the Borrower and the Disbursement handbook which should be read in parallel 
with this manual. Please refer to section 7 of this manual for more detailed information on 
the IFAD Disbursement procedures.     
169 
PIM Y2RRDP 
6.1 Flow of Funds, opening of special accounts and    project accounts 
244. 
In accordance with the section 4.04(d) of the General Conditions, immediately after 
entry into force of the Financing Agreement, there shall be a Designated Account (DA) 
for the IFAD Loan denominated in the currency    of the loan (USD/EURO) to be opened, 
through which IFAD funding shall be channelled. The DA is to be set up at and managed 
by DOF.    DOF will be directly responsible for the management, maintenance and 
reconciliation of the DA activities.    Supporting documents required for IFAD 
disbursements will be prepared and submitted by CPMOs through PPMO for review and 
verification before sending to DOF for further disbursement processing.   
245. 
The PPMO and county CPMOs are responsible for reviewing the Disbursement 
Request as well as the supporting documentation required for IFAD disbursements.   
Disbursement Requests will be prepared and submitted by CPMOs to PPMOs for review 
and verification before sending the Disbursement Request to DOF for further 
disbursement processing.    Once approved, project resources will be channeled directly 
from provincial level to county level . 
In  accordance  with  Section  3.1  of  the  LDH,  the  Designated Account  will  be  administered 
following Imprest Account arrangements. Advances from this Financing must be segregated 
from other funds for the Project . 
246. 
Additional general conditions    precedent    to withdrawal:    The    following   
are    designated    as    additional    general    conditions    precedent    to withdrawal 
  (a) The Provincial Project Management Office (PPMO”) and at least one County PMO, the 
respective key Project staff shall have been selected; 
(b)  The Borrower, through the Lead Project Agency, shall have submitted, and the Fund shall 
have received, an official document confirming the availability of adequate counterpart funds 
for the first Project Year; 
(c)  The  Designated Account  shall  have  been  duly  opened  :  Documentation  evidencing  the 
opening  of  the  Designated  Account,  with  details  of  the  names  and  titles  of  the  persons 
authorized to operate the DA, must reach IFAD before withdrawal from the loan account can 
begin. 
(d)    the designated representative a letter designating the names of officials authorized to sign 
withdrawal  applications  which  includes  their  authenticated  specimen  signature(s).    The 
project is    eligible and authorised to use the IFAD Client Portal (ICP), the applicable form is 
included in LTB. 
(e)  A draft PIM shall have been prepared and is acceptable to the Fund and 
(f)  A computerized accounting system acceptable to the Fund shall have been identified and 
selected by the Provincial PMO. 
247. 
Upon fulfilment of conditions precedent to withdrawal and the Borrower’s request, 
the Fund will make one (or more) withdrawal(s) of up to the ceiling USD'/EURO    xxxx 
million for the loan ( will determine after the project costs are provided) , and deposit 
such amount(s) into the Designated Account; DOF shall submit withdrawal applications 
to replenish the Designated Account from time to time, based on expenditures, provided 
that the amount claimed is not less than 20% of the initial deposit. All withdrawals must 
be in line with projected expenditures as detailed in the approved AWPBs. 
170 
PIM Y2RRDP 
The following are the SOE thresholds    that apply for withdrawal application under procedure 
(i) "Advance Withdrawal" and under procedure (iii) "Reimbursement": USD 300,000    for all 
expenditures categories. 
248. 
PMOs and IAs shall maintain Implementation ledger Accounts in local currency in 
the Treasury System or commercial banks    to receive the proceeds of the IFAD 
financing and/or the counterpart funding respectively. The County PMOs and BOFs will 
ensure that funds received at each level are transferred without delay. Separate 
bookkeeping is maintained by each of the IAs where Project activities will be 
implemented. 
249. 
Y2RDP will pilot a result-based Lending/disbursement (RBL) in selected sub-
components. Replication at larger scale could be considered at mid-term on the basis of 
the positive results and lessons generated during implementation. The disbursement under 
RBL will be conditional to the achievement of agreed and independently verifiable targets 
or milestones. Detailed disbursement linked indicators need to be identified and verified 
by an assigned independent agency following agreed verification protocols.   
250. 
FM procedures for the annual audit, verification on missions are still   as part of the 
annual process. Project needs to ensure that verification on the funds used for the 
intended purpose, for efficiency, social equity, basically value added principles. 
In  accordance  with  Section  3.1  of  the  LDH,  the  Designated Account  will  be  administered 
following Imprest Account arrangements. Advances from this Financing must be segregated 
from other funds for the Project . 
251. 
Retroactive  financing 
  As  an  exception  to  the  General  Conditions  for 
Agricultural  Development  Financing,  IFAD  will    be  seeking  IFAD  Executive  Board 
approval that for retroactive financing from the loan    up to a maximum of 10% of the total 
IFAD financing ( i.e US$7.5 million) for eligible expenditures incurred as from the date 
which the design document got approval by Quality assurance group to the date of the entry 
in  force  of  the  financing  agreement.  Eligible  expenditures  for  retroactive  financing  are 
considered those incurred to finance the start-up and preparation project activities such as 
: (i) purchase of essential items (including equipment and procurement of MIS system) for 
the PMOs; (ii) recruitment of project staff; (iii) costs related to tendering, selection, and 
recruitment  of  service  providers;  (iv)  costs  related  to  the  finalization  of  the  program 
implementation manual, customization of accounting software to fit IFAD requirement and 
license  fees,  start-up  trainings  and  workshops;  (v)  establishment  of  the  M&E  system, 
including carrying-out of the baseline survey and development of MIS; (vi) exposure visits 
for knowledge and experiences sharing; (vii) surveys and feasibility studies; (viii) training 
and  technical  assistance  for  cooperatives,  including  recruitment  of  service  providers, 
cooperative  support  field  officers,  technical  advisors  for  business  plans  development, 
brokers/facilitators  for  linkages  with  supermarkets;  and  value-chain  officers  and 
monitoring & evaluation officers; and (ix) business plans.   
252. 
Financing of taxes:  In order to improve the efficiency of funds flow and better 
support project implementation, IFAD’s funds may be used to finance taxes that are not 
“excessive, discriminatory or otherwise unreasonable”. In case the Government intends to 
171 
PIM Y2RRDP 
use  IFAD  financing  to  finances  taxes  that  is  impossible  or  impractical  to  exempt,  the 
Government  would  need  to  formalize  such  request  in  writing.  The  amount  of  IFAD’s 
financing to be used to finance taxes will be further confirmed upon finalisation of project 
costs and taxes.     
(Chart 8: Flow of funds of the project) 
6.3 Bank reconciliation 
253. 
The 
FM must perform monthly reconciliations between the designated account(s) balance recorded 
on bank statements and local cash book balance, recorded on the system. Performance of the 
monthly reconciliation should follow the following steps: 
i) Designate Account balance recorded on bank statement on reconciliation date is taken as 
starting figure; 
ii)  Add  reimbursements/replenishments/other  deposits  that  have  been  processed  and  are 
due to designated account, but not yet recorded on bank statements;   
iii) Subtract undelivered cheques. Any long-outstanding cheques should be identified and 
investigated   
172 
PIM Y2RRDP 
iv) Following these adjustments, the bank statement and local finance system cash totals 
should agree. Any remaining difference should be reported and investigated; 
v) The completed bank reconciliation statement should be signed by the FM; and 
vi) The reconciliation should be reviewed and countersigned by independent finance team 
member who understands the reconciliation process. 
Periodic designated account reconciliations will be    submitted IFAD as part of periodic progress 
report as outlined in section 9.   
  Please refer to  annex XII (also form 104 of the Disbursement handbook) for a standard 
Designated Account Reconciliation Statement   
7.0 IFAD Disbursement Procedures 
254. 
The IFAD disbursement procedures are governed by the Letter to the Borrower 
(LTB) and the Disbursement Handbook, which will be sent the PMU/LPA upon the 
project effectiveness. The handbook is also available on the IFAD site 
http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm.   
As stated in the LTB and the LDH, four standard disbursement procedures may be used for 
withdrawal of financing: 
Procedure I 
255. 
Advance withdrawal (using imprest accounts or revolving funds with replenishment 
to a bank account(s) designated to receive financing resources in advance). This modality 
is used to advance and/or replenish funds to a bank account as designated by the 
borrower. The Fund may place a limit on the amount to be advanced and/or replenished. 
Relevant details on the modality – which is project specific – are agreed between the 
borrower and the Fund, and detailed in the LTB. 
Procedure II 
Direct payment. This modality is used for eligible project expenditures to be paid directly by 
IFAD, generally for large contracts, to suppliers, contractors, consultants or third parties, as 
authorized by   
Procedure III 
  Reimbursement. This  is  applicable  when  eligible  project  expenditures,  reimbursable  under 
the financing, have been pre-financed by the borrower. Such reimbursements are expected to 
be claimed no later than 90 calendar days from the date of payment by the borrower. 
7.1 Evidence of Authority to Sign Withdrawal Applications 
256. 
The Fund requires the borrower’s (or recipient’s) representative, as designated in the 
financing agreement, to furnish satisfactory evidence of the authority and 
authenticated specimen signatures of the individuals who will sign WAs on 
of the borrower. This evidence must reach the Fund before the first WA is 
presented by the borrower and should be the original (photocopies, facsimiles or other 
means of transmission are not acceptable). A sample template is provided in annex 1 of 
the disbursement handbook. Each WA should be signed by such duly authorized 
individuals, and the Fund must be notified of any change in the signatories authorized to 
withdraw funds from the loan/grant account.   
behalf 
173 
PIM Y2RRDP 
The  Fund  must  also  be  notified  of  the  designated  signatories  for  operating  any  designated 
and/or  programme  or  other  accounts,  including  changes  thereto,  whether  or  not  these 
authorized  signatories  are  included  in  the  financing  agreement.  Such  changes,  as  effected 
during  the  life  of  the  project,  must  be  communicated  promptly  to  the  Fund. The  borrower, 
guided by the sample in annex 1 of the disbursement handbook, should provide the names and 
specimen signatures of the newly appointed signatories and include the date when such change 
is to take effect. The original of such changed documentary evidence is to be provided to the 
Fund.   
7.2 The Designated Account 
257. 
The flow of funds for the Project starts with the opening of the project Designated 
Account (DA), denominated in the currency    of the loan (USD/EURO) through which 
IFAD funding shall be channelled. The DA is to be set up at and managed by DOF. The 
FM is responsible for opening and managing the Designated Account including receiving 
on a monthly basis the DA Statement of Account from the bank and reconciling it against 
PPMO records. Disbursements from the DA should be recorded in the PPMO account 
records as of the date they are made, that is when the checks are issued. 
7.3    Withdrawal of Financing Proceeds and Supporting Documentation 
258. 
Based on the Letter to the Borrower and the Disbursement Handbook, the 
withdrawal of all Project financing proceeds (direct payments to contractors from IFAD, 
and to reimbursements and replenishments to the designated account) is done through the 
use of Withdrawal Applications (WA) -form 100 in the disbursement handbook.   
259. 
It is the FMs and the DFM’s responsibility to make sure that the WAs are correctly 
prepared, the documentation is complete and submitted to IFAD in a timely manner.   
The necessary forms and supporting documentation to be attached to the WA (form 100) 
are outlined in detail for each disbursement method in section 3 of the Disbursement 
Handbook 
260. 
Upon Project entry into force and after sending to IFAD, the letter designating the 
two officials authorized to sign Withdrawal Applications (WA) with their names and 
specimen signatures, the FM will prepare the first Withdrawal application together with 
the necessary supporting documentation requesting the IFAD to transfer an initial 
advance to the designated account up to a ceiling of USD xxxxxxxxxxxxx. Disbursement 
from the DA may then start for eligible expenditures under the Project.   
174 
PIM Y2RRDP 
(Chart 10: Withdrawal of IFAD Funds) 
261. 
For the subsequent WAs, prepared by the DFM, the financial must ensure that the 
right supporting documentation is attached to the WAs before providing clearance. When 
submitted supporting documentation to IFAD    should be copies the while the original 
documentation is to be retained by the PMU/LPA and securely located to enable 
inspection by IFAD representatives and auditors for a period of at least 10 after the 
project completion date in accordance with the IFAD General conditions. 
262. 
As specified in chapter 3 of the IFAD disbursement handbook, for    all payments ( 
Works, goods, consultants’ and other    services) the following supporting documentation 
is required:   
a)  The signed contract or confirmed purchase order (Showing the specified amount that is due 
paid.  If  this  has  been  sent  earlier  to  the  fund  a  reference  to  the  accompanying  letter  or 
document should be given in a footnote to the relevant Application summary Sheet –form 
100) 
b)  The bank guarantee for advance payment, as specified in the contract documents 
c)  The bank guarantee for performance, as specified in the contract documents 
d)  Copies  of  communications  sent  by  the  IFAD  country  programme  manager  to  the  lead 
project agency  (LPA)  providing  the  IFAD’s  no  objection (post  or  Prior)  to the contract 
award, and   
e)  Evidence of payment. 
For payments of goods, in addition to a-e: 
f)  Supplier’s  invoice  duly  certified  for  payment  by  the  PD  –  specifying  the  goods,  their 
quantities and prices 
175 
PIM Y2RRDP 
g)  Bills of lading or similar documents; and   
h)  As appropriate, the certificate of delivery (to include condition of goods to delivery) 
For Payments of Consultants’ and other services, in addition to a-e: 
i)  The supplier’s or consultant’s claim, duly certified for payment by the PD and showing 
sufficient detail. If such Services relate to the importation of goods (for example, freight 
and insurance payments), adequate reference should be given to enable IFAD to relate each 
of these items to specific goods whose cost has been or is to be financed by the financing 
closing date; and   
j)  As a appropriate, a certificate of delivery of satisfactory services 
For progress and retention payments of civil works in addition a-e: 
k)  the claim if the contractor, including a financial progress report, stating the work performed 
and the amount due; 
l)  A certificate-signed by the project consultants or owner’s representative, if any, or by the 
borrower’s  chief  engineering  officer  or  resident  supervising  engineer  assigned  to  the 
project, to the effect that the work performed is satisfactory and the payment claimed is due 
in accordance with the terms of the contract, and   
m)  A copy of the contract payment monitoring form signed in original by the certifying officer. 
263. 
Together with each WA received for replenishment to the designated account, the 
project must submit the designated account reconciliation Statement, prepared by the 
DFM for the same reporting period in which the eligible expenditures are being claimed. 
This form needs to be accompanied by bank statements of the designated account and that 
of any other operating, district, project accounts ensuring that the closing bank balances 
for all these accounts correspond to the balances at the end of the same reporting period 
as indicated in the WA period. 
In order to minimize transaction costs, the FM must make sure that withdrawals from the loan 
and/or grant account shall be made in amounts of no less than US$ xxxxxxx or its equivalent, 
or such other amount as IFAD may designate in an advice to the borrower from time to time. 
7.4 Use of Statements of Expenditures (SOE) and SEO Thresholds 
264. 
The statement of expenditure (SOE) procedure is normally used for those 
expenditure types where it is impracticable or unduly burdensome to require submission 
of full documentation. However, the supporting documentations for the Statements Of 
Expenditures must    be maintained by the PMO/LPA and made available for review by 
IFAD supervision missions upon request and to external auditors during their annual 
review of project accounts to enable issuing of an independent audit opinion.   
Details regarding the use of the Statement of Expenditure (SOE) are provided in section 4 of 
the disbursement handbook. In accordance with the Letter to the Borrower the SOE threshold 
applies for all project expenditures up to a threshold of USD 300 000.   
The SOE thresholds above may be amended by the Fund during the course of project implementation.   
8.0 Processing of payments 
265. 
The Project will mainly finance, small works (rural roads, irrigation infrastructure 
etc.), consultants' services (design, supervision and studies), goods (office supplies, 
computers, cars), microfinance in the form of grants and credit as well as PMU operating 
costs (salaries, travel expenditures etc.). Last section outlined how the PMU will receive 
funds from IFAD to cover the incurred expenditures related. This section will outline the 
176 
PIM Y2RRDP 
different steps involved in the outflow of funds from the PMU to the Contractors, 
Suppliers, and Consultants etc. The procurement process of these items, including the 
hiring process for consultants is detailed in the project procurement manual. 
8.1 General instructions 
266. 
For all payments, the FM should ensure that the following steps are performed: 
i) 
ii) 
Preparation  of  Payment  request  voucher.    A  payment  request  voucher  should  be 
prepared for each payment.   
Validation of invoice. The following validation checks should be performed by the FM 
on invoice: 
 
Invoice arithmetically correct; and 
  Quantity  and  price  recorded  on  invoice  should  be  checked  back  to  contract,  order, 
certification of completion/delivery 
If there is any discrepancy identified, it should be raised with the vendor prior to proceeding 
with invoice processing, 
iii) 
Supporting  documentation:    the  following  documents  should  be  attached  to  the 
payment voucher to support validation: 
  Copy of invoice;   
  Copy of letter of approval from technical committee or the specialist, minister; 
  Copy of purchase order, goods received note and contract if applicable; and 
  Copy of required guarantees   
All vouchers are authorized by the Minister after signatures of the FM, PD the and Director 
General of the LPA 
8.2 Processing of payments for Civil Works and Goods 
267. 
Project will incur expenditures related to works under Componenet 1; Climate 
sensitive investments and capacity building      in the form of rural roads, irrigation 
infrastructure etc. and goods    under components 01, Sub-component 1.2. Investing in 
climate resilient infrastructure 3 (Project Management) in the form of    fixed assets. 
The Expenditure Cycle for works and goods is detailed in the following chart: 
177 
PIM Y2RRDP 
(Chart 12: Processing of payments for Works and Goods) 
268. 
Before releasing the payment to the contractor or supplier, the FM will make sure the 
following processes are followed:   
A.  The quantity of goods is checked back to the purchase order and to contract and bid 
award  letter  (if  applicable).  The  committee  members,  assigned  by  steering 
committee/LPA after being assured that quality of goods is compliant with the contract 
conditions deliver an accepted delivery sheet or a compliant report to the Procurement 
Officer. The FM will ensure that the Procurement Officer provides all the necessary 
documents  including  the  invoice  and  the  acceptance/compliant  report  before 
proceeding with the payment.   
B.  The  condition  of  the  goods  are  reviewed  for  any  damage  or  impairments.  Damaged 
goods are to be identified and returned to the supplier/replaced. If any goods are rejected 
or returned to the supplier because they are not as ordered or are of sub-standard quality, 
the  FM  should  be  notified.  FM  must  keep  a  central  record  of  all  goods  returned  to 
suppliers  and  maintain  a  separate  record  of  all  goods  and  equipment  delivered  by 
suppliers by contracts funded by the IFAD financing. 
C.  All the works, are to be monitored by an architect or engineer. It is good practise to 
assign the architect/engineer responsible for the design to monitor and assess the works 
of  the  contractor.    The  architect  or  engineer  is  responsible  for  sending  compliant 
reports/certificate of completion to the Procurement Officer in the PMU which includes 
the percentage of completion of the construction and if the construction materials are 
compliant with the contract conditions and specifications.    A request for payment is 
prepared by the Procurement Officer to be send to the FM. The FM will ensure that the 
payment  request  includes all the necessary documents including  the invoice and the 
compliant reports/certificate of completion before proceeding with the payment to the 
contractor for the completed phase.   
178 
PIM Y2RRDP 
8.3 Processing of payments    for Consultants' Services 
269. 
Under the Project there are two types of consultants' services; a) Consultants with a lump sum 
contract, and b) Consultants with a time based contract. For type (a) consultants, payments will be 
made against the delivery of outputs as detailed in their contracts. For type (b) consultants, 
payments will be made against the submission of a time sheet and a summary of activities 
performed. PMU members will be paid against the submission of a monthly time sheet. The 
Expenditure Cycle for type (a) consultants is detailed in the following chart: 
(Chart 13: Processing of Payments for consultants - type A)     
The Expenditure Cycle for type (b) consultants is detailed in the following chart: 
(Chart 14: Processing of Payments for consultants - type B)     
179 
PIM Y2RRDP 
270. 
Before  releasing  the  payment  to  the  consultant  (firms),  the  FM  will  undertake  the 
following steps: 
A)  The consulting services reports are monitored by technical committees, assigned by the 
steering committee/LPA for the purpose of evaluating the deliverables submitted by the 
consultant (firms). Therefore the FM will ensure that no payment to the consultant is 
prepared    unless an approved committee report or letter of approval received from the 
committee assures that the deliverable submitted by the consultant is compliant with 
the  contract  conditions,  these  documents  should  be  passed  first  through  the 
Procurement Officer. 
B)  The consulting services reports are monitored by the specialist responsible for the activity for 
the purpose of evaluating the deliverables submitted by the consultant (Individual Consultant). 
Therefore  the  FM  will  ensure  that  no  payment  to  the  consultant  is  prepared    unless  an 
approved  report  received  from  the  specialist  assures  that  this  report  is  compliant  with  the 
contract terms and conditions, these documents should be passed first through the procurement 
officer. 
All Supporting Documents and Internal Forms must be retained at the PMU Office in the LPA and 
must be maintained and archived in accordance with the maintenance of records section of this manual.   
8.4    Processing of Payments for    Office Supplies and Other Operating Costs 
271. 
The payment for office supplies and operating cost will be against the preparation by the 
procurement officer of a serially numbered checklist evidencing the receipt of office supplies, and 
the presentation of the Purchase order and supplier invoice. The FM will compare the information 
on the checklist to the purchase order and supplier invoice, then sign the checklist. The payment 
for services is against the presentation by the supplier performing the service of a service invoice.   
At the end of each month, the FM will prepare a serially numbered "List of Payments" that detail all 
the incurred costs for office supplies and operating costs during the month and present it to the PD for 
review and authorization. After the PD's authorization of the payments, the FM will prepare the checks 
and send them to the PD who will prepare an "Internal Memorandum" detailing the check numbers, 
amounts, suppliers and explanation of payments. The "Internal Memorandum" and the checks will be 
presented to the Minister of Finance and his Advisor to approve the payments and sign the checks. 
The following chart summarizes the process detailed above: 
180 
PIM Y2RRDP 
(Chart 15: Processing of Payments for Office supplies and operating costs)     
8.6 Travel Arrangements & Processing of Travel Related Expenditures 
272. 
Under the Project there is a budget allocated for workshops and study tours as well as staff 
training courses. The following chart summarizes the transaction cycle that should be followed to 
get approval for the travel and the expenditures related to it: 
(Chart 16: Processing of Payments for Travel and Training)     
9.0 Financial Reporting 
273. 
Periodic financial progress reports are a formal requirement of the IFAD Financing 
Agreement. Sufficient information must be made available about what money is spent on, 
how much is spent and what the results are. The major financial reports include the 
following: AWPB, monthly financial reports, periodic financial progress reports, 
supervision reports, annual financial statements and audit reports.   
181 
PIM Y2RRDP 
(Chart 17: Project    Financial reporting cycle) 
In addition to the AWPB, supervision reports and audit reports (discussed in detail in section 2, 
11 and 12 of this manual), the FM will ensure that the following financial reports are prepared 
in a timely manner and submitted to IFAD in due time (applicable to reports 2-4 only): 
1.  Monthly financial reports for PPMO internal use only. These reports will be verified during IFAD 
supervision missions.   
2.  Periodic  (semi-annual)  progress  reports,  to  be  provided  to  IFAD  within  45  days  after  the 
reporting period 
3.  Annual financial statements, to be provided to IFAD within 4 months after the end of the project 
fiscal year. 
4.  Annual financial statements audited by an independent auditor acceptable to the    Fund and in 
accordance with internationally accepted auditing standards and terms of reference cleared by 
IFAD, to be provided to IFAD within 6 months after the project fiscal year (explained in detail 
in section 11).   
9.1 Monthly Reports 
274. 
In accordance with best practises, the FM will prepare monthly financial reports   
based on the accounting system to aid management decision and control. The monthly 
management accounts will include the following. 
  Monthly  Budget  Execution  Report,  summarising  the  budget-actual  comparison  of  the 
expenditures incurred, component-wise and category-wise. The report will also include a list of 
commitments entered into and still to be paid, by component and by category.   
  Bank  Reconciliation  Statement  (please  refer  to  annex  XIII  or  form  104  of  the  Disbursement 
handbook) 
  Petty Cash reconciliation form   
Please see a sample of the above mentioned report in annex V   
182 
PIM Y2RRDP 
9.2 Periodic Progress Reports 
275. 
Semi-annual progress reports should be submitted to IFAD no later than 45 days 
after the end of reporting period during the programme implementation period. 
The importance of the periodic progress reports lies in the fact that they provide IFAD with 
sufficient information to determine whether the funds disbursed to the project are being used 
as intended, the project implementation is on track and the budgeted costs will not be exceeded. 
The  financial  information  should  be  linked  to  the  information  on  physical  progress  and 
procurement to give assurance that the financial and physical progress are consistent. 
The Periodic Progress Reports include the following: 
• 
  Project Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments by Category: This report summarizes the 
sources  of  project  financing,  with  the  uses  of  funds  in  accordance  with  the  disbursement 
categories  foreseen  in  the  Financing  agreement  with  the  Fund.  This  report  also  states  the 
cumulative expenditures from the start of the project until the date of the report as well as the 
cash flow forecast for the following semi-annual period. The automated accounting system has 
been talor made to generate the report with all required details.   
The standard format for the presentation of this report is provided in Annex VI: Table 1. 
  Uses  of  Funds  by  Project  category:  This  report  details  the  project  expenditures  by  each 
expenditure category or sub category and by financier. 
A sample of a    Uses of Funds by Project category is provided in Annex VI: Table 2 
•  Uses  of  Funds  by  Project  Activity:  This  report  details  the  project  expenditures  by  each 
component or sub-component consistent with those foreseen in the Financing Agreement. The 
total  planned,  actual  and  cumulative  expenditures  in  this  report  should  correspond  to  those 
mentioned  in  the  uses  of  funds  section  of  the  “Sources  and  Uses  of  Funds”  report  presented 
above.   
  A sample format for this report is provided in Annex VI: Table 3 
•  Cash flow forecast: This report summarizes the cash inflow and outflow for the following semi-
annual period and is explained in detail in section 9.3.   
A sample of a Cash Flow Forecast is provided in Annex VI: Table 4 
•  Designated Account Reconciliation Statement   
Please  refer  to  annex  XIII  (also  form  104  of  the  Disbursement  handbook)  for  a  standard 
Designated Account Reconciliation Statement. 
•  SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement: This report summarizes the claimed and received 
WA from IFAD during the reporting period. 
A sample of a SOE-WA statement is provided in Annex VI: Table 5 
•  Contract Expenditures: This report details all the contracts signed and amounts paid during the 
quarter by category.   
183 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  A sample format for this report is provided in Annex VI: Table 6 
•  Physical progress report: This report summarizes the quantitative physical progress made in 
achieving  overall  objectives  and  links  them  to  project  expenditures  by  component  and  by 
category. This report should also contain a narrative part on the strategic direction for the next 
planning cycle as well as the main financial problems encountered. 
  A sample format for this report is provided in Annex VI: Table 7 
9.3 Cash Flow Forecast 
276. 
Preparing periodic cash flow forecasts is essential to ensure the project has sufficient 
funds to meet its commitments (expenditures to contractors, service providers, suppliers 
of goods, salaries of the PMU staff, operating and maintenance cost of the PMU such as 
rent, electricity, internet etc.) as they fall due. It is the FMs responsibility to prepare 
periodic cash flow forecasts by undertaking the following steps: 
1.  Determining the opening balance of the time period 
2.  Determine (as accurately as possible) all the cash inflow already secured from different 
sources during the time period on a monthly basis. 
3.  Determine (as accurately as possible) all the payments due during the time period on a 
monthly basis.   
4.  Based on the calculation (steps 1-3) determine the estimated cash need for time period 
in question. 
When preparing the cash-flow analysis, key sources for information include the AWPB (up-
to-date), the procurement plan (up-to-date), disbursement timetable of all signed contracts 
and historic expense reports for PMU management costs as these can be assumed to stay 
relatively constant over the implementation period. 
Based on the estimated cash flow needs, the FM in consultation with the PD will prepare 
an submit for approval the required withdrawal applications in a timely manner in order to 
ensure sufficient liquidity and avoid any delays to the project implementation.           
Sample of a cash flow forecast is provided in annex VI, Table 4. 
9.4 Annual Financial Statements and Audit Reports 
277. 
IFAD requires that the financial statements are prepared in accordance with IFRS/IPSAS or 
IPSAS cash. (National Standards are also acceptable as long as they meet the minimum 
requirements) and that the annual statements are provided to IFAD within four months after the 
end of the fiscal year.    In accordance with the Project Design Report, the project will prepare it 
financial statements in accordance with IPSAS cash. 
The project financial statements should include the following information: 
  Project Information and performance,   
  Statement of project management responsibilities,   
  Statement of cash receipts and payments (by category and by financier),   
184 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  Statement of cash receipts and payments (by component),   
  Statement of comparative budget and actual amount,   
  Statement of Special Account movements,   
  Statement of Special Account Reconciliations,   
  SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement and Notes to the Financial Statements. 
  A sample of financial statements are provided in annex XV .   
  It  is  important  to  note  that  IFAD  financing  proceeds  should  be  disclosed  separately  form  the  other 
financiers (donors, government, beneficiaries etc.). It is also important to note that where the project 
consists of more than one entity the lead-PMU must provide consolidated financial statements. 
10.0 Fixed Asset Management 
278. 
Fixed asset management is an important process that seeks to track fixed assets for the 
purposes of financial accounting and to ensure preventive maintenance, and theft deterrence. 
Adequate Fixed asset maintenance also increases the sustainability of the project. 
There are three elements in fixed asset management that require the attention of the FM   
  Purchase of equipment 
  Setting up and maintaining an asset register including verification 
  Setting up a plan for disposal and/or handover of the asset once the project is completed   
10.1 Purchase of Equipment 
279. 
All procurement and payments for project equipment will be processed in line with the 
guidance provided in the procurement section of the PIM. The DFM financial officer should assign 
a unique, sequential asset number to all furniture and equipment items purchased (excluding minor 
items such as stationary).This must be clearly labelled on each item. Each item of equipment must 
be recorded in the fixed asset register 
10.2 Asset Register 
280. 
The DFM must maintain a register of all (material) project equipment. This will be recorded 
on the asset management module of the accounting software. The asset register should record the 
following information for each individual piece of equipment: 1) Asset description, 2) Asset 
number, 3) Serial number of the item, 4) Officer responsible for asset, 5) Funding of asset (IFAD, 
government etc..), 6) Location; Date of purchase; and 7) Estimated life. The     
  A sample of a fixed asset register is provided in annex VII. 
185 
PIM Y2RRDP 
10.3 Asset Verification Review 
281. 
The FM must ensure that    a verification count of all equipment recorded in the fixed asset 
register    is performed at least once a year. This should include the following checks: 
  Verify that all equipment is still held in the location recorded on the register; and 
  Check that equipment is still in a reasonable state of repair. 
  Discrepancies  between  the  verification  exercise  and  the  fixed  asset  register  should  be 
investigated. Where assets are missing or seriously damaged, they should be removed from 
the asset register. The removal should be formally documented and approved by the financial 
officer and by the LPA. 
The  verification  review  must  be  performed  by  different  staff  from  those  who  use  the  equipment,  to 
ensure adequate segregation of duty. 
10.4 Vehicle Maintenance and Fuel 
282. 
The drivers are required to record all trips and fuel refills in a logbook and collect all the 
supporting documentation (invoices etc.). The vehicle logbook provides control over the use of the 
cars as well as fuel consumption. Fuel distribution is handled by the DFM. Fuel is purchased on an 
as-needed basis by giving coupons to the drivers who must use the selected fuel station. The PMU 
is billed by the station twice a month. Unused coupons are kept in the office safe in the custody of 
the DFM. For official missions, a special cash provision is given to mission leaders to allow them 
to purchase fuel (at reputable gas stations) during the trip.   
The safety of cars is the responsibility of the recipient staff members and drivers assigned to the 
vehicles. Consequently, they must ensure that the cars are parked in a secure area when not in use or 
outside working hours. The drivers are required to monitor the maintenance of their assigned vehicles 
under the supervision of the PMU. The drivers must notify the PMU of maintenance needs so that the 
cars can be serviced on a timely basis. The cars must always be taken to the selected PMU garage for 
repairs and maintenance 
The DFM should on a monthly basis review the mileage and fuel usage as well as any undertaken 
service as reported in the log book of each car and compare these with the official invoices and travel 
authorizations etc. to make sure the numbers are accurate.   
An insurance policy must be taken by the PMU to ensure all cars    and passengers against all risks, 
including damage, theft, fire, as well as injury and property damage to third parties. The insurance must 
also  cover  the  same  risks  when  the  cars  are  used  by  the  recipient  staff  members  outside  of  normal 
working hours. 
  A sample of a vehicle log and vehicle history record log is provided in annex IX A & B. 
11.0 Audit Arrangements 
283. 
The project audit is an ex-post review of financial statements, records of transactions 
& financial systems; It examines the adequacy of accounting systems & procedures, 
capacity to maintain appropriate accounts & documentation of the project/grant 
expenditures. The objective of the project audit is to provide credibility and assurance of 
accountability. 
186 
PIM Y2RRDP 
The auditing is conducted by the DAO which is constituted as an independent body under the 
National Audit Office (NAO) and responsible for the audit for all IFIs projects in China. The 
Provincial Audit Office will be delegated to be responsible for auditing the project. PAO    has 
rich experiences with WB, ADB and IFAD project auditing. The audited financial statements 
and a detailed audit report along with a Management Letter not later than six months after the 
end of each financial year. 
IFAD will publicly disclose project financial statements and audit reports of projects financed 
by  IFAD.  In  line  with  the  standards  of  the  International  Aid  Transparency  Initiative,  the 
government is encouraged to publish relevant financial information on their own websites, for 
increased  accountability.  The  audit  TORs  shall  explicitly  mention  the  right  of 
  the   
borrower/recipient  and    of    IFAD    to    publish    the    audit    report,    with    no 
limitation-of-use clause. 
The Audited financial statements need to be sent to IFAD no later than 6 months after the end 
of  the  fiscal  year. The  detailed  instruction  regarding  project  audit  are  outlined  in  the  IFAD 
guidelines for project audits available at http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm 
11.1 The Audit Cycle and Appointing the Auditor 
284. 
The complete audit cycle can be divided into the three main roles carried out by the 
FM/PPMO, the Auditor and IFAD. 
The PPMO and the financial officer will: 
  Timely prepare TORs of the Audit and submit these to the Fund for no objection,   
  manage the selection process of the auditor (if relevant)   
  and appoints the auditor. 
  Prepare the financial statements for reporting period   
  Make available all the financial information necessary to the auditors.   
 
  Submit the audit report to the fund no later than 6 months  after the end of the 
  should respond to the audit findings and recommendations. 
project fiscal year. 
The Auditor will: 
  perform the audit work including the the audit opinion 
 
  Provide a management letter 
Indicate any ineligible expenditures 
The Fund will: 
  Provide a non objection to the auditors TORs 
  Monitor timely submission and review of audit reports 
  Follow  up  on  remedial  action\apply  sanction  and  /or  remedies  if  relevant 
including suspension of disbursement and or cancellation of loan balance (Legal 
Notice is sent to the LPA    after 3 months of delay. Suspension of disbursement 
to the project after 6 months delay.) 
187 
PIM Y2RRDP 
(Chart 18:    Project Audit cycle) 
285.  When appointing the auditor the financial officer will need to ensure that the 
following steps are followed:   
a)  Financial Officer/PPMO prepares TORs for the auditor and sends it to IFAD for 
review and no-objection.   
b)  IFAD communicates “no objection” to borrower. 
c)  Financial  Officer/  PPMO  r  initiates  the  procurement  process  using  the  agreed 
TORs. 
d)  Financial Officer/ PPMO informs IFAD of the name of proposed auditor and the 
procurement process followed for the selection. 
e)  IFAD  communicates  “no  objection”  to  borrower  on  the  selection  of  proposed 
auditor upon performance of the necessary due diligence. 
f)  Financial Officer/ PPMO    appoints the auditor. 
g)  The auditor appointed normally issues a formal engagement letter   
11.2. TORs of the Auditors and the Engagement letter 
286.  When preparing auditors TORs the financial officer should address the point 
outlined below:   
a)  Description of the employing project authority or entity; 
b)  Term of the auditor’s engagement, namely whether it is for a fiscal year or some 
c)  other period; 
d)  Description and the timing of the financial statements  and other material  to  be 
provided by project management for the audit; 
e)  Terms for delivery of the audit report; 
f)  Specification  that  the  audit  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  internationally 
accepted auditing standards; 
g)  Provision of a management letter; 
h)  Statement of access to project records, documents and personnel available to the 
auditor;     
i)  Details regarding submission of a proposal and work plan by the auditor. 
Furthermore, the contents of the TORS should include: 
188 
PIM Y2RRDP 
a)  A description in  the TORs of the  entity  engaging the auditor and whether it is 
acting on behalf of or is a constituent part of a larger entity 
b)  Legal and general descriptions of the project and the LPA, in sufficient detail to 
enable the auditor to understand their nature, objectives and activities. 
287. 
The following additional information should also be considered: 
c)  Organizational charts; 
d)  Names and titles of senior managers; 
e)  Names  and  qualifications  of  officers  responsible  for  financial  management, 
accounting and internal audit; 
f)  name and address of any existing external auditor, if a change is made; 
g)  Description of information technology facilities and computer systems in use; 
h)  and 
i)  Copies  of  the  latest  financial  statements,  financing  agreement,  minutes  of 
financing  negotiations,  project  design  document,  and  annual  work  programme 
and budget, if it is available. 
The auditors are required to provide a formal engagement letter confirming their acceptance of 
the appointment and outlining the methodology, scope and responsibilities under the audit. The 
borrower’s representative will sign and return a copy of the letter to the auditor. 
    A sample of an engagement letter is provided in annex V of the IFAF guidelines for 
project audits. 
11.3 The Audit Report 
288. 
The Audit Report must include the following elements which should also be 
reflected in the auditor’s TORs: 
  An opinion on the Project’s financial statements 
 
In addition to the audit report, the independent auditor will prepare a management letter. 
This  will  include  comment  and  recommendations  on  the  adequacy  of  the  financial 
management  system,  and  on  the  system  of  internal  control.  The  management  letter 
should also  include a follow up section on the status  of implementation  of previous 
years recommendations 
12.0 IFAD Supervision 
289. 
The project will be subject to extensive supervision from IFAD during the whole 
implementation period to ensure that the PMU fiduciary requirements are completed on 
time and to minimise the project’s fiduciary risk.   
If financial arrangements of the PMU are deemed acceptable, IFAD will rely on them to 
provide assurance that the financing proceeds are being used for the intended purposes. In the 
case  that    IFAD  identifies  weaknesses  in  the  financial  arrangements,  it  will  require  the 
189 
PIM Y2RRDP 
PMU/LPA to take the appropriate measures to mitigate those risks e.g. changing the design and 
operation  of  internal  control  processes  or  modifying  the  disbursement  arrangements  for  an 
operation.   
The IFAD supervision of the project includes the following measures: 
  Monitor of timely submission of    audit reports and review of these reports 
  Verify  compliance  to  audit  recommendations  and  recommendations  made  by  past 
supervision missions. 
  Monitor the submission of timely periodic financial reports and review of these reports 
  Monitor disbursements rate and the quality of the received Withdrawal Applications 
  Annual or semi-annual financial management supervision missions. 
12.1 Supervision missions by the Fund 
290. 
Throughout project implementation, IFAD will conduct annual financial supervisory 
missions    to develop financial management ratings and ensure compliance with the 
IFAD’s requirements. During the supervisory missions, IFAD will assess and monitor the 
adequacy of the PMU/LPA financial management arrangements such as accounting, 
budgeting, internal controls, flow of funds, financial reporting and the auditing practices. 
The key findings and recommendations of the mission will be captured in the Aid 
Memoire. 
291.  When preparing for and during an IFAD supervisions mission, the necessary 
supporting actions by the FM will include the following: 
 
  Update and make available for the mission, the project financial information and especially 
the incurred expenditures by component, by category and by financier as of the last day of the 
preceding month.   
  Please refer to annex XI for the financial tables required for the aid memoire   
  Update  and  make  available  reports  on  the  status  of  counterpart  funding  (has  the 
Borrower/Lead  Project Agency  made  available  financing  proceeds  to  the  Project  as 
planned?     
  Provide a walkthrough of the existing accounting system including its main modules, 
budgeting, accounting, financial reports, fixed asset register as well as the    security 
settings in use. 
  Facilitate checking of the internal controls, by system  “walk through” to  ensure that 
approved procedures are consistently being followed.   
190 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  Make available Withdrawal Applications, Statement of Expenditures and all supporting 
documentation regarding expenditures claimed under the SOE thresholds to facilitate   
the verifying of adequacy, completeness and validity of claims.   
  Make available evidence of qualifications and educational background of the financial 
staff including, organogram of the PMU, CVs, TORs of each position and PMU training 
plan.   
  Update and make available a complete a fixed asset register and facilitate sample test 
check of physical existence of the asset. 
  Make available written procedures regarding financial operations such as processing of 
transactions,  financial  administration  manual,  accounting  manual,  fixed  asset 
maintenance  and  records  management  as  well  as  the  lead  project  agency’s 
anticorruption policy and whistle blowing procedures. 
  Prepare and make available the updated bank account reconciliation statement and bank 
account statements for all designated and project accounts. 
  Arrange meeting with the auditors and any other selected party requested by the mission. 
  Make available all necessary documentation and contracts regarding procurement not 
subject to prior review. 
  Provide an update on the actions taken regarding    past audit recommendations as well 
as action points    outlined in the past aide memoires. 
  Make available the most recent AWPBs, annual and semi-annual reports   
  Participate in report writing if necessary. 
13.0 Loan completion and Closing 
292. 
The closing of the loan/grant is due six months after the project completion date. Both 
the completion and the closing date of the loan have financial implications on the project 
management such as: development and submission of a recovery plan, ensuring eligibility 
of expenditures and submission  of the necessary documents outlined below.  Please also 
refer to section 1.3 of the Disbursement Handbook.     
13.1 Recovery plan 
293. 
To ensure that the designated account is completely and timely justified, the financial 
officer/PMU has to develop and submit to the Fund a so called recovery plan outlining the 
percentages  per  withdrawal  application  that  will  recovered  and  paid  respectively.  The 
recovery plan should be submitted to the fund around 6 months before the completion date 
or when the outstanding balance (amount still undisbursed by IFAD is less than the double 
of the authorized allocation.   
191 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Please refer to annex XII for    a sample recovery plan. 
13.2 Loan Completion 
294. 
As  defined  in  the  Financing  agreement  the  completion  date  of  the  loan  its  6th 
anniversary;  that  is  six  years  after  it  entered  into  force.  By  the  completion  date  all  the 
project  activities  must  have  been  finalised.  The  payments  can  be  done  also  after  the 
completion date, as long as the commitments/ contracts are signed prior to the completion 
date.  Activities  that  have  continued  after  the  completion  date  are  not  considered  as 
ineligible expenditures and can therefore not be financed by the IFAD funds.   
295. 
After  the  completion  date  but  no  later  than  the  closing  date  (six  months  after  the 
completion  date)  the  PMU  can  still  incur  expenditures  related  to  so  called  winding  up 
expenditures e.g. Final Audit, Project completion report, Project staff salaries involved in 
the winding up activities, PMU maintenance cost, project completion workshop. 
13.3 Loan Closure 
296. 
The Fund requires the following to be provided by the PMU in order to close the loan: 
  Confirmation of last withdrawal application 
  Submission of final audit report 
  Submission of project completion report 
The Final Audit Report has to cover, the final project year up to the final expenditures and 
it  can    be  paid  from  the  loan  available  balance  by  using  for  example  direct  payment  or 
Reimbursement of pre financed expenditures.   
Annexes: 
Annex I: Sample Job descriptions related to Financial Management and    Administration 
Annex II: Sample Annual Work Plan and Budget   
Annex III: Sample chart of account   
Annex IV: Sample TORs for an accounting software 
Annex V: Sample Monthly Budget Execution Report   
Annex VI: Sample Periodic Financial Progress Report   
Table 1: Sample Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments by Category     
Table 2: Financial performance per expenditure category and    financier 
Table 3: Financial performance per component and per financier 
Table 4: Project Cash Flow Forecast 
Table 5: SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement. 
Table 6: Signed Contract Listing 
Table 7: Physical Progress Report 
Annex VII: Fixed asset register 
Annex VIII A: Petty Cash Request Form 
Annex VIII B: Petty Cash Reconciliation Form 
Annex IX A: Vehicle Log 
192 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex IX B: Vehicle History Record 
Annex X : Sample Terms of Reference for the Audit of Project 
Annex XI: Required Aide Memoire tables for IFAD Supervision missions   
Table 1:    Cumulative expenditures by component and Financier - 
Table 2: Budgeted Expenditures and Performance against previous year’s    AWPB   
Table 3A: Financial performance by financier   
Table 3 B. Financial performance by financier by component   
Table 3 C: Expenditures by category   
Annex XII: Sample recovery plan  
Annex XIII: Designated account reconciliation statement (Imprest account ) 
Annex XIV: Checklist for Withdrawal Application 
Annex XV: Sample of financial statements   
Annex  I:  Sample  Job  descriptions  related 
Administration 
to  Financial  Management  and   
A.  PD 
297. 
Responsible for all aspects of IFAD projects implementation under direct supervision 
of the Steering Committee and the Lead Project Agency. Specific duties: 
  Plan, organize and coordinate project implementation in line with rules and regulations and 
provisions of the loan/grant agreements. 
  Elaborate  and  review  project  documents  as  well  as  IFAD  standard  procurement  and 
disbursement documents. 
  Organize, coordinate, monitor, and control the work plan, budget and procurement plan to 
ensure delivery of project outputs. 
  Ensure the efficient management of project resources in a transparent manner. 
  Supervise  project  disbursement,  accounting  and  financial  management  and  ensure 
eligibility of funds use in accordance with the loan/grant agreements. 
  Ensure that procurement of goods, services and works is carried out according to project 
design and IFAD procedures. 
  Manage  the  PMU  staff  to  ensure  efficiency,  including  appraising  their  performance 
annually. 
  Communicate  the  projects’  objectives  and  components,  to  target  groups  including 
stakeholders to ensure sustainability and ownership of the project. 
  Assess  qualifications  and  pre-qualifications  of  implementing  partners,  consultants,  and 
contractors that may be selected for project implementation. 
  Negotiate contractual arrangements with various implementing partners and contractors. 
  Evaluate  performance  of  implementation  by  governmental  and  non-governmental 
implementing partners, consultants and contractors. 
  Prepare agreements with beneficiaries, stipulating the conditions of their participation. 
  Ensure  a  close  cooperation  and  coordination  with  other  national  and  international 
development partners at national and district level. 
  Update the Project Implementation Manual if and when necessary, 
  Prepare quarterly and annual reports to IFAD, the steering committee and LPA as well as 
other stakeholders (if any). 
  Develop and maintain a M&E and MIS to monitor project progress and performance. 
  Ensure full compliance with directives issued by the Project Steering Committee and the 
LPA . 
193 
PIM Y2RRDP 
B.  FM 
298. 
Under the direct supervision of the PD , and within the framework of projects 
appraisal reports and loan/grant agreements, responsible for the financial and 
administrative management of the PMU , including Accounting, Budgeting , financial 
reporting, internal controls, auditing arrangement, flow of funds and the efficient 
management of projects resources. Specific duties: 
  Prepare together with the PD the Annual work plan and budget and the budget and financing 
plan in particular. 
  Master IFAD key documents such as, the disbursement handbook, procurement guidelines 
and handbook, IFAD guidelines for project audits, the Financing Agreement (FA) and the 
Letter to the Borrower (LTB).   
  Develop  and  maintain  an  efficient  accounting  system  and  reliable  internal  control 
procedures and guidelines for financial reporting and recordkeeping. 
  Responsible  for  the  preparation,  review  and  monitoring  of  projects  budgets  including 
financing  plan,  procurement  plan  (together  with  the  Procurement  Officer),  and  staff 
development plan (together with the training focal point)   
  Prepare/verify  all  withdrawal  applications  for  submission  to  IFAD,  and  ensure  the 
availability of funds for all planned activities. Manage the projects bank accounts, approve 
and co-signs all payments. 
  Responsible for all project procurement, either directly or by delegation. 
  Prepare and provide financial reports including the sources and uses of funds statement, 
incurred  expenditures  by  component,  expenditure  category  and  financier,  designated 
account reconciliation statement, fixed asset list and cash flow forecast etc. for submission 
to the Project steering committee, LPA and IFAD on a semi and annual basis, and maintain 
all records in a form appropriate for audit. 
  Lead the process of contracting an external audit firm to conduct an independent audit of 
the annual project accounts, ensuring that annual audits are carried out within the specified 
timeframe. 
  Develop  and  maintain  a  system  of  financial  control  over  all  expenditure  incurred  by 
implementing partners. 
  Responsible  for  developing  and  managing  an  effective  and  performance  based  human 
resources management system. 
  Supervise and coordinate the work of staff placed under his/her direct authority. 
  Review and regularly update the Financial and Administrative Manual of the PMU. 
  Develop together with the Financial DFM the Accounting manual of the PMU. 
  Responsible for the organization and supervision of the PMU office, assets, logistics, and 
all administrative matters. 
  Undertake any other activities assigned by the PD. 
C.  DFM 
299. 
Under the direct supervision of the FM; specific duties include: 
  Assist the FM in the implementation of a sound financial management system. 
  Prepare financial reports, including monthly funds reconciliation, and monthly, quarterly, 
semi-annual and annual expenditure statements;   
194 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  Prepare transaction vouchers, and input all transactions into the PMU accounting system 
before submission to the FM for approval; 
  Process all payments, ensuring that PMU procedures are strictly adhered to; 
  Process monthly payroll, payment of salaries to staff and project contributions; 
  Manage and report on the use of Petty Cash in accordance with the approved procedures;   
  Assist the FM in the preparation of withdrawal applications; 
  Prepare cash flow forecasts as required; 
  Monitor  financial  returns  from  Implementing  Partners,  including  periodic  visits  to  their 
offices; 
  Assist in the preparation and monitoring of annual operational budgets 
  Functional supervision and training of Accounts & Administrative Assistants in PMU. 
  Maintenance of a well organized and up-to-date filing system for accounting and financial 
records as well as an fixed asset tagging system; 
  Perform physical inventory of project assets each year; 
  Assist the FM in the preparation of the accounting manual of the PMU 
  Provide assistance to the external auditors as required; 
  Undertake any other activities assigned by PMU management. 
D.  Administrative Assistant   
300. 
Under the direct supervision of the FM. Specific duties include: 
  Assist the Financial DFM in the implementation of a sound financial management system. 
  Assist  the  Financial  DFM  in  preparing  financial  reports,  including  monthly  funds 
reconciliation, and monthly expenditure statements;   
  Assist  the  FA  in  prepare  transaction  vouchers,  and  input  all  transactions  into  the  PMU 
accounting system before submission to the FM for approval; 
  Assist the FA in process all payments, ensuring that PMU procedures are strictly adhered 
to; 
  Assist  the  FA  in  process  monthly  payroll,  payment  of  salaries  to  staff  and  Project 
contributions; 
  Assist the Financial DFM and FM in the preparation of withdrawal applications; 
  Assist the FA and FC in prepare cash flow forecasts as required; 
  Assist in reviewing and monitor financial returns from Implementing Partners, including 
periodic visits to their offices; 
  Assist in the preparation and monitoring of annual operational budgets 
  Collate data received from colleagues into the system. 
  Manage a well organized and up-to-date filing system for accounting and financial records; 
  Assist in providing assistance to the external auditors as required; 
  Undertake any other activities assigned by PMU management. 
  Supervise the driver(s) and office attendant. 
  Perform secretarial duties, including maintenance of a well organized filing system. 
  Collect and review financial reports from implementing partners at district level. 
195 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex II: Sample Annual Work Plan and Budget   
Table 1-4:Sample Budget and Financing Plan 
Summary table 1: Planned Project Expenditures by Component and Financier 
Financing Source 
IFAD 
Loan 
IFAD 
Grant 
Government 
(Budget) 
Government 
(Tax) 
Beneficiaries 
Total   
Local  USD 
Market 
a.  Rural  Market 
Component 
Rural 
1. 
Development 
1 
innovation strategy 
  1b. 
infrastructure 
1c.  Women  Capacity 
Building 
Rural  Market 
2. Irrigation Infrastructure 
3. Rural Finance     
Programme 
4. 
Management 
Total 
196 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Summary table 2: Planned Project Expenditures by Expenditure Category and Financier 
Category 
I. Civil Works 
II.  Equipment,  Goods  and 
vehicles 
III.  Technical  assistance 
and Studies 
IV. 
Workshops 
V. Credit line 
VI. Incremental Operating 
Costs 
Total 
Training 
and 
Total   
Local  USD 
Financing Source 
IFAD 
Loan 
IFAD 
Grant 
Government 
(Budget) 
Government 
(Tax) 
Beneficiaries 
197 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Summary table 3: Planned Project Expenditures by Component and Expenditure Category 
Component 
1  a.  Rural 
Market 
innovation 
strategy 
Rural 
  1b. 
Market 
infrastructure 
1c. 
Women 
Capacity 
Building 
Irrigation 
2. 
Infrastructure 
3. 
Rural 
Finance     
4. 
Programme 
Management  Total 
Rural 
1. 
Market 
Development 
Civil 
Category 
I. 
Works 
II. 
Equipment, 
Goods  and 
vehicles 
III. 
Technical 
assistance 
and Studies 
IV.  Training 
and 
Workshops 
V. 
line 
VI. 
Incremental 
Operating 
Costs 
Total 
Credit 
198 
Financing Source 
IF
AD 
Lo
an 
IFA
D 
Gra
nt 
Gov. 
(Budg
et) 
Gov. 
(Tax) 
Benef. 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 4: Detailed Tables per Component, Expenditure    Category    and Financier 
Categ
ory 
III. 
Techn
ical 
assista
nce 
and 
Studie
s 
Items 
Unit 
Uni
t 
cos
t 
Qua
n-
tity 
Physi
cal 
Outr
each 
Total   
Timeline 
Qua
rter 
1 
Qua
rter 
2 
Qua
rter 
3 
Qua
rter 
4 
To
tal 
of 
Description 
activity 
by 
Component/subc
omponent   
1.  Rural  Market 
Development 
1 
a. 
Market 
innovation 
strategy 
Rural 
value chain expert 
Awareness 
building 
Workshop 
Baseline study 
Market 
Local 
survey 
Seminar 
Publications  and 
booklets 
consul
tant 
30 
000  1 
works
hop 
Study 
report 
Semin
ar 
3 
4 
000  12 
500
0 
120 
000  1 
21 
000  3 
15 
5000 
3000
0 
48 
000 
1500
0 
1200
0 
6300
0 
7500
0 
199 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Rural 
  1b. 
Market 
infrastructure 
Feasibility study 
Awareness 
building seminar 
Publications 
Rural roads 
III. 
Techn
ical 
assista
nce 
and 
Studie
s 
I. 
Civil 
Works 
10 
000  1 
20 
000  4 
20 
200 
KM 
4000 
####
### 
200 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 5: Sample Procurement Plan 
Table 6: Sample Staff Development Plan   
201 
ComponentSubcomponent/ ActivityItemUnitQuantintyUnit cost estimate (USD)Total cost estimate (USD)Financing SourceProcurement MethodBid DocumentIFAD no objectionPublication (date)EOIResponse TimeClosing DateOpening SessionBid/quate evaluation (date)IFAD Prior review required Final reportNo ObjNotification of AwardSignatureEnd DateWORKSitem1item2GOODSitem3SERVICESitem4ContractTable 5: Procurement planPreparation of Tendering ProcessBidding ProcessEvaluation Process 
PIM Y2RRDP 
202 
CategoryComponentName and description  of person(s)Description of training activity Proposed trainer/training institutionLoaction of the training activityEstimated cost of the training activity (USD)Additional costs (e.g. travel, accomondation. DSA)Financing sourceIV. Training and Workshops4. Programme ManagementFinancial controller of the PIUFinancial Management CourseITC/ILO Turin Italy4 0003 500IFAD LoanIV. Training and Workshops4. Programme ManagementAdministrative assistant of the PIUadvanced course in EnglishProfessional Language InstituteLocal2000naIFAD LoanTable 6: Staff Development Plan 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex  III:  Sample  chart  of  account  (This  will  be  adjusted  once  the  cost  tabs  are 
finalized) 
Chart of Accounts 
Account code                                                          Account name                                                                                                               
1-00-0-0                      Establishment of a Macro-Fiscal Analysis Unit     
1-01-0-0                      International Advisory Services 
1-01-0-1                    Macroeconomic Analysis & Modeling Advisor 
1-02-0-0                      Local Advisory Services 
1-02-0-1                    Full-Time Macroeconomic Analysis & Modeling Advisor 
1-02-0-2                    Fiscal Team Support Advisor 
1-02-0-3                    Public Enterprise Coverage Advisor 
2-00-0-0                      Public Expenditure Management 
          2-10-0-0                      Cross-Cutting Issues 
2-11-0-0                      International Advisory Services 
2-11-0-1                      Legal Consistency Advisor 
2-11-0-1                      Senior Advisor PIP/ Loi-Programme 
2-20-0-0                      Expenditure Planning & Budget Formulation 
2-21-0-0                      International Advisory Services 
2-21-0-1                    Resident Budget Planning Advisor 
2-21-0-2                    Visiting Budget/ Sectoral MTEF Advisor 
2-21-0-3                    High-Level Review of BC / CoA Advisor 
2-22-0-0                    Local Advisory Services 
2-22-0-1                  Budget Preparation Advisor 
2-22-0-2                  Sectoral Economist A 
2-22-0-3                  Sectoral Economist B 
2-22-0-4                  Review of BC / CoA Advisor 
2-30-0-0                      Budget Execution, Monitoring & Audit 
2-31-0-0                  International Advisory Services 
2-31-0-1                Senior Public Audit Expert 
2-31-0-2                Treasury Management Strengthening Advisor 
2-31-0-3                Budget Execution System Diagnostic & Solutions Advisor   
2-32-0-0                Local Advisory Services 
2-32-0-1              Treasury Management Strengthening Advisor 
2-32-0-2              Development of a Cash Forecasting Tool (Software Development) 
2-32-0-3              Budget Execution System Diagnostic Advisor 
3-00-0-0                      Debt Management 
                        3-01-0-0              International Advisory Services 
                        3-01-0-1            Debt Strategy Formulation Advisor 
3-01-0-2            Cost Risk Analysis Advisor 
3-01-0-3            Debt Strategy Implementation Advisor 
3-01-0-4            Data & Debt Recording Advisor 
3-02-0-0            Local Advisory Services 
3-02-0-1          Debt Management Advisor 
3-02-0-2          Legal Advisor 
4-00-0-0                      Aid Coordination & Management 
4-01-0-0            International Advisory Services 
4-01-0-1          Resident Aid Coordination & Management Advisor 
4-02-0-0          Local Advisory Services 
4-02-0-1        Aid Coordination & Management Advisor 
4-03-0-0        Miscellaneous Expenses 
203 
PIM Y2RRDP 
4-03-0-1        Representation at Donor Meetings 
5-00-0-0                      Training & Capacity Building 
5-01-0-0            International Advisory Services 
5-01-0-1          Training Design & Implementation Advisor 
5-02-0-0            Local Advisory Services 
5-02-0-1          Training Coordinator 
5-03-0-0              Miscellaneous Expenses 
5-03-0-1              Workshops 
5-03-0-2              Study Tours       
6-00-0-0                      Project Management 
6-01-0-0              Local Advisory Services 
6-01-0-1            Project Manager 
6-01-0-2            Financial Management Specialist 
6-01-0-3            Procurement Specialist 
6-02-0-0              Miscellaneous Expenses 
6-02-1-0              Operating Costs 
6-02-1-1        Accounting Software 
6-02-1-2        Office Equipment 
6-02-1-3        Office Equipment Maintenance Expense 
6-02-1-4        Stationary & Office Supplies 
6-02-1-5        Advertising Expense 
6-02-1-6        Post Expense 
6-02-1-7        Translation Expense 
6-02-1-8        Printing Expense 
6-02-1-9        Bank Charges 
6-02-2-0              Project Audit 
7-00-0-0 
8-00-0-0 
A/C Payables 
Bank & Related Accounts 
8-01-0-0          BDL Designated Account 
8-02-0-0          IFAD Account 
                8-03-0-0          Foreign Exchange Difference 
204 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex IV: Sample TORs for an accounting software 
IFAD Project XXXX 
Accounting Information System 
A.  Background 
The LPA is currently in the process of implementing an IFAD Project XXXX. The project is 
implemented through a project implementation unit (PMU) within the LPA. In order to comply 
with IFAD’s reporting requirements the LPA will need to procure an Accounting Software to 
be used by the PMU for the Project for the following purposes: 
1)  to collect, analyze, store, and distribute information that is useful for decision making 
2)  l to provide transparency and accountability of the project activities, 
3)  to 
  provide  timely  reports,  help  detect  errors  and  deficits  during  project 
implementation and indicate necessary corrections, and   
4)  to prepare and present progress reports to the PMU, LPA and IFAD. 
The project will be managed from the PMU/LPA located in the Capital and four regional offices   
situated in the districts of CC,BB, and BB where the project will be implemented. The main 
functions will be run from the PMU in the capital but accounting entries will also be executed 
form the regional offices in the three districts.       
B.  Specifications of the Software 
General features 
1.  The Accounting software should be configured as a modular solution and the different 
modules should be suitably integrated, the following are the basic modules: 
a.  Chart of Account 
b.  Accounting 
c.  Financial Reporting 
d.  Budget 
e.  Assets 
f.  Withdrawal Application 
g.  Contract Management, and integrating other modules if needed. 
2.  classifying the levels of the Chart of account into four levels; 
a.  Type (Assets – Liabilities – Expenses) 
b.  General Ledger Account 
c.  Subsidiary Accounts 
d.  Subsidiary -1 Accounts, to end up with auxiliary accounts. 
3.  Handling all the financial transactions of the Project according to the chart of account, 
that is used to: 
a.  Capture the financial data under the appropriate headings 
b.  Classify and group financial data for the various financial reports. The structure 
of the Chart of Accounts caters data to be captured by: 
i.  the Project components and sub-components 
ii.  expenditure items under each component and sub-component 
iii.  The IFAD disbursement category for the Project 
iv.  Sources of funding 
4.  All vouchers used in the system are based on double entries. 
5.  Ability to account under different bases of accounting (cash,modified accural, Accural) 
205 
PIM Y2RRDP 
6.  using adjusting entry when needed 
7.  Handling the definition of various currencies used by the system 
8.  Holding multi – donor’s information, with notification that no contract will have more 
than two donors. 
9.  recording the daily currency rates for all the predefined currencies, if reports can be 
demanded by Lebanese Government currency 
10. Recording the loan number and source of fund. 
11. Capacity to customize reports by e.g. exporting    data to excel. 
Financial reporting 
12. Produce the periodic Financial Reports as requested by IFAD: 
a.  Statement  of  Cash  Receipts  and  Payments  per  Project  components  showing 
quarterly, yearly and cumulative balances for the quarter and cumulative;   
b.  Statement  of  Cash  Receipts  and  Payments  per  Project  categories  showing 
quarterly, yearly and cumulative balances for the quarter and cumulative;   
c.  Statement of Designated Account reconciling period-opening and end balances;   
d.  Statement of Project commitments, i.e., the unpaid balances under the Project’s 
signed contracts; 
e.  Statement of fixed assets, 
f.  Statement of Cash Payments using SOE. 
13. produce  other  financial  statements  on  a  quarterly  and  annually  basis,  which  are  as 
follows; 
a.  Journal and Payment Vouchers 
b.  Statement of Special Accounts 
c.  Cost Center Statements 
14. Progress report (physical) and not financial by contract, component and category (all 
projects). This request will involve: 
a.  A  function  will  be  designed  and  developed  to  allow  the  user  to  define  the 
planned (estimated) physical % completion on each period (year, Quarter). 
b.  A function will be designed and developed to allow the user to enter/modify the 
actual reported on physical % completion on each period (year, Quarter). 
c.  An Inquiry function to display physical progress on each contract 
d.  A report showing detailed physical progress reporting per period 
e.  A report showing up-to-date physical progress reporting per period 
15. .Consolidated report (financial report) of all projects managed under the software. 
16. Recording the budget of all the activities of the project, and enable comparison of the actual 
performance with budgets/targets (quarterly, annual, and cumulative for the Project).   
17. a fixed assets listing report indicating all relevant information (such as description, location, 
quantity, serial number, etc.) which needs to be updated and include any discrepancies between 
the regular physical inspection and the accounting records 
18. Enhancement on the Withdrawal Application report to include the SOE and Summary sheet   
Procurement 
19. Keeping detailed records for all the contractors and consultants (ID number, Name, Nationality, 
Address, Phone, Fax, e-mail, contact name “position, phone number, fax, bank account bank 
address” and other information needed, and the accounting system should afford information 
regarding the procurement  cycle that took  place  before contract  signature and report on the 
following:. 
a.  Prior review thresholds; 
206 
PIM Y2RRDP 
b.  Procurement methods thresholds; 
c.  Procurement reference; 
d.  Activity description; 
e.  Component (as per the description schedule of the Loan); 
f.  Category (as per disbursement schedule); 
g.  Estimated amount; 
h.  Procurement method used; 
i.  Prior/Post review; 
j.  Date of issuance of advertisement; 
k.  Bank no objection on bidding documents (Goods/works) or RFP (consultants); 
l.  Date of bid (Goods/works) or RFP (consultants) submission; 
m.  Bid opening date (goods/works) or Financial Proposal opening date(consultants); 
n.  Bank No objection to evaluation report; 
o.  Bank no objection to contract draft; 
p.  Date of submission to the Bank of the Copy of signed contract; 
q.  Contract  related  data  (date  of  signature,  date  of  completion,  contract  amount,  and  contract 
amendments and payments terms). 
Security 
20. Handling the required security according to predefined system security and privileges. 
21. The program  has  adequate security  features including password protection , not  possible to 
delete a posted transaction, controlled access 
22. Includes proper backup and system maintenance procedures. 
Training and support 
23. Training of    the Financial officer and head DFM and four regional DFMs on all features of 
the software. 
24. Provide a complete and a user friendly manual 
25. Configuration and Full installation of the software in seven computers, three in the capital four 
in the different regional offices. 
C.  Delivery time table 
The commencement of services for this assignment is expected to be no later than the forth 
week of March 2012. 
The main objective of the firm is to deliver a well designed software, that facilitates reflection 
of project needs and be designed to provide the financial information required by all interested 
parties  (the  LPA,  Ministry  of  Finance  and  IFAD)  and  fulfil  the  legal  and  regulatory 
requirements of the Ministry Of Education. 
The firm is expected to deliver the system during the phase mentioned below: 
                  Deliverable’s Title 
Ref  
Deliverable 1 : install the present system 
Deliverable 2 : needed modifications should be applied on the system  
Deliverable 3 : Training sessions on the system   
1 week 
1 week. 
Duration 
3 weeks 
207 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex V: Sample Monthly Budget Execution Report   
208 
ACTUALPlanned/BudgetedVarianceCurrentYear-ToCumulativeCurrentYear-ToCumulativeCurrentYear-ToCumulativeQuarterDateTo-DateQuarterDateTo-DateQuarterDateTo-Date Cash Payments per Component 1-Component 1 Sub Component 1.1  Sub Component 1.2  Sub Component 1.3 2-Component 23- Component 34-Component 4TotalCash Payments per Expenditure categoryCategory 1:WorksCactegory 2: GoodsCategory 3: Consultancy ServicesCategory 4: Credit lineCategory 5: PIU costTotalCommitments Entered (not payed) To - Date6. Monthly Budget Execution Report 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex VI: Sample Periodic Financial Progress Report   
1 . Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments by Category (all financiers) 
Reporting 
Period 
(Quarterly/Se
mi-annually) 
Cumulative 
Forecast:  next 
months 
6 
US$ 
US$ 
US$ 
  Direct 
  Receipts     
IFAD  Loan  Designated 
Account   
IFAD  Loan 
payments 
IFAD Grant Designated 
Account   
IFAD Direct payment 
Government Funds 
Beneficiary Funds 
R 
S 
T 
U 
V 
Y 
R^ 
S^ 
T^ 
U^ 
V^ 
Y^ 
R* 
S* 
T* 
U* 
V* 
Y* 
Total Receipts 
P=R+S+T+U+
Z+V+Y 
P^=R^+S^+T^+U^+
Z^+V^+Y^ 
P*=R*+S*+T*+U*+
Z*+V*+Y* 
I. Civil Works 
II.  Equipment,  Goods 
and vehicles 
III. Technical assistance 
and Studies 
IV. 
Workshops 
V. Credit line 
VI. 
Operating Costs 
Incremental 
Training 
and 
a 
b 
c 
d 
f 
a^ 
b^ 
c^ 
d^ 
f^ 
g 
O=a+b+c+d+f
+g 
X 
less 
Exchange 
Total Payments 
Foreign 
difference 
Receipts 
Expenditures 
Opening Cash Balance     L 
Comprising 
IFAD  Loan  Designated 
Account   
IFAD  Loan 
payments 
  Direct 
=P-O+X 
e 
f 
g 
h 
j 
k 
W=e+f+g+h+j+k 
g^ 
O^=a^+b^+c^+d^+f
^+g^ 
X^ 
=P^-O^+X^ 
L^ 
"=P*-W" 
G 
209 
PIM Y2RRDP 
IFAD Grant Designated 
Account   
IFAD Direct payment 
Project Account 
Counterpart  Accounts 
(for  government  and 
beneficiary funds) 
Closing Cash Balances    =L+P-O+X 
Table 1: Sample Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments by Category     
=L^+P^-O^ 
=G+P*-W 
210 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 2: Financial performance per expenditure category and    financier 
2. Summary of Expenditures by Loan Categories and By Financiers (USD) 
Loan 
Cate
gory 
Description 
category 
Financing Source (USD) 
of 
IFAD Loan 
Repor
ting 
perio
d 
Cumul
ative 
IFAD Grant 
Repor
ting 
perio
d 
Cumul
ative 
Government 
(budget) 
Repor
ting 
perio
d 
Cumul
ative 
Government 
(Tax) 
Repor
ting 
perio
d 
Cumul
ative 
Beneficiaries 
Repor
ting 
perio
d 
Cumul
ative 
Total 
Repor
ting 
perio
d 
Cumul
ative 
Civil Works 
  Equipment,  Goods 
and vehicles 
Technical assistance 
and Studies 
Training 
Workshops 
  Credit line 
Incremental 
Operating Costs 
and 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
Total 
Table 3: Financial performance per component and per financier 
211 
PIM Y2RRDP 
212 
ComponentPlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVarianceComponent 1Sub-component 1Sub-component 2Sub-component 3Component 2Component 3Component 4TotalTotal Allocati-on per design reportRevis-ed alloca-tion3. Financial performance by financier by component (USD ‘000)Reporting period CumulativeReporting period CumulativeCumulativeCumulativeReporting period CumulativeReporting period Reporting period IFAD loanIFAD grantTotalBeneficieriesGovernment (Budget & tax) 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 4: Project Cash Flow Forecast 
5.    Semi-annual cash flow forecast 
Month 
1 
Month 
2 
Month 
3 
Month 
4 
Month 
5 
Month 
6 
    Cash Inflow 
IFAD Loan 
IFAD Grant 
Government   
Beneficiary   
Other Sources 
          Total Cash Inflow 
    Cash Outflow 
  Category 1: Works   
   0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
  Category 2: Equipment, 
Goods and vehicles 
  Category  3:  Technical 
assistance and Studies 
Category  4:  Training 
and Workshops 
  Category 5: PMU cost   
Salaries 
Rent 
stationary 
etc. 
    Total Cash Outflow 
    Net Cash flow 
    Opening Balance 
    Funds Available 
213 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 5: SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement 
5. Statement Of Expenditures Withdrawal Application Statement 
By  category  of  Expenditures  in 
Local Currency 
WA submitted to IFAD 
WA 
n..  WA n.. 
WA 
n.. 
WA 
n..  Total 
Category  Category 
1 
2 
3 
Total 
Description 
AAAA 
BBBB 
CCCC 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
In USD equiv/ 
Rejected from IFAD 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Net Reimbursed 
xx 
xx 
WA  pending  submission  to 
IFAD 
WA 
n..  WA n.. 
Category  Category 
1 
2 
3 
Total 
Description 
AAAA 
BBBB 
CCCC 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
WA 
n.. 
WA 
n.. 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Withdrawal  applications  are  submitted  for  reimbursement  to  IFAD  using  the 
historical 
exchange rate of the transfers to the Operating Account. 
Expenditures partially or totally rejected by IFAD (if any) should be detailed here. 
This statement should be reconciled with the Statement of Receipts and Payments 
214 
PIM Y2RRDP 
215 
Total 
Contract 
Value 
Total 
Contract 
Amount 
Invoiced 
to date 
Total   
Disbursed on   
Contract 
Total 
Undisbursed 
Amount 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 6: Signed Contract Listing 
6. Signed Contract Listing   
Reporting period: 
Contract Information 
Disbursement  Contract 
Contract  Contract  Supplier/ 
Contract 
Category 
Description  Start 
End 
Contractor  No. 
Name 
  Description 
Category  1: 
Works   
Category  2: 
Equipment, 
goods  And 
Vehicles 
Category  3: 
Consultancy 
services 
  Category 4 
   Total 
216 
Plan to completion 
Revised 
Original 
Actua
l as % 
of 
Plan 
Total 
cost 
Completio
n date 
Tota
l 
cost 
Completio
n date 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 7: Physical Progress Report 
Table 7: Physical Progress Report 
Description of activities 
Progress and Cost 
Physical 
Progress to date  Cost to date 
Category 
1. Works 
3. Consultancy services 
Training 
4. 
Technical assistance 
and 
5. Credit line 
Actua
l   
-
Irrigation 
Project activity by 
component/Sub-
component 
2. 
Infrastructure 
Road infrastructure 
Road works 
Design 
Civil  works  -site 
clearance 
Civil  works 
construction 
Civil 
finishing 
1 a. Rural Market 
innovation 
strategy 
feasibility studies 
market survey 
1c. 
Women 
Capacity Building 
Workshops 
Training courses 
3. Rural Finance        
Micro Credit 
works 
Planne
d 
Actua
l   
Planne
d 
217 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Grants 
Annex VII: Fixed Asset Register 
4. Fixed Asset Register 
ASS
ET   
RE
F. 
NO. 
ASSET 
DESCRI
PTION 
COMPO
NENT 
FINAN
CING 
SOUR
CE 
BENEFI
CARY 
AGENC
Y 
LOCA
TION 
ASSIG
NED 
TO 
TAG 
NUM
BER 
SUPP
LIER 
NAM
E 
PMT/IN
V. 
REFER
ENCE 
DATE 
OF 
PURC
HASE 
DAT
E  OF 
REC
EIPT 
PURC
HASE 
VALU
E 
REM
ARKS 
218 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Tot
al 
219 
Annex VIII A: Petty Cash Request Form 
Date: _________________ 
Requested by 
: _______________________ 
Mode of payment 
    _______________________ 
Signature 
Name 
¤  Reimbursement   
¤  Advance 
Description  of  purchases 
(goods/services) 
Unit   
price 
Quantit
y 
Total 
cost** 
Budget/ 
Activity 
code 
Explanation / Comments 
TOTAL AMOUNT* 
________________  ____________________________ 
_________________ 
Processed by   
Approved by 
FM DFM 
* Total amount cannot exceed xxxxx. 
** Attach supporting document (invoice, receipt, etc.). 
Payment received by 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex VIII B: Petty Cash Reconciliation Form 
Project ________________________  Date of reconciliation ______________________ 
______________ 
                      ______________ 
                        ______________ 
______________ 
                          ______________ 
______________ 
______________ 
Part i. Petty cash reconciliation 
Petty cash balance brought forward (a)  
Replenishments during the current month (b) 
Total petty cash balance (c = a + b) 
Disbursements during the current month (d) 
Petty cash book balance (e = c – d) 
Cash count balance (f) – see part ii. below   
Difference (G = E – F) 
Explanation Of Difference 
_________________________________________________________________________ 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
Part Ii - Cash Count 
Description 
bank notes 
          500 
    1 000 
    2 000 
coins 
    10 
    20 
    50 
total in local currency 
Total amount 
Quantity 
Counted/reconciled by (DFM)___________ 
      Reviewed by (FC) __________________ 
      Date _________________ 
221 
Annex IX A: Vehicle Log 
Vehicle registration number ______________________________________                          Assigned driver ______________________________ 
Date 
Time 
Departing  Arrival  Departing  Arrival  Destination  Purpose 
Mileage 
Trip 
Fuel purchase 
Mileage  Quantity 
Driver 
signature 
Responsible 
staff 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex IX B: Vehicle History Record 
Vehicle  registration  number          ______________________________________                                                                          Assigned 
driver ____________________ 
Date  Repairs 
Service & maintenance 
Insurance 
Type   
Period 
covered 
Cost 
Fitness tests 
Checked 
by   
Cost 
Description 
repair 
of 
Garage  Cost  Description 
of 
Garage 
Cost 
service 
Report accidents in the space below, providing all relevant details for each occurrence: 
Date: 
Place: 
Name of driver: 
Circumstances: 
Damage to PMU vehicle: 
Damage to other vehicles: 
Injuries (indicate name of victims and describe injuries): 
Insurance settlement: 
223 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex X : Sample Terms of Reference for the Audit of Project XXXX   
The following are the terms of reference (‘ToR’) on which the LPA agrees to engage audit 
firm ‘the Auditor’ to perform an Audit and to report in connection with the Agreement with 
the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) concerning the project XXX 
where in these ToRs the ‘Contracting Authority’ is mentioned this refers to IFAD which has 
signed  the  Agreement  with  the  Recipient/Borrower  and  finances  the  services.  The 
Contracting Authority is not a party to this engagement. 
TERMS  OF  REFERENCE 
FOR 
THE  FINANCIAL  AUDIT  AND  FACTUAL 
FINDINGS OF 
[TITLE OF THE PROJECT 
1.  Background 
   The  International Fund  for  Agricultural Development (IFAD)  is  aiding  the 
borrower/recipient in the form of loan(s) [and/or grant(s)]. 
   A  financing  [and  /or  grant]  agreement  or  agreements  has/have  been  signed 
between IFAD and the borrower/[recipient]; refer to appendix 1. 
[Insert  for  private  auditor]:  IFAD  requires  the  borrower/recipient  to  appoint  an 
independent auditor to audit the accounts related to the project, in accordance with 
the IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing. 
          The reporting entity is [xxx]. 
   The  entity  prepares  its  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  [applicable 
accounting standard]. 
          The auditor conducts its audit in terms of [applicable auditing standard]. 
          [Insert any other information that may be relevant to the auditor]. 
2.  Objective 
The objective of this audit is to enable the  auditor to express an opinion on whether the 
financial  statements  (including  additional  disclosures  as  outlined  in  section  5)  present 
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the reporting entity as at [insert year-
end date], and/or the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended, 
in conformity with the [applicable accounting standards]. 
22
4 
PIM Y2RRDP 
3.  Responsibilities of the borrower/[recipient] 
i.              General 
Provide financial statements for the activities financed by the loan/[grant] that are 
reconcilable to its records and accounts. 
Provide the auditor with access to all legal documents and correspondence with 
consultants, contractors and other persons or firms engaged by the 
project,  and  any  other  information  associated  with  the  project  and  deemed 
necessary by the auditor. 
          Ensure that the accounting policies are consistently applied and disclosed. 
Ensure  that  appropriate  internal  controls  are  implemented  to  prevent 
misstatements and susceptibility to fraud. 
   Ensure compliance with all relevant laws and regulations that pertain to the entity, 
as well as with the financing agreement between the 
borrower/[recipient] and IFAD. 
Provide the financial statements to the  auditor within a reasonable time and be 
available for any queries that the auditor may have.
22
5 
PIM Y2RRDP 
ii.          Financial statements 
The borrower/[recipient] shall: 
Prepare  financial  statements  covering  the  reporting  period  [date]  to  [date],  in 
accordance with [IPSAS/IPSAS “Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of 
Accounting” standards]. In  addition, the  following specific disclosures will  be 
included in the financial statements: 
   Withdrawal application summary – appendix 1 to the IFAD Handbook on 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects; 
Sources  and  uses  of  funds  statement  –  appendix  2  to  the  IFAD 
Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed 
Projects; 
          Designated Account statement and reconciliation – appendix 3 to the 
IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed 
Projects; 
          [Statement of Expenditure – appendix 5 to the IFAD Handbook on 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects] – 
application to grants; 
          [Expenditure transaction list - appendix 6 to the IFAD Handbook on 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects] – 
applicable to grants. 
4.  Responsibilities of the auditor 
i.          Auditing standards 
The  auditor is  responsible for  the  formulation of  an  opinion on  the  financial 
statements in accordance with [ISA/ISSAI/national auditing standards]; 
ii.          General principles 
By agreeing to these terms, the auditor confirms that: 
The firm is independent from the project, its staff and activities, in accordance with 
international best practices. 
The  firm  is  not  providing  consultancy  services  to  the  project  or  preparing  its 
project financial statements (nor has it done so in the previous two years). 
The auditor is suitably qualified and a member of a professional body affiliated with 
the International Federation of Accountants. 
          [The office of [public auditor] is a member of the International Organization of 
Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI).] 
The  auditor  is  able  to    conduct  the  audit  in  line  with  auditing  standards 
acceptable to IFAD, pursuant to paragraph 4.1. 
          The  firm  can  assign  an  audit  team  to  the  audit    that  has  the  necessary 
competence and skills. 
The  firm  has  a  proven  track  record  in  conducting audits  of  a  similar  nature and 
complexity. 
iii.          Management letter 
The  management  letter  is  an  integral  part  of  the  audit  package  that  documents 
accounting and internal control issues identified by the auditors. The management letter 
should: 
   Outline  the  auditor’s  recommendations  to  improve  identified  accounting  and 
internal control issues; 
          Include the responses of project management to the identified control issues, 
and its proposal to address the issues identified within a specific time period.
22
6 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Where  applicable,  follow  up  on  the  issues  identified  in  the  previous  year's management 
letter. 
iv.           
Reporting 
The Auditor is required to deliver an audit package that includes: 
The  audited  financial  statements,  including  additional  disclosures  as  outlined in 
paragraph 3.2; 
          An audit opinion on the financial statements, within the scope as outlined in 
paragraph 5; 
[A  report  on  factual  findings,  within  the  scope  of  agreed-upon  procedures  as 
outlined  in    paragraph  6.]    Any    ineligible    expenditure  identified  should   
be 
clearly mentioned. 
          A management letter, including the information outlined in paragraph 4.3; 
The  audit  report  should  provide  sufficient  detail  as  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the 
procedures  performed  by  the  auditor.  The  auditor  is  required  to  provide  the  audit 
package by no later than [insert date]. Reports are to be delivered in English. 
5.    Scope of the financial audit 
In performing the audit, at a minimum the auditor shall: 
   Obtain    an    understanding  of    the    internal    controls 
to    the   
financial reporting process, to identify and assess any weakness in internal control 
that 
might result in misstatements, whether due to fraud or to error; 
related 
   Design and conduct audit procedures in response to any weaknesses identified in the 
internal  controls  relating  to  the  financial  reporting  process,  to  obtain 
audit  evidence  that  the  financial  statements  are  fairly  presented  and  free  from 
material misstatements, in accordance with the applicable accounting framework; 
          Verify whether expenditure that was incurred in the name of the project is in 
line with  the  terms of  the financing agreement(s) (appendix xx)  and  incurred for 
the  purposes  intended  in  this  agreement.  Both  IFAD  and  third  party funding 
should be taken into consideration; 
   Verify  that    the    inventory  and    fixed    assets  held    by    the    entity  exist,   
are complete, are properly accounted and are used for the project purposes; 
   Note  any  weaknesses  in  the  internal  control  environment  and  in  the  financial 
reporting process, and communicate those in the management letter. 
          [List others]. 
6.    Scope of the agreed-upon procedures 
The auditor is required to perform the following specific procedures and report on factual 
findings as required in paragraph 4.4. 
i.          Withdrawal application summary 
The  auditor  is  requested  to  obtain  the  individual  withdrawal  applications  (WAs) 
submitted to IFAD, as summarized in the withdrawal application summary, and develop 
test procedures to: 
   Determine 
  Designated 
  Account 
  whether 
  currency   
the 
equivalent    was determined  using  the  historical  exchange  rate  of  transfers  to 
the  operating 
account; 
          Determine whether goods and services have been purchased through the SOE 
mechanism in line with the stipulated SOE threshold;
22
7 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Determine  whether  the  expenditures  claimed  through  SOE  procedures  were 
properly  and  appropriately  authorized,  classified47    and  supported  by  audit 
documentation; 
          Identify any ineligible expenditure; 
          [List additional procedures, if applicable].48 
ii.          Designated  account  statement  and 
reconciliation 
The auditor is requested to review the activities of the designated account(s) associated 
with the project, including the initial advance, replenishments, interest that may accrue 
on  the  outstanding  balances,  and  the  year-end  balances.  The  auditor  is  requested 
develop test procedures to: 
          Check the accuracy of the Designated Account reconciliation(s); 
   Confirm  that  the  Designated  Account(s)  have  been  maintained  in  accordance 
with the provisions of the financing agreement; 
          [List additional procedures if applicable]. 
7.    Public disclosure 
IFAD promotes public disclosure of project financial information to enhance the level 
of  transparency  and  accountability.  IFAD  will  disclose  project  audit  reports,  as 
appropriate,  in line with the Fund’s disclosure policy. Management Letters issued by 
auditors  are  not  subject  to  public  disclosure  by  IFAD.  In  agreeing  to  the  terms  of 
reference, the auditor explicitly acknowledges IFAD’s right to publicly disclose audit 
reports (audited financial statements and audit opinion) and will issue reports without 
a limitation of use clause. 
  Audited  financial  statements  and  audit 
To  facilitate  the  public  disclosure  process,  the  auditor  is  requested  to  submit  two 
separate files as follows: 
- 
opinion; and 
- 
Letter. 
  Management 
22
8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex XI: Required Aide Memoire tables for IFAD Supervision missions   
Table 1:    Cumulative expenditures by component and Financier -as at 
DD/MM/YYYY (USD '000) 
IFAD 
Loan 
IFAD 
Grant 
Benef
. 
Governmen
t 
Tota
l 
Rural 
Rural 
a.  Rural 
1. 
Market 
Development 
1 
Market 
innovation 
strategy 
  1b. 
Market 
infrastructure 
1c.  Women 
Capacity 
Building 
2. 
Infrastructure 
3. 
Finance     
4.  Programme 
Management 
Total 
Irrigation 
Rural 
Table  2:  Budgeted  Expenditures  and  Performance  against  previous  year’s    AWPB 
(USD '000) 
IFAD 
Loan 
IFAD 
Grant 
Benef
. 
Governmen
t 
Tota
l 
Financial 
Performance 
(% ) 
Rural 
a.  Rural 
1. 
Market 
Development 
1 
Market 
innovation 
strategy 
  1b. 
Market 
infrastructure 
1c.  Women 
Capacity 
Building 
2. 
Infrastructure 
Irrigation 
Rural 
22
9 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Rural 
3. 
Finance     
4.  Programme 
Management 
Total 
Table  3A:  Financial  performance  by  financier  -  as  at 
DD/MM/YYYY 
Approval   
(USD 
‘000) 
Current 
(USD 
‘000) 
Disbursements 
(USD ‘000) 
Per  cent 
disbursed 
Financier 
IFAD loan 
Government 
Private 
sector 
Beneficiaries 
Total 
Table 3 B. Financial performance by financier by component - as at DD/MM/YYYY   
(USD) 
Gover
nment 
Private 
sector 
Ap
pr.  Actual  % 
Ap
pr. 
Act
ual  % 
IFAD Loan   
Act
Ap
ual  % 
pr. 
Beneficiarie
s 
Ap
pr. 
Act
ual  % 
Total 
Ap
pr. 
Act
ual  % 
1. 
Supporti
ng 
inclusive 
rural 
develop
ment 
a.   
Improvin
g Chanye 
fupin 
model 
23
0 
PIM Y2RRDP 
b. 
Stimulati
ng 
entrepren
eurship 
c. 
Improvin
g  access 
to 
finance 
a. 
Improvin
g 
infrastru
cture 
climate 
resilienc
e 
b. 
Improvin
g 
rural 
infrastru
cture 
4. 
Program
me 
Manage
ment 
TOTAL   
23
1 
PIM Y2RRDP 
TABLE  3  C:  Expenditures  by  category 
DD/MM/YYYY (USD) 
-  as  at 
Original    Revised   
Allocation  Allocation 
Expenditures 
W/A 
pending 
Balance  Per 
cent 
Spent 
Category 
description 
Civil 
I. 
Works 
II. 
Equipment, 
Goods  and 
vehicles 
III. 
Technical 
assistance 
and Studies 
IV. Training 
and 
Workshops 
V.  Credit 
line 
VI. 
Incremental 
Operating 
Costs 
Unallocated 
Total 
23
2 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex XII: Sample recovery plan  
23
3 
Particulars Reporting PeriodWA No.DateUS $EURSDR118/01/2006250 000.00$                 -€                              172 648.51-€                              172 648.510.00#VALUE!Exchange Rate:Ref. No.WA No.DateEstimated WA value(SP)Estimated WA value(USD)ProposedRecovery %Recovery Amount(USD)Commulative Recovery Amount(USD)Commulative Unjustified balance(USD)14021-Feb-12111 832.5645%50 324.6550 324.65(50 324.65)2413-Mar-1272 685.1135%25 439.7975 764.44(75 764.44)3425-May-1274 685.1135%26 139.79101 904.23(101 904.23)4437-Jul-1270 885.1142%29 771.75131 675.98(131 675.98)5445-Sep-1264 885.1140%25 954.04157 630.02(157 630.02)64531-Dec-1282 627.6680%66 102.13223 732.15(223 732.15)74610-Jun-1326 065.11100%26 267.85250 000.00(250 000.00)8503 665.77 USD           250 000.00 USD           Prepared by:Confirmed by:15-Oct-11DateDate(77 351.49)Justification:In accordance with IFAD procedures, any amount unjustified at the time of loan closing date will be promptly refunded to IFAD.Loan Closing Date:TOTALAuthorized Allocation0.00Unjustified balanceUSD                  SDR30-Jun-13Recovery PlanDesignated Account31-Dec-12IFAD Loan No.:Project Completion Date:IFAD Loan Amount (SDR)20 000 000.00 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex XIII: Designated account reconciliation statement (Imprest account ) 
5 A. Designated Account Reconciliation Statement (imprest account) 
Designated Account No: 
Bank Name: 
1. Total Advanced by IFAD 
2. Less total amount recovered by IFAD 
3.  Equals  present  outstanding  amount  advanced  to  the  designated 
account (line 1 less line 2) 
  USD 
  USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
4.Balance  of  designated  account  per  attached  bank  statements  as  of 
(Date: day/month/year) 
5. Plus balance of the project account(s) (listed separately) 
Plus balance of sub accounts (listed separately) 
Plus balance of Cash in Hand 
Total of Bank Balances (designated A/C, PA, SUB accounts& cash in 
hand balance) (line 4+line 5) 
6. Plus total amount claimed in this WA no. 
7. Plus total amount withdrawn from the designated/PA/Grant account 
and not yet claimed for replenishment) or WAs pending submission 
USD 
8. Plus amounts claimed in previous applications but not yet created at 
the date of bank statement and/or claimed after date of bank statement  USD 
Application 
No. 
Date 
Amount 
USD 
$ 
$ 
$ 
9. Minus  Interest earned (to be completed. If zero, please enter 
zero) 
10. Total Advance accounted for (line 5 through line 
9) 
11.  Explanation  of  any  difference  between  the  totals  appearing  in 
Lines 3 and 10 
e.g. 
Non  eligible  amount  to  be  refunded  to  the 
designated account 
  USD 
  USD 
  USD 
  USD 
23
4 
PIM Y2RRDP 
e.g. 
e.g. 
e.g. 
12 DATE 
application 
in 
errors 
calculation 
percentage financing 
counterpart  financial  resources 
to be reimbursed 
cheques 
cleared/presented to Bank 
not 
yet 
of 
  USD 
  USD 
  USD 
  SIGNATURE 
  Name in full   
  Title in Full 
23
5 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex XIV: Checklist for Withdrawal Application 
23
6 
xxxxxxLoan/Grant(cid:9)No.WA(cid:9)No.FORM(cid:9)100(cid:9)-(cid:9)APPLICATION(cid:9)FOR(cid:9)WITHDRAWALYes(cid:9)or(cid:9)No1.(cid:9)Sequential(cid:9)numbering(cid:9)of(cid:9)withdrawal(cid:9)application2.(cid:9)Withdrawal(cid:9)application(cid:9)amount(cid:9)tallies(cid:9)with(cid:9)sequentially(cid:9)numbered(cid:9)summary(cid:9)sheets3.(cid:9)Categories/subcategories(cid:9)charged(cid:9)according(cid:9)to(cid:9)schedule(cid:9)2(cid:9)of(cid:9)financing(cid:9)agreement4.(cid:9)Percentage(cid:9)of(cid:9)financing(cid:9)applicable(cid:9)for(cid:9)each(cid:9)category(cid:9)or(cid:9)subcategory5.(cid:9)Availability(cid:9)of(cid:9)funds(cid:9)in(cid:9)categories(cid:9)and(cid:9)the(cid:9)overall(cid:9)financing(cid:9)amount6.(cid:9)Currency(cid:9)of(cid:9)payment7.(cid:9)Completeness(cid:9)and(cid:9)accuracy(cid:9)of(cid:9)banking(cid:9)instructions8.(cid:9)Complete(cid:9)name(cid:9)and(cid:9)address(cid:9)of(cid:9)correspondent(cid:9)bank9.(cid:9)WA(cid:9)is(cid:9)signed(cid:9)by(cid:9)Authorized(cid:9)Representative10.(cid:9)Expenditure(cid:9)summary(cid:9)sheet(cid:9)by(cid:9)category(cid:9)attachedSTATEMENT(cid:9)OF(cid:9)EXPENDITURE1.(cid:9)Eligibility(cid:9)of(cid:9)expenditures(cid:9)claimed(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(a)(cid:9)Within(cid:9)SOE(cid:9)financial(cid:9)ceiling(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(b)(cid:9)Expenditures(cid:9)under(cid:9)specific(cid:9)category(cid:9)[-----](cid:9)eligibility2.(cid:9)Form(cid:9)102(cid:9)signed(cid:9)by(cid:9)designated(cid:9)Project(cid:9)Accountant,(cid:9)Project(cid:9)Director,(cid:9)Authorized(cid:9)Representative3.(cid:9)Form(cid:9)102(cid:9)supported(cid:9)by(cid:9)signed(cid:9)Form(cid:9)101(cid:9)(for(cid:9)items(cid:9)reported(cid:9)in(cid:9)2,(cid:9)but(cid:9)over(cid:9)the(cid:9)financial(cid:9)ceiling)DESIGNATED(cid:9)ACCOUNT(cid:9)–(cid:9)REPLENISHMENT(cid:9)REQUESTS1.(cid:9)Amount(cid:9)within(cid:9)ceiling(cid:9)figure(cid:9)agreed(cid:9)as(cid:9)a(cid:9)reasonable(cid:9)limit(cid:9)[--(cid:9)US$(cid:9)or(cid:9)--];(cid:9)or(cid:9)per(cid:9)AWP/B(cid:9)period2.(cid:9)Amount(cid:9)at(cid:9)least(cid:9)equal(cid:9)to(cid:9)30(cid:9)per(cid:9)cent(cid:9)of(cid:9)the(cid:9)advance(cid:9)or(cid:9)3(cid:9)months(cid:9)of(cid:9)expenditure;(cid:9)(cid:9)3.(cid:9)Amount(cid:9)agreed(cid:9)sufficient(cid:9)to(cid:9)cover(cid:9)a(cid:9)specific(cid:9)reporting(cid:9)period(cid:9)(revolving(cid:9)fund(cid:9)option)4.(cid:9)Exchange(cid:9)rate(cid:9)used5.(cid:9)Completeness(cid:9)of(cid:9)designated(cid:9)account(cid:9)banking(cid:9)and(cid:9)account(cid:9)details6.(cid:9)Enclosed(cid:9)designated(cid:9)account(cid:9)reconciliation(cid:9)and(cid:9)bank(cid:9)statementsSUPPORTING(cid:9)DOCUMENTATION(cid:9)(attached(cid:9)when/if(cid:9)required)1.(cid:9)Copy(cid:9)of(cid:9)contract2.(cid:9)Copy(cid:9)of(cid:9)invoice,(cid:9)certified(cid:9)by(cid:9)Project(cid:9)Director3.(cid:9)Copy(cid:9)of(cid:9)bank(cid:9)guarantee(cid:9)and(cid:9)performance(cid:9)guarantee(cid:9)(for(cid:9)advance(cid:9)payment)4.(cid:9)Copy(cid:9)of(cid:9)delivery(cid:9)receipt5.(cid:9)Copy(cid:9)of(cid:9)evidence(cid:9)of(cid:9)payment6.(cid:9)Completed(cid:9)Form(cid:9)1017.(cid:9)Completed(cid:9)Form(cid:9)102(cid:9)(A(cid:9)or(cid:9)B)(cid:9)including(cid:9)reference(cid:9)to(cid:9)AWPB,(cid:9)name(cid:9)of(cid:9)the(cid:9)supplier,(cid:9)invoice(cid:9)contract(cid:9)number,(cid:9)total(cid:9)contract(cid:9)value,(cid:9)date(cid:9)of(cid:9)payment,(cid:9)list(cid:9)of(cid:9)supporting(cid:9)documentation,(cid:9)and(cid:9)payment(cid:9)reference(cid:9)(bank/(cid:9)cash)PROCUREMENT1.(cid:9)Copy(cid:9)of(cid:9)‘no(cid:9)objection(s)’(cid:9)provided(cid:9)by(cid:9)IFAD(cid:9)(attached)2.(cid:9)Copy(cid:9)of(cid:9)Contract(cid:9)Payment(cid:9)Monitoring(cid:9)Form(s)(cid:9)-duly(cid:9)Signed(cid:9)(cid:9)(attached)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)3.(cid:9)Copy(cid:9)of(cid:9)Register(cid:9)of(cid:9)contracts(cid:9)with(cid:9)regerence(cid:9)to(cid:9)th(cid:9)eprocurment(cid:9)plan-(cid:9)duly(cid:9)signed(cid:9)(attached)(cid:9)COMPLIANCE(cid:9)WITH(cid:9)CONDITION(S)(cid:9)FOR(cid:9)DISBURSEMENT1.(cid:9)In(cid:9)accordance(cid:9)with(cid:9)terms(cid:9)in(cid:9)section(cid:9)E(cid:9)of(cid:9)the(cid:9)Financing(cid:9)Agreement2.(cid:9)In(cid:9)accordance(cid:9)with(cid:9)terms(cid:9)in(cid:9)the(cid:9)Letter(cid:9)to(cid:9)the(cid:9)Borrower/RecipientEXPENDITURE(cid:9)INCURRED/COMMITTED(cid:9)BEFORE(cid:9)PROJECT(cid:9)COMPLETION(cid:9)DATE1.(cid:9)Expenditure(cid:9)verified(cid:9)as(cid:9)eligible:(a)(cid:9)contract(cid:9)signed(cid:9)before(cid:9)project(cid:9)completion(cid:9)date(b)(cid:9)goods(cid:9)delivered(cid:9)before(cid:9)project(cid:9)completion(cid:9)date(c)(cid:9)services(cid:9)completed(cid:9)and/or(cid:9)rendered(cid:9)before(cid:9)project(cid:9)completion(cid:9)dateRemarks:Prepared(cid:9)by:(cid:9)Project(cid:9)AccountantDated:(cid:9)xx/xx/xxDated:(cid:9)xx/xx/xxCertified(cid:9)by:(cid:9)Project(cid:9)Director 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Annex XV: Sample Project    Financial Statements 
Project Name……………………………….. 
Implementing Agency……………………… 
IFAD Loan/Grant Number…………………….. 
PROJECT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X 
Prepared in accordance with the Cash Basis of Accounting Method of the International 
Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) 
23
7 
PIM Y2RRDP 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X 
CONTENTS  
  PAGE 
Project Information and performance                                                                                                                                       
1 
Statement of project management responsibilities  2 
Report of the independent auditor                                                                                                                                                 
3 
Statement of cash receipts and payments (by category)                                                                               
4 
Statement of cash receipts and payments (by component)                                                                     
5 
Statement of comparative budget and actual amount                                                                                       
6 
Statement of Special Account movements                                                                                                                       
7 
Statement of Special Account Reconciliations                                                                                                           
8 
SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement                                                                                                                             
9 
Notes to the Financial Statements                                                                                                                                               
10-11 
23
8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
PROJECT INFORMATION AND PERFORMANCE 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
  Institutional  Details/Information:    Implementing  agency,  status,  location, 
names, account numbers and address of bankers (Special and Project accounts) 
name and address of independent auditors 
  Members of the Project Coordinating Unit: Names and roles 
  Background  Information  on  the  Project:  Source  of  financing:  size  of 
Loan/Grant(s), effective and closing date(s) 
  Project Objectives:      As per Design Completion/Appraisal Report 
  Project Costs: By component and category of expenditures as per Financing 
Agreement    and Design Completion/Appraisal Report 
  Summary  of  Performance:  Physical  progresses  as  per  Progress/Supervision 
Reports 
23
9 
PIM Y2RRDP 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
ACCOUNTING 
OF 
STATEMENT 
COORDINATOR’S RESPONSIBILITIES 
OFFICER 
AND 
PROJECT 
24
0 
PIM Y2RRDP 
24
1 
 PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER  STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES)  FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X        Notes 200X 200X-1 Cumulative to date    Local currency Local currency Local currency  Balance B/F 4 XXX XXX   FINANCING            IFAD Credit           Initial Deposit    XXX      Replenishments to SA  XXX XXX XXX      IFAD Direct Payments 5 XXX XXX XXX  Government Funds 6 XXX XXX XXX  Other Donors 7     Other Receipts 8              TOTAL FINANCING  XXX XXX XXX              PROJECT EXPENDITURES:      (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES)     Cat IFAD CREDIT     1 AAA 9 XXX XXX XXX 2 BBB 9 XXX XXX XXX 3 CCC  XXX XXX XXX 4 DDD  XXX XXX XXX 5 EEE  XXX XXX XXX 6 GGG  XXX XXX XXX 7 HHH  XXX XXX XXX 8 LLL  XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX              Government Funds     1 AAA  XXX XXX XXX 2 BBB  XXX XXX XXX  TOTAL  XXX XXX XXX        TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES  XXX XXX XXX        BALANCE C/F 4 XXX XXX XXX   
PIM Y2RRDP 
24
2 
 PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER  STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY COMPONENT)  FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X        Notes 200X 200X-1 Cumulative to date    Local currency Local currency Local currency  Balance B/F 4 XXX XXX   FINANCING            IFAD Credit           Initial Deposit    XXX      Replenishments to SA  XXX XXX XXX      IFAD Direct Payments 5 XXX XXX XXX  Government Funds 6 XXX XXX XXX  Other Donors 7     Other Receipts 8              TOTAL FINANCING  XXX XXX XXX              PROJECT EXPENDITURES:      (BY COMPONENT)     Comp IFAD CREDIT     A AAA  XXX XXX XXX B BBB  XXX XXX XXX C CCC  XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX        Government Funds     A AAA  XXX XXX XXX B BBB  XXX XXX XXX  TOTAL  XXX XXX XXX        TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES  XXX XXX XXX        BALANCE C/F 4 XXX XXX XXX   
PIM Y2RRDP 
24
3 
 PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER  STATEMENT OF COMPARISON OF BUDGET AND ACTUAL AMOUNTS  FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X         200X Budget 200X Actual Variance         Notes Local currency Local currency Local currency    XXX XXX XXX  FINANCING            IFAD Credit          Replenishments to SA  XXX XXX XXX      IFAD Direct Payments  XXX XXX XXX  Government Funds  XXX XXX XXX           TOTAL FINANCING  XXX XXX XXX              PROJECT EXPENDITURES:      (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES)    Cat IFAD CREDIT     1 AAA  XXX XXX XXX 2 BBB  XXX XXX XXX 3 CCC  XXX XXX XXX 4 DDD  XXX XXX XXX 5 EEE  XXX XXX XXX 6 GGG  XXX XXX XXX 7 HHH  XXX XXX XXX 8 LLL  XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX              Government Funds     1 AAA  XXX XXX XXX 2 BBB  XXX XXX XXX  TOTAL  XXX XXX XXX        TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES XXX XXX XXX        Surplus/Deficit for the period          XXX         XXX          XXX       The excess/deficit of actual expenditures over the Budget of X% was due to….   
PIM Y2RRDP 
(as per Bank Statement) 
Include reconciliation with IFAD records 
24
4 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER STATEMENT OF SPECIAL ACCOUNT ACTIVITIES FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X Account No:  ___________     Bank: ________________     Address:_______________               USD (or as otherwise  denominated) Local Currency Equiv Opening Balance  Notes      XXX XXX       Add:      IFAD Replenishments:     Date WA No XXX    Date WA No XXX      XXX  XXX XXX Bank Interests    XXX XXX Total    XXX XXX       Deduct:      Transfers to Operating Accounts:    Date  XXX    Date  XXX      XXX  XXX XXX       Bank Charges    XXX XXX Exchange Rate Difference  XXX XXX Closing Balance as at 31/12/200X  XXX XXX   
PIM Y2RRDP 
24
5 
 PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER  STATEMENT OF SPECIAL ACCOUNT RECONCILIATION  FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X         Account No:  ___________       Bank: ________________       Address:_______________           USD (or as otherwise  denominated) Local Currency Equiv     Notes   1 Initial Deposit    XXXX XXXX 2 Less amount(s) recovered:    XXXX XXXX 3 Outstanding Amount advanced    XXXX XXXX         Represented by:      4 Special Account Balance as at 31/12/200X    XXXX XXXX        5 Plus amounts claimed but not yet credited as at 31/12/200X:       WA XXX Date     WA XXX Date      XXX   XXXX XXXX         Plus amounts withdrawan not yet claimed, composed of:               Was Prepared not yet submitted:       WA XXX      WA XXX       XXX             Was not yet prepared: XXX            6 Total amount withdrawan not yet claimed    XXXX XXXX        7 Less Interest earned and/or plus Bank charges (if included in the Special Account)    XXXX XXXX        8 Total Special Account Advance as at 31/12/200X    XXXX XXXX         Difference between Line 3 and line 8    XXXX XXXX         Notes:       
PIM Y2RRDP 
Withdrawal  Applications  are  submitted  for  reimbursement  to  IFAD    using  the 
historical exchange rate of the transfers to the Operating Account 
Expenditures rejected by IFAD (if any) should be detailed here. 
This statement should be reconciled with the Statement of Receipts and Payments and 
include reconciliation with IFAD records 
24
6 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER SOEs-WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X by Category of Expenditures  in Local Currency Notes   Category description Category description Total In USD Equivalent Rejected from IFAD Net Reimbursed  Cat No 1 2       WA No:                XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX  Total        XXX   WA Pending for Submission:          WA No: XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX              XXX  TOTAL XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX   
PIM Y2RRDP 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X 
1. 
FINANCIAL  REPORTING  UNDER  INTERNATIONAL  PUBLIC  SECTOR 
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS (IPSAS) 
In accordance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS),    notes 
to the financial statements of an entity should: 
  Present  any  information  about  the  basis  of  preparation  of  the  financial 
statements  and  the  specific  accounting  policies  selected  and  applied  for 
significant transactions and other events, and 
  Provide  additional  information  which  is  not  presented  on  the  face  of  the 
financial statements but is necessary for a fair presentation of the entity’s 
cash  receipts,  cash  payments,  cash  balances  and  other  statements  as 
statement of financial position 
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 
2 
The  principle  accounting  policies  adopted  in  the  preparation  of  these  financial 
statements are set out below: 
A  Basis of Preparation 
The  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  International 
Public  Sector Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS)  with  particular  emphasis  on  Cash 
Basis Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of Accounting 
B  Cash Basis of Accounting 
The cash basis of accounting recognizes transactions and events only when cash is 
received or paid by the entity. 
C Foreign Currency Transactions 
Cash  receipts  and  payments  arising  from  transactions  in  a  foreign  currency  are 
recorded in  the financial statements using the average rate of exchange.      Cash 
balances  held 
Gains/Losses  on  foreign  currency  transactions/balances  are  dealt  within  the 
Statement of Special Account Activities. 
in  foreign  currency  are  reported  using 
the  closing  rate.     
3 
BUDGET 
The  budget  is  developed  on  the  same  accounting  basis  (cash  basis),  same 
classification  and  for  the  same  period  as  the  financial  statements.      Material 
variances (above    XXX) have been explained as notes to the financial statements 
24
7 
PIM Y2RRDP 
CASH/FUND    BALANCES 
4 
                  Reconciliation 
Cash Accounts 
Advances 
4-a 
  CASH DETAILS   
A/c  No______    Project  Operating 
Account 
A/c  No_______  IFAD  Designated 
Account (as per DA Statement) 
Petty cash 
200X 
Loc 
currency 
200X-1 
Loc 
currency 
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
200X 
Loc 
currency 
200X-1 
Loc 
currency 
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
5 
DIRECT    PAYMENTS 
These payments were made directly by IFAD from the Loan account to the specified 
supplier/service  provider  in  accordance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the 
financing Agreement 
Include here details of direct payments 
WA,    Date,    currency and amount received, amount in local currency 
6  GOVERNMENT COUNTERPART FUNDS 
  Details  here.    Cumulative  contributions,  yearly  contributions  (compared  to 
budget).    Include details of counterpart contributions as tax exemption. 
Include details of tax treatments. 
7  OTHER DONOR FUNDS 
List of Donors 
200X 
Loc 
currency 
200X-1 
Loc 
currency 
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
Add details of cumulative and expected contributions   
8  OTHER RECEIPTS 
24
8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Interest Income 
other income (specify) 
9 
NON-CURRENT ASSETS 
Financial 
Currency 
Statement 
1 
Cat 
Infrastructure 
200X-
1 
200X 
200X 
Loc 
currency 
200X-1 
Loc 
currency 
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
  XXX   
-
Cat 2 Vehicles 
Cat 
Equipment 
3-
200X 
200X-
1 
200X-
1 
200X 
Opening Balance  XXX 
Additions 
(Statement 
Receipts 
Payments) 
Disposals 
Closing Balance 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
of 
and 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX  XXX 
XXX  XXX 
This  schedule  includes  all  assets  acquired  from  the  commencement  of  the  Project.   
These assets are stated at cost.      Existence and beneficial ownership to be verified by 
the auditors. 
  Apart of the summary schedule, details schedules for yearly changes to be included. 
10  YEARLY PROCUREMENTS 
Include here a list of the yearly procurements including methods 
24
9 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Chapter 9: Project Procurement 
301.  The  main  items  of  goods  to  be  procured  for  project  are  office  and  technical 
equipment and furniture. Other goods and materials will be procured following the 
local  shopping  (LS)  as  appropriate.  Civil works  will involve the  improvement of 
rural  infrastructure,  including  irrigation  and  drinking  water  supply  facilities  and 
village roads. They will be procured by using NBF and LCB or LS, depending on the 
nature  of  expenditure  and  the  estimated  value  of  the  related  contract.  Technical 
services, training, workshops and studies for the project will be procured by using 
Direct Contracting or NBF method.   
302.  The following Table presents a summary of the procurement methods. Figures in 
parenthesis are the respective amounts financed by IFAD. 
303. Procurement of goods, works and services financed by the project will be carried 
out in accordance with the Procurement Law of the People's Republic of China 
(2002) and its amendments to the extent that they are consistent with the provisions 
of IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines and Handbook (2010) and its 
amendments. The procurement methods to be applied, prior review arrangements, 
and the thresholds for different procurement methods will depend on the 
25
0 
ChinaY2RDP  PDRProcurement ArrangementsLocal(US$ '000)CompetitiveLocalDirectBiddingShoppingContractingN.B.F.TotalA. Civil work---86,311.186,311.1 B. Smart civil work20,482.9---20,482.9 (18,434.6)(18,434.6)C. Equipment and material-156.3-129.7286.0 (140.7)(140.7)D. Training, workshop, capacity building  & TA--8,781.2490.09,271.2 (7,903.1)(7,903.1)E. Goods, services and inputs-3,338.0-265.23,603.3 (3,004.2)(3,004.2)F. Grants and subsidy--85,818.018,955.7104,773.7 (44,132.3)(44,132.3)G. Salary and allowances---2,986.02,986.0 (580.5)(580.5)H. Operating costs---3,801.53,801.5 (377.9)(377.9)I. Operations and maintenance---2,769.02,769.0Total20,482.93,494.494,599.2115,708.1234,284.6(18,434.6)(3,144.9)(52,035.4)(958.3)(74,573.3)Note: Figures in parenthesis are the respective amounts financed by IFADProcurement Method 
PIM Y2RRDP 
expenditure and the estimated value of the contract and will be detailed in the letter 
to the borrower.   
304. A procurement plan covering a period of 18 months is prepared, attached as table 2 
& 3, as part of AWPBs to be reviewed by IFAD. Fist AWPB is also prepared and 
attached as table 1. The procurement plan is based on the individual procurement 
plans prepared by each county and the Provincial PMO, the plan contains 
information of goods disaggregated into different modules and the project 
management component. It is live plan and will be amended/updated accordingly 
during the course of project. The project will, during the project implementation 
period, use national procurement regulations and items of specific applicability will 
be identified clearly in procurement plans that are submitted to IFAD along with 
AWP&B. 
305. Details on procurement review by IFAD, including prior and post reviews; 
modifications etc. are explained in Appendix I of the IFAD Procurement Guideline 
Manual.    The CPMOs/PPMO will adhere to the National including those of the 
Provincial and IFAD procurement requirements and maintain all relevant 
documents, bids, purchase orders and payment vouchers for post review by IFAD 
and for audit purpose 
306. Community participation in procurement (CPP) where appropriate, may be 
considered for some interventions. The Appendix II of the IFAD Procurement 
Guideline Manual outlines the considerations in this respect. The CPMO, in 
coordination with the PPMO will workout the detailed procedures and regulations 
relevant to community participation in procurement, where needed. The principals 
of transparency, competition, participatory monitoring, and joint decision-making 
will be adhered at all levels. County PMOs will also involve themselves in 
monitoring the procurement process, and ensure compliance of procedures and 
principals such those procurement methods as Local Shopping and Local 
Competitive Bidding.   
25
1 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 2: Procurement Plan for first 18 Months (Civil Works) 
表2 Table 2合同编号Contractnumber合同内容Contract contents单位 Unit估计数量 AmountEstimated预算成本（人民币千元）Budget(CNY'000)预算成本（美元千元）Budget(US$'000)采购方式Procuremethods是否前审（Y/N）priorreview预计执行期限Expectedexecutionperiod采购组织单位organization合计Total土建类合计Civil works 65,757.75      9,300.95   AB-W-20-XXX池塘 Pond个 set154            4,138.30        585.33        NCBN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX蓄水池 Storages个 set 121            1,311.18        185.46        NCBN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX灌溉系统 Irrigation system目 mu2,403          7,948.49        1,124.26      NCBY2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX管道 Pipeline公里 km691            32,232.88       4,559.11      NCBY2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX泵站 Pumping stations座 set8              7,690.67        1,087.79      NCBN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX灌溉渠道 Canal公里 km34             4,498.78        636.32        NCBY2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX人畜饮水 Domestic water套 set5              2,314.87        327.42      NCBN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-W-20-XXX渠配路 修复 Rural road,rehabilitation公里 km             995,622.58        795.3         NCB Y2020.8 - 2021.12货物合计 Goods TotalAB-G-20-XXX县项目办办公设备 Officeequipments and supplies ofcountiesLot7746.03          105.5LSN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-G-20-XXX县孵化中心设备货物 Goodsequipment for county incubationcentersLot7802.45          113.5LSN2020.8 - 2021.12货物合计Total goods 1,548.47       219.02     备注：1、土建类合同编码为：AB县-W-年份+序号(序号为001开始，依此类推），例如镇雄土建第一合同编码为ZX-W-20-001 Note for numbering      2、货物类合同编码为：AB县-G-年份+序号(序号为001开始，依此类推），例如镇雄货物第一合同编码为ZX-G-20-001                                            国际农发基金贷款云南乡村振兴示范项目 Y2RDP                                  2020-21 年度项目采购计划汇总表（工程类）18 month Procurement Plan (Civil Works)  
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table 3: Procurement Plan for first 18 Months (Services) 
附表3合同编号 ContractNo.任务描述 Activities预算成本（人民币千元）Budget(CNY'00预算成本（美元千元）Budget(US$'000)选择方式 MethodPrior Review是否前审（Y/N）合同预期Executing Period执行期组织采购单位 Organizingparty咨询类 Consultancy6140.78868.57AB-C-20-XXX合作社达标论证 Coop certification325.2246.00CQSY2020.8 - 2021.12 AB-C-20-XXX孵化中心技术支持 TA forincubation centers3673.64519.61CQSN2020.4 - 2021.10 AB-C-20-XXX金融服务咨询 Rural Finance TA1081.42152.96CQSN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-C-20-XXX项目办技术咨询 TA for PMOs1060.50150.00CQSN2020.4 - 2021.10服务类 Service6419.18907.95AB-S-20-XXX项目基线调查 Baseline Survey473.6967.00QCBSY2020.4 - 2021.10AB-S-20-XXX监测评价服务 M&E service1604.89227.00LCN2020.8 - 2021.12AB-S-20-XXX管理信息系统开发MIS Development713.05100.86CQSY2020.4 - 2021.10AB-S-20-XXX地方工作人员培训 Local stafftraining2828.00400.00LCN2020.4 - 2021.10AB-S-20-XXX国内培训 Domestic training 799.55113.09LCN2020.4 - 2021.10合计Total12,559.96   1,776.51     备注：1、咨询类合同编码为：AB县-C-年份+序号(序号为001开始，依此类推），例如镇雄土建第一合同编码为ZX-C-20-001
Note for numbering       2、服务类合同编码为：AB县-S-年份+序号(序号为001开始，依此类推），例如镇雄土建第一合同编码为ZX-S-20-001 国际农发基金贷款云南乡村振兴示范项目 Y2RDP  2020-21 年度项目采购计划汇总表（咨询服务类）18 month Procurement Plan (Services) 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Table: 1 First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
IFADGovBenOpeTotalIFADGovBenOpeTotal农发政府受益人经营主体合计农发政府受益人经营主体合计A.1A1.1 Upgrading cooperative meeting合作社标准化改造1. Payment to cooperative  meeting 改造费用支付份1,204.7               133.9                  -     -         1,338.5       120.5     13.4      -    -       133.9      10%2. Verification expenses 论证费用84.7                     9.4                       -     -         94.2          28.8      3.2       -    -       32.0       34%3. Investment on pro-poor cooperatives合格合作社的投资7,339.9               -      -     4,893.2               12,233.1      367.0     -       -    244.7     611.7      5%A1.2. Cooperative co-investment 一般合作社投资模式13,312.7             2,935.9               -     13,312.7             29,561.4      1,996.9   440.4     -    1,996.9   4,434.2    15%A1.3 Company-cooperative-householdsmodels 企业合作社农户模式16,019.8             10,679.9             -     16,019.8             42,719.4      2,403.0   1,602.0   -    2,403.0   6,407.9    15%A1.4 Other innovative models 其它创新模式5,339.9               5,339.9               -     5,339.9               16,019.8      801.0     801.0     -    801.0     2,403.0    15%A1.5. Product traceability system 产品追溯体系179.6                   20.0                     -     -         199.6         71.9      8.0       -    -       79.8       40%A1.6 Improving climate information|andadoptation advice 天气智慧生产服务1,416.7               157.4                  -     -         1,574.2       283.3     31.5      -    -       314.8      20%小 计 Subtotal44,898.1   19,276.4   -    39,565.7   103,740.1   6,072.3  2,899.4  -   5,445.5  14,417.3  14%A.2Stimulating entreprenuership andBusiness Services 创业孵化与服务A2.1. Business incubation / Servicecentres 孵化中心226.9                   25.2                     -             -                       252.1                      45.4      5.0       -    -       50.4       20%A2.2. Technical assistance to theservice centre 技术援助3,117.7               346.4                  -             -                       3,464.1                   311.8     34.6      -    -       346.4      10%A.2.3 Start up Investment 创业启动投资2,120.0               -                       -             2,120.0               4,240.0                   106.0     -       -    106.0     212.0      5%A2.4 Operation cost 运行费用958.3                   526.4                  -             -                       1,484.7                   191.7     105.3     -    -       296.9      20%小 计 Subtotal6,422.9               898.0                  -             2,120.0               9,440.9                   654.82   144.96   -   106.00   905.78    10%A.3Improving access to finance 金融服务A3.1 Strengthening financial capacity能力建设242.9                   27.0                     -             -                       269.9                      48.59     5.40      -    -       53.99      20%A3.2 Improving financial advisoryservices 改进咨询服务215.9                   24.0                     -             -                       239.9                      43.19     4.80      -    -       47.99      20%小 计 Subtotal458.9                   51.0                     -             -                       509.9                      91.78    10.20    -   -      101.97    20%51,779.9         20,225.3        -         41,685.7        113,690.9         6,818.9       3,054.6       -       5,551.5       15,425.0       14%表Table 1：                                      国际农发基金贷款云南乡村振兴示范项目 Y2RDP                                       2020-21AWPB by Component 项目实施与投资费用计划汇总表（按建设内容）报告单位：云南省项目办  By Provincial PMO                    报告日期：   2020 年1 M  月1  D日                                   Unit 单位：千美元 '000 USD项目目标 Project Total Budget 2020-2021 Plan 年度计划序号项目活动 Project Activities单位 Unit规模Number占目标%A、Improving Chanyefupin Model 改进产业扶贫模式规模 Number投资费用 Financier投资费用 Budget & FinancierTotal Component A 
PIM Y2RRDP 
IFADGovBenOpeTotalIFADGovBenOpeTotal农发政府受益人经营主体合计农发政府受益人经营主体合计B.1 气候智能基础设施发展Climate SmartIrrigation InfrastructureB1.1 Design and Planning 气候智能基设规划与设计347.138.6-             -                       385.7104.1    11.6       -    -        115.7     30%B1.2 Infrastructures 设施建设池塘 Pond个 set513        1,170.7130.1-             -                       1,300.7351.2     39.0        -    -          390.2      30%蓄水池 Storages个 set 404        370.941.2-             -                       412.1111.3     12.4        -    -          123.6      30%灌溉系统 Irrigation system目 mu8,010      2,248.5249.8-             -                       2,498.3674.6     75.0        -    -          749.5      30%管道 Pipeline公里 km2,304      9,118.21013.1-             -                       10,131.32,735.5   303.9       -    -          3,039.4    30%泵站 Pumping stations座 set28         2,175.6241.7-             -                       2,417.3652.7     72.5        -    -          725.2      30%灌溉渠道 Canal公里 km113        1,272.6141.4-             -                       1,414.0381.8     42.4        -    -          424.2      30%人畜饮水 Domestic water套 set16         654.872.8-             -                       727.6196.5     21.8        -    -          218.3      30%用水者协会 Support to WUA个 each17.21.9-             -                       19.15.2       0.6         -    -          5.7        30%渠配路 修复 Rural road, rehabilitation公里 km331        2,385.8265.1-             -                       2,650.9715.7     79.5        -    -          795.3      30%设施管护 O&M0.00.0687.0         -                       687.0-       -         137.4  -          137.4      20%小 计 Subtotal19,414.42,157.2687.00.022,258.55,928.4  658.7      137.4  -        6,724.6   30%B.2Public Rural infrastructure 公共基础设施B2.1设计监测费用 Infrastructure designand supervision-                       8,689.4               -             -                       8,689.4                   2,606.82    -    -          2,606.82   30%B2.2基础设施建设 Infrastructureinvestment农田道路 Rural/Farm road-                       37,928.6             -             -                       37,928.6                15,171.5    -    -          15,171     40%水源和水池 Water source and storages-                       10,226.0             -             -                       10,226.0                4,090.4     -    -          4,090.4    40%渠道管道等 Canals and pipelines-                       18,544.7             -             -                       18,544.7                7,417.9     -    -          7,417.9    40%其它公共设施 Other infrastructures-                       10,922.3             -             -                       10,922.3                4,368.9     -    -          4,368.9    40%小 计 Subtotal77,621.7             77,621.7                -      33,655.5   -    -        33,655.5  43%Total Component B19,414.36           79,778.80           686.98      -                       99,880.13              5,928.4  34,314.2   137.4  -        40,380.0  40%表Table 1：                                      国际农发基金贷款云南乡村振兴示范项目 Y2RDP                                       2020-21AWPB by Component 项目实施与投资费用计划汇总表（按建设内容）报告单位：云南省项目办  By Provincial PMO                    报告日期：   2020 年1 M  月1  D日                                   Unit 单位：千美元 '000 USD项目目标 Project Total Budget 2020-2021 Plan 年度计划序号项目活动 Project Activities单位 Unit规模Number占目标%B、公共基础设施和服务Improving infrastructure climate resilience规模 Number投资费用 Financier投资费用 Budget & Financier 
PIM Y2RRDP 
IFADGovBenOpeTotalIFADGovBenOpeTotal农发政府受益人经营主体合计农发政府受益人经营主体合计3.1 项目办设备 PMO equipment140.7145.30.00.0286.070.3        72.7        -    -          143.0      50%3.2 项目培训研讨能力建设等 Training,workshop etc.1710.3522.60.00.02232.9342.1       104.5       -    -          446.6      20%3.3 项目监测与评估 M&E and KM related1180.9553.90.00.01734.8236.2       110.8       -    -          347.0      20%3.4 项目办运行 Office operation0.02961.70.00.02961.7-         592.3       -    -          592.3      20%3.5 办公室人员 Office staff 0.02341.00.00.02341.0-         468.2       -    -          468.2      20%小 计 Subtotal3031.96524.50.00.09556.4648.6     1,348.5    -    -        1,997.1   21%3,031.91             6,524.49             -             -                       9,556.40                648.6     1,348.5    -    -        1,997.1   21%74,226.2   106,528.6  687.0  41,685.7   223,127.5   13,396.0  38,717.3   137.4  5,551.5    57,802.2  26%表Table 1：                                      国际农发基金贷款云南乡村振兴示范项目 Y2RDP                                       2020-21AWPB by Component 项目实施与投资费用计划汇总表（按建设内容）报告单位：云南省项目办  By Provincial PMO                    报告日期：   2020 年1 M  月1  D日                                   Unit 单位：千美元 '000 USD项目目标 Project Total Budget 2020-2021 Plan 年度计划Total component C Total合计序号项目活动 Project Activities单位 Unit规模Number占目标%3、项目管理与能力建设 Project Management 规模 Number投资费用 Financier投资费用 Budget & Financier 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  Chapter 10: Draft Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
  Objective 
307. 
The objective of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is to make 
sure that all environmental, social and climate change risks related to the project’s 
activities and investments are properly identified, managed and mitigated. For more 
details on the risks related to the project, see the full analysis in the SECAP main 
document. The below table outlines the projects interventions and related risks and 
mitigation measures, how their effectiveness will be monitored and who will be 
responsible, and the related budget. This framework shall be finalized as part of the 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) at project start up and updated and adjusted as 
need be during project implementation.         
Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM) 
308. 
The project will follow IFAD's Complaints Procedure which ensures that appropriate 
mechanisms are in place to allow individuals and communities to contact IFAD directly 
and file a complaint if they believe they are or might be adversely affected by an IFAD-
funded project/programme not complying with IFAD's Social and Environmental Policies 
and mandatory aspects of SECAP. 
309. 
IFAD's Grievance and Redress Mechanism shall be fully explained to stakeholders 
during the programme's start-up workshop and to beneficiaries during the programme's 
activities. The complainants should first bring the matter to the attention of the County 
Project Management Offices (PMOs) of the County Agriculture and Rural Development 
Agencies (CARAs) or the Provincial Project management Office (PPMO) of the 
Provincial Agriculture and Rural Development Agency (DARA). If the PMOs or PPMO 
do not adequately respond, the matter may be brought to the attention of IFAD. The issue 
may also be brought straight to IFAD if the complainants feel they might be subject to 
retaliation if they bring it first to the PMOs or the PPMO. 
310. 
Grievances shall be addressed at the field level by the project team which will be the 
first layer of redressal mechanism. If the grievance is not resolved at the field level, it will 
be escalated to the PPMO and then to IFAD who will be responsible for addressing 
grievances related to violations of the Programme's SECAP reflecting IFAD’s social and 
environmental policies and standards. 
311. 
As provided by IFAD’s Policy on prevention and response to Sexual Exploitation 
and Abuse (SEA, 2018), all contracts with project personnel, contractors, service 
providers and other third parties, that are funded with IFAD funds, must include 
provisions: (i) for prohibiting acts of AES; (ii) that establish the obligation to immediately 
report to IFAD or the Government incidents of SEA; and (iii) that establish immediate 
termination of contract based on proven acts of SEA. 
312. 
Likewise, all contracts with contractors and service providers and other third parties 
must include provisions for the protection of labour rights and working conditions. 
25
7 
PIM Y2RRDP 
313. 
All grievances (including reports on SEA and violations of worker rights and 
conditions) received and action taken to address them will be reported to the relevant 
PMO, PPMO and the Steering committee. The PMOs and the PPMO shall ensure that all 
complaints received and actions taken are included in the progress reports to IFAD. 
314. 
As detailed in the ESMP table below, all infrastructure investments are foreseen to 
be within IFAD’s environmental and social risk category B. As part of the approval of 
any concrete infrastructure investment to be financed under the project, the PMOs 
(monitored by the PPMO) must verify if its dimensions are exceeding the thresholds 
listed in the table below, which would trigger an environmental risk category A. In the 
case the thresholds are exceeded IFAD must be contacted before any investments are 
made to discuss and agree on the environmental and social impact assessments needed 
and risk mitigation measures to be implemented. 
Criteria and thresholds for infrastructure investments that will trigger an environmental and 
social risk category A 
Irrigation 
The  investment  include  the  construction/  rehabilitation/upgrade  of 
dam(s)  and/or  reservoir(s)  meeting  at  least  one  of  the  following 
criteria   
-  more than 15 metre high wall;   
-  more than 500 metre long crest;   
-  more than 3 million m3 reservoir capacity; or   
-  incoming flow of more than 2,000 m3/s   
The investment involve large-scale irrigation schemes rehabilitation 
and/or development (more than 100 hectares per scheme)14   
The investment include drainage or correction of natural waterbodies 
investment 
extraction/diversion/ 
The 
containment  of  surface  water,  leaving  the  river  flow  below  20  per 
cent environmental flow plus downstream user requirements 
significant 
involve 
Roads 
All infrastructure 
The investment include construction/ rehabilitation/upgrade of roads 
that entail a total area being cleared above 10 km long, or any farmer 
with more than 10 per cent of his or her private land taken   
The  investment  will  cause  significant  adverse  impacts  to  habitats 
and/or ecosystems and their services (e.g. conversion of more than 
50 hectares  of  natural  forest,  loss  of  habitat,  erosion/other  form  of 
land degradation, fragmentation and hydrological changes). 
The investment area include ecologically sensitive areas,15  areas of 
14  The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary 
based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. China’s regulations determining size of 
irrigation development requiring a full ESIA will be adopted where they exist. However, where there 
are no standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares as an irrigation development unit size to trigger 
an ESIA. 
15   “Sensitive  areas”  include:  protected  areas  (national  parks,  wildlife/nature  reserves,  biosphere 
reserves)  and  their  buffer  zones;  areas  of  global  significance  for  biodiversity  conservation;  habitats 
depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal  ecosystems, including coral 
reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and 
25
8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
global/national  significance  for  biodiversity  conservation,  and/or 
biodiversity-rich  areas  and  habitats  depended  on  by  endangered 
species 
The investment will result in economic displacement16  or physical 
resettlement of more than 20 people, or impacting more than 10 per 
cent of an individual household’s assets 
variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation, areas 
that  include  physical  cultural  resources  (of  historical,  religious,  archaeological  or  other  cultural 
significance), and areas with high social vulnerability. 
16  Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or 
means of livelihoods. 
25
9 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Interventions  Social,   
Mitigating Measure 
Monitoring 
Environmental  & 
Climate Risks 
All 
interventions 
Risks  not  mitigated 
causing 
adverse 
impacts on people and 
livelihoods 
the 
project area 
in 
  Make  sure  the  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism 
  Quarterly 
(GRM) is strictly applied.     
  Ensure  dissemination  of  the  GRM  to  local 
communities, contractors, service providers, other 
third parties and workers prior to starting project 
activities. 
  Maintain  solid  documentation  for  the  received 
complaints during the operation of the project and 
track  the  level  of  responsiveness  (provision  of 
feedback).   
review  of 
number 
complaints 
received. 
  Quarterly 
All 
interventions 
Social: 
Beneficiary 
Dissatisfaction 
  Collect  feedback  on  project  performance  and 
beneficiary satisfaction from women and men of 
various  ethnic  and  age  groups,  with  special 
and 
Responsible 
Institution 
the 
of 
  PMOs 
and 
PPMO. If not 
then 
solved 
IFAD.   
Cost 
All 
budget 
figures need to be 
checked 
completed  with 
the latest  version 
of the Costab 
  $2,000 
(PPMO 
admin 
budget) 
the 
the 
of 
review  of 
number 
complaints 
addressed, 
mechanisms 
used  and 
the 
time  it  took  to 
address them. 
  Annual  surveys. 
  PMOs 
PPMO 
and 
  $3,000 
(M&E 
budget) 
  
PIM Y2RRDP 
All 
interventions 
Discrimination 
Social: 
Gender  issues  and  all 
forms 
of  Gender 
Based  discrimination 
and  exclusion  from 
project  benefits  and 
leadership roles. 
representation  of  vulnerable  households,  through 
focus group discussions. 
  PMOs  and  PPMO  to  have  gender  and  social 
inclusion experts and gender balance among their 
staff. All staff to have minimum gender training. 
  Achievement of gender quotas for beneficiaries of 
the  various  activities  (on  average  at  least  50% 
women), as established in the Logframe and PIM, 
to be closely monitored. Corrective actions to be 
promptly taken if falling behind in achieving the 
targets. 
  Gender  training  for  men  and  women  raising 
awareness  on  gender  based  discrimination  and 
leadership  training  for  women  to  be  given  to 
cooperatives,  Water  Users 
members 
likes),  and  start-ups 
Associations  (or 
entrepreneur groups.   
their 
of 
All 
interventions 
on 
Environmental: 
Impact 
the 
protected  areas  and 
their  buffer  zones  in 
particular 
Yunnan 
Parallel 
Protected 
the   
Three 
Rivers 
Area 
  None  of  the  project  intervention  areas  will  be 
within  the  YPRPA.  Most  interventions  are  on 
already  existing  agricultural  land.  If  any  of  the 
intervention areas should be in the buffer zones of 
the  YPRPA  its  management  Bureau  must  be 
informed  and  asked  to  verify,  that  the  proposed 
activities  are  in  line  with  the  specific  zones 
management and use regulations. 
  Quarterly 
collecting 
gender 
disaggregated 
monitoring  and 
evaluation  data 
the 
track 
to 
extent  to  which 
have 
women 
been 
to 
participate  and 
benefit 
from 
project activities 
and take leading 
roles 
and 
positions.   
  Verification 
able 
time  a 
every 
new 
intervention 
approved.   
is 
  PMOs 
and 
PPMO  M&E 
responsible 
 
in 
Included 
M&E  budget 
and 
$5,000 
(Capacity 
building 
budget) 
  PMOs  with 
 
annual 
monitoring 
by 
PPMO 
the   
PIM Y2RRDP 
(YPRPA) 
Component A: Supporting Inclusive Rural Development 
Meet 
Activity A.1.1: 
Upgrading 
Cooperatives 
to 
Operational 
Standards 
Activity A.1.2: 
Matching 
Grant 
Support 
for 
Certified  Pro-
Poor  Farmer 
Professional 
Cooperatives 
Social:   
  Women,  Youth 
and 
vulnerable 
households are not 
benefiting 
from 
improved 
the 
the 
business  of 
cooperatives 
Social: (PIM chapter 3 attachment 1)   
  The  operational  standards  include  criteria  for 
inclusion  of  poor  households,  youth  and  women 
among the members and inclusion of women in the 
board 
  The operational standards include criteria for fair 
 
benefit sharing of profits. 
  Compliance with the standards will be verified by 
an independent third party 
  Business plan proposals to include an assessment 
of  all  social  exclusion  and  adverse  impact  risks 
and proper mitigation measures including measure 
to ensure inclusion and benefits to women youth 
and poor and vulnerable households     
Initial 
verification  and 
annual 
follow 
up  verification 
compliance 
of 
with 
social 
inclusion 
standards 
 
Independent 
third 
and 
and PPMO 
party 
PMOs 
  $5,000 
(M&E 
budget) 
Environmental: 
 
Increased 
production  with 
inadequate 
may 
practices 
increase 
soil 
erosion,  pollution 
from 
agrochemicals 
Environmental: (PIM chapter 3 attachment 2) 
  Business  plan  proposals 
to 
include:  1)  an 
assessment  of  all  environmental 
risks  and 
mitigation  measures  related  to  the  agricultural 
production and eventual processing activities; and 
2)  documentation  of  how  the  investments  in 
production  and  processing  activities  will  comply 
with  local  environmental  standards  and  required 
certificates 
PIM Y2RRDP 
and  waste  from 
processing 
activities 
  TAG and CARA to review the environmental risk 
assessment of the business plans and compliance 
with  IFAD  and  the  governments  environmental 
standards before the approval of the business plan 
and matching rant   
  Key  environmental  and  social  risk  mitigation 
measures 
the  Financing 
included 
Agreement  between  the  Cooperative  and  the 
county PMO 
to  be 
in 
resilience; 
adaptation 
  Training  and  technical  assistance  provided  as 
needed  to  the  cooperative  farmers,  livestock 
keepers and to operators and employees of related 
processing  plants  in:  improved  soil  and  water 
management  practices;  IPM;  other  practices 
increasing  production  sustainability  and  climate 
good 
and 
change 
manufacturing  practices  (waste  management  and 
resources  use  efficiency);  and  operation  of 
renewable energy technologies.     
Social: (PIM chapter 3 attachment 3) 
  Joint  investment  proposal  and  financing  plan 
investment  agreement  signed 
prepared  and 
between cooperatives, enterprise and the PPMO 
  The funding proposal and business plan must have 
a  clear  identification  and  socio-economic  profile 
of  beneficiary  households  (location,  number, 
Activity A.1.3: 
Cooperative 
Co-investor 
support 
Activity A.1.4: 
Company-
cooperative/h
Social: 
  Women,  Youth 
vulnerable 
and 
households are not 
benefiting 
from 
various 
the 
models 
  County 
PMOs  with 
periodic 
checks by the 
PPMO 
  Annually 
social 
monitoring    of 
cooperative’s 
compliance with 
environmental 
and 
safeguards 
including 
mitigation 
measures 
included  in  the 
business  plans 
and 
financing 
agreements 
all 
 
Independent 
third 
and 
and PPMO 
party 
PMOs 
  $5,000 
(Capacity 
building 
budget) 
 
Initial 
verification  and 
follow 
annual 
up  verification 
compliance 
of 
social 
with 
safeguards  and 
PIM Y2RRDP 
ousehold 
models 
Activity A.1.5: 
Other 
Innovative 
Models 
  Elite capture 
  Pressure  on  land 
tenure  of  poor 
from 
households 
increased 
land 
value 
poverty, ethnic minority, gender and age of main 
participant/beneficiary, farm size, etc.) 
inclusion 
standards 
  Project  funds  can  only  be  used  to  finance  the 
cooperative  or  household  investments  including 
joint  infrastructure  and  training  and  capacity 
building (no enterprise assets ca be funded) 
  No 
funding  will  be  provided  directly 
to 
enterprises,  but  will  be  channelled  through  the 
cooperatives or directly to farmers   
  The investment agreement to include agreement to 
third-party monitoring of the social safeguard and 
inclusion measures 
  China has a dual urban-rural land tenure system, 
where  urban  land  belongs  to  the  state  and  rural 
land  belongs  to  rural/farmer’s  collectives.  The 
user rights for rural land are distributed to the rural 
households to be used for agricultural production 
regulated  by  a  long-term  land-use  contract.  The 
households  can  lease  the  land  to  other  actors, 
however, 
and 
the 
implementation  of  joint  proposals  and  financing 
plans  small  land  holders  will  be  supported  to  be 
active  producers  in  the  cooperatives  as  a  viable 
alternative to leasing their land. 
development 
during 
  County 
PMOs  with 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Environmental: 
 
Increased 
production  with 
inadequate 
may 
practices 
soil 
increase 
erosion,  pollution 
from 
agrochemicals 
and  waste  from 
processing 
activities 
Environmental: (PIM chapter 3 attachment 2) 
 
Investment proposal and business plan to include: 
1)  an  assessment  of  all  environmental  risks  and 
mitigation  measures  related  to  the  agricultural 
production and eventual processing activities; and 
2)  documentation  of  how  the  investments  in 
production  and  processing  activities  will  comply 
with  local  environmental  standards  and  required 
certificates 
  TAG and CARA to review the environmental risk 
assessment of the business plans and compliance 
with  IFAD  and  the  governments  environmental 
standards before the approval of the business plan 
and matching rant   
  Key  environmental  and  social  risk  mitigation 
the  Financing 
included 
measures 
Agreement  between  the  Cooperative  and  the 
county PMO 
to  be 
in 
  Training  and  technical  assistance  provided  as 
needed  to  the  cooperative  farmers,  livestock 
keepers and to operators and employees of related 
processing  plants  in:  improved  soil  and  water 
management  practices;  IPM;  other  practices 
increasing  production  sustainability  and  climate 
change 
good 
and 
manufacturing  practices  (waste  management  and 
adaptation 
resilience; 
periodic 
checks by the 
PPMO 
  Annually 
social 
monitoring    of 
cooperative’s 
compliance with 
environmental 
and 
safeguards 
including 
mitigation 
measures 
included  in  the 
business  plans 
financing 
and 
agreements 
all 
PIM Y2RRDP 
resources  use  efficiency);  and  operation  of 
renewable energy technologies. 
Activity A.1.6: 
Establishment 
of 
County 
Traceability 
System 
Activity A.1.7: 
Improving 
Climate 
Information 
and 
Adaptation 
Advice. 
Activity A.2.1: 
Business 
Incubation/ 
Service 
Centres 
Activity A.2.2: 
Investment 
Support 
Start-ups 
for 
  No 
adverse 
environmental 
and  social  risks 
from 
foreseen 
these 
two 
activities 
Social: 
  Not  achieving  to 
include 
50% 
women among the 
supported 
youth 
by 
star-up 
investment grants 
Social: 
  Application  of  concrete  targeting  strategies  to 
attract  young  women  to  the  Business  Incubation 
Service Centers (BISC) in collaboration with the 
All-China-Women-Federation. 
  Monitor closely the participation of women among 
the beneficiaries, and take action if below 50%. 
Environmental: 
  Pollution 
improper 
management 
from 
of 
Environmental: 
  Business  plan  proposal  for  matching  grants  to 
include:  1)  an  assessment  of  all  environmental 
risks and mitigation measures related to the star-
  Quarterly 
collecting 
gender 
disaggregated 
monitoring  and 
evaluation  data 
to 
the 
track 
extent  to  which 
young  women 
are  benefitting 
the 
from 
 
  County 
PMOs 
periodically 
checked  by 
the PPMO 
PIM Y2RRDP 
from 
the 
waste 
start-up 
activity 
and inefficiency in 
use  of  water  and 
energy resources 
up activity; 2) documentation of how the activity 
will  comply  with  local  environmental  standards 
and  eventual  required  certificates;  and  3)  when 
relevant  priority  shall  be  given  to  renewable 
energy sources and water and waste recycling.   
  Evaluation  committee  of  matching  grants  to 
review the assessment of environmental and social 
risks  of  the  business  plans  and  the  adequacy  of 
proposed mitigation measures. 
in 
to  be 
  Key  environmental  and  social  risk  mitigation 
the  Financing 
included 
measures 
Agreement for the matching grant as needed 
  Training  and  technical  assistance  provided  as 
needed by the BISCs to the start-up entrepreneurs 
in: environmental and climate risk assessment and 
mitigation measures; proper management of solid 
waste  and  wastewater 
recycling; 
resources  use  efficiency;  and  operation  of 
renewable energy technologies.       
including 
Environmental: 
  Training 
in  environmental  and  social 
risk 
assessment to be included in the training of finance 
institutions 
  Environmental and social risks assessments to be 
included in the tools used by finance institutions to 
evaluate credit worthiness of credit applications   
Environmental: 
  Credit 
finance 
an 
in 
supports 
increase 
agricultural 
production  with 
inadequate 
Sub-
3.1.3 
component 
A.3: 
Improving 
access 
finance 
to 
matching 
grants. 
  Annually 
and 
monitoring    of 
Start-up 
activities 
their 
compliance with 
environmental 
and  social  risk 
mitigation 
measures 
  Annual 
monitoring 
of 
the  application 
of 
the 
assessment  tool 
supported 
by 
 
  County 
PMOs   
periodically 
checked  by 
the PPMO     
PIM Y2RRDP 
practices 
increasing 
soil 
erosion,  pollution 
from 
agrochemicals 
and  waste  from 
processing 
activities 
  Credit 
finance 
supports 
an 
increase  in  non-
agricultural 
activities  causing 
pollution 
from 
improper 
of 
management 
waste 
and 
inefficiency in use 
and 
of  water 
energy resources 
Social:   
  Economic 
Component B: Climate Proofed Public Infrastructure Planning & Development 
Activity B.1.1: 
Climate 
proofed 
irrigation 
planning, 
Social (PIM activity B.1.2 description) 
  Transparent, informed and documented discussion 
with  all  farmers  benefitting  from  the  planned 
to  reach  voluntary  signed 
irrigation  system 
consent  with  land user  rights  holders  for placing 
displacement  by 
of 
conversion 
farmland  to  water 
finance 
institutions 
  Six-monthly 
monitoring 
application 
environmental 
and  social  risk 
of 
of 
 
  County  PMO 
backed up by 
the  County 
Water 
PIM Y2RRDP 
& 
design 
decision 
making 
Activity  B.1.2 
Climate 
proofed 
Smart 
irrigation 
Activity  B.2.2 
Improvement 
and 
development 
of 
drinking 
water supply 
safe 
ponds  and  pools. 
Will  only  affect 
very  small  areas 
-100m2) 
(25m2 
and  no 
farmer 
affected  will  lose 
more than 10% of 
his/her land 
  Ad 
hoc 
organisation 
of 
O&M of irrigation 
systems 
and 
infrastructure may 
affect 
sustainability 
Environmental: 
  Downstream 
impacts  on  water 
ecological 
systems 
overuse  of 
water source 
  Conversion 
forest 
from 
the 
of 
to 
land 
management 
measures   
Bureaus 
needed 
as 
compensating 
water ponds or pools on their land. Farmers may 
decide 
farmers  by 
transferring user rights to land from non-affected 
farmers.   
affected 
  Establishment of water users associations (WUA) 
or other O&M associations/groups at the irrigation 
infrastructure planning phase and involve them in 
the  design  of  the  irrigation  system  and  the 
development of an O&M plan, including roles and 
responsibilities,  budget  and  cost 
recovery 
mechanism. 
  Training  of    WUA  or  other  O&M  group  in 
rainfall 
irrigation  water  management  using 
forecasts and operation and maintenance of water 
infrastructure 
rainy  mountainous  province 
Environmental: 
  Surface water resources are in general plentiful in 
(700-1100 
the 
mm/year with moderate evapotranspiration with a 
mean  temperature  between  15-23  degrees).  The 
water source for the irrigation system investments 
will in most cases be water harvested and stored 
from  mountain  streams.  In  some  cases,  it  will 
pumped water from the Jin Sha Jiang river which 
has a dry season streamflow of 400m3/second. The 
PIM Y2RRDP 
and 
reservoirs 
pumping stations 
  Drainage  water 
with 
polluted 
agrochemicals 
  Low  efficiency  in 
usage of irrigation 
water     
water volume intake will in all cases be far below 
the  2m3/second  limit  above  which  approval  is 
needed from the Municipal Water Bureau17. There 
will be no pumping in the peak of the dry season 
where irrigation water will come from the stored 
water  in  ponds  and  reservoirs.  It  is  planned  the 
water  pumping  will  be  based  on  solar  energy. 
There  will  be  no  pumping  of  ground  water 
financed  by  the  project.  On  the  contrary,  the 
provision of irrigation based on surface water will 
facilitate 
and  unsustainable 
groundwater wells currently used by farmers can 
be closed 
irregular 
that 
  The water harvesting and irrigation infrastructures 
financed  by  the  project  are  small  scale  and  low 
risks  with  ponds  from  15-100m3  serving  80-
200mu each18  and reservoirs of up to 130 000m3 
which  are  all  already  existing  but  a  few  will  be 
upgraded by the project. They will need approval 
from the County Water Bureaus19     
  Only limited land areas will be used for reservoirs 
and  pumping  stations.  Most  of  this  land  is 
17 Measures for the administration of water intake permit and water resource fee collection in Yunnan province (2009) 
18 1 hectares equals 15 Chinese mu 
19 Regulations on the Management of Water Conservancy Projects in Yunnan Province (March 2018) 
PIM Y2RRDP 
currently  village  collectively  owned  barren  land. 
The biggest case will be the solar driven pumping 
stations,  which  will  cover  less  than  30  mu  (2 
hectares).  No  forest  with  any  protection  grade 
status will affected. 
In most cases drip and sprinkler irrigation will be 
used and only in few cases surface/flood irrigation 
will  be  used  for  paddy  fields,  where  proper 
drainage will be designed. 
 
  Farmers  to  be  trained  in  IPM  in  line  with  the 
government’s  action  plan  for  capacity  building 
and introduction of practices for reduction in the 
use  of  agrochemical,  which  has  already  led  to  a 
30%  reduction  in  pilot  examples  in  some  of  the 
project  counties.  An 
the 
production in the project areas are organic or green 
production  certified  meaning  limited  use  of 
agrochemicals.     
important  part  of 
  WUAs or other O&M associations/ group in areas 
of water scarcity will be trained in adaptive water 
management  for  water  use  efficiency  under 
different  climate  conditions  using  digital  water 
monitoring  of  water  productivity  and  use 
efficiency         
Activity B.2.1: 
Improvement 
Social:   
Social (PIM activity B.1.2 description) 
  Six-monthly 
monitoring 
of 
  County  PMO 
backed up by 
 
CARAs 
needed 
as 
of 
application 
environmental 
and  social  risk 
management 
measures   
PIM Y2RRDP 
and 
development 
of 
systems. 
road 
  Economic 
displacement  by 
of 
conversion 
farmland to roads. 
Will affect limited 
no 
areas 
affected 
farmer 
lose  more 
will 
of 
10% 
than 
his/her land 
and 
  Ad 
hoc 
organisation 
of 
rural 
O&M  of 
roads  may  affect 
their sustainability 
  Transparent, informed and documented discussion 
with  all  farmers  benefitting  from  the  road  and 
affected  by  its  routing  to  reach  voluntary  signed 
consent with land user rights holders of farmland 
proposed for conversion to the road. Farmers may 
farmers  by 
decide 
transferring user rights to land from non-affected 
farmers.  Monetary  compensation  may  also  be 
used.   
compensating 
affected 
  Before the investment in any road infrastructure an 
operation and maintenance (O&M) plan for each 
section  of  the  roads  must  be  prepared,  including 
roles  and  responsibilities,  budget  and  sources  of 
funding 
Environmental: 
  Soil  erosion  and 
increased  risks  of 
landslides 
from 
improper drainage 
and  interventions 
and 
on 
slopes 
mountain 
sides 
removing 
vegetation   
Environmental: 
  There will be a mixture of upgrading of existing 
roads and construction of new roads. Most of the 
roads  are  too  small  to  require  an  environmental 
assessment. The responsibility for rural roads has 
been transferred to  the CARA, who will oversee 
that proper erosion control and drainage measures 
are built into the biding process, contracts, and the 
engineering  design  before  they  give  the  final 
permission for the road construction.   
PIM Y2RRDP 
  Conversion 
forest 
roads     
land 
of 
to 
Activity  B.2.4 
Land 
improvement 
and 
preparation 
Environmental 
  Loss  of 
when 
land 
constructing 
terraces. 
topsoil 
levelling 
and 
to 
  Township governments working with the County 
PMO  will  manage  the  contracting  process.  In 
the  constructing  company,  a 
addition 
supervision company will be contracted to oversee 
the  works  and  its  acceptance.  A  warranty  is 
included in the construction contract, which makes 
the  constructing  company  responsible  for  fixing 
any failures in the works, including the failure to 
apply  proper  soil  erosion  control  and  drainage 
measures, within the 1st year after the end of the 
project. 
  Most  of  the  roads  will  go  through  current 
agriculture  land  and  collectively  owned  barren 
land. In a few cases forestland will be impacted, 
which will require the assessment of impacts and 
approval from the forest Bureau. Forest land with 
any protection category should be avoided.         
Environmental: 
  Addition of organic to the soil after the levelling 
should be applied as part of the land improvement 
approach.       
  Verification 
the field 
in 
  County 
PMOs 
CARAs 
 
and 
PIM Y2RRDP 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Chapter 11: Terms of Reference of Key PMO Staff 
315. 
For successful implementation of the Project, a project management system, 
PMOs, will be established at county levels and at province level which will 
operate under the guidance of Provincial Department of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs as lead agency. Specifically the Farmland Enhancement Division within 
DARA would take lead responsibility for project implementation management, 
supervision and evaluation, and will act as the Provincial Project Management 
Office (PPMO). Additional support will be mobilized from the Division of 
Cooperative Economy of DARA, and other division whenever needed. Major 
implementation responsibilities of the project lie with the counties. County Project 
Management Offices (CPMOs) will be established at the County Bureau of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs. Relevant technical bureaus in the counties (such as 
water conservancy, metrological, transportation bureaus, etc.) will be mobilized to 
support the project implementation in the related activities of the project as per 
need.   
316. 
The prime responsibilities of a PMO, inter alia, are to consolidate annual 
work plan and budget (AWPB) at their respective level, coordinate project 
implementation, manage the project resources, monitor project implementation, 
report on implementation progress on a six-monthly basis and project impact on 
required basis, and to ensure that project’s implementation strategy is effectively 
applied in all activities including the project’s targeting, gender and youth 
strategies. Generally, the overall responsibilities of the CPMO/PPMO staff are 
similar to that of a project management office. However, each PMO staff has 
his/her specific tasks and responsibilities in accordance with the post he/she holds. 
The main responsibilities of the key PMO staff are as follows: 
317. 
PMO Director/Officer: The director/head of each PMO will undertake the 
overall responsibility of project implementation. The overall responsibility is to 
coordinate the PMO staff, relevant institutions and implementing agencies to 
ensure that the project implementation complies with the project Loan Agreement, 
strategy and requirements for reaching its objectives and goal. This include close 
monitoring of the effectiveness of the implementation of the project’s targeting, 
gender and youth strategies. His/Her specific responsibilities mainly include the 
following points: 
  Staff the PMO with qualified personnel in accordance with the requirements 
set forth in the Loan Agreement, work out the responsibilities of PMO staff, 
organize performance appraisal of PMO staff by the end of each year through 
linking the responsibilities with achievements of each PMO staff; 
  Work out management/administration regulations of the PMO to ensure that 
all  PMO  staff  perform  their  duties  properly  and  that  project  property, 
documentations, data and records are filed and kept properly with gender and 
age disaggregated data, whenever applicable; 
27
5 
PIM Y2RRDP 
  Plan and organise necessary trainings and workshops for PMO staff and other 
relevant project personnel to raise their capacity, awareness, and responsibility 
senses  of  project  implementation,  particularly  the  trainings  on  project 
implementation  modalities,  M&E,  gender  sensitization, 
management, 
participatory  planning,  and  effective  targeting  of  in  particular  vulnerable 
households, women and youth; 
  Facilitate PMO staff executing their duties properly and ensure that all reports 
will be submitted to IFAD timely as required; 
  Coordinate  relevant  institutions  and  implementing  agencies  to  formulate 
project implementation plan, particularly AWPBs, in accordance with project 
strategy  and  approach,  including  the  identification  and  selection  of  target 
villages  and  beneficiaries  for  each  module  and  the  adaptation  of  project 
modules to local conditions; 
  Make  sure  all  project  partner  institutions  and  agencies  are  aware  of  the 
project’s specific gender strategies for: strengthening of capacities of women; 
their involvement in the development and implementation of investment plans; 
and promote their leadership roles in the supported cooperatives; 
  Coordinate relevant institutions to ensure timely allocation of project resources 
to the implementing agencies to carry out the project, including IFAD loan and 
counterpart funds, and monitor the use of project resources to ensure that the 
project fund are not misused; 
  Supervise  the  implementation  of  AWPBs  to  ensure  that  the  project  is 
implemented and appropriately target the eligible beneficiaries with particular 
focus on meeting the targets for benefits to vulnerable households, women and 
youth; 
  Coordinate  relevant  institutions  to  ensure  that  women  focused  activities  are 
well implemented and poor women’s participation is fully focused; 
  Plan  and  organise  assessments/evaluations  of  project  outcomes  and  impact, 
including  the  benchmark/baseline,  mid-term,  and  completion  surveys  with 
data disaggregated by gender, age and ethnicity, when relevant, and report the 
results to IFAD as required; 
  Work out adjustment proposal of implementation and submit it to  IFAD for 
“no objection” when needed, based on the up-to-date situation and results, for 
achieving  project  objectives  including  the  objectives  for  the  different  target 
groups. 
318.  M&E Officer: The M&E officer, under the guidance of project director, will 
undertake the responsibility of monitoring the project implementation, including 
project progress, achievements, availability of resources, expenditures, targeting, 
and gender mainstreaming, and collecting relevant data and reporting to project 
director to ensure that the project activities are implemented in accordance with 
27
6 
PIM Y2RRDP 
project strategy and with approved AWPBs. The specific responsibilities are as 
follows: 
  Develop  project  monitoring  strategy  and  action  plan,  by  component  and  by 
module, through consulting with relevant implementing agencies and related 
village  implementing  groups,  including  the  methodology,  channels,  and 
procedures of data collection; 
  Monitor the physical and financial progress and achievements of the project 
by component and by module and with data disaggregated by gender, age and 
ethnicity, when relevant; 
  Monitor  the  allocation  and  flow  of  project  resources  including  IFAD  loan 
proceeds and counterpart funds, and their uses, to see if the funds are available 
to implementing agencies on time for carrying out the project and if the funds 
are targeted and used properly; 
  Cooperate  with  relevant 
the 
implementation  of  project  modules  target  the  poor,  women,  and  youth 
appropriately in accordance with the project strategy; 
implementing  agencies 
to  monitor 
if 
  Assist project director to plan and organise assessments/evaluations of project 
outcomes  and  impact,  including  the  benchmark/baseline,  mid-term,  and 
completion surveys as well as other irregular assessment activities with data 
disaggregated by gender, age and ethnicity, when relevant; 
  Plan  and  organise  M&E  training  for  relevant  personnel  to  improve  their 
capacity  in  performing  M&E  activities,  including  M&E  methodology  and 
techniques, RIMS, data collection, data analysis, and reporting; 
  Prepare M&E report and project progress report and submit them to IFAD on 
time as required, after confirmation and approval of relevant PMOs; 
  Report to PMO director regularly with proposals based on the analysis of M&E 
data to ensure that the project activities are implemented in accordance with 
the  project  strategy  and  approach  and  is  on  time  with  achieving  the  targets 
established in the Logical Framework. 
319.  Gender Focal Coordinator (GFC): The GFC, under the guidance of project 
director, will undertake the responsibility of ensuring gender equity and equality 
in project implementation through development and implementation of project 
gender strategy and action plan. The overall objective is to facilitate rural men and 
women equitably participating in project activities and benefiting on an equitable 
basis by creating necessary enabling environment, using appropriate tools to 
address gender differences, and by cooperating with all project stakeholders, 
particularly with Women Federation and other implementing agencies. The 
specific duties of the project GFP include: 
  Develop project gender strategy and action plan, particularly for component A, 
through  consulting  with  relevant  stakeholders,  including  the  Women 
27
7 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Federation and focus group discussions with women involved in all functions 
in potential beneficiary cooperatives and women investors and entrepreneurs,     
and implementing agencies; 
  Coordinate  with  relevant  institutions  and  implementing  agencies  to  fully 
address gender issues in the formulation of AWPBs; 
  Supervise the implementation of gender action plan through cooperation with 
the  M&E  officer  to  ensure  equitable  participation  by  men  and  women  in 
decision-making and project implementation;   
  Coordinate with relevant institutions and implementing agencies to create an 
enabling environment for women to play an effective and broad role in project 
activities  and  to  ensure  that  women  focused  activities  are  conducted  and 
attention  will  be  drawn  to  enhance  the  quality  of  such  activities  to  benefit 
women;   
  Plan and organize gender sensitive training for relevant project staff involved 
in the project implementation, promote and disseminate the project’s gender 
approach to all stakeholders. 
  Coordinate with WFs to foster the capacity of poor women in participating in 
the  cooperative  activities  under  component-A  of  the  project  including  in 
leadership roles; 
  Monitor  resources  allocation  to  support  gender-related  activities  and  assess 
and report results achieved.   
  Transfer update gender mainstreaming knowledge from  IFAD to the project 
area  and  report  through  provincial  PPMO  to  IFAD  any  change  of  policies 
related to gender. 
320. 
Project Accountant: The project accountant, under the guidance of project 
director, will take the responsibility of managing the Project Account, i.e. 
maintaining a separate account and records, preparing financial statements of the 
operations, resources and expenditures related to the project, setting up accounting 
subjects, transferring project resources to relevant implementing agencies, 
preparing withdrawal application and documents, to ensure that the project 
resources are well managed and used for project implementation in line with the 
Loan Agreement and the approved AWPBs. His/Her specific responsibilities are 
as follows: 
  Work out, under guidance of project director, financial management regulation, 
and set up accounting subjects for the management of project resources; 
  Open  a  project  account  under  the  guidance  of  project  director,  maintain  a 
separate account and records and thereafter prepare the financial statements of 
the  operations,  resources  and  expenditures  related  to  the  project,  and  the 
prefecture  PMO  accountant  will  submit  the  financial  statements  through 
27
8 
PIM Y2RRDP 
provincial PMO to IFAD timely as required after confirmation and approval of 
PMO and relevant departments; 
  Well  manage  the  flow  and  expenditures  of  project  funds  by  subjects,  and 
properly file and retain the records evidencing project expenditures for annual 
audit  by  independent  auditors  and  for  inspection  by  the  representatives  of 
IFAD;   
  Prepare withdrawal application and related documents of IFAD loan proceeds 
on  a  frequent  basis,  well  manage  the  funds  in  the  project  account,  timely 
transfer of project funds to relevant implementing agencies for carrying out the 
project; 
  Supervise  the  use  of  project  resources  through  cooperation  with  the  M&E 
officer; 
  Plan  and  organise  necessary  trainings  or  hold  workshops  for  relevant 
accountants to improve their capacity in the management of project account 
and in the preparation of financial statements of the operation, resources and 
expenditures related to the project and withdrawal applications. 
27
9 
PIM Y2RRDP 
Project Organizational Structure 
MOF 
IFAD 
Provincial DARA 
Provincial Farmland 
Enhancement Division  
Provincial Cooperative 
Economy Division  
Provincial PMO 
County BoARA 
County PMO 
Implementing agencies ( water 
conservancy, metrological, 
Farmer cooperatives/ WFs  
Township PMO 
VIG 
Villages & farmer households/ Cooperative Members/ 
Young Entrepreneurs/ enterprisers  
Legend: 
Implementation & 
M&E contact 
Financial 
management & 
supervision 
Endorse & 
Daily contact 
approve 
with IFAD 
Macro contact 
28
0 
China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Overall Summary
Risk Category / Subcategory
1/5
Inherent
risk
Residual risk
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Financial Management
Organization and Staffing
Budgeting
Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Internal Controls
Accounting and financial reporting
External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Low
Low
N/A
Low
N/A
Low
Low
N/A
Moderate
N/A
N/A
Low
N/A
Low
Moderate
Moderate
N/A
Moderate
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Low
N/A
N/A
Low
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Risk Category / Subcategory
2/5
Inherent
risk
Residual risk
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
The risk that a country’s political developments result in delays or the potential reversal of key political
decisions and commitments (including approval and implementation of laws and regulations, and timely
counterpart funding) that underpin the project’s success. This includes upcoming elections, impending
changes in government, high political instability/turnover/uncertainty, and/or changing political priorities.
Mitigations:
Overall there is a low likelihood that political and governance factor could impact the project objective or
IFAD program reputation. 
Risk1: stability and continuity: government stability and continuity has no risk due to prevailing socialist
system of ruling communist party. 
Risk2: Adequate resources and commitment: Project is very much aligned with government priorities and
strategies so there is no issue of lack of comment or resources. 
Risk3: bureaucratic changes i.e DARA officials/PPM: adequate assurances are assumed from
government authorities on continuity of officials related to project.
Macroeconomic
Risk:
The risk that macroeconomic policies, such as monetary, fiscal, debt management/sustainability, and
trade policies are not robust, are unsustainable, and/or are vulnerable to domestic or external shocks
(e.g. resulting in high inflation, low foreign exchange reserves, large fiscal deficits, debt distress),
undermining government capacity to mobilize counterpart funding, and significantly impacting market
dynamics of value chains, including market prices and profit margins for project target groups.
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Low
Low
N/A
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Mitigations:
3/5
Overall Macroeconomic indicators have very strong track record of growth and stability, so no impending
risk to project objective or IFAD program in the country. 
Risk 1: status of external and fiscal account balance: both external and internal accounts have historic
no/low-deficit trends. Fiscal space both at capital account and current account are healthy and pose no
risk. 
Risk 2: macroeconomic policy support: project objectives are very much aligned with macroeconomic
policy of domestic consumption, economic sustainability, rural revitalization and elimination of poverty. 
Risk 3:Trade dispute: Current trade dispute with USA if got worsen, might slow down economy but there
is no direct risk to project or IFAD program.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
The risk that a country’s strategies and policies governing the rural and agricultural sector are not
sufficiently pro-poor and/or aligned with IFAD priorities (e.g. on land, environment, climate, gender,
indigenous peoples, nutrition, youth, private sector engagement), undermining project implementation and
the achievement of project development objectives.
Mitigations:
Sector strategies and policies represent low risk to project objective or IFAD program due to high
alignment with national priorities. 
Risk1: Alignment with Sector level strategies: Project is designed as per agriculture sector policy
Document No 1. i.e. rural revitalization. 
Risk 2: Alignment with country’s development strategy and objectives: the project is aligned with country
development strategy of eliminating poverty by 2020 and monitoring post 2020 resilience of livelihood of
people.
Environment and Climate Context
Project Scope
Technical Soundness
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
The risk that technical design factors, such as over-complexity, over/insufficient-ambition or
innovativeness, inadequate incorporation of lessons learned and best practices, weak economic, social
inclusion and environmental sustainability rationale, weak analytic underpinnings (including because
such may not be available), or overly rigid design, may undermine project implementation and
achievement of project development objectives.
Mitigations:
Very low likelihood that technical design of project adversely affect project objectives/goals or hamper
IFAD program due to IFAD extensive experience with similar projects. 
Risk1: community participation : project design mission witnessed high community participation,
enthusiasm and trust and project objective are very much demand driven. 
Risk 2: ownership of local government : IFAD and Client have extensive experience of working together
and local ownership is reflected by willing to invest in matching grants. 
Risk 3: operational risk: IFAD and Client have worked mutually in the same geographic area and can
handle any operational risk if arise. Presently project foresee low operational risk.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Moderate
4/5
The risk that the project executing agency does not have adequate resources, processes and/or systems
to manage the project effectively (in accordance with the Financing Agreement and all relevant IFAD
basic legal documents) towards achievement of envisaged project development objectives. This includes
the project executing agency’s lack of experience with IFAD (or other multilateral development bank)
projects/procedures and lack of capacity to coordinate/support implementation arrangements that may
involve several government agencies, different levels of government (or non-government entities), or
multiple donor/financing agencies with different procedures and/or reporting requirements.
Mitigations:
There is a moderate likelihood that institutional capacity for implementing and sustaining the operational
management may adversely impact the project objective. 
Risk 1: Strong in-house capacity: Risk1: Though implementing agency i.e DARA has strong in-house
capacity for project preparation and implementation , the proposed project with bottom-up approach of
strengthening poor house-holds through ug-graded and independent cooperatives might pose moderate
risk. To mitigate the risk, extensive training of officials and monitoring is planned. 
Risk 2: Area of operation: , though one province, is quite diverse in terms of topography, ethnicity and
poverty. Project design caters special care to ethnic minority and backwardness of area in terms of socio-
economic indicators. 
Risk 3: project design is innovative in nature i.e. post production emphases and focus on cooperatives
rather than enterprises: extensive training of project staff and community cooperative members is planned
on cooperative up-gradation and selection and capacity building on value chain development.
Financial Management
Project Procurement
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
The risk that the implementing agency does not have sound processes, procedures, systems and
personnel in place for the administration, supervision and management of contracts resulting in adverse
impacts to the development outcomes of the project.
Mitigations:
Overall procurement functions and controls are strong due to extensive project implementation
experience. 
Risk1: procurement compliance and capacity: principles of efficiency, effectiveness, integrity,
transparency and accountability are well in placed and ensured. 
Risk 2: value for money: project sustainable objectives embrace for value for money due to proper
procurement functions.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
The risk that relevant stakeholders are not identified, and/or of inadequate/insufficient information
disclosure, consultation/coordination with and buy-in from stakeholders on project objectives, delivery of
interventions and promotion of sound environmental and social practices (e.g. with government, project
target groups, civil society organizations, implementing partners, private sector, including financial
intermediaries), resulting in misunderstandings or opposition by stakeholders, or
duplication/inconsistencies between partners working in the same target area that may undermine project
implementation and achievement of project development objectives.
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
N/A
Low
Low
Low
Mitigations:
5/5
Overall risk on stakeholders concern is very low due to well informed and well discussed project
objectives and well understood by general public and target group. 
Risk1: Targeting principles: targeting principle of project by generating development benefits to create
jobs and provide rural services is very much aligned with national and local priorities and strategies. 
Risk 2: Targeting strategy: project is focused on recognized poor and vulnerable group i.e. extreme poor,
ethnic minorities, women/youth and disable and aged people. Client and IFAD interventions are well
coordinated and complementary to each other.
China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10:       Exit Strategy  
1. 
Y2RDP  has  dual  objectives  of  enhancing  the  income  generating  opportunities  for  the  poor 
and vulnerable groups in the project area, meanwhile demonstrating effective pro-poor public and 
private  partnership  as  well  as  public  services  for  inclusive  agribusiness  development  being  the 
driving force for rural revitalization.   
2. 
The exit strategy of the  project  thus takes  considerations of two important  dimensions: a) 
effectiveness  and  sustainability  of  project  interventions  and  values  during  and  after  project 
implementation  and;    b)  potential  scaling  out/up  project  experiences  and  lessons  to  inform 
government strategies and policies in rural revitalization.   
3. 
Overall, exit strategy in the sustainability dimension will build on:  
i)  Alignment  and  synergy  with  government  strategies  and  programs  to  ascertain  political 
commitment and sustainability of resources.   
Y2RDP  adopts  most  of  its  strategic  and  implementation  features  well  aligned  with 
government strategies and policies. Mainstreaming smallholders in modern agriculture and 
revitalizing  the  rural  areas  with  thriving  industry  that  can  benefit  the  smallholders  are  the 
key  strategies  of  the  government  that  Y2RDP  will  closely  aligned  with.  Human  resources 
development  especially  the  focus  to  youth  and  women  will  nurture  new  farmers  for  rural 
China to vitalize. Throughout the implementation, the project shall focus on demonstrating 
inclusive,  equitable  and  sustainable  business  models  adopting  a  value  chain  approach.  
Standardizing  farmer  cooperatives  and  supporting  cooperative-led  business  models  will  be 
given priority by the project. Evidence based success and experience in all these areas shall 
draw due emphasis from governments for continued support of project practices and values. 
A  robust  Management  Information  System  (MIS)  will  be  developed  for  Y2RDP  to  serve 
management and strategic purposes.  
ii)  Beneficiary empowerment and stakeholder institutional capacity building.  
Y2RDP  shall  adopt  adequate  beneficiary  participation  in  developing  business  plans  where 
they are one of the benefiting partners.  Through cooperative standardization, Y2RDP shall 
empower  smallholders  with  collective  decision  making  in  agro-business  management,  the 
same  applies  to  Y2RDP’s  special  support  to  rural  women and  youth.   Project  management 
offices  will  be  established  on  basis  of  existing  offices  within  the  government  systems  to 
ascertain continuity.  Private entities involved in the project will be selected based on criteria 
considering their sustainable operation.  All the government and private institutions shall be 
oriented  with  project  strategy  and  approach  of  inclusive  and  sustained  value  chain 
development,  so  as  to  adequately  carry  out  their  services  and  support  during  and  after 
project implementation.   
iii)  Lasting  partnership  with  service  providers  and  economic  entities  to  ascertain  business 
continuity.  
Y2RDP shall adopt competitive and transparent process to select agri-business partners for 
the smallholders. Sub-sectors with local specialties and market comparative advantages will 
be  prioritized  as  result  of  value  chain  mapping.  Public  finance  to  the  business  partnership 
shall not constitute subsidy to either of the partners in the relation, rather will be catalyst to 
forge business relation and start/expand business operation.  Performance of business  will 
be  linked  to  disbursement  of  public  support.  Government  services  will  be  availed  to  the 
partnership during and after project completion.  
Incubation  centers  established  by the  project  will  aim to  graduate  from  initially  subsidized 
operation at project start to self-survival at project completion from services offers. External 
partners  for  related  business  services  (e.g.  training  of  young  entrepreneurs  etc)  will  be 
networked as sustained resources for  these centers to continue their service provision.  
iv)  Robust technical and economic sound business proposals that will generate benefits for all 
partners.  
The  review  and  approval  committees  of  Y2RDP  shall  employ  experienced/competent 
technical reviewers to ascertain business proposals are technically sound and economically 
viable.  As  much  as  possible,  value  chain approach will  be  adopted  by  all  BPs.  Project  MIS 
shall be  developed to monitor the performance of BPs during the project  implementation.  
Profitability  from  project  support  agri-business  partnership  shall  provide  incentive  for 
private entities to continue invest in the rural sectors.   
v)  And  last  but  not  the  least,  the  project  supported  infrastructures  shall  adopt  adequate 
climate  considerations  to  mitigate  risks  and  be  sustained  in  their  functioning  through  the 
O&M arrangements introduced by the project.    
4. 
The exit strategy on scaling out/up dimensions will build on:  
(a)  Pathways through building synergy with other interventions of the country program  which 
would include analytical works, technical assistance, impact assessments, policy engagement, 
south-south cooperation and partnerships. Meanwhile, interventions will be built in Y2RDP 
to allow a process of knowledge capturing, sharing and policy influence be led by the PPMO 
to explore scaling up of best practices derived from the project.   
(b)  Engagement of national and provincial level stakeholders as drivers to replicate and scale up 
effective and innovative ideas and experiences derived from Y2RDP.  Central level agencies 
such  as  MOF,  NDRC,  LGOP  have  strong  expectation  from  IFAD  finance  project  for 
innovations and best practices.  A number of features in Y2RDP, once prove to be successful, 
shall  inform  the  Ministry  of  Agricultural  and  Rural  Affairs  (MARA)  for  adoption  in  their 
program  and  policies,  such  as  cooperative  standardization  program, 
  rural  youth 
entrepreneurship  program,    traceability  system,  climate  service  for  agricultural  production 
etc..  
(c)  Exploring  spaces  in  the  context  of  government  strategic  pursuit to  revitalize  rural  areas  to 
scale  up  project  best  practices,  this  relates  to  political  emphasis,  financing  required  from 
both government and private sectors, engagement of related institutions both at local and 
national levels. Partnership shall be explored with academic institutions (such as the Chinese 
Academy  of  Agricultural  Sciences)  both  for  M&E  and  for  analytical  work,  development 
partners  for  sharing  and  learning  from  each other, and  related  service  providers  and  local 
institutions  to  scale  up  project  introduced  practices.  A  robust  MIS  and  knowledge 
management  strategy  shall  be  developed  at  outset  of  project  implementation  to  offer 
learning space for possible eventual scaling up.  
5. 
Potential focuses for sustained effect and for learning and scaling up of Y2RDP may include, 
but  not  limited  to,  some  of  the  following:  Result  Based  Lending,  incubation  center,  cooperative 
standardization,  climate  related  risk  mitigation  schemes  and  services,  traceability  system,    various 
inclusive agri-business models adopting value chain approach, climate proof techniques in irrigation 
and  infrastructure  development,  benefiting  mechanisms  involving  smallholders,  Business  Plan  for 
strategic  development  of  agro-entities,  Management  Information  System  for  results-oriented 
project management.  The modular design of the project especially relating to business models may 
also offer a learning for government projects to replicate.  
6. 
To  successfully  implement  the  above  outlined  exit  strategy,  due  efforts  and  certain 
provisions should be made during project implementation. Among others, it will be important for all 
PMO staff to  comprehend and appreciate the project strategy and key design features, staff training 
and  exchange  visits  shall  be  regularly  conducted,  especially  during  the  project  start  up.  Adequate 
budget  for  project  M&E  and  knowledge  management  should  be  made  available.    Y2RDP  shall 
undertake necessary advocacy and policy related events to engage and inform partners and policy 
makers.    Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  shall  outline  key  technical  requirements  and 
processes to guide the implementation of the strategic and technical features and approaches that 
may  generates  potential  for  replication  and  scaling  up.    Technical  assistance  will  be  imperative 
especially  in  the  areas  of  cooperative  standardization  and  agri-business  management.  Y2RDP  shall 
also actively participate in IFAD program related activities including annual portfolio review, COSOP 
consultation  and  policy  related  events.    Y2RDP  shall  also  maintain  regular  interaction  with  key 
stakeholders and partners at national and provincial level.   
China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
1/1
 Gender transformational
 Youth sensitive
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
 National gender policies, strategies
 National youth policies, strategies
 National nutrition policies, strategies
Situation
analysis
and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems and
youth group
opportunities, by gender
 Use (pro-WEAI) assessment for
M&E baseline
and actors
and actors
 Main youth groups
 Key nutrition problems and
 Challenges and opportunities by
underlying causes, by group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
 Nutrition pathways
empowerment
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Youth employment included in
outcomes and impacts
 Policy engagement on GEWE
project objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
Human
and
financial
resources
ECG
Remarks
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Outreach disaggregated by age
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Women are > 40% of outreach
beneficiaries
Pro-WEAI indicator
Further details to be confirmed
 Staff with gender TORs
 Staff with youth TORs
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for youth activities
 Funds for nutrition activities
 Funds for Pro-WEAI surveys in M&E
budget
Gender
Nutrition
Youth
 No social inclusion themes
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused
Finance
N/A
N/A
$0
China
Yunnan Rural Revitalization Demonstration Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Stakeholders consulted
Mission Dates:
16 to 25 September 2019
Document Date:
27/02/2020
Project No.
2000002358
Report No.
5310-CN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Y2RDP Stakeholders Consulted During Design Mission 
Who 
Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (DARA) 
Farmland Enhancement Division in DARA 
Farmland  Construction  Division,  Dept.  Of  Agri.  &  Rural 
Development   
Division of Cooperative Economy in DARA 
Poverty Alleviation Division in DARA 
Finance Division in DARA 
Yunnan Bureau of Agriculture and Rural Affairs 
Yunnan Metrological Bureau 
Women’s Federation 
Youth League 
Poverty Alleviation Office 
Maternity and Child Care Center 
Bureau of Agri. & Rural Development   
Poverty Alleviation Office 
Bureau of Ethnic Groups and Religions 
Bureau of Employment 
Women’s Federation 
Youth League 
Water Conservancy Bureau 
Transportation Bureau 
Wenxing Village Committee (Village heads & households) 
Dayanchang Livestock Coop. 
Jiaju Village (Village heads, households & women) 
Agriculture, Water Conservancy and Transportation Bureaus 
Environment Protection Agency 
County Metrological station   
Plant  protection  and  Extension  Services,  Agriculture  and  Rural 
Development Bureau 
Bureau of Agri. & Rural Development   
Poverty Alleviation Office 
Bureau of Ethnic Groups and Religions 
Youth League 
Bureau of Human Resources and Social Security 
Women’s Federation 
Water Conservancy and Transportation Bureaus 
Bonanshan Tea Company 
Boheng Tea Factory 
Dapingtan Village (Village heads, households & women) 
Dapingtan Tea Factory 
Where 
Yunnan Province 
Yunnan Province 
Yunnan Province 
Yunnan Province 
Yunnan Province 
Yunnan Province 
Yunnan Province 
Yunnan Province 
Yunnan Province 
Yunnan Province 
Yunnan Province 
Yunnan Province 
Yunlong County 
Yunlong County 
Yunlong County 
Yunlong County 
Yunlong County 
Yunnan County 
Yunnan Province 
Yunnan Province 
Yunlong County 
Yunlong County 
Yunlong County 
Yunlong County 
Yunlong County 
Yunlong County 
Yunlong County 
Yongping County 
Yongping County 
Yongping County 
Yongping County 
Yongping County 
Yongping County 
Yongping County 
Yongping County 
Yongping County 
Yongping County 
Yongping County 
Shijiacun Kiwi Coop. 
Women’s Federation 
Youth League 
Poverty Alleviation Office 
Maternity and Child Care Center 
Pianjiao Township 
Pianjiao Pomegranate Coop. 
Cunong Fruit & Vegetable Coop. 
Anhong Cropping and Livestock Coop. 
Bureau of Agri. & Rural Development   
Poverty Alleviation Office 
Women’s Federation 
Maternity and Child Care Center 
Youth League 
Bureau of Agri. & Rural Development   
Bureau of Agri. & Rural Development   
Bureau of Agri. & Rural Development   
Bureau of Agri. & Rural Development   
Water Conservancy and Transportation Bureaus 
Water Conservancy and Transportation Bureaus 
Water Conservancy and Transportation Bureaus 
Water Conservancy and Transportation Bureaus 
Water Conservancy and Transportation Bureaus 
Village Committees and Farmer Cooperatives   
Village Committees and Farmer Cooperatives   
Village Committees and Farmer Cooperatives   
Village Committees and Farmer Cooperatives   
Village Committees and Farmer Cooperatives   
Village Committees and Farmer Cooperatives   
Village Committees and Farmer Cooperatives   
Yongping County 
Lanping County 
Zhenxiong County 
Lanping County 
Zhenxiong County 
Yongshen County 
Yongshen County 
Yongshen County 
Yongshen County 
Yongshen County 
Yongshen County 
Yongshen County 
Yongshen County 
Yongshen County 
Huaping County 
Lanping County 
Zhenxiong County 
Suijiang County 
Huaping County 
Lanping County 
Zhenxiong County 
Suijiang County 
Yongshen County 
Yongping County 
Lanping County 
Zhenxiong County 
Huaping County 
Lanping County 
Zhenxiong County 
Suijiang County 
